in the past few lectures I've been discussing Einstein's
general theory of relativity, which tells us more accurately than does Newtonian gravity,
what happens in the vicinity of massive or energetic objects?
It's a weird theory, I mean there's a lot of counterintuitive aspects to it, and I only
had a chance to describe some of its fundamentals.
If you want to learn more, there's a teaching company course on general relativity and indeed
the quantum revolution, which you can view at your pleasure and learn many more details
of all these weird theories of modern 20th century physics.
It's fantastic stuff, and what to me is amazing is that not only have these various theories
been substantially confirmed from experimental measurements, but also that they do have an
effect on our everyday lives, especially quantum mechanics and special relativity, but to some
degree even general relativity.
Now a major prediction of general relativity is the physical possibility of a black hole,
a region of space where there's so much material in such a small volume that the space time
curvature is sufficiently strong to trap everything, even light.
So light can't get out, the thing appears black, and then it's a black hole.
Lots of theoretical possibility, but does nature actually choose to produce such weird
objects?
That is, are black holes science fact or fiction?
Because the equations say that they're physically possible, doesn't necessarily mean that nature
chooses to produce such objects.
So we'd like to find out whether there really are black holes.
Well light can't escape from a black hole, so you can't really see one.
Now you might say, well just look up into the sky for dark blobs and those are black
holes, but you can't do that, you can't just say, well there's a dark spot in the sky,
that's a black hole, that could just be a space between stars where there aren't any
stars or galaxies, that's not a black hole.
There are cartoons that illustrate this, some astronomers are looking at a photograph and
there's sort of a circular region that looks dark and they say, oh wow, it's black and it
looks like a hole, I'd say it's a black hole.
It's not that easy, you have to have much better evidence before the scientific establishment
accepts your proposition that you found a black hole.
We don't see black holes directly, but we can detect them through their gravitational
influence on other objects, and here for example to remind you is a binary star system where
the two stars orbit their common center of mass, and if one of them is more massive than
the other, in this case by a factor of 3.6, then it's closer to their common center of
mass than the less massive object is.
So suppose you had a black hole as the more massive object and a regular star orbiting
it.
You could detect the orbit of the small star around the center of mass and deduce from
the amount of this orbit, that is from its period and the speed, you could deduce the
mass of the object that's pulling on it.
This is very reminiscent of what we've already talked about when discussing exoplanets, okay?
The wobble in the star's spectrum allows us to deduce the presence of an extracellar
planet orbiting that star.
So you look for what's called spectroscopic binaries, stars where the spectrum shows a
shift in the absorption lines, and if you have a spectroscopic binary and you measure
the orbital speed and period of one of the stars, let's say it's only one star is visible,
and you deduce that the other star has some minimum mass that's above 3 or 5 solar masses,
yet is not visible, but should be visible if it were any kind of a normal star.
You might deduce that, gosh, it must be a black hole by the process of elimination,
okay?
So that's the idea.
Well, let's go back and review some of these concepts.
Here is a binary star that you're looking at with a telescope, and you might only see
it as one star, even through the telescope, but a series of spectra shows the absorption
lines moving back and forth in a periodic way.
One set of absorption lines is associated with one star, the other set of absorption
lines is associated with the other star, and if you increase the orbital speed, you can
see that these absorption lines wobble back and forth more than in the case of the smaller
speeds.
So suppose you have a system like this, but you only see one set of absorption lines.
Let's say the one that's going back, forth, back, forth, back, forth, like that, but you
don't see the other set of absorption lines.
So you're only seeing one of the stars.
You would deduce that the other one is too faint to see, okay?
You don't, you can't see it, so you can't see its absorption lines.
Well, from the orbital period and the amount of the shift, you can deduce what its mass
must be in order to produce the observed motion of the stars whose absorption lines are visible.
And if you measure the star whose absorption lines are visible, and you say, oh, let's
say it's a G type main sequence star like the sun, well, then you know it's mass, it's
one solar mass, or maybe it's a B type star having 10 solar masses or something like that.
In other words, if you measure the mass of the visible star, you have some information
on the total mass of the system contributed by that one star.
But the measurement of the wobble back and forth gives you another set of information
about the total mass of the system.
I recall Kepler's third law written in Newton's form.
It said that the sum of the masses, M1 plus M2, times the square of the orbital period
is equal to 4 pi squared over G, times the semi-major axis cubed.
So if you measure, if you make measurements of the, of the one set of lines in the spectrum
that you see, that's called a single line spectroscopic binary, because you only see
one set of lines, and use Kepler's law, you get, you get some information about the sum
of the, of the masses.
But if you also know something about one of the stars, the visible stars, because it's
a G star or a B star or whatever, you know how much that one visible star contributes
to the sum of the masses, and so you can get some idea of the mass of the invisible object.
Okay, that's, that's the general principle.
I'm just trying to give you briefly what astronomers do.
It's somewhat more complicated than that, but this is the essence of what we do.
So the properties of the visible star can tell you something about how much it's contributing
to the total mass of the system.
Or maybe, you know, you'll find that the visible star is such a pipsqueak that it contributes
so little to the total mass of the system that, you know, to a good first approximation,
the entire mass is the mass of the black hole.
Things like this can give you some idea of the mass of the invisible object.
That's what I'm trying to tell you.
And if that mass exceeds a certain limiting value, yet the object is not visible.
So suppose it's 10 solar masses, but if it were a 10 solar mass normal star, it would
be easily visible, you know, but it's not.
That kind of argument, the process of elimination can lead you to deduce that it's probably
a black hole.
That's a good black hole candidate.
And then you want to do other observations that verify whether it really is a black hole
or not.
All right.
So you want to look for spectroscopic binaries that might yield the presence of a black hole.
But where do you look?
I mean, there are lots and lots of stars in the sky.
You can't just take spectra night after night of all those stars.
It would be prohibitively time consuming.
So we need a clue.
We need a clue as to which star would be the preferable one to look at that yields the
biggest chances of finding a black hole.
And observations at x-ray wavelengths can provide such a clue.
If a black hole or a neutron star is orbiting around another star, it can steal material
from that other star.
And as in this animation, that material can glow because it settles into an accretion
disk and the accretion disk gas gets so close to the compact object, either a neutron star
or a black hole, that it heats up a tremendous amount in the strong gravitational field around
that neutron star or black hole.
So all this material is spiraling in, and it's hitting all the other material, and there's
a lot of friction, and it heats up a lot, and it can glow at x-ray wavelengths, not
just at optical or ultraviolet wavelengths, as would have been the case for an accretion
disk around a lower gravitational field star, like a white dwarf or a normal star.
They have accretion disks that glow at visible or ultraviolet wavelengths, but the strong
gravity of a neutron star or a black hole creates accretion disks that glow at x-ray
wavelengths.
So in fact, you have this heart of the accretion disk is the black hole, which itself is black,
but the disk around it is glowing brightly at x-ray wavelengths and at other wavelengths.
The picture that I showed reminds me, every time I see it, of Joseph Conrad's masterpiece
Heart of Darkness, written in 1902.
The heart of the system is the black hole, it's this dark object, but surrounding it
is gas that's glowing a lot and can be easily seen, and in particular, at x-ray wavelengths,
there's this distinctive signature of a strong gravitational field.
So you look at the sky with x-ray satellites, like the Chandra x-ray observatory pictured
here, and there have been many other x-ray satellites.
And indeed, Ricardo Giaconi is an astronomer who in the 1960s and 70s developed x-ray satellites
and was sort of the pioneer in x-ray astronomy, and the development of these x-ray detectors
and satellites led to the discovery of all sorts of exotic objects, and so he actually
was awarded half of the 2002 Nobel Prize in Physics for his development of x-ray astronomy
and his studies in x-ray astronomy.
And one of the most interesting early objects to be found with x-ray telescopes was an object
called Cygnus x1, the brightest x-ray source in the constellation Cygnus the Swan.
It appears to be a star orbiting a black hole, creating an accretion disk that glows
at x-ray wavelengths.
And that black hole has a mass of at least seven solar masses, but more likely something
like 16 solar masses.
So that's way above the neutron star limiting mass, be it three or five solar masses, you
know, and white dwarfs can only reach 1.4 solar masses, and a normal star having a mass
of seven to 16 solar masses would be glowing brightly, you know, and yet we don't see it.
So this observational evidence for a black hole orbiting around the visible star in the
Cygnus x1 system, what was hailed as the first observational evidence for black holes in
our galaxy, and that data were gathered and published in 1971 by Tom Bolton.
But the conclusions for this particular case depend a lot on what you assume for the mass
of the visible star.
The problem is that the visible star is a giant massive star, having something like
33 solar masses.
So if you put 33 solar masses for, say, M2 in Kepler's third law, and you put in the
orbital period and the distance between them and all that, well, you know, you get a value
for M1, the mass of the putative black hole, but that value of M1 is uncertain because
the value of M2 being so large, 33 solar masses, is itself also uncertain.
You know, we're not sure that that star has a mass of 33 solar masses.
Maybe because of its interaction with a companion, its structure has changed, and maybe it's
only a 15 solar mass star, or maybe it's a 50 solar mass star, in which case the companion
wouldn't need to be very massive and might not be a black hole.
So the problem with Cygnus x1 is that it doesn't provide a definitive case.
I mean, most of us think it really is a black hole, but you can weasel your way out of it
and say, oh, it's something else, because the visible star has such a high mass and such
a large uncertainty associated with that mass that it kind of messes up your conclusions
about the invisible object and makes them less certain.
So what we'd really like to have is a very low mass star, say a K or an M main sequence
star orbiting a black hole, because in that case, the mass of the star is irrelevant.
Let's go back to Kepler's third law as written by Newton, M1 plus M2 times the orbital period
squared is 4 pi squared over G times the semi-major axis cubed.
Well, if M2, the mass of the visible star, is far, far less than the mass of the object
that it is orbiting, the putative black hole, that is, if M1 is much, much greater than M2,
then you can essentially ignore M2 in this equation.
It doesn't really matter whether it's half a solar mass or a third of a solar mass or
one solar mass.
It doesn't make much difference.
Yes, it makes some difference in detail, but it doesn't make much difference.
So let's just ignore it altogether.
In that case, the equation simplifies.
It becomes M1 P squared equals 4 pi squared over G r cubed.
For a circular orbit, the circumference 2 pi times the radius of the orbit is equal
to the time it takes to complete that orbit, the period, multiplied by the velocity, v.
So distance equals rate times time.
And if you simplify this and solve for r, you get r is vp over 2 pi.
Plug that into your other equation and you get that M1 equals v cubed p over 2 pi G.
Now if you don't care about the math, don't worry about it.
I'm just doing this for those who want to see more of the details.
The point is the following.
If a low mass star is orbiting a black hole candidate, then a measurement of the orbital
speed, v, and the period, p, gives you the mass of the thing around which the star is
orbiting.
That mass is just v cubed p over 2 pi G, all right?
So you can measure v and p from spectra.
Plug it into some equation, this equation, and deduce M1, the mass of the invisible object.
Now what you really get is a minimum mass.
You don't know the inclination of the system.
Is it edge on to your line of sight?
Is it face on or nearly face on?
This ambiguity is the same one that affects the determination of masses of exoplanets.
If you don't know the inclination of the system, you don't know what the correction
factor is.
But what you do know is that the measured gravitational influence gives you a minimum
possible mass for the unseen object.
And if that minimum possible mass exceeds, say, five solar masses, the maximum for a
rotating neutron star, you've got a good bet that this is a black hole.
And even if it exceeds three solar masses, the maximum for a non-rotating neutron star,
you've got a pretty good bet that this is a black hole, although it might be a neutron
star.
Well, how do you find good candidates for low mass stars orbiting black holes?
Again you look in x-rays.
And sometimes these accretion disks, which form around the compact object, develop blobs.
There's a rather rapid accretion event where a blob moves in into the accretion disk and
traverses a big distance and releases a large amount of energy in a short time.
So you get a flare at x-ray wavelengths.
And the x-ray telescopes notice those bursts.
They're called x-ray nova, like a nova, but at x-ray wavelengths.
And of course, the accretion disk gets hot all around, and so it emits not just x-rays
in the hottest parts, but ultraviolet radiation in the cooler parts and optical radiation
in the still cooler parts.
So the whole disk is hot, but not all parts are equally hot, so different parts emit different
forms of radiation.
So the whole thing brightens at all wavelengths, not just x-ray wavelengths, but you notice
it at first at x-ray wavelengths, because there's the accretion disk in it, a blob formed
in it.
Okay?
X-ray satellites find these x-ray novae, and alert optical astronomers such as myself
to their existence.
We then wait for all the radiation to fade.
It gradually fades with time after the accretion event.
And eventually we might see the faint normal star that's in that system.
And my group did this in 1995, was the first of many such objects we've studied.
It was an object called GS2000 plus 25, that's just its phone number or something, also known
as QZ-Vulpeculae.
And it was discovered by a Japanese satellite called the Ginga satellite, and it became
bright at all wavelengths.
But then it faded with time, and eventually a picture showed this faint star at the nominal
position of the x-ray source.
And I went to the Keck Observatory with my students and measured the spectrum of this
faint star.
And you can see the following.
There's hydrogen emission, that comes from whatever gas still remains in the accretion
disk, but most of the light is dominated by the light from the faint star, and you see
it has absorption lines in it.
And these are similar to the absorption lines in normal stars, an example of which is shown
below the spectrum of GS2000 plus 25.
So there are these absorption lines, and if you take a series of several spectra or many
spectra over the course of the night, these particular spectra look noisy, but nevertheless
the information is there, and a sophisticated analysis of the spectra shows that the lines
are wobbling back and forth in wavelength over the course of the night.
Indeed, here is the radial velocity curve that we derived for this object over the course
of one night.
Initially, the visible star was moving away from us at 520 kilometers per second.
Four hours later, it was moving toward us at 520 kilometers per second.
It then started zooming away from us, reaching a maximum speed of 520 kilometers per second
away from us, and so on.
This is a sinusoidal pattern indicative of a circular orbit of that faint star around
something that's tugging on it, something that gravitationally pulls on it and allows
it to be in this orbit.
Well, when you put in the speed 520 kilometers per second and the orbital period turns out
to be 8 hours, roughly 8.3 hours, into Kepler's third law, you find out that the minimum mass
of the invisible object is five solar masses.
Now, any normal five solar mass star would be easily visible.
A white dwarf can't be that massive.
Even neutron stars probably can't be that massive unless they're a very special kind
of neutron star.
So this was a good case for a black hole, and indeed, there was a headline in the San Francisco
Chronicle.
You see astronomers observe black hole in the Milky Way in a subtext, you know, subtitle.
Maybe 14 times as dense as the sun.
Well, they didn't mean 14 times as dense, they meant 14 times as massive, and we came
up with the number 14 after taking into account the probable inclination of the system.
So the minimum of five solar masses turns out to be more like 14.
Subsequent, better analysis of those data and additional data that we gained suggests
that the black hole has a mass of 8 to 9 solar masses, and so we revised our number after
this article came out.
Well, this velocity curve gives the minimum mass, but if we want to get some idea of the
inclination, we can look at the brightness versus time, or the light curve of the visible
star.
If you look at brightness versus time, in this particular case, we saw that the visible
star got somewhat brighter and then fainter, and then brighter and fainter, and this can
be understood to be as the result of the star presenting a different shape as seen by us
during various parts of its orbit.
So here's the black hole that it's orbiting.
When it's in this configuration, the star looks basically circular, but when it has
moved over to this part of its orbit, the star looks more like a pair or a teardrop.
Because remember, the black hole is stealing material away from the star, causing it to
have this deformed shape.
Since it looks bigger in this position than in that position, it looks brighter here than
there, and that causes this variation in observed brightness.
Notice if the star had been orbiting perpendicular to our line of sight, its shape would have
been constant, independent of the position in its orbit, and so the light curve would
have been flat.
Clearly between these two extremes, either edge on view or a face on view, there are
many possibilities, and the amplitude or height of the light curve variation, of the brightness
variation, tells us something about the inclination.
You can also learn about the relative masses of the two stars, the visible star and the
invisible star, by noting that it's not just the visible star that orbits the invisible
star, they both orbit their common center of mass.
It's just the more massive thing doesn't move very much, but it moves a little bit,
and this motion can be detected because the accretion disk produces an emission line,
as you can see in these spectra, and in a series of spectra taken over the course of
the night, the emission line moved back and forth almost imperceptibly.
You have to do a rigorous analysis of the data to show that it's moving around, but
the data do show that the thing is moving around, and that gives you the relative masses
of the putative black hole in the star.
And again, if you know something about the mass of the visible star, and you know the
relative masses, then you can get information about the mass of the invisible object.
So when you do all this kind of stuff, the point is that you can come to a pretty good
estimate of the mass of the invisible object, and in this particular case we found that
the inclination is 65 degrees, and the invisible object has something like 8 to 9 solar masses,
and we did this work in 1995 and in the subsequent few years.
Now since then, there's been about 20 such systems found and measured with very well-measured
masses for the invisible object.
And here's a diagram showing schematically a bunch of these systems.
Here's Cygnus X1, the first one, and you can see the bloated star distorted into sort
of a teardrop shape by the black hole that it's orbiting.
And then there are other ones here as well, where there's the star and the black hole
and its accretion disk.
And for comparison, you can see the size of Mercury's orbit around our Sun.
Now Mercury orbits our Sun at about four-tenths of an astronomical unit, and you can see that
a bunch of these X-ray binary systems that are thought to have black holes in them are
considerably smaller than four-tenths of an astronomical unit.
So that's really kind of cool.
Now it turns out that we can even tell that some of these black holes are probably spinning
because material, gas and the accretion disk, can get closer to a spinning black hole than
to a non-spinning black hole.
Turns out if you're gas particle near a non-spinning black hole, you can get down to three Schwarzschild
radii, and you can have a stable orbit there.
But if you get closer in than three Schwarzschild radii, you rapidly get sucked into the black
hole.
It goes, and just eats you up, okay?
It's like this cosmic vacuum cleaner that I said the Sun would not be if it were a
black hole, but if things are close enough to the black hole, closer than three Schwarzschild
radii, they get sucked in.
Now for a spinning black hole, it turns out that material can spend a substantial amount
of time closer in than three Schwarzschild radii, but not yet sucked into the black hole.
So you can spend more time close to a spinning black hole than to a non-spinning black hole.
So here's a representation of that.
Here's a non-rotating black hole.
There's all this stuff orbiting it, and the last stable orbit is at three Schwarzschild
radii, and there's some amount of gravitational red shifting of the light seen from particles
of gas at that last stable orbit, and that gravitational red shifting can be measured
from the spectrum in a way that I won't go into because it's technically complicated.
Now if you have a spinning black hole, material can get closer in, and this is actually related
to the frame dragging effect that I discussed in the previous lecture, and it can get closer
in, and the gravitational red shift suffered by photons escaping from these inner orbits
is greater than the gravitational red shift from gas farther away, and that can be discerned
from the X-ray spectrum of the star.
Here you have the X-ray flux or brightness at X-ray wavelengths versus energy in some
units, thousands of electron volts, and the point is that the shape of this X-ray spectrum
differs from that around a non-spinning black hole, and thus you can discern that this particular
black hole is probably spinning.
Now let's consider the formation of relativistic jets in the vicinity of a black hole.
Here's an animation of a spinning black hole with an accretion disk.
What's illustrated is that if you have a spinning black hole with a spinning accretion disk around
it, high-speed jets of particles can go zooming along the rotation axis of the black hole
and of the disk.
You get these relativistic jets of particles moving at a substantial fraction of the speed
of light.
Now, many newspaper articles say that the jet is somehow emerging from within the black
hole and zooming out at speeds close to the speed of light.
That's not true.
Zoning is coming out of the black hole, at least not classically.
I'll talk about black hole evaporation in a future lecture, but that's not what's going
on here.
So here the jet is formed outside of the black hole, outside of the event horizon, in the
vicinity of the black hole to be sure where the gravity is strong and things can get accelerated
to high speeds, but not from within the event horizon.
So just be sure that that's clear when you read these articles that sometimes say that
a jet has been seen emerging from a black hole.
What they mean is from the vicinity of a black hole.
And here's an excellent example of one of these objects.
It's an object called SS-433 that's been known for a long time and for many years astronomers
measured the speed of this jet of particles coming from some compact region in the middle
of an accretion disk.
And in this case, the speed is a quarter of the speed of light.
Wow, I mean that's how fast these things are coming out.
And some other jets show speeds of 90% of the speed of light.
It's amazing.
For a long time we didn't know whether the source of this jet was gravitational energy
near a neutron star or a black hole.
Many people thought it was a neutron star, but recent evidence suggests that there's
a 16 solar mass black hole in the middle of this SS-433 object.
And that's really cool.
Mind you, we don't yet understand how the particles get accelerated to incredible speeds
in a jet, but we do seem to see the presence of jets near compact black holes.
And finally, the evidence that's very interesting and recent is that if you look at an object
that is thought to be a black hole in a binary system, you find that the particles that are
accretion disk isn't very bright in the very central region.
And what we think is happening is that material in the accretion disk is being swallowed beyond
the event horizon in these cases, but is hitting the hard surface of the neutron star in the
cases where there's a neutron star rather than a black hole.
So basically what's going on is if material is being accreted onto a neutron star, it
hits a hard surface and glows because it gives up its gravitational energy and starts
glowing.
If instead it gets swallowed by a black hole, it never hits the hard surface and doesn't
give up its energy of motion and produce light, so it appears dimmer.
So in quiescence, that is, outside of an X-ray outburst when there's no clumps in the accretion
disk, the objects that have black holes in the center are dimmer than those that are
thought to have neutron stars in the center, suggesting that we really have seen evidence
for material going beyond the event horizon being swallowed by a black hole.
