We've seen that both the theoretical and observational evidence for stellar mass black holes appears
to be quite convincing.
You know, we've got these binary systems where one star is tugging on another star, but the
star that's doing the tugging is dark and yet very massive, and so it seems like it
must be a black hole.
In a future lecture, I'll show you that there's really compelling observational evidence for
the existence of supermassive black holes in the centers of galaxies.
That evidence is even stronger than the evidence for the existence of stellar mass black holes.
Still, it's hard to get an intuitive feeling for what it would be like to go into a black
hole and actually watch what you're seeing.
You know, I mean, what's a black hole really like?
You know, how do we experience one?
How do we get a gut feeling for one?
Well, you can do that with modern computer programs that trace the light rays as they
go through bent or curved space time, the highly distorted space time around a black hole and
in it.
And I'll show you some of what you see when you run these computer simulations in this
lecture.
I'll also explore what you yourself would see and experience if you were to go into
a black hole and what an outside observer would see as you are going toward the black
hole and into it.
We will find that the two perspectives yield very, very different results.
The outside observer sees completely different phenomena than those that you see.
It's simplest to consider, at least initially, a non-rotating black hole.
Now a lot of what I say can be applied to rotating black holes as well with some modifications,
but it's just simpler to consider a spherical, non-rotating black hole.
I'll have more to say about rotating black holes later in this lecture and in another
lecture.
So let me remind you that for a non-rotating black hole, there's a radius known as the
short-shield radius within which the black hole has a tight grip on everything, including
light.
So not even light can get out.
So if an object is outside the short-shield radius, it can in principle escape from the
vicinity of the black hole, but if it's within the short-shield radius given by 2gm over
c squared, where m is the mass of the black hole, then you can't get out if you're within
that radius.
And so the spherical surface or the spherical region at that radius is called the event horizon
because an outside observer can't see any events that occur within that distance.
So it's a horizon you can't see beyond it.
You can't see events beyond it, and as I joked last time, it would be a real event in your
life if you were to go past the short-shield radius, past the event horizon, because you
wouldn't be able to get out, and so that wouldn't be so great.
Well a massive black hole has a stronger gravitational field over a larger area than
a small black hole.
The event horizon has a radius that is directly proportional to the mass.
So a big black hole has a bigger event horizon than a little black hole.
So you might think that the big black holes are more dangerous.
That's true in the sense that they occupy a bigger volume.
On the other hand, it turns out you can get closer to a supermassive big black hole without
being torn apart than you can to a small black hole.
Here a small black hole, the tidal forces, or the forces trying to stretch you apart,
are much greater than those near a big black hole.
So in that sense, a big black hole is the safer bet, because you can get closer to it
and observe it in more detail without being torn apart.
Let me review tidal forces, and in particular in this context.
Suppose we have a black hole down here, and here you are, rather large compared to this
black hole.
Anyway, you're coming down, and the force of the black hole exerted on your feet is
denoted by this large downward pointing arrow, and the force of the black hole on the top
of your torso, for example, is denoted by this smaller arrow.
Because your torso and head are farther from the black hole than your feet are, the force
on your head and torso is smaller than the force on your feet.
So relative to the center of your body, the feet are being stretched away.
So you get stretched like this, and indeed the ends of your arms get pulled toward the
black hole like this along radial directions, and so too do other parts of your body get
pulled toward the center of the black hole along radial directions.
So not only do you get stretched, but you get squeezed as well.
You're being squeezed down in like this and stretched along the length of your body.
And as you get closer and closer to the black hole, this tidal stretching and squeezing
become greater and greater.
And you eventually become elongated into a big, big long structure, and we call this
process informally spaghettification, because you sort of become a strand of human spaghetti.
In fact, your body can't withstand such forces.
It actually snaps apart, so you'd snap in two, and then each of those halves would snap
in two, and each of those halves would snap in two.
So you'd just go snap, snap, snap, snap, snap, and you'd be torn apart.
The spaghetti wouldn't last very long.
So if you want to go and explore the environment of a black hole, go find a supermassive one
like those that exist at the centers of many galaxies, as I'll discuss in a few lectures.
Don't go toward a stellar mass black hole, because those are the ones that will tear
you apart.
All right, so suppose you do find a supermassive one toward which you can safely go, at least
for a while, without being torn apart.
Let's ask ourselves what you would see if you were to look at the sky.
Well, you would see a very highly distorted sky because of the strong curvature of space
time around you.
Starlight that's going in one direction might normally have missed your eyes, but it gets
bent toward you and enters your eyes, and so the star appears to be in some completely
different direction.
And this is happening all around you, and the degree to which it's happening depends
on the exact path of the light.
The light that passes closer to the black hole is bent a lot more than the light that
passes farther away.
So you get this highly distorted image, and indeed you can get multiple images of the
same stars.
So let's take a look at some simulations of what you would see.
These are based on the general theory of relativity.
They do assume a certain speed for your spacecraft, and what you would see does depend in some
detail on exactly what you're doing and what your speed is and all that.
Let's not go into all those details right now.
Let's just assume we're flying toward the black hole and get a general idea of what
you would see.
So first is sort of the first frame of the first movie where I want to set my bearings
in a sense.
You're looking at the sky toward a black hole.
The black hole is over here, and you see the familiar winter sky.
Now of course I've assumed that the black hole is in our galaxy, in our vicinity, but
I just told you to find a supermassive one in some other galaxy.
So forget about that complication.
Because it's in your galaxy and it's along the line of sight toward the winter constellations
and it's a safe one to get close to.
Here's what you would see.
There's Orion with Betelgeuse, Rigel, the Belt.
Here's Sirius in the big dog, Canis Major, Aldebaran and Taurus, Castron Pollux in Gemini,
and Procyon in the little dog, Canis Minor.
Now right there you can see fainter images of Betelgeuse, Procyon and Sirius.
These are sort of the counter images caused by the distortion of space around the black
hole, and though the main images are very bright and distinct, these counter images,
at least initially when you're far from the black hole, are faint.
But you will see as you get closer to the black hole that those images get brighter,
and indeed all of the stars will start getting secondary images.
So let's now watch the movie.
There's the winter sky, and now we're getting closer to the black hole, and you can see
how the, first of all, the stars sort of move away from the black hole because of this distortion
of their trajectories, and all of the stars, if you look closely here, start having secondary
images along a line through the center of the black hole and to the opposite side.
So you get sort of a very distorted view of the universe as you're going toward the black
hole.
So that's kind of fun.
Well, let's suppose you get down to 10 Schwarzschild radii from the black hole, and you start
looking around.
Here's what you would see, and you're now at 10 Schwarzschild radii, and suppose you
want to circle the black hole.
So you start circling the black hole, and you get this very distorted view of all these
stars whizzing around.
Let's do that again.
You're circling around the black hole at 10 Schwarzschild radii, and that's what you
would see.
This is reminiscent of what you would see if you had a black hole passing across your line
of sight toward a bunch of distant galaxies.
Remember I showed that a few lectures ago.
Here's this black hole passing across the line of sight toward distant galaxies, and
you get these Einstein rings forming, and you get this apparent rotation of the galaxies
around the black hole.
That rotation is reflected in this animation as well, where you see the star sort of rotating
around the black hole as you circle the black hole.
So anyway, it's a weird relativistic effect.
Now let's suppose you get down to the photon sphere, which is 1.5 Schwarzschild radii from
the center of the black hole.
Suppose you start at 10 Schwarzschild radii, and you travel down toward the photon sphere
at 1.5 Schwarzschild radii.
So you've got first this view of the black hole, as we saw in the last frame of the previous
movie.
And now you're going down toward the black hole, and finally when you get to the photon
sphere, the whole thing appears just black, because you're looking into the heart of the
black hole now.
The rest of the sky is now behind you, so the whole sky is now behind you, and toward
you is the black hole, and obviously it looks dark.
So that's what you would see as you approach the photon sphere.
Now you're at the photon sphere itself, and you're looking down into the black hole, and
you see just this blackness.
But as you lift your gaze higher up and start looking out toward the sky behind you, you
would see the sky rise like this, and the stars would appear.
But they're not moving around now left and right the way they were in the previous movie,
because I'm not rotating, I'm not circling around the black hole now.
I was just sort of at the photon sphere and letting my gaze drift upwards.
But now let's actually circle the black hole while we're at the photon sphere and see what
happens.
You'd get all these stars whizzing around with multiple images in some cases, and you
can see the dramatic curvature and distortion of space, because the images of the stars
go flying off all over the place and curving off toward the side and doing all sorts of
weird things.
So you'd get a wild view, look at that, it would just be a wild view as you're looking
around at stars traveling at the radius of the photon sphere, just weird effects.
And to really understand this, you have to study these simulations in much more detail
and watch the trajectories of individual stars, and we just don't have time to do that right
now, but I wanted to give you some idea of what you might see.
Now suppose you continue going down further after crossing the photon sphere.
Well recall that the exit cone of any light that you yourself try to shine out using a
flashlight, say, becomes narrower and narrower.
So if you angled your light at too big an angle, it would just go into the black hole,
and if you angled it nearly straight up, it would escape.
In a similar way, starlight is coming in toward your eye through this exit cone, but now it
would be, I guess, called an entrance cone.
And starlight from over here, say, would bend around, go into the exit cone, or the entrance
cone, and hear your eyes, and starlight from over here would do the same thing, and from
over here it would do the same thing.
So the whole sky would enter this entrance cone, and you would then see it as a whole,
you would see the whole sky as a small circular patch above you, and everywhere around there
would be darkness.
So the whole sky would be scrunched into a little circular patch above you.
And as you got closer and closer to the event horizon, that circular patch would get smaller
and smaller, nevertheless encompassing the entire sky, because all photons from all stars
can reach you because of this gravitational bending, but they're all squished into appearing
to come from this narrow exit cone.
So that's really a weird effect.
And finally, when you reach the event horizon, the exit cone squishes down to zero, and so
the whole sky is essentially in a point, but you can't distinguish the stars at that point
because they're all squished together.
And then when you go beyond the event horizon, well, no one really knows what you would see
at that point.
It would be a very highly distorted view, for sure, because photons entering the black hole
from different directions would bend around a lot and reach your eyes, so you'd see some
complicated mess, unless you happen to be in the center of the black hole and looking
out along radial directions.
Then I think it would be not such a mess, although I'm not sure exactly, and I haven't
found anyone who's actually done the calculations.
I think more research is needed in this area.
So anyway, that gives you some idea of the very distorted view you would see if you were
to try to travel toward a black hole.
Now suppose you want to stay comfortably outside the black hole, but you want to throw your
mortal enemy toward the black hole because you really, this person or this creature is
doing terrible things to the world and you just want to get rid of them.
So suppose you're, for example, Yoda, and you want to throw Darth Vader into the black
hole, and you do this with great gusto.
You say, Vader, die, you wicked fiend, we're getting rid of you in the dark force forever,
and Vader on his way in is saying, but I'm Luke's father, you know, don't do this or
something.
Anyway, it would be high drama indeed.
But let's go back to relativity and physics and examine what we would actually see and
what Darth Vader would experience while falling into the black hole.
Well, first of all, Yoda would see Darth Vader's clocks slowing down because Darth Vader is
going into a strong gravitational field and in a strong gravitational field clocks run
more slowly than in a weak gravitational field out here where Yoda is.
So suppose you start out and it's noon in both places on both clocks, you've synchronized
them, then far from the black hole where Yoda is, four hours might pass, whereas closer
to the black hole where Darth Vader is, only two hours may have passed.
And the closer Vader gets to the event horizon, the greater is this apparent slowing down
of time, time dilation.
That is, Yoda looking at Darth Vader's clock thinks that Vader's clock is ticking more
and more and more slowly relative to his Yoda's clock.
And this is a very real effect, this time dilation, and indeed, we've even detected
it here in the Earth's very weak gravity because the GPS satellites and the whole positioning
system wouldn't work if this weren't the case.
So in fact, it turns out that as Vader gets extremely close to the event horizon, the clocks
slow down to a halt.
In fact, they come to a stop when Vader reaches the event horizon.
So from Yoda's perspective, Vader never crosses the event horizon because it would take an
infinite amount of time to do so.
Yoda sees Vader getting progressively closer to the event horizon, with Vader's clocks
slowing down more and more, but it would take an infinite amount of time to even reach
the event horizon.
So Yoda doesn't have the pleasure of seeing Vader actually cross the event horizon.
Indeed, from an outside observer's perspective, nothing ever crosses the event horizon of
a black hole because it would take infinite time from our outside perspective to do so.
So in fact, anything that has ever fallen into a black hole from our perspective is actually
hovering infinitesimally above this imaginary surface called the event horizon.
It's like a membrane.
And indeed, there's a whole paradigm for studying black holes called the membrane paradigm,
where nothing ever falls in.
It just hovers from our perspective infinitesimal distance above the event horizon.
So anyway, that's kind of a cool effect.
Now from Vader's perspective, he really does fall in, and it takes just a finite amount
of time.
But from the outside world's perspective, nothing falls in.
So if a star were collapsing from the outside perspective, it would get smaller and smaller
and smaller, and then it would reach some minimum size, essentially the size of the
event horizon, at which point it would become frozen.
It would no longer get any smaller.
And indeed, Soviet astrophysicists initially studying black holes gave them the name frozen
star because they appear to come to a halt as they're collapsing.
But that name didn't stick.
The Princeton physicist John Archibald Wheeler came up with the term black hole, and that
was just something that people could really appreciate more than frozen star, I guess.
And so that's what they're called now.
But in a sense, frozen star would have been a good term as well.
So from Vader's perspective, he falls in.
Clocks are ticking normally for him.
He doesn't know that anything is going on.
In your local frame of reference, everything is always occurring in a way that's independent
of your frame of reference, because that's actually what relativity is all about.
It's only from other frames of reference that things look different.
So Vader crosses the event horizon and does die in a finite amount of time.
He hits the singularity, which, you know, classically is a point of infinite density.
But if you include quantum mechanics, it probably has some small, fuzzy, fluctuating size.
I'll talk more about quantum mechanics and string theory later on.
You know, we really don't know what the singularity looks like, but in any case, it's probably
very dense, but not infinitely dense.
Now, suppose Vader were to get close to the black hole, but then turn on some rockets
and escape without having crossed the event horizon.
Then because Vader's clocks ran more slowly during the time when he was in the vicinity
of the black hole, once he emerges and comes back out to fight Yoda, way out here, where
space time is normal, his clocks will have registered much less time than Yoda's.
So Vader will have aged much less than Yoda aged during this time.
So this is a way of jumping into the future.
Less time passes on your clocks than on those of the outside observers.
That doesn't mean you read more books or see more movies or fight more, you know, whatever
they fought in the various creatures they fought in those movies and books.
But you know, you don't increase your actual lifespan, but you jump into the future relative
to other people or other creatures having aged much less than they did.
That's kind of an interesting effect.
All right, well, the other thing that happens is that Vader's light signals, you know, suppose
he's got a flashlight or a lightsaber emitting light, Yoda would see those light signals
getting progressively more and more redshifted as Vader gets closer and closer to the black
hole.
And that's because the light signals experience this gravitational redshift that I talked about
before.
You've got, in a sense, the light trying to come out of a very steep well, and in so
doing it loses its energy.
It progressively gets redder and redder and redder.
So it's not an instantaneous effect.
You don't go from blue light to radio waves.
Rather you go from blue to green to orange to red to infrared to radio.
And as the photon is trying to get out of this gravitational field, it becomes progressively
longer and longer wavelength and hence shorter and hence smaller and smaller energy.
So you get this gravitational redshift effect.
You also get a fading effect, not just because the photons drift from the optical window
to the infrared and radio and hence fade, but also because the photons are being emitted
by Vader's flashlight atoms, you know, in the little filament of the light bulb.
There's all these little electrons and other things glowing.
And those are like clocks, and all clocks are slowing down.
And so the photons, the light, is being emitted at a progressively slower and slower rate.
So there's a fading due to that effect as well.
So for yet another reason, Yoda wouldn't have the pleasure of seeing Vader actually cross
the event horizon because by the time Vader gets close to the event horizon, he will have
faded beyond visibility.
So you just sort of blink out, basically.
And we've seen this effect, we think, in the vicinity of a rotating black hole, the
object called Cygnus X-1 that I mentioned when I discussed observational evidence for
black holes.
There's this blob that was observed by the Hubble Space Telescope, not in such detail,
but the light from it apparently was seen.
And the blob faded as it got closer to the black hole and became redder.
So it became redshifted and it faded.
We think this effect then has been observed, although the data on which that animation
is based are, well, the interpretation of those data is still a little bit controversial.
If you were to look at a star that's collapsing down to form a black hole, not the sun, because
it's not massive enough, but a more massive star might do this, you would see it fade
as well because of the gravitational redshifting effect and the time dilation effect and another
effect.
The reason is that less and less of the light is getting out from the star because only
that part that's going out within the exit cone can possibly reach your eyes.
So the light from this edge of the star wouldn't reach your eyes up here because that light
would just, you know, it's going in this direction and it would be captured by the black hole.
So less and less light is coming out of the exit cone.
So for three reasons a star would fade as it is collapsing down to form a black hole.
So that's the way it goes, you know, you never see the matter cross the event horizon and
moreover it fades from view, you know, so the clock slowed down and it fades from view.
So you never actually see the formation itself of the black hole, you only see the events
leading up to it.
What about Vader?
Well, as I said, clocks to him are running at the normal rate, he crosses the event horizon
in a finite amount of time and he hits the singularity and gets crushed in a finite amount
of time.
And in between, you know, coming close to the black hole and being squished in a singularity,
he would have been stretched by this spaghettification effect, you know, so a lot of bad things would
happen.
That's the way it goes.
On his way in, he would see a lot of blue shifted light from stars out in space because
their light is coming into a strong gravitational field and is getting gravitationally blue shifted
rather than red shifted.
So he sees lots of stars and a highly distorted view, as I showed in those earlier simulations,
and the stars appear bluer than normal because light coming toward a strong gravitational
field gets blue shifted in the same way that light coming out of a gravitational field
gets red shifted.
And there's nothing Vader can do to stop his eventual destruction.
He'll get eaten by the singularity.
Now that's the case if you go toward a non-rotating black hole.
If you go toward a rotating black hole, it is at least mathematically possible that you
might traverse it and end up somewhere else, and I'll discuss that in the next lecture.
Let me introduce, then, rotating black holes.
The structure of a rotating black hole is considerably more complex than that of a
non-rotating black hole.
For a given mass, the event horizon is smaller, but always spherical as in a non-rotating
black hole.
So here's a non-rotating black hole, and then for a given mass, if you give the thing
some rotation, the event horizon actually shrinks, and you get a region around it called the
ergosphere that I'll talk about more in a few minutes.
And if you rotate the black hole more and more and more, the event horizon shrinks more
and more, and you reach a maximum rotation speed at which the event horizon has a radius
equal to one half of the normal Schwarzschild radius.
In fact, what happens if you look at the mathematics, and I'll show you this in the next lecture
in more detail, is that two event horizons form.
When you have no rotation, there's just one event horizon.
If you give the black hole a little bit of spin, then a second event horizon forms close
to the center, and the outer event horizon moves in a little bit.
If you then rotate the black hole even more, the outer event horizon moves in, the inner
event horizon moves out, and finally at the maximum rotation rate, the two horizons meet
and actually vanish.
When the two horizons meet and vanish, you would have what's called a naked singularity.
A naked singularity is one that's not clothed.
It's not cloaked by an event horizon, so you would be able to see it just sitting there.
Since its gravity is so strong, there'd be nothing really to see.
No photons would escape.
The danger of a naked singularity is that you wouldn't know that you've hit one until
you're there.
Well, you'd start getting stretched, of course, tidally, but the point is there'd be no event
horizon that would signal the presence of something really dangerous.
Naked singularities are not clothed by an event horizon.
A lot of theorists think that naked singularities cannot occur in nature.
People say that nature abhors a naked singularity, and so they actually think that a black hole
can never reach this maximum rotation rate at which the event horizon disappears or vanishes.
But that's never been completely theoretically proven, and indeed some physicists have found
contrived ways in which you might be able to form a naked singularity.
Let's go back to this picture that we had of a rotating black hole.
I had mentioned that the event horizon gets smaller, but then there's this region indicated
in gray around the event horizon called the ergo sphere.
Erg is like work or energy, and sphere is, well, it's a sphere, but it actually looks
kind of squashed elliptical here.
That's a region where the dragging of space around the black hole is so great that no
rocket could be devised, not even one traveling close to the speed of light, in such a way
as to keep you stationary.
In other words, space is dragged around a rotating object.
The gravity probe B is attempting to measure this around the Earth, but around a rotating
black hole, the dragging of space is so extreme that no rocket ship would allow you to remain
stationary, so you'd have to be dragged around.
The interesting thing about this is that if you look at the top view of a rotating black
hole rather than the side view, as was the case in the previous diagram, then in the
top view you've got this rotating black hole, a circular ergo sphere region around it, and
you can actually derive energy or work from that ergo sphere.
For example, you could have a civilization with both a garbage problem and an energy
problem.
They have too much garbage and they have too little energy.
They could solve both problems by sending garbage trucks into the ergo sphere, dumping
the garbage into the black hole at the appropriate moment, and that would then fling the garbage
truck out with greater energy than the energy it had coming in.
That garbage truck could then hit a windmill or a garbage truck mill, turning it, generating
a current which would then light up all the light bulbs in this city's civilization.
This is a practical application of a rotating black hole where you're tapping or stealing
some of the rotational energy of the black hole in such a way that you actually decrease
the energy of the black hole.
It's not rotating as much anymore in a sense, but you've used that energy then to help your
own people or aliens solve their energy crisis.
Now, admittedly, it would take a pretty advanced civilization to achieve this, but this at least
provides nice fodder for sci-fi books and movies.
