I've discussed how someone falling into a black hole would be ripped apart by tidal
forces, the spaghettification process, and finally crushed in the singularity, the very
dense region in the very center of the black hole.
The infinitely dense, maybe not.
We need some sort of a quantum gravity theory to tell us really the nature of the singularity.
In any case, it wouldn't be pleasant, okay?
But there are some mathematical studies that suggest that it might in principle be possible
to traverse a black hole, in particular a rotating black hole or possibly a charged
black hole, and end up either in a very distant part of our universe through a shortcut, or
possibly even in another universe altogether, a disconnected region of space and time, like
a bubble that's different from our own space and time, our own bubble.
So there might be these passages called wormholes between universes, and you could traverse those
wormholes by jumping into a rotating black hole.
This idea has appeared quite often in science fiction movies and books, and let's just
explore it here.
It has some basis in mathematics, but as we will see, unfortunately, it turns out probably
not to be possible to make these journeys.
So let's explore the structure of black holes.
First, I need to carefully define what I mean by curved space.
Now we've already had some diagrams that try to illustrate it.
A flat piece of rubber, if distorted by a paperweight in the middle, would appear curved
like this.
Here I've left out the paperweight because I want to emphasize that it's the mass or
the energy itself that causes this distortion.
It is not the gravity of the earth pulling on that paperweight that causes the sheet
to distort.
All right?
So I've left out the paperweight in this diagram, but you can see that the thing curves
down to a third dimension.
The sheet was initially two-dimensional, and then the presence of mass or energy causes
it to warp and curves the space around it.
But let's see if we can come up with a better mathematical definition of what curved space
really means.
Let's first consider flat space.
In flat space, it turns out that if you move a little arrow along different paths from
point A to point B, the final orientation of the arrow is independent of the path that
you chose.
Let me illustrate.
Here's a flat sheet of paper.
We start at point A with an arrow pointing this way, and we want to end up at point B.
If we choose this path here, always keeping the arrow parallel to itself, so you take
tiny little steps, little infinitesimal steps along the way, making sure that the arrow is
always parallel to what its direction was at the previous location, and you end up with
the arrow pointing in this direction when it reaches point B. If instead you take some
other path and do the same thing, always keeping the arrow parallel to itself, you find that
the final orientation of the arrow is independent of the path that you chose.
All paths lead to a final orientation which is the same.
That is the property of flat space.
If we now instead go to a curved space, we will find that if we take two different paths,
always keeping the arrow parallel to itself along small successive steps along that path,
then we will end up with an orientation that is dependent on the precise path taken.
And when you find that to be the case, you know that you're experiencing a curved space.
Let's take a look at this on a sphere.
Both of us have some intuitive feeling that a sphere is indeed curved.
It's not flat.
There's all sorts of distortions if you try to flatten out a sphere onto a sheet of paper.
So I'm going to start down here with the pen, and I'm going to draw an arrow pointing in
this direction.
And now I'm going to go along, let's call it the equator of this sphere, always keeping
the arrow along the same direction.
So here it is pointing like this right now.
I kept it parallel to itself along this journey.
Now let me go along a line of longitude up to the pole, always keeping the arrow parallel
to itself, and in the end it points at me.
Let me rotate it over.
You can see that it's pointing at me if I take this path to the final position.
If instead I start down here at the equator, the arrow is pointing this way, but now I
displace the arrow along a path here, always keeping it pointing the same way, and then
come up a line of longitude up to the pole, again always keeping the arrow pointing the
same way.
You see that along this path, in the end, the arrow basically points at you, not me.
So the final orientation of the arrow was dependent on the path taken, even though the
initial orientation of the arrow was the same in both cases.
This tells you what you already intuitively know.
A sphere is a curved space, not a flat space.
Okay, now that we've looked at a sphere, let's take a look at a cylinder and ask ourselves
whether a cylinder is flat or curved.
Well, I can take a sheet of paper and perform this experiment and find that a sheet of paper
is, as intuition tells you, flat space.
If I now bend this sheet of paper into a cylinder like this, and if I were to try to draw little
arrows and different paths along that cylinder, and you can try this at home, I would find
that the final orientation of the arrow is independent of the path taken.
In other words, a cylinder is flat space, which is perhaps counterintuitive because it
looks like it's rolled up.
That's true, I've rolled up the flat space, but I haven't crinkled it in any way.
I haven't distorted it.
I haven't mathematically warped it.
I've simply wrapped it around itself, but I've retained the mathematical properties
of a flat space.
Okay, keep that in mind because we're going to come back to it later.
So now let's look at two-dimensional maps of curved space.
There's always some distortions, and that's what I want to emphasize here.
Whenever you look at a two-dimensional map of a three-dimensional curved space, there's
going to be some distortions.
So when you look at this top diagram here and you ask people on the street, what's that?
They tell you that's the earth.
Well, wait a minute, how can that be the earth?
It's rectangular, it's got four corners, it's got edges.
I mean, that's not the earth that I know, right?
It's got this Antarctic continent that first of all is broken up into two pieces, and second
of all looks even bigger than it should, and so does Greenland.
Greenland looks huge here, and it's a pretty big thing, but it's not as big as all of North
America, you know?
So there's all these distortions.
When you try to take an intrinsically curved or spherical earth and map it onto a two-dimensional
flat sheet of paper, we're used to such distortions.
We say, okay, there are aspects of this map, this so-called Mercator projection that are
useful, and there are aspects that are not, and you have to keep in mind which things
are distorted and which are not.
It turns out the Mercator projection is very good for navigation because North and East,
those directions are preserved at each location, and if you're just moving from one place to
another, instantaneously North and East and West and South do point the right way on a
map like this.
But clearly the areas and shapes of continents are grossly distorted in a map like this,
and no one would use such a map to compare the relative areas of Greenland and say Egypt
or something like that.
So you have to keep in mind the distortions, and all of the maps that I'll show you in
this lecture have one distortion or another, but you have to keep that in mind.
They also have certain useful properties, and that's why we use these maps, but I will
try to point out where the maps are giving you the wrong impression and where they are
useful.
So now let's take a look at this warped space that we've seen in a number of lectures now,
and ask ourselves, what is this really showing us?
This is showing us the geometrical structure of space, a two-dimensional slice of space,
not the full three dimensions, outside of a massive body that is causing this distortion.
Now if we make the massive body denser and denser and denser, the local gravitational
field, that is the local curvature of space and time, though time isn't indicated here,
all get more warped, they all get more curved.
And as seen from the outside then, it kind of looks like when you have such high density
that you have a black hole, it kind of looks like the black hole actually joins up with
another part of space through a bridge here, formerly called the Einstein-Rosen bridge,
often called a wormhole.
So here's the structure of a black hole as seen from the outside, and it looks like it
joins up with another similar structure somewhere else in the universe.
And indeed, that region of the universe could be a long way away if you went along the normal
path, but it's just a short distance if you go through the Einstein-Rosen bridge.
Well you can even consider the possibility that a black hole joins you up with another
universe somewhere else.
See these two sheets of paper are not joined at the edges here, they are two separate sheets
of paper that look like they each have a black hole joining up somewhere between them in
some third dimension, which is sort of inaccessible to the creatures that live in flat space,
but this wormhole forms if you have a sufficiently compressed object.
So these are the kinds of diagrams that led some science fiction writers to seriously
consider the possibility of using black holes to travel to other parts of our universe,
very distant parts of our universe, or perhaps better yet, even to other universes.
And this appears in the movie, in the book Contact, for example.
Well the problem with those maps that I just showed you is that they nicely illustrate
the geometry of space outside the black hole, but they don't actually tell you what's going
on inside.
So look at what's going on inside, you need another kind of a map, and it too will have
certain distortions, but other aspects of the maps I'm about to show you will better
illustrate the interior of a black hole.
These maps are based on what we call space-time diagrams.
If we have two axes, time going in the vertical direction, distance or space going in the
horizontal direction, we can define forward being in this direction, positive x for example,
backward is negative x, time moving forward is in the upward direction, that's the future,
and the past is down here.
Now the diagram is set up in such a way that light travels along 45 degree lines, so if
you have one year from point O to C up here, then one light year would be the same distance
along the forward direction or the x-axis, light travels one light year in one year,
so it travels along this diagonal line, this 45 degree line, it travels 10 light years
in 10 years, okay, and so again it travels along this 45 degree line, it travels one
light second in one second, so again 45 degree line.
Now any material object can't travel as fast as the speed of light, so it covers less distance
in a given amount of time than light would have, so it travels along a path that is steeper
than the path of light, the 45 degree line.
If you're sitting in one place and you don't want to move anywhere at all, then time simply
goes forward for you and you go up vertically like this.
If you're lying on your bed at a given instant, your body would be a little line segment like
this, it would be at several different places in x at a given time, call it zero.
Now events that occurred in your past can send a signal to you if they're anywhere within
this 45 degree half angle cone, so a signal could come from event A to U because that
signal traveling say you know through regular postal mail or whatever could reach you, you
know bicycle could get to you if bicycle is traveling fast enough.
But a signal from point B out here in this region that we call elsewhere could not get
to you because even traveling at the speed of light, the signal would only go along a
45 degree line and would at best get to point C to get from point B to O point where you
are, the line would have to be shallower than 45 degrees, meaning that the signal would
have to travel faster than light and that's not permitted.
So these areas here are called elsewhere.
Signals from events in those areas cannot reach you, whereas signals from the past can
reach you and you can send signals at the speed of light or in a car or a rocket ship
or just staying in one place, you can send signals into the future or you can move forward
into the future.
So with this diagram in mind, let's draw a special kind of a diagram of a black hole
called a Kruskal-Sakaris diagram after Martin Kruskal and Peter Sakaris who first developed
these diagrams.
This will show you the interior of a black hole and it looks kind of weird, but once
again, space is to the right or left, time is up and down and this diagram has the property
that light travels along 45 degree lines.
So first of all, note that at the left here there's our universe, on the right you see
the other universe, the one that I talked about in those diagrams where it kind of looked
like there's an Einstein-Rosen bridge joining up two universes.
There they are, there's ours and there's the other one.
And by the way, the whole universe, even if it's infinite, is compressed into a finite
area square in this diagram.
That's a distortion if I ever saw one, but in any case, the map will be useful as you
will see.
Okay, let's take a look at other parts of this diagram.
Here's the interior of the event horizon, this is the black hole and here's the singularity,
it's drawn fancifully with these teeth like it's a shark or something, the singularity
is going to eat you if you get there.
Here's the event horizon.
There's also a singularity back here corresponding to another black hole, but as we'll see in
a few minutes, that's a weird black hole, it's called a white hole.
Anyway, let's look at possible trips that we could take from this location here.
We could take trip A from our part of the universe to some other part of the universe,
let's say we go out to dinner at a local restaurant, we go basically forwards in time
and a little bit away in space and so we end up at our restaurant.
That would be a perfectly valid and good trip to take.
We could take trip B beyond the event horizon of the black hole, but that would be stupid
because once you cross the event horizon, there's no way you can get out again because
to do so, you would have to follow a trajectory which is more shallow than a 45 degree line
because the event horizon is already a 45 degree line and only light at best can travel
along that line.
You could go at best along that line or anywhere in the forward direction or along this line
here if you were light, but basically you can only go forward along your forward future
cone and that cone always intersects the singularity, so you definitely get squished.
There's no way to escape because to escape, you would have to travel faster than light.
Well you might say, what if I want to traverse the wormhole and end up in this other universe?
Can I do that?
Well, you can't even do that because once you enter the event horizon or pass the event
horizon, again, you can only go always within a cone with 90 degree opening angle.
You can basically only go forwards and a little bit left and right.
You can't get to this other universe because to do so, you would have to follow a trajectory
that's shallower than 45 degrees and that would mean that you're traveling faster than
the speed of light, so you can't get to this other universe.
So for a non-rotating black hole, which this diagram is a representation of, you can't
actually traverse that wormhole because to do so, you'd have to go faster than the speed
of light and that's not permissible.
Now let me get back to this other singularity here.
If you had particles in this region here, this blue region here, they could move basically
forward in time or anywhere within a cone of opening angle 90 degrees and you could see
that they could enter our universe or they could enter the other universe, but they could
never go back into this region here.
So this is actually the time reversal of a black hole.
It's a region from which stuff emerges, but it can never go back in.
Just like a black hole in our universe is a region into which stuff can go, but it can
never come back out.
So theoretically, mathematically, there might be these regions called white holes where
we would see things coming out from no real apparent source, you know, there's no factory
there or something, it's just stuff appearing, but we've never seen that in the universe,
so we think that this mathematical white hole doesn't actually exist, okay?
They sort of just a mathematical oddity, but the white holes apparently don't exist.
Now you'll notice an interesting aspect of the singularity in this Kruskal-Sakaris diagram.
The singularity is basically this horizontal structure.
It's not a particular point in space as seen by you within the black hole, rather it covers
much of space and you hit it at some time in your future.
That time depending on exactly what trajectory, what path you decide to take.
But there's no way to avoid it because in a sense it's everywhere around you and you
will hit it regardless of what you do at some particular time in your future and that time
can be shorter or longer, but always finite, not infinite.
The singularity is no longer a point in space, it's an event in your future, in time, and
there's no way to avoid it.
That's the problem with the non-rotating black hole and the Kruskal-Sakaris diagram illustrates
that very well.
Next we will see what we have with a rotating black hole and you'll see that the structure
is very different and in particular, mathematically at least, the singularity can be avoided.
In a rotating black hole or a charged black hole, you get a very different structure.
We don't expect charged black holes to actually exist in nature because if they were charged
they'd quickly steal the opposite charges from their surroundings and neutralize themselves.
Electromagnetic forces are very strong.
We don't expect to see charged black holes but rotating black holes we do expect to
see because they form from the collapse of rotating stars.
If you look at the Kruskal-Sakaris diagram of a rotating black hole, first it looks
really hairy and complicated but let's just look at it slowly and try to understand it.
Once again, there's our universe over here and the other universe that was familiar in
the Kruskal-Sakaris diagram of a non-rotating black hole.
But then there are these other universes as well.
Here's another universe, there's another universe.
And indeed, there's an infinitely repeating pattern of this sort where you have big squares
like this, two sides of which are additional universes.
So it looks like in a sense the black hole, the rotating black hole joins you up with
an infinite progression of universes.
There are other interesting aspects here as well.
This line here is the outer event horizon of the rotating black hole.
This line there is the inner event horizon.
So you will recall that I said in the previous lecture that a rotating black hole has two
event horizons.
Here you can see them.
There's one of them, there's the other.
You can go into this region here and then go close toward the singularity and even hit
it.
But you could in principle cross the outer event horizon, then cross the inner event
horizon, then cross another inner event horizon forwards in time, and then back out through
the outer event horizon and into another universe.
So what an amazing trip.
Going forwards in time, never at an angle greater than 45 degrees, you could make a journey,
trip C here, that in fact avoids the singularity and allows you to end up in another universe.
Either this one, or if you changed course somewhere along the way, you could end up
in that one, or then you could traverse additional wormholes and end up in some other universes.
What an amazing trip that would be.
Now the stupid trip would be trip B. You cross the outer event horizon, then the inner event
horizon, and then you sort of head toward the singularity.
But you can easily avoid the singularity in this case, at least mathematically, because
now the singularity is basically a vertical structure.
It's something that exists at a particular point in space and moves forward in time,
in distinction to the singularity in the non-rotating black hole, which was basically everywhere
in space beyond the event horizon, and you hit it at some particular time.
Here the singularity is basically in the time direction, and you can avoid it by choosing
your spatial location wisely.
And then you can take a really boring trip within your own universe going to a restaurant
here, and then of course you can't get to that universe because as in the case of the
non-rotating black hole, it would require a speed greater than the speed of light.
So this kind of diagram suggests that you can actually travel through a rotating black
hole to another universe.
What a trip that would be.
Another way to think about it is that there's kind of a ring singularity in the middle of
this black hole.
When you have a rotating black hole, the mathematics, which I won't show you today, kind of indicates
that the singularity is a ring, and you could actually go through that ring avoiding the
dense parts.
Now you'd have to worry about being tidally disrupted through this spaghettification process.
You need to worry about that.
But forgetting that minor complication, it looks like you could go through the ring or
in a sense between these two event horizons and end up in another universe.
Now recall what I said earlier when I said that you could take a flat sheet of paper
and roll it into a cylinder, and you haven't changed the local geometry.
This is still flat space.
You've changed what's called the topology.
You've taken something that goes out in all these directions and is flat and doesn't join
in on itself, and now you've joined it in on itself so that you could actually sort of
go around in circles and stuff, so you've changed the topology, but you haven't changed
the local geometry.
So now suppose I take this Crescult-Saccaris diagram of the rotating black hole, and I've
got it on a sheet of paper, and I wrap the paper around making a cylinder.
Here's the diagram that I would get.
Now this looks complicated, but it's not so bad.
You've got the usual Crescult-Saccaris diagram wrapped around itself to form a cylinder.
Consider what sort of a journey you might take.
You could start out here from Earth, go through the wormhole of a bunch of rotating black
holes all the way around, and come back to your own universe.
In this case, the journey ends up at a place sort of forward in time from where you started
here on Earth, but you might imagine starting somewhere here, let's say, going into the
rotating black hole, going around all these universes here, and then ending up here at
a position in time that precedes the time at which you left for your journey.
This diagram suggests that you could go through these wormholes and come back to your own
universe, or go to other universes, but let's come back to our own universe at a time before
you left.
This is bad news, because what if you decided to go off and prevent your parents from ever
meeting before you were born?
So your parents never meet.
They go off and marry someone else and have other kids or whatever.
How could you then have been born to make this journey in the first place and prevent
your parents from having ever met?
This is what physicists call a violation of causality.
There's always a cause and effect relationship.
Whatever effect you have, there's a cause that preceded it, cause and effect.
You can't go back in time, physicists think, and change the history of the universe in
such a way as to have prevented your existence and your going back and doing all these things
that change the history of the universe.
This appears in science fiction books and movies all the time, back to the future and
all this kind of stuff.
But this is a real problem for physicists because all of physics falls apart if you
violate causality.
So this looks like a real problem.
It's often said that you go back in time and kill your parents, but I don't want to be
that violent.
Just prevent your parents from ever meeting before you were born.
How could you have done that if you weren't born?
That's the essence of the problem.
So how do we deal with this?
One way in which physicists deal with this is by saying that, okay, there's something
about the violation of causality that's so fundamental that that fundamental aspect of
physics prevents any real journey through black holes of this sort, even though it appears
to be mathematically possible.
The other way to deal with this is to say that these diagrams that I drew are actually
for idealized black holes.
By that I mean that these are black holes that existed with the birth of the universe.
The universe was born with these black holes and wormholes already present during the time
of birth.
These are not wormholes or black holes that formed as a result of the collapse of a real
star.
Because the problem is that if the wormhole results from the formation of a black hole
that resulted from the collapse of a rotating star, then it turns out there's enough matter
in the central regions to crunch up the wormhole and squeeze it shut.
Or even if there's not that material, even if you've got an idealized black hole to begin
with, if you decide to make this journey into it, you will in the process gain so much energy
and contribute it to the black hole that that will squeeze the wormhole shut.
So it's sort of like a catch-22.
The idealized wormhole and black hole may present a passage to another universe or to
your own universe as long as you don't actually choose to make the journey.
If you choose to make the journey, your own gravity and the energy associated with your
motion squeezes the wormhole shut.
That may be the way to get out of this conundrum.
You can't violate causality because the wormhole squeezes shut.
But then some physicists have countered and said, well, what if there's some sort of locally
anti-gravitating material out of which you could make a spacesuit that would prevent
the wormhole from squeezing shut?
If that's the case, then maybe you could make this journey and we're back to this problem
of the violation of causality.
Perhaps we can take solace in the fact that no such anti-gravitating substance has been
found that you can locally harness and create an anti-gravity field around you.
I will talk later about dark energy that has anti-gravitating properties and fills our
whole universe.
But it does not appear as though we know of any kind of material that you could locally
harness and collect and create a spacesuit out of and prevent the wormhole from squeezing
shut.
So it looks like, though mathematically, you might be able to make these journeys through
idealized black holes, in practice, it just doesn't work.
And indeed, the science fiction stories are just that, science fiction, not fact.
