Given the extreme curvature within a black hole, for many decades physicists thought
that black holes are truly black, nothing can escape from within the confines of this
highly curved space-time.
But now, in attempts to unify the two great pillars of modern physics, general relativity
on the one hand, the physics of the very large, and quantum mechanics on the other hand, or
quantum physics, the physics of very, very small things, it has been found that perhaps
black holes actually do shine, gradually radiating away their mass and ending up as gargantuan
explosions.
That's a pretty amazing thought, okay?
Black holes shining, why would that happen?
Well, this is a generic feature of attempts to unify quantum physics and general relativity.
You might ask, why should they be unified if they work so well?
Well, it turns out, though, each of them works well in its own realm of applicability.
When you try to put them together and you try to describe the properties of very small
particles or even of space itself over very small spatial scales, the results from quantum
physics and general relativity are completely at odds with one another.
They are in violent disagreement.
The two theories are utterly incompatible and give nonsensical answers when you try
to apply both quantum mechanics and general relativity to high-energy particles or very
small regions of space or things like that.
Now, we don't yet have a fully self-consistent unified theory of general relativity and quantum
physics together.
Attempts are being made all over the place at such a theory and the leading candidate
is string theory, and I'll have a little bit to say about string theory later on in the
course.
But what I want to emphasize here is that regardless of the specifics of the unification
theories, of which there are several, it is thought that a general theory of unification
a generic property will be this interesting evaporation of black holes.
That is, it seems to be so fundamental that it will end up being a characteristic or a
prediction of any specific unified theory, whatever it ends up being.
And the basic idea is that this evaporation occurs due to the presence of quantum fluctuations
in and near the black hole's event horizon, and it works best for tiny little black holes
with a lot of curvature where particles can actually escape from the black hole in a manner
actually analogous to quantum tunneling, kind of like if I hit myself against the wall enough
times I'll end up on the other side someday unscathed.
Now, the odds for that are low, very low, so I'm not about to do it.
If you have enough particles trying to do this, and if the wall, if the barrier isn't insurmountable,
then they can actually travel through it and get out to the other side.
So why might we expect a black hole to evaporate?
I'm going to give you the general argument, and it gets pretty complex, okay?
This is really hairy stuff, kind of like traveling through a wormhole, which I discussed in the
previous lecture.
I just want you to get the gist of the idea.
Don't worry about the details or the mathematics, you know?
It's really quite complex stuff, but I thought it was just too good to pass up in a course
like this.
In the next lecture, I'll get back to the observations and things that go bang and that
you can photograph and see and stuff, but here we're getting a little bit of theoretical
physics and it's fun.
My account will follow the historically correct order, so you can get some idea of how these
notions developed with time, okay?
And initially, we will ignore quantum effects entirely, so we'll say there's just classical
physics, there's no quantum mechanics, no quantum fluctuations, and nothing weird like
that.
All right, well, we've said that, classically, the mass of at least a non-rotating black
hole cannot decrease with time.
It can only stay the same or increase with time, all right?
I said that nothing can get out of a black hole.
So matter and energy, photons can be added to a black hole, increasing its mass.
That increases its Schwarzschild radius and it increases the surface area of the black
hole as well, because the surface area of the event horizon being a spherical structure
is just 4 pi times the Schwarzschild radius squared.
So if you're adding material in and the Schwarzschild radius is growing, the surface area will
grow as well in proportion to the square of the Schwarzschild radius.
And the Schwarzschild radius is proportional to the mass of the black hole, so the surface
area of a non-rotating black hole is proportional to the square of the mass of the black hole,
okay?
Since M cannot decrease, the surface area cannot decrease either.
It can best remain the same, or if stuff falls in, it increases.
Now let's consider the analogous situation for a rotating black hole.
For a rotating black hole, it turns out that the surface area again can only increase or
stay the same.
It can never decrease.
The mass can actually decrease under certain circumstances, because as I said, you're tapping
the rotational energy when you send garbage in a special way toward a rotating black hole.
So you can fiddle around with the spin and the mass and the other properties, but the
thing that cannot decrease is the surface area of the event horizon of a rotating black
hole.
That can only remain the same or increase.
All right, well, this idea that the surface area of either a rotating or a non-rotating
black hole can only increase or remain the same got stated as the second law of black
hole dynamics by Stephen Hawking.
He said, in any natural process, the surface area of the event horizon of a black hole
always increases or at best remains constant.
It never decreases.
That's the second law of black hole dynamics.
Now worded in this way, it closely resembles the second law of thermodynamics.
Now thermodynamics is the study of the relationship between heat and work and other forms of energy.
What happens to the temperature of a gas if you pump on it like in a bicycle tire, all
that's thermodynamics.
And it's a very important field in physics.
And it has four laws, the zero, first, second, and third.
And the second law is by far the most important.
It plays a huge role in governing the physical universe.
And the second law states the following.
In any natural process, the entropy of a closed system always increases or at best remains
constant.
It never decreases.
That sounds a lot like the second law of black hole dynamics, where it's the surface area
of the event horizon that always increases or at best remains constant.
Well what are entropy and a closed system?
Entropy is just a measure of the amount of disorder in a system, you know, things jumbling
around.
Are there many different ways of organizing something or are there only a couple of different
ways?
How much disorder is there?
You know, you start out with a clean desk, maybe at the beginning of the week, I never
have a clean desk.
But by the end of the week, it's all jumbled up.
That's entropy, okay?
Entropy of the universe basically increases unless you take pains to decrease it.
And if you do that, the entropy somewhere else has to increase.
Closed system, what's that?
Well, a closed system is one from which nothing escapes.
All are present and accounted for, so to speak.
You haven't lost touch with any components of the system.
So stated in this way, the second law of thermodynamics and the second law of black hole dynamics
sound quite similar.
And it turns out that there are ways of stating the zero first and third laws of thermodynamics
in a way that's analogous to the properties of black holes.
That is, black holes behave in ways that can be described by sentences that resemble very
much the zero first and third laws of thermodynamics, not just the second law.
So this resemblance, this correspondence between the laws of black hole dynamics and
thermodynamics led in 1972 to a proposal by the physicist Jacob Beckenstein that the surface
area of a black hole is basically proportional to its entropy.
So you have the event horizon and it has some surface area which can never decrease in size.
And he said, let the surface area be proportional to its entropy.
Some disorder in a black hole that can be measured in some way, but a nice way of just
quantifying how much disorder there is is by simply saying, hey, here's the surface
area of the event horizon and the bigger the surface area, the greater is the entropy of
the black hole.
Well you might say, why is there any entropy at all in a black hole?
What's all this disorder?
I mean, we don't see anything inside it, so it's not like my cluttered desk.
Well the entropy of a black hole is related to the no-hair theorem that I mentioned in
lecture 60.
Remember I said that a black hole has no hair, a black hole in equilibrium, which is
not still collapsing but has pretty much reached an equilibrium configuration, can be described
by three and only three properties.
It's mass, it's angular momentum or spin, and it's charge.
And in fact, we don't even expect most black holes to be charged or even any for that matter
because they rapidly steal the opposite charges away from their surroundings and neutralize
themselves even if they happen to have been born with some charge.
So a black hole is a very simple structure.
It has no details, it has no hair, it only has a mass and a spin, and maybe a charge.
Okay?
Well that's kind of weird because there was a lot of information that went into making
the black hole.
You've got this black hole and you throw books into it, they're full of information.
You throw sculptures in it, you throw yourself into it, that wouldn't be so smart, okay?
But anyway, you throw things into a black hole that clearly have information.
There's, you know, they have properties and you know those properties, and yet after the
black hole has devoured them, you can't tell anything about what the black hole consists
of, right?
You don't know what was thrown in there.
You've lost all that information.
A loss of information corresponds to a gain in entropy.
So indeed, black holes have a tremendous amount of entropy because of this loss of information.
Alright, so next step, the analogy with the laws of thermodynamics suggests that a black
hole is physically a thermal body.
It's like a body jiggling around and emitting radiation and all that.
Indeed it resembles very closely what we call the black body earlier in this course.
Remember a black body is one that doesn't transmit any radiation and it doesn't reflect
any radiation, it only absorbs it and it heats up, okay?
Well a black hole doesn't transmit any radiation, a black hole isn't transparent and it doesn't
reflect any photons, it only absorbs them.
So it really looks in that sense like a black body.
It absorbs stuff, doesn't transmit it or reflect it.
So if a black body can be thought of, so if a black hole can be thought of as a thermal
body of this sort, then it must have a temperature associated with it because any thermal body
has a temperature associated with it.
And if there's a temperature associated with the black hole, then as in the case of any
black body at a non-zero temperature, it must radiate, it must shine, right?
Any thermal object with a non-zero temperature has things jiggling around and they shine,
they emit radiation, that's what a black body does.
So the idea then would be that a black hole being like a thermal body, like a black body,
shines.
Well, that's weird, that's paradoxical right away because remember I said that we're ignoring
quantum effects and in classical physics nothing can get out of a black hole.
Yet the whole shining process of a thermal body is really a quantum mechanical property
and so you've got this conundrum where you started treating the black hole as a classical
body and suddenly you conclude that it shines because it's got a temperature, but shining
is an inherently quantum mechanical process so you're forbidden from using that and plus
nothing can get out of a black hole anyway.
We were taught that since we were on our mother's knee, or at least since you heard me a few
lectures ago, right?
So Beckenstein basically didn't pursue the idea any further.
He felt that this is where the analogy between black holes and normal black bodies must fail.
He didn't pursue it.
But Stephen Hawking realized that the conclusion that nothing can come out of a black hole might
not hold if you consider quantum mechanical processes, okay?
He said that maybe stuff can come out.
For example, if you have automatic creation and annihilation of little particles and antiparticles
and things like that, maybe there's a way for them to get out in some cases and in fact
then in 1975 Hawking published an article where he proposed that black holes can evaporate
through a quantum mechanical process regardless of the details of whatever theory finally
emerges unifying quantum mechanics and general relativity in a fully self-consistent way.
He said that this should happen regardless of the details because it's a fundamental
process having to do with creation of little particles and antiparticles.
Well he describes some of his work in a very popular book published in 1988, A Brief History
of Time.
It's an interesting book.
It's heavy going at times.
It's not conceptually easy and indeed he's written some books since then, The Universe
in a Nutshell and A Briefer History of Time where the concepts are explained a little bit
more clearly and plus more time has gone by and new things have been discovered.
But the original book, A Brief History of Time, has one equation in it, E equals MC squared.
Actually his publishers told him that sales would drop by one half for every equation
that he includes in the book and so he apparently wasn't willing to have sales drop too much
but E equals MC squared is so important that you can't have a book on physics without including
E equals MC squared, okay.
Anyway, so as I said this book is interesting but a tough read.
It's been purchased by a lot of people.
It was a number one best seller but I kind of like to joke that it's the most purchased
but least read through to completion book in existence.
I mean people like to have it on their coffee tables and stuff regardless of whether they
really understand it because visitors come by and they say, ooh you read Stephen Hawking's
books.
He must be really brilliant and I'm not denigrating anyone here if you don't understand his book.
It's hard stuff.
It's difficult quantum mechanics and general relativity which he's trying to explain to
the lay person and he does an admirable job but I think a better job in his later books
which were written also with the help of people who have a lot of experience explaining things
to the general public.
So here's the basic idea for the evaporation.
It goes back to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which I had already introduced
in lecture 20 when discussing the wave particle duality of light.
You will recall that Heisenberg was this great physicist who thought of things while
other physicists were also considering quantum aspects of the world and Heisenberg in particular
said that well there's a certain uncertainty in any measurement.
If you measure for example the energy of a physical process over a certain amount of
time then the product of the uncertainty in your measurement of the energy and the uncertainty
in the time at which you made that measurement which is essentially the length of time it
took the measurement has to be bigger than some number and it's a small number.
Here you can see delta E, delta T is bigger than or approximately equal to H, Planck's
constant after Mach's Planck, a very small number divided by 2 pi.
So he said that you cannot know with perfect precision the energies of a system or the
time at which you made that measurement such that say the product is 0 or less than this
quantity H over 2 pi.
Similarly there's a relationship regarding the product of the uncertainties in the position
of a particle let's say and it's momentum, it's mass times its velocity.
You can't know both quantities with perfect precision.
Delta X, delta P, P is momentum and delta means uncertainty.
That product delta X, delta P is at least as big as Planck's constant over 2 pi and
I have this t-shirt from purely academic t-shirts that says Heisenberg says delta X, delta
P is greater than or equal to H bar, H bar is H over 2 pi.
The equation knows best and indeed this is one of the fundamental equations of all of
quantum physics.
So Heisenberg contributed to the ideas that many of his contemporaries were giving out
but his uncertainty principle I think is one of the most essential aspects of quantum theory.
You really can't have quantum theory without something like the uncertainty principle.
So you can know the position of something really well in which case you don't know its
momentum very well at all, its mass times its velocity or it's just its velocity let's
say.
Or you can know the energy really well, a small uncertainty in the energy but in that
case you don't know the time very well.
Or vice versa, you can know the time really well and not the energy or you can know the
speed or momentum really well but not the position.
These are complementary quantities and there's this great joke about Heisenberg.
He was driving a car and he was breaking the speed limit by a lot and he was stopped by
a police officer and the police officer said do you know how fast you were going?
And Heisenberg said no sir but I know where I am.
So he knew where he was but he didn't know at all how fast he was going.
So he appealed to the uncertainty principle.
I think he was still issued a ticket but I don't really know.
It's a joke.
Okay.
All right so let's get back to the energy and time version.
Delta E delta T is greater than H over 2 pi whenever we make an observation of a real
system.
However, there can be cases where virtual particles form spontaneously out of nothing.
With an energy E or delta E, delta E is just their energy, they start out with nothing
and now they have some energy so that's the change in energy delta E and they exist for
a certain amount of time, boom, delta T. And if that time is short enough, the product
delta E delta T can be less than plonks constant over 2 pi.
Delta E delta T is less than plonks constant over 2 pi.
This is a temporary quantum violation of the classical law of conservation of energy because
something appeared out of nothing.
But that's okay.
Quantum mechanics allows violations of classical laws.
That's what quantum mechanics is all about.
Or another way to think of it is that the positive energy created by this little pair
of particles that gets created leaves behind sort of a negative energy hole so that they
cancel out and the energy is still zero.
There are different ways of thinking about it and I'll talk about this more later when
I talk about the dark energy of the universe.
But in any case, this creation of virtual particles is going on everywhere in this room,
everywhere inside of atoms, everywhere all the time.
They are called quantum fluctuations.
But you can look at them here.
You've got, for example, a neutrino gets created out of nothing and so does an anti-neutrino.
Then a little while later they annihilate.
Or a proton gets created out of nothing and so does an anti-proton, a little while later
they annihilate.
So you start with zero, you end up with something for a short time, and then finally they annihilate
and the final state is zero once again.
Quark and anti-quark.
There was zero to begin with, then for a while there were both of them and then a little
bit later there's zero in the end, or electron and positron.
These are all matter, anti-matter pairs, particles, anti-particles.
What do you call matter and what do you call anti-matter?
It doesn't really matter if you get my drift.
We could have called anti-matter matter and then the opposite thing would have been anti-matter.
They're just the opposites, okay?
When they hit each other they annihilate and we've already encountered positrons which
are anti-electrons when we consider nuclear reactions in the sun and other stars.
Okay, well these quantum fluctuations are virtual in that you can't directly measure
them because they don't last long enough, but they do affect the universe.
They affect the energy levels of the hydrogen atom and there are other things called the
Casimir effect.
And I'll discuss this all more when I discuss this dark energy in the universe that appears
to be making the universe expand at a faster and faster rate.
So I'll get to this in more detail in the cosmology part of the course.
But suffice it to say for now that these quantum fluctuations do exist and their influence
on the properties of atoms and things has been measured.
So they really are real, but you can't measure any specific quantum fluctuation individually
because to do so would be a violation of this Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
They only exist because they themselves are violating the uncertainty principle.
If you try to make a measurement on them, the product of the energy in the time would
have to be bigger than Planck's constant over 2 pi, and that's not allowed because they
don't exist to allow you to make that kind of a measurement.
This is crazy stuff.
No one has a good intuitive feel for quantum mechanics and that's just the way it goes.
But it works.
It gives predictions which agree with experimental measurements in so many ways.
All right, back to quantum fluctuations now near a black hole.
Near a black hole, these fluctuations can occur all over the place.
They can occur outside the black hole, for example, an electron and a positron can spontaneously
appear and then disappear, and that can happen within the black hole as well.
Or maybe it happens outside the black hole and then both of them go into the black hole
and then they disappear, you know, they annihilate.
So most of the time they just spontaneously form and they annihilate.
But occasionally one of the two particles, and it doesn't matter whether it's the particle
or the antiparticle, in this case the electron or the positron, in any case one can go in
leaving the other one outside.
Now that's weird.
If the other one is left outside, it doesn't have a partner with which to annihilate and
so in principle it could escape.
This is amazing.
It can escape.
Being with it energy, positive energy, where did that energy come from?
From our perspective, the particle or antiparticle that went in went in with negative energy.
Now this is hard stuff.
You know, it's not intuitive.
It's kind of like remember in the black hole case where we outside think of the singularity
as being a point in space, we always talk about it being the center of the black hole.
But then I said if you actually enter a black hole, specifically a non-rotating one, the
singularity is horizontal in the space-time diagram, that is it exists over a large region
of space, not a single point.
So space and time kind of become reversed inside a black hole.
The singularity is not a point in time, the singularity is not a point in space.
It's sort of everywhere in space and it occurs at some time in your future.
So time and space reverse their meaning as seen from the outside.
Similarly particles can travel in with negative energy as seen from the outside.
That's just the way it works.
And so the other guy, the one that didn't go into the event horizon, can escape.
And as a bunch of them escape, all together they interact, they create photons, they annihilate
each other creating even more photons or they accelerate past each other emitting photons.
The result is that you get a thermal distribution of energies for the resulting photons and
the particles that escaped.
This is called Hawking Radiation and in fact it is the evaporation of black holes.
Now when I give this lecture in my class at UC Berkeley, I dress up as a black hole and
I've got a little alien hanging from my neck.
That alien is being tidally disrupted or spaghettified by the tidal forces of the black
hole and there's a little thing in the alien that says, take me to your leader.
So I have buckets attached to me with celestially appropriate candy like Mars bars and Eclipse
gum and orbit gum and Starburst candy and Milky Way and all that.
So I have these little buckets attached to me and I start throwing the candy out to the
audience and that's to illustrate an evaporating black hole.
And it's very memorable to the students.
So they actually get that part of the exam questions right.
So this black hole evaporation is sort of almost like a tunneling process is another
way you can think of it.
Again I could ram myself against the wall and eventually make it through.
You can think of these black hole evaporation processes as in a sense particles being created
inside the horizon and then tunneling their way through.
That's another way of thinking about it.
The mathematics is very complex but there are various more or less intuitive ways of
trying to think about it.
And I spoke at length about the particle creation and annihilation process, the quantum fluctuations.
But another way of thinking about it is quantum tunneling or something.
But in any case you get this evaporation.
So outside the horizon there's all these particles and photons coming out.
The black hole is losing energy in the process.
And the temperature associated with the black hole is given by Planck's constant times the
speed of light cubed divided by the quantity 16 pi squared times a thing called Boltzmann's
constant K times G, Newton's constant of gravity times M, the mass of the black hole.
The important part here is that the temperature is proportional to the reciprocal or the inverse
of the mass of the black hole.
So as the black hole evaporates its mass decreases, the temperature rises because it's the reciprocal
of the mass.
The luminosity of a black body is proportional to r squared t to the fourth, if you've got
a spherical one, remember l equals 4 pi r squared t to the fourth, sigma t to the fourth.
So l is proportional to r squared t to the fourth, r is proportional to M, t is proportional
to 1 over M, so in the end l is proportional to 1 over M squared if you do the math.
As the mass decreases, the temperature of the black hole increases, the rate of evaporation
increases and as the mass goes to zero, the evaporation rate goes to infinity, that is
the thing in the end explodes.
Now for any stellar mass black holes or supermassive black holes in the middle of galaxies, the
rate at which they evaporate is utterly negligible, they accrete material from their surroundings
much more quickly, much, much more quickly.
This evaporation is only at a high rate for black holes that are tiny, maybe a billionth
of the mass of the earth or less, okay?
Hawking has suggested that such tiny black holes do form shortly after the birth of the
universe due to density variations shortly after the Big Bang.
If that's the case, then all of the ones that are born with less than 10 to the 15th grams,
that's about the mass of a big mountain, have already evaporated away.
There's been enough time, 14 billion years for them to evaporate away.
The ones that are 10 to the 15th grams in mass initially, having an event horizon roughly
the size of a proton, are right at this time evaporating furiously away, and since the
rate of evaporation approaches infinity as the mass approaches zero, you end up with
these bangs.
And most of the photons that should come out should be gamma ray photons.
So if miniature black holes exist from the birth of the universe, then Hawking says some
of them should be evaporating right now, and should be giving rise to gigantic bursts
of gamma rays, high energy photons.
Have we ever seen any gamma ray bursts that might be indicative of the evaporation of miniature
black holes?
Stay tuned and I'll tell you in the next lecture.
