In discussing the evaporation of miniature low-mass black holes like the mass of a mountain
or something, I said that a burst of gamma rays would be emitted, a burst of radiation
just as the thing's mass is going to zero.
Interestingly, celestial gamma ray bursts, or GRBs for short, have indeed been detected.
But unfortunately for Stephen Hawking, they are very unlikely to be evaporating black
holes.
They just don't have the right properties, and I'll describe the properties of gamma
ray bursts in a few minutes.
However, we do think that gamma ray bursts are linked with the formation of black holes,
not miniature ones, but stellar mass black holes, it turns out.
These gamma ray bursts, or GRBs, are among the hottest topics of modern astrophysics.
There's just a flurry of activity going on right now in research on GRBs.
You can see, in fact, that even Bill Clinton was interested in this question in his science
and technology policy address.
He said, there are so many more questions yet to be answered, and so I wonder, are we
alone in the universe?
What causes gamma ray bursts?
And so on.
What makes up the missing mass of the universe?
What's in those black holes anyway?
So, he covered a lot of the important questions, as I had mentioned in a previous lecture,
and gamma ray bursts were on his mind during this science and technology policy address
in the year 2000.
The history of gamma ray bursts of celestial ones starts in the late 1960s, when several
spy satellites called the Vila spy satellites were launched by the U.S. Air Force to monitor
Soviet compliance with the nuclear test ban treaty.
They wanted to see whether the Soviets were essentially exploding nuclear weapons, which
create bursts of gamma rays in the process.
And they did not find any violations of the treaty.
But what they did find were these celestial sources that went bang in the night, or in
the day.
Bursts of gamma rays over a very short interval of time, just a few seconds up to a few hundred
seconds.
And that was really weird, because no one knew what could produce such celestial bursts.
Here's a picture of one of the Vila satellites, looking around, looking for violations of
the test ban treaty, and instead it made this amazing discovery, which launched a whole
new area of astrophysics.
So here's sort of an animation of what you might see with the Vila satellite.
There goes a burst of gamma rays, and then a few days later there's another burst, and
another burst.
And they appear in random parts of the sky.
They didn't appear to be concentrated in any single region, although the Vila satellites
only found 73 of these things, and you might say that with such a small number there might
not have been any apparent concentration toward any part of the sky.
When you look at the brightness of the gamma rays versus time, the so-called gamma ray
light curve of a GRB, you find that no two of them are the same.
They're like fingerprints, none of them are the same.
So here's a bunch of them, where on the vertical axis we're plotting the number of photons,
or counts, detected per second in units of 1,000, versus time in seconds.
And you can see that some of them are very spiky, some have a more smooth distribution,
some consist of only two spikes, some of many spikes.
The joke goes, when you've seen one GRB, you've seen one GRB, right?
You haven't seen them all, because they're all different.
Nevertheless, there are two main types of GRBs, the so-called long duration and short
duration GRBs.
The long duration GRBs are represented by this typical example.
They don't last long on a cosmic time scale, just a few tens of seconds or a few hundred
seconds, but that's long compared to another class, the short duration ones, which last
only a second or two or less.
So look at this one, it just spiked up and down in much less than a second, whereas this
one had many spikes over about a hundred seconds, so those are the long and short kind.
Now here you can also see one that lasted a few seconds, four or five seconds, and some
astronomers thought that that was yet a third class of GRBs, but really now that we found
many, many, many GRBs, we see that there's a distribution of times for the short ones
and there's a distribution of times for the long ones.
There's a valley that's right around a couple of seconds, and so we simply say that the
ones that are shorter than two or three seconds duration are the short ones and the ones longer
than two or three seconds duration are the long ones, but any specific GRB of duration
two or three seconds, you don't really know whether it's fundamentally the long burst
variety or the short burst variety, and they have some other differences as well.
The short ones tend to emit more really high energy gamma rays than the long ones, and
there are other differences, but in some cases you can't really tell which one you're looking
at.
Well, so these gamma ray bursts appeared with no particular concentration in the sky, so
let me show you a map again of the Earth, this is the whole Earth, and an analogous map
of the sky would look like this, and you can see the plane of the Milky Way galaxy going
across the center of the map here, and there's the halo above and below it, and the bulge
region in the middle.
So what we're saying is that the GRBs found by the Vela satellites kind of appeared everywhere
randomly in the sky.
Now if these things had been, for example, surface explosions on neutron stars, I mean
you might expect that neutron stars accreting material might go through a nova process,
kind of like a white dwarf accreting material.
That was one postulated model for gamma ray bursts.
Well, if they're neutron stars, you would have expected their distribution to resemble
that of the Milky Way galaxy, that is especially of the massive stars in the Milky Way galaxy,
because massive stars tend to produce neutron stars at the end of their lives and they would
be concentrated toward the plane.
Some neutron stars escape, you know, and so they're seen up here, but most are along the
plane, and this is indeed the distribution of pulsars that I showed in an earlier lecture.
The fact that they were distributed more uniformly, more isotropically as it is called, immediately
showed that these things are not basically neutron star nova, you know.
Well so what could they be with such an isotropic distribution?
One possibility was that they are very nearby, just a few light years away.
Okay, if they're all just a few light years away, you might expect a spherical or an isotropic
distribution around you.
But in that case, why don't we see the ones that are farther away?
By that I mean all the gamma ray bursts that the Vela satellites detected were easily detected,
they were easily bright enough to be seen.
There could have been fainter ones that would have been barely bright enough to be seen,
but the Vela satellites didn't see them.
When you see the gamma ray burst, it's really bright.
So if there's a spherical distribution of weird objects around us, why does it end at
a couple of light years?
Why aren't there ones farther away, in which case we'd see fainter gamma ray bursts?
So that possibility was ruled out rather quickly.
Another possibility was that these things are enormously distant, billions of light
years away.
And you know, the universe extends in all directions for billions of light years.
So if they're uniformly distributed in the universe, but mostly very, very far away from
us because they're rare, let's say, then you'd see this spherical distribution.
Or an isotropic distribution is another way of putting it.
But in that case, if they're billions of light years away, the intrinsic power or luminosity
of these gamma ray bursts must be truly stupendous because they're bright.
And if they're in addition at such gargantuan distances, that means they must be intrinsically
very, very powerful.
And no one knew of a way to come up with this stupendous amount of power.
Or people said, well, look at the distribution of our Milky Way galaxy.
What if they are halo objects?
What if they're way out here, but basically bound to our galaxy?
That would produce, to a first approximation, a spherical or isotropic distribution.
But there are problems with that model because, as I will tell you in more detail later, our
Sun is about one-half to two-thirds of the way out from the center of our galaxy toward
some ill-defined edge.
So we're out here somewhere, and there's more halo volume in these directions than
in the opposite directions.
So you'd expect more GRBs in these directions over here, where there's more volume for
the halo.
So then astronomers said, well, what if they are a population of an even bigger halo, sort
of 10 times bigger than the halo drawn in this picture here?
So in that case, we're nearly in the center of that distribution, and you might expect
it to be isotropic.
The problem with that is that if you make the halo too big, then you'd expect the Andromeda
galaxy, if it has a similar halo, to have a similar number of gamma-ray bursts, and
you might expect to start seeing a concentration of them toward the Andromeda galaxy.
Because if our galaxy is typical, and the Andromeda galaxy is kind of like ours, and
they have these vast halos of gamma-ray bursts, you should see Andromeda's population of
gamma-ray bursts, yet there was no apparent concentration of gamma-ray bursts toward Andromeda.
So there was a big debate.
Are they halo objects, or are they at these so-called cosmological distances, billions
of light-years?
Very difficult to tell.
We really didn't know for many years.
Well, this was great for theorists, because they could come up with all sorts of models,
all mechanisms for what gamma-ray bursts might be, and they were essentially unconstrained
by the data, because we didn't really know how far away they are.
So in fact, in the 20 years between 1973 and 1992, 118 distinct hypotheses had been published
by theoretical astrophysicists trying to explain the nature, the physical nature of gamma-ray
bursts.
For example, they might be matter-antimatter collisions, you have balls of matter-antimatter,
who knows where they came from, but they would produce gamma-rays.
Or maybe they're comets hitting the surfaces of neutron stars.
Neutron stars have a high surface gravity.
There's a lot of pull there.
So when a comet hits the surface, it releases a lot of energy, and that tends to come out
in energetic gamma-rays.
Or maybe they're a new class of exploding stars or something like that.
So the theorists were just running wild.
Unfortunately for Stephen Hawking, the theory that they are miniature black holes exploding
was not a viable theory for very long, despite the fact that there were not that many observations.
There were some, and the observations pretty much don't agree with his hypothesis of exploding
black holes, miniature black holes.
And the basic reason is that you saw that these gamma-ray bursts are kind of spiky.
They brighten and fade and brighten and fade, and an evaporating miniature black hole shouldn't
do that.
It should just go, you know, it explodes at the end, and there's an exponential sort
of ramp-up that goes, bang, like that, and it shouldn't do all these little wild oscillations
in brightness.
And there were other problems as well.
So although one of the 118 hypotheses was that these are the long-sought miniature
black holes, unfortunately, you know, that's not what they are.
So that's the way it goes.
Well, great progress was made in this area by the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory, one
of NASA's four great orbiting observatories.
There's the Hubble Space Telescope, there's the Spitzer Space Telescope, there's the
Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory, and then there is the Chandra X-ray Observatory.
And these are, you know, fantastically important telescopes, and in particular the Compton
Gamma-Ray Observatory lasted from 1991 to the year 2000, and it detected a whole bunch
of Gamma-Ray bursts.
Here's an artist's impression of the Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory.
You can see a number of gizmos here.
These are the different detectors that it had.
It was deployed by the space shuttle and then the various instruments began to collect data.
In particular, there was an instrument called the Burst and Transient Source Experiment,
and you can see that there are actually eight little devices at the corners, at the eight
corners of this rectangular box, and these devices scan the sky in eight octants, and
they essentially monitor most of the sky at any given time.
This batsy thing here, two of the eight are shown, and this batsy device then detected
a whole bunch of Gamma-Ray bursts, and you can see one going off right there.
In the sky above the Milky Way in this particular case, you can see a burst, and you can plot
the brightness, or the photons per second versus time, and see this thing brightening
and fading, and that's what batsy did.
And it found 2,700 of these things during the nine or ten years of operation.
And when you plot the distribution of these nearly 3,000 Gamma-Ray bursts in the sky,
you can see that the distribution is completely uniform.
It's isotropic.
No area of the sky has a concentration of Gamma-Ray bursts, which is statistically greater than
any other area.
Now you might see, well, there's a hole right there, and there's a clump right here.
But if you throw darts at the wall in a room, you will get statistically significant-looking
clumps and areas where there weren't any darts, even if you just throw blindly.
You have to actually look at the statistics and figure out whether this is a physical
clumping or not.
And it turns out this is consistent with random throwing of darts onto the wall.
There's no clear clumping in any part of the sky.
And the different colors are used to signify different energies for the Gamma-Ray bursts,
how bright they were, how intense they were.
So these and other data suggested that Gamma-Ray bursts are, in fact, at cosmological distances
very, very far away, because they couldn't really be in an extended halo of our galaxy
because we still live sort of toward one side, and you'd see more of them in one region
than the other.
And moreover, if Andromeda is similar to our galaxy, we should have started seeing Gamma-Ray
bursts corresponding to Andromeda, which is only 2 million light-years away.
And if our halo is nearly that big, and we're seeing Gamma-Ray bursts in our halo, then
we should see them in Andromeda as well.
Those are comparable distances.
So we didn't see a distribution that was concentrated toward Andromeda.
And so most people started recollectively saying, these things are billions of light-years
away.
But that was a conclusion that was sort of not, you know, didn't make people feel good
because the energetics of these objects was still unfathomable.
And moreover, we didn't have any other way of studying these objects because no counterparts
to Gamma-Ray bursts at other wavelengths had ever been found.
The Batsy device on the Gamma-Ray Observatory told you roughly where a Gamma-Ray burst occurred
in the sky.
But it had an uncertainty that was pretty large, you know, five degrees or so, you
know, diameter, kind of like that of an outstretched hand, you know, and you couldn't tell exactly
where these things were.
And so people were trying to find optical and x-ray and radio counterparts or afterglows
to Gamma-Ray bursts in order to study them at other wavelengths and learn more about
them.
But there was nothing to be seen because these instruments wouldn't tell us precisely where
to look.
And so people were frustrated.
Well, in 1996, a huge breakthrough occurred when an x-ray satellite known as BeppoSax
was launched.
And it had the capability of not only detecting Gamma-Ray bursts, but also of getting an image
of that part of the sky where the burst occurred at lower photon energies, x-ray energies rather
than just the high energy Gamma-Rays, okay?
So it was able to look and pinpoint where the Gamma-Ray burst occurred.
And lo and behold, it found x-ray counterparts to the Gamma-Ray bursts.
Here's a visual picture of one of them.
These are, you know, optical photons, but they're used to represent x-ray photons.
So here you could finally tell with considerable accuracy where the Gamma-Ray burst occurred.
And with these precise positions provided by the BeppoSax satellite, optical astronomers
could then look at the sky and look for fading optical afterglows corresponding to the Gamma-Ray
bursts.
And sure enough, they were found.
Here is a bright object.
It looks dark in this picture because this is a negative image, not a positive image.
The sky should be black and the stars should be white.
And here on February 28, 1997, there's a bright thing.
And this was the same day as BeppoSax detected a Gamma-Ray burst at this position and found
an x-ray afterglow.
And then a week or so later, that bright optical thing had faded and there was nothing left
there.
There was a little fuzzy thing next to it.
Well, that fuzzy thing is a galaxy.
And spectra of the galaxy showed that it was really far away.
I'll tell you soon how we deduce those things.
We're getting to galaxies in the next part of the course.
So this optical transient was associated with a distant galaxy.
And other optical transients were found as well.
Here's one for GRB 97-1214.
They're named after the year in which they were found, the month and the day.
So this was December 14, 1997.
And here is a kek pair of images taken shortly after the GRB occurred and then sometime later.
And it had faded.
Well being associated with galaxies in all of the cases where we could see an object
next to the Gamma-Ray burst meant that these things really are far away and that undeniably
their power or luminosity must be incredibly large.
Now some of these things are unbelievably powerful.
There was one found in 1999, a Gamma-Ray burst that alerted, you know, astronomers
here on the ground and they studied that burst.
But there were also robotic telescopes that were scanning the sky and happened to catch
the optical afterglow of that Gamma-Ray burst.
And this telescope in particular called ROTC consists of four wide-angle cameras that are
sort of staring at the sky all the time, taking pictures, you know, click, click, click, just
multiple exposures.
And they caught the optical afterglow of the Gamma-Ray burst without even having been
notified that a Gamma-Ray burst occurred.
I mean, it was in their data already because they were taking data over a wide swath of
the sky.
And here you can see this optical afterglow on January 23rd, 1999.
And you can see that in a previous image taken in 1994, there was nothing there.
This optical afterglow was so bright that if you had been looking at the right part
of the sky through a good pair of binoculars, you would have seen it.
It was ninth magnitude, you know, a factor of 16 or so fainter than can be seen with
a naked eye.
But with a good pair of binoculars, you could see it.
And yet it turns out that this object is billions of light years away, roughly 10 billion light
years away.
And you could see it with a good pair of binoculars.
That is amazing, okay.
When the Hubble Space Telescope looked at the afterglow, it found that it is in a fuzzy
thing whose spectrum showed that it's a distant galaxy.
So indeed, gamma ray bursts are cosmological.
They occur in very distant galaxies.
And that was the big breakthrough of the BeppoSax satellite.
But BeppoSax only lasted a few years, and we wanted to get lots of these things.
You know, it found a few dozen, but we wanted hundreds in order to study their properties
overall.
You know, some are different from others.
We already know that from their light curves.
So you need to study an ensemble of objects.
Well, so some astronomers said, let's launch satellites that will specifically find these
things and then alert, in real time, ground-based telescopes to the presence of the gamma ray
bursts so that those ground-based telescopes can right away, maybe even robotically, turn
their gaze toward the right part of the sky and capture a possible optical afterglow.
So there was an experiment called the High Energy Transient Explorer, HEDI.
There were two of them.
HEDI-1 failed after launch.
But HEDI-2 was out there, and it found gamma ray bursts, and it measured their positions,
and then it transmitted those positions through radio signals to telescopes on the ground,
to one main station on the ground, which then, you know, distributed the data or the position
of the gamma ray bursts to telescopes throughout the Earth.
And the way that this HEDI thing was able to do that was that during its orbit, it is
always above a receiving station on the ground.
There's a network of telescopes, of radio telescopes on the ground, that could capture
the signals from the HEDI-2 satellite and transmit those signals to a central processing
unit, which would then tell all the ground-based radio telescopes what's going on.
So here you have HEDI flying above all these radio receivers on the ground, and there's
one in the Galapagos, and here Hiva-Oa, that's in the Marquesas Islands, and on Maui, and
all over the place, you know.
So this HEDI thing was great, and it alerted robotic telescopes like my telescope at Lake
Observatory, Kate, the telescope that Wei Dong Lee and I and my entire team run, primarily
to search for supernovae, but gosh, we want to get into the gamma ray burst game as well.
Why not?
You know, it's an exciting game.
So this HEDI satellite would send signals that our computer program would interpret
correctly, and it would, those signals would tell us the position of the gamma ray burst,
and the telescope would then automatically slew its position to the right part of the
sky and start taking photographs repeatedly, even as we slept, right?
We don't need to be present because HEDI tells the computer the coordinates, and the
computer is programmed to respond.
So here's one of our best successes.
There's the optical afterglow of a gamma ray burst, and some time later you can see
it has faded.
These things fade away quite quickly.
This was a gamma ray burst that was first seen on December 11, 2002, and you can see
that we took so many snapshots of it that we could monitor its light curve or brightness
on the vertical axis versus time, and this was, at that time, in December 2002, the best
ever sampled light curve of the optical afterglow of a GRB, and I'm very proud of our group
and of our telescope for getting this light curve.
Now the only kind of gamma ray bursts for which optical counterparts had been found
through the early 2000s, 2000, 2001, 2002, were the so-called long duration gamma ray
bursts.
We had never actually found a counterpart to a short duration burst, and that's because
these satellites don't have enough time to determine an accurate position for the short
duration bursts because they don't last very long, but at least HEDI and these other satellites
had found a lot of long duration bursts, had pinpointed their positions, and allowed us
to study them, and it turns out that studies of the radiation from these bursts showed
that the radiation must be coming out in jets in a highly beamed fashion, like a laser,
and what emerged was a so-called fireball model where, for some reason, jets of relativistic
particles, particles traveling at nearly the speed of light, are ejected along two axes,
and then they interact with material and cause a lot of radiation to come out.
So here's the idea, there's some engine here, which might be very small, creating a burst
of energetic particles which hit each other.
There are many such bursts, causing internal shocks because these various bursts of particles
slam into each other.
The collisions produce a lot of gamma rays, that's the gamma ray burst, and then sometime
later those energetic clumps of particles hit clouds of gas, the interstellar medium,
and those collisions produce radio waves and optical radiation and x-rays.
So it's this so-called external shock that produces the afterglow at other wavelengths
and an internal shock that produces the gamma rays themselves.
And what was found was that these long duration bursts occur in galaxies forming lots and
lots of massive stars, here's an example of one.
So this jet mechanism must be something associated with massive stars.
So something called the Collapsar model was developed by Stan Woosley and his group.
He basically said that in some cases, the collapse of a massive star can form a jet
along the axis of rotation of that star, and that jet can burst through the star.
And if the jet is oriented along our line of sight, then we will see it glowing brightly,
and if it's pointing the wrong way, then we won't see it.
It's just, you know, it's pointing the wrong way, it's kind of like a pulsar pointing the
wrong way.
So here's what could happen then, you've got a massive star blowing off a wind of material,
but then near the end of its life, that star decides to collapse.
So it's collapsing like the first stage of a supernova.
But it's also rotating, and along the axis of rotation, there's this jet of radiation
and particles, which pummels its way through the star, bursting through the surface and
creating two oppositely directed beams or jets, which, if they happen to be pointing
our way, appear really, really bright.
And if they're not pointing our way, then we won't see the gamma ray burst, we might
just see a normal supernova or something like that.
So here's one of these jets pummeling its way through the star in a computer simulation.
These are very complex calculations that are done, but it looks like in some cases the jet
can pummel its way out through the star, and then these accelerated particles shine a tremendous
amount.
So these gamma rays, they collide with other particles, and they create this great burst.
So a snap picture might look something like this, and to demonstrate what might be happening,
you can try this at home.
I won't do it here in this nice classroom, but you can take a yogurt container of some
yogurt, but just make sure it's one of the containers that is narrower at the top than
at the bottom, and it's hollow here, I don't have anything inside.
If you were to drop this thing very carefully in a vertical way and let it hit the ground,
then you would see the yogurt go bursting out in a jet because it's being confined by
the sides of the container.
It's a dramatic thing to do, but just don't do it near any expensive furniture that can't
be cleaned or anything like that, or near first of their type paintings or something
like that, because it is very messy.
So this is sort of like the Supernova bounce demo, where the tennis ball was dropped on
top of a falling basketball and it got ejected.
So in a similar way, if you have a rotating star, then the sides can constrain the material
to flow more or less along the axis of rotation, and this works best probably if you have a
stripped core collapse Supernova, for example, one that doesn't have much or any hydrogen
or helium, so it only has the carbon and oxygen layers and the oxygen neon and magnesium and
the iron core.
In that case, there's not as much material for the jet to pummel through, so it's able
to get out more easily.
So the collapse arm model suggests that at least some long duration gamma ray bursts
are actually supernovae, and we see them along the jet axis of ejection.
And so there's a perfect test for this model.
We should go out, look at long duration gamma ray bursts, and see whether they indeed are
or are not in some cases associated with supernovae.
