We have seen that roughly once per day, somewhere in the sky, there's a tremendous burst of
high energy photons, gamma rays lasting just a few seconds or a few hundred seconds, just
coming from some random spot, a different spot each time, each day, roughly. Now these
so-called gamma ray bursts have a distribution of duration times, but generally there are
two groups, those with durations of less than two seconds or so, and those with durations
of more than two seconds. And it really is what's called a bimodal distribution, as
is shown here. There's this group of short duration gamma ray bursts centered on perhaps
a tenth or two tenths of a second duration, and then the long duration gamma ray bursts
centered on something like twenty second duration. And as I mentioned last time, the leading
hypothesis, at least for the long duration GRBs, is that they come from massive stripped
stars that implode, forming a relativistic jet of high energy particles along the axis
of rotation of this rotating star. And if the jet happens to be pointing in our direction,
then we see it as this bright flash. So here's this imploding star with an axis of rotation
along which relativistically accelerated particles, that is particles going at ninety, ninety-five,
even ninety-nine percent of the speed of light, are zooming along, emitting radiation. And
if that jet is pointing at us, it looks really, really bright, but it doesn't last very long.
Now we think that these objects come from the so-called stripped massive stars, not
stars that have a thick hydrogen envelope, such as the one at the left here, but rather
stars in which at least the hydrogen envelope is gone, and maybe even both the hydrogen
and helium envelopes. So these are the massive stars that either through winds of their own,
as this one here shows, or through transfer of material to a companion star, as in this
artist's illustration, have lost their outer envelopes of material, leaving a more or less
bare core, not all the way down to the iron, but at least down to the carbon and oxygen
layer, something like that. Why do we prefer a stripped star for the massive progenitor
of a gamma ray burst? It's simply because the more material that has been lost prior
to the implosion and explosion, the easier it is for this jet of particles to pummel
its way through the remaining material and actually get out. So if you look at this jet
trying to get out, if there's a lot of material through which it has to blast its way, it'll
lose energy. It'll slow down while trying to get out, and it'll be less likely to get
out. But if there's not much material, then it can make its way out more easily. And ideally,
there'd be no material at all blocking its path so that the high-speed charged particles
could zoom out very, very easily. But we're not sure whether this ideal is actually ever
reached in practice. We think that there's always at least a little bit of material through
which it has to go, but the jet has so much energy that it's able to blast its way through.
Now why do we want these objects to be rapidly rotating? That's part of this so-called collapse
R model, that the star not only implodes but is also rapidly rotating. Well, if you have
rapid rotation, then you get a natural ejection axis, a natural axis along which to funnel
these high-speed charged particles. And moreover, with rotation, you get an accumulation of
material in the equatorial plane, and that material blocks any jet from going along the
equator and forces it to go along the path of least resistance, that is, the axis. So
if you've got sort of a donut of material in the equatorial plane, the high-speed charged
particles are unlikely to go in that direction. Rather, they will go along the path of least
resistance, which is this axis of the jet. So then you might ask, why should some massive
stars, when they implode, when their cores implode, produce jets and others not produce
jets? What is it that makes the gamma ray bursts so energetic and so powerful compared
to normal supernovae? One leading hypothesis is that it's the same mechanism as the core
collapse mechanism I had previously described for type 2 and type 1b and type 1c supernovae.
But in this case, you have not only more rapid rotation than normal, but also collapse not
just down to a neutron star, having a radius of 10 kilometers or something like that, but
instead a black hole. So if the material collapses even more than to the size of a neutron star,
all the way down to a black hole, you can get a greater release of gravitational energy,
gravitational potential energy. You know, when you drop things, they pick up speed,
they fall. That's at the expense of their gravitational energy. And if something falls
into a deeper gravitational field, it picks up more speed. And if all these things collide
with one another, those collisions can lead to the emergence of radiation, of photons
and also of high speed charged particles. So it's thought that these GRBs may be literally
the birth cries of black holes. The black hole is formed during the implosion of the
star. And somehow, the details are still not understood, you get the conversion of gravitational
energy into the high speeds of the ejected particles going along these two bipolar jets.
Okay, that's the basic idea. Now, the remaining material could fall all the way in and continue
to form an even bigger black hole, or it could explode. So just because you have these two
jets coming out from the vicinity of a black hole doesn't mean that the rest of the material
absolutely has to collapse down into that black hole as well. I mean, if you formed a neutron
star along the way during this collapse, for example, then you might have a flood of neutrinos
that pushes out the remaining material in the more or less normal way of a supernova,
or some other effect might push out the remaining stuff. So you could get a supernova explosion
that's relatively normal for a core collapse object, except that it has these two jets,
okay? Or you might have all the material going whomp and collapsing directly down to a black
hole and not producing a supernova explosion. The collapse arm model comes in these two
basic flavors, okay? But the prediction is that at least in some cases, you not only
have the jet, but you have the material in the equatorial plane, which ultimately explodes
outwards, forming a more or less normal supernova. So the prediction might be that at least some
long duration gamma ray bursts are also associated with visible supernovae. So if we plot the
optical brightness on the vertical axis versus time along the horizontal axis, the gamma ray
burst after glow fades with time. That's the energy associated with the gamma ray burst
and with the jets crashing into circumstellar material, gas, you know, around the star.
So that after glow dies down with time. But then after a while, maybe a week or two after
the gamma ray burst, supernova light starts making its appearance because it starts to
dominate over the declining after glow of the gamma ray burst itself. So you might expect
to see bumps in the light curves of gamma ray bursts, at least if this hypothesis is
correct. Well, in 1998, there was a gamma ray burst, 980425, which happened to be spatially
coincident or at least consistent with the position of an optical supernova as shown
here. There's the optical picture of a supernova. And we know the gamma ray burst went off somewhere
in a little circle sort of surrounding that supernova. And it's at least in position consistent
with the supernova and also consistent in time. In other words, the supernova occurred
maybe a week or so after the gamma ray burst. And that's consistent with, you know, the
time it takes for supernova light to brighten. Now, in this particular case, there was no
optical after glow visible to the gamma ray burst itself. In other words, there wasn't
any optical radiation associated with the burst of gamma rays themselves. But a week
later, so there was this supernova. So some physicists said, well, you know, this is just
a spatial and temporal coincidence. These are two unrelated objects, and they happen
to be in about the same place and about the same time. But others said, well, this is
a really weird supernova. It has some really strange properties. And we think it really
was associated with the gamma ray burst and supports this collapse our model, where at
least in some cases, there's a supernova associated with the gamma ray burst. But there was doubt
in many people's minds. If you look at that supernova, it was a weird one. It looked like
not just a highly stripped type one C, but perhaps an even more highly stripped variety,
where even part of the carbon oxygen layer was gone, beginning to reveal the next layer
in the oxygen neon magnesium layer. And this supernova supernova 1998 BW associated with
the gamma ray burst, or at least possibly associated with it, you know, looked weird,
but supported the hypothesis that the progenitor stars of at least some collapse stars are
these highly stripped stars. Nevertheless, as I said, there was doubt. So people waited
for another example. And in 2003, there was GRB 030329 on March 29, 2003, and associated
with it was the optical light of a supernova and a spectrum brightness versus wavelength
from violet to red of the putative supernova associated with GRB 030329 looked very much
like the spectrum of that supernova 1998 BW, which had been supposedly associated with
gamma ray burst 980425. Now the spectrum is noisier. That's what all these little up and
down undulations are. But the big undulations, the broad ones are very similar to those in
supernova 1998 BW. And this pretty much sealed the case in the minds of many astronomers
because GRB 030329 was a much more typical GRB. It was more luminous than the one in
1998. It had a normal optical afterglow. In other words, it had all the characteristics
of normal GRBs, and it had a visible supernova associated with it. What more could you want?
That was just really great, many of us thought. By 2003 or so, the Collapsar model was reasonably
well established, and people thought that this may really signal the birth of a black
hole. Now we wanted more such cases, and so the Swift satellite was sent up in 2004, and
this satellite was a great example of a NASA mission that didn't cost very much. It was
about $250 million. It was special purpose, and it just exceeded expectations. It found
lots of gamma ray bursts and did lots of cool things. And so here's the lift off of the
rocket that launched the Swift satellite into an orbit high above Earth's atmosphere.
And in a 96 lecture astronomy course highlighting so many wonderful NASA results from NASA
telescopes, I've got to show at least one launch of one of these telescopes. So there
it is, a beautiful successful launch in November of 2004. And the Swift satellite since then
has been finding a gamma ray burst roughly every three days. And it's a very good satellite
because it has not only detectors that scan much of the sky, finding the gamma ray bursts,
that's what this bat thing is, burst and transient sort of a detector. But it also has an X-ray
telescope and a UV optical telescope, which can quickly take pictures of the part of the
sky from which the gamma ray burst occurred and find an X-ray and optical afterglow possibly
associated with the gamma ray burst. And here you can see the bat device detected a gamma
ray burst, the telescope then slewed quickly over toward the direction of the gamma ray
burst and the X-ray part of the telescope and the UV optical part of this whole spacecraft
then started snapping pictures of that part of the sky. And in this way they provide very
good coordinates and pictures of optical afterglows of GRBs. And here is sort of the field of
view of the X-ray telescope. It's said that well somewhere in there the gamma ray burst
occurred and in fact the UV optical telescope might even show the afterglow sitting in this
galaxy right there. So it's been a great satellite and most recently in February of 2006 it found
yet another case of a rather weak GRB with which there was clearly associated a visible
optical supernova. And that supernova as well had the characteristics of a stripped star.
However this particular weak GRB may have been associated with the formation of a neutron
star instead of a black hole. Now I've been talking so far about the long duration gamma
ray bursts. What about the population of short duration bursts which are only about one-fifth
or one-sixth as frequent as the long duration bursts but seem to be a class of their own.
They have shorter time scales, they tend to emit more high energy gamma rays and so on.
Well SWIFT has discovered several short duration gamma ray bursts for which it also found a
detected optical counterpart. So finally we see something glowing at other wavelengths
corresponding to the short duration gamma ray bursts. We didn't have that until 2004 or 2005.
And what has been found is that these short bursts seem to be in galaxies containing only
old stars. So here is one case of the SWIFT X-ray afterglow being somewhere in this little
circle here and everywhere in that circle are only old stars associated with the halo
of this galaxy here. This particular afterglow didn't show any optical radiation. Since then
there's been a little bit of optical radiation and we have absolutely verified that these
short duration gamma ray bursts come from distant galaxies having only old stars. Now
if you look at the position at which the short duration gamma ray burst occurred, not only
is it consistent with there being a population of old stars there but there's been no supernova
light associated with those particular afterglows. There's been no bump in the light curve as in
the long duration gamma ray bursts. And so this suggests that it's not a massive star
undergoing core collapse and the rest of it exploding, rather maybe it's two neutron stars
merging together to form a black hole during their final merging process. If that's the
case then short duration gamma ray bursts are also the birth cries of black holes. So
you might have two neutron stars orbiting each other closely like this and they spiral
together and as they merge some still mysterious process produces these two oppositely directed
jets. And here's an animation of what might be going on. Two neutron stars closely orbiting
one another like the binary pulsar I've discussed before. They spiral in toward each other and
during the final merger process a tremendous amount of energy is emitted. Boom! Like this,
and much of it is directed along two oppositely directed jets which in that particular animation
were going the wrong way by the way. They should have been going along the orbital axis of the two
stars and instead they went off in some cockeyed direction. That was a minor mess up by the
animator but oh well that's the way it goes. There's also the possibility that some of the
short duration gamma ray bursts are mergers of neutron stars with black holes, not mergers of
neutron stars with other neutron stars. And this would mean that instead of being the birth cry
of a black hole it would be sort of a growth spurt of the black hole because it accretes a
neutron star. And here's an animation that shows this process. There's a neutron star going around
a black hole. It gets tidally disrupted when it gets close enough to it and then it accretes
onto the black hole and while it's still outside the black hole these two oppositely directed
jets go zooming out. Now there's one other possibility and that is that at least a small
fraction of the short duration gamma ray bursts might be magnetars, these star quakes on the
surfaces of neutron stars having inordinately high magnetic fields. A quadrillion gas, a
million billion gas. I discussed the magnetars a few lectures ago and here's the animation of what
one might look like. There's a spinning neutron star, there's a star quake, a redistribution of
the crust and the magnetic field and it emits this burst and then you know basically keeps on
spinning it. It survives. It's still a neutron star that's intact. It just had a redistribution
of the crustal material and the magnetic field and this can give rise to a large amount of energy.
In December of 2005 there was a magnetar burst that produced enough gamma rays to actually
affect Earth's atmosphere. So here they are coming out and they travel many many light years
and they come toward the Earth's atmosphere and they actually ionized part of the Earth's atmosphere.
So that was a really hefty blast of a neutron star, a magnetar in our own galaxy, yet it was as
bright as a gamma ray burst and much of the radiation came out in the form of gamma rays.
This was a gamma ray burst just not the typical kind. The typical kinds come from more distant
galaxies but you could see even this one had it been in a fairly nearby galaxy. So probably at
least a small fraction of the gamma ray bursts are not the total destruction of a neutron star
forming a black hole but rather one of these magnetar starquakes. Now this blast that hit
the Earth's atmosphere raises the interesting question should we worry about gamma ray bursts?
You know could the gamma rays affect Earth's atmosphere so much like by destroying the ozone
layer that you know life on Earth would be greatly endangered or if we're really close to a gamma ray
burst we know within a few hundred light years could the gamma rays just sterilize all all the
planets on you know surrounding a star that's near a gamma ray burst and indeed in Sky and
Telescope magazine there was this headline no gamma rays of doom if there's a gamma ray burst
sufficiently nearby could it could it really hurt us? Could gamma ray bursts have caused at
least some of the mass extinctions over the history of our planet? Well we think that they're rare
enough that they don't produce mass extinctions more than once every billion years or so so it's
unlikely that there's been too many mass extinctions here on Earth as a result of these gamma ray
bursts and in particular the extinction of the dinosaurs was almost certainly due to the collision
of a comet or an asteroid with the Earth not a gamma ray burst despite what this dinosaur here
is thinking you know looking up at the gamma ray burst and calculating the total energy emitted by
it I'm not sure you know dinosaurs could do that but anyway so so we think that there these events
are rare enough that that probably at most maybe one mass extinction in the last billion or two
years was due to a gamma ray burst and in particular there's new evidence suggesting that
the at least the long duration gamma ray bursts tend to occur in galaxies having fairly low abundances
of heavy elements compared to our own galaxy which you know two percent or one percent of the
elements are heavy elements and the observed gamma ray bursts tend to occur in in these galaxies that
that seem to have a lower abundance of heavy elements as though there's something about the
heavy element composition of massive stars that makes it more likely to form a gamma ray burst
if there's not many heavy elements in the atmosphere of the star maybe the collapse occurs
more easily or maybe the winds are able to get rid of the atmosphere of the star or something like
that so so given that our galaxy has quite a high heavy element abundance that further decreases
the chances that our own galaxy will have a gamma ray burst that will extinguish us I think we have
to worry a lot more about comet and asteroid collisions you know for for humans for the
existence of humans not to speak of you know our own social diseases like war and and pestilence and
all that so anyway um so how can we be sure that the gamma ray bursts are produced by the collapse
of a star to form a black hole or the merging of of two neutron stars forming a black hole
or or some other energetic process like that associated with either the birth or the growth
of a black hole we'd like to be sure of that well one way of verifying this claim and also testing
general relativity would be to detect gravitational waves ripples in the fabric of space time
created during the formation of the black hole when you have the collapse of a massive star
and especially when you have a very non-spherical situation like two neutron stars orbiting each
other merging together you get emission of gravitational waves so here are the warpings
of space produced by two neutron stars as they orbit one another they produce these
waves of gravity gravitational waves ripples in the fabric of space time and in this animation
which i've shown before you can see these ripples going out now this animation happens to have been
made for two white dwarfs that merge to form either a bigger white dwarf or a neutron star but you
could just as well have two neutron stars coming together like this emitting gravitational waves
more and more quickly until there's a tremendous burst of them just just flowing out tremendously
as these two things merge together in their final moments and there you have a rapidly spinning
remaining either neutron star in this case or or black hole so you get a large amount of
gravitational waves coming out in a situation like this resulting in the formation of a black hole
that would be a wonderful signature to see but gravitational waves are extremely difficult
to detect they're very weak now they have a a rather interesting signature if you take a
gravitational wave and it's coming along like this it first stretches an object along one axis and
squeezes it along the perpendicular axis and then it stretches it along that perpendicular axis
and squeezes it along the first one so they go like this that kind of a thing but only ever so
slightly gravitational waves are so weak that we expect a one meter long rod to only change size
by an amount equal to a millionth of the size of a proton a one meter rod won't oscillate very much
okay and yet we'd like to detect this the first attempts were made by joseph webber a pioneer
in such studies where he made a cylindrical aluminum bar two meters long and he tried to detect
these small fluctuations in length of you know only a millionth of the diameter of the proton
he didn't succeed but but his methods paved the way for future methods and many of them rely on
an interesting idea where if you oscillate an object at its natural resonant frequency you can
amplify the effect and either detect it with a detector or even hear it you know your ears are
a detector and an example is if you take a wine glass and rub your finger a wet finger on the edge
if you do it just the right way you can sometimes hear a rather loud audible effect let's try it
yeah there it goes
so try this at home you can get it to work quite well if you change the pressure and angle of
your finger some some orientations work really really well now joseph webber chose a frequency of
a thousand hertz a thousand cycles per second to be the resonant frequency of his rod and he was
hoping to amplify this minute effect by by having the rod oscillate at this resonant frequency
by resonant frequency i kind of mean if you're pushing someone on a swing if you're pushing them
in phase the amplitude builds up right whereas if you push them at the wrong time you know
when they're coming back you push them forward but they're only in midway through their swing or
something like that you won't build up the amplitude okay so you want to resonate with
something and you can build up the amplitude okay so he paved the way he didn't detect anything but
he got people excited about the prospect of detecting gravitational waves so in the past
decade or so ligo the laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory was built two
facilities one in washington one in louisiana where there's an l-shaped structure about four
kilometers long on each arm and inside that structure there's a a tube with a vacuum inside
and along the tube laser light can go and it goes through a thing called a beam splitter
sending half of the laser light toward one mass over here and the other half toward another mass
over there there are mirrors attached to these two masses which reflect the light back now if you
focus your attention on the light reflected back from mass one part of it then gets split by the
beam splitter toward a detector the other part goes back toward the laser where another mirror
can actually send it back it turns out the light from mass two also bounces off goes to the beam
splitter hits the detector or in part of it can go back to the laser and and bounce off of yet
another mirror now by setting up the system so that at least initially the two laser beams that hit
the photo detector destructively interfere giving you zero light that is they're out of phase one
laser beam is going up down up down the other one is going down up down up like this so you set
this experiment up so that if there's no gravitational wave the two paths differ
in such a way that you get exact destructive interference of the waves giving you zero light
at the detector okay now suppose a gravitational wave comes through it makes one arm slightly
longer the other one slightly shorter okay so now the two waves coming into the detector
will be not so perfectly out of phase producing a small signal here i have them
five percent not quite perfectly out of phase and then ten percent and then twenty five percent
and you can see that the more in phase they are the more light you will see and so what you can
try to detect are changes in the lengths of the tubes as a result of this gravitational wave
coming by and producing a signal in the resulting light measured at the detector that's the idea
now LIGO has not yet measured any gravitational waves again they're very very weak and a four
kilometer length arm is not really long enough to produce a measurable effect for anything other than
the most massive you know neutron stars and black holes merging very very close to us so
the LIGO scientists didn't even really expect to detect anything but again they're paving the way
for more advanced techniques hoping to show that with even better experimental setups
they will someday find the distinctive signature of merging neutron stars or the collapsing core of
a massive star signaling the birth of a black hole and verifying one of the major predictions of
general relativity the existence of these ripples in the fabric of spacetime carrying gravitational
wave energy that will be a fantastic discovery once it's made
