We have seen that the Milky Way galaxy, our home, is a vast system of stars containing
perhaps a few hundred billion stars spanning a hundred thousand light years in diameter.
A huge place of which our sun is just one of myriads of stars.
But is this the entire universe?
Is our Milky Way galaxy the entire universe, or is there something more out there?
For a long time astronomers thought that the Milky Way is all that there is.
But by the early twentieth century there were good reasons to think that there are in fact
other galaxies, other island universes as they were called, and I will now discuss the evidence.
Some nebulae, like the Orion Nebula, are clearly members of our own galaxy.
You can see the stars within them causing the gas to glow, and one can use a number
of techniques to measure the distances of those stars, and they are clearly within our
galaxy.
The Orion Nebula in particular is about fifteen hundred light years away.
But the nature of other nebulae, the so-called spiral nebulae, was much more controversial.
Here's a couple of examples of spiral nebulae, as they appeared perhaps through the telescopes
being used by early twentieth century astronomers.
They didn't quite look like Orion because they had more of a structure, a spiral shape
to them like this, and here's one in particular that definitely looked like a spiral.
And these things were more controversial because it's conceivable that they are vast systems
of stars gravitationally bound together beyond our Milky Way, or maybe they're just a special
peculiar looking nebulae in our own galaxy, like the Orion Nebula, but with a different
shape.
But you couldn't see very clearly any massive ionizing stars within those things, so people
began to doubt that they are clouds of gas in our own galaxy.
In 1920 there was a famous debate between Heber Curtis and Harlow Shapley, two major
astronomers of the time, and the debate was called the scale of the universe, because
really that's what was at stake.
If our galaxy is all that there is, then the universe is pretty big, but not gargantuan,
whereas if these little spiral nebulae are actually systems of stars of their own, galaxies
in their own right, then the universe is far, far more vast than just our galaxy.
Shapley used excellent reasoning to conclude that in fact our galaxy is all that there
is.
The trouble is that he had faulty data and incomplete knowledge, and with those faulty
data and incomplete knowledge he came to the wrong conclusion.
We now know that the spiral nebulae are other galaxies in their own right.
And that's the conclusion that Curtis came to, but with perhaps somewhat weaker reasoning.
One of the things that Shapley believed was that Adrian von Mannen, an astronomer, had
measured the apparent angular rotation of at least one spiral nebula, M101, shown here.
He thought he could see it actually rotating, and you could calculate the entire rotation
period of that galaxy, and it turned out to be only about 100,000 years.
So Shapley reasoned if this thing is really millions of light years away, but it completes
one rotation in 100,000 years, yet it's a vast object.
It's huge because it appears pretty big and it's millions of light years away, so it
must be physically very large.
Well to complete one rotation in 100,000 years would mean that its speed, its rotation speed
would be highly relativistic, close to the speed of light, and it would be just torn
apart, flung apart by the rapid rotation.
So Shapley concluded that this thing must be nearby, and so for a given size, an angular
size in the sky, its physical size would be much smaller than if it were millions of light
years away, so a given angular rotation would translate into a smaller physical speed and
it wouldn't be torn apart.
Excellent reasoning, but it turns out von Mannen's observation of the apparent angular
rotation was simply wrong.
There is no measurable rotation over a human lifetime, okay?
That's the brakes.
Another argument that Shapley used was that there was an apparent nova, a new star in
the Andromeda nebula, and if you compared its brightness with the apparent brightness
of Novi in our own galaxy, you would conclude that in fact the Andromeda nebula wasn't very
far away.
However, it turns out that that nova was not a nova of the normal sort.
It was a supernova, it was a much, much more luminous object, and had Shapley known about
such objects, he would have concluded that Andromeda is really very, very, very far away
in order to make this very luminous object appear so faint.
And Curtis in fact said, well maybe there are two classes of Novi, maybe there are really
luminous ones and not so luminous ones, and he said maybe this one is the really luminous
variety that's far away, but there wasn't any real evidence for that at that time.
Now we look at galaxy, and here's one taken through an amateur-sized telescope, and it
shows a supernova, supernova 2006X.
Had one assumed that that's a regular nova, one would have concluded that this object
is quite nearby, not at distances of millions of light years.
In the mid-1920s, the famous astronomer Edwin Hubble, after whom the Hubble Space Telescope
is named, made a major breakthrough in resolving this controversy.
He used the 100-inch telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory, known as the Hooker Telescope,
to observe in great detail some of these spiral nebulae, in particular the Andromeda nebula.
And within the Andromeda nebula, he recognized a certain type of star, we've already discussed
them, they're called the Cepheid variable stars, and you will recall that Cepheid variables
brighten very quickly, then fade more slowly, and their total period of brightening and
fading is of order a few days or up to about 100 days, and they have this very distinctive
light curve, or graph of brightening and fading versus time.
Now as we discussed in lecture 45, Cepheid variables are evolved super-giant stars that
actually grow bigger and smaller with time, and hence brighter and fainter, and they have
these periods of one to 100 days, and the more luminous Cepheid variables are the ones
with the longer periods than the less luminous ones, and indeed Henrietta Leavitt, shown
here on the right next to Annie Jump Cannon, another famous early 20th century astronomer.
She figured out this period of luminosity relationship, Leavitt did, by looking at the
large and small Magellanic clouds, where the stars are all at about the same distance
from us, and so the Cepheid variables that appear brighter are also the ones that are
more luminous than the ones that appear fainter, because all the stars are at the same distance,
so you don't have to worry about the distance.
So she saw that the ones that appear brighter have the longer period than the ones that
appear fainter, and so she determined this so-called period luminosity relationship where
you plot the luminosity on the vertical axis that's similar to absolute magnitude, going
up to minus 8, so these are very luminous stars actually, our own sun has an absolute
magnitude of only about plus 5 or so.
So anyway, you see the less luminous ones have short periods, and the luminous ones
have long periods, so from this period luminosity relationship, one can look at the average
brightness of a Cepheid variable of unknown distance, compare it with the known luminosity
of a Cepheid variable having the same period, okay, and in this way, comparing the luminosity
with the apparent brightness, you can determine the distance of that Cepheid variable and
hence the distance of the galaxy or nebula in which it's located, and you know the luminosity
by having measured the period and by comparing with this graph of Cepheids having known luminosity
and known period.
So Hubble noticed that the Cepheid variables in the Andromeda nebula and a few others look
really faint, they're very, very faint on average, and he could tell that they're faint
not because there's smog, you know, gas and dust blocking his view, because they didn't
look anomalously red, they looked the normal color but just really faint, and so he concluded
that to look so faint, they must be incredibly distant, unbelievably distant almost, you
know, so this Andromeda nebula he found was way outside the confines of our own Milky
Way galaxy, and given its apparent angular size, it actually spans a couple of degrees
in the sky, he deduced that the Andromeda nebula is this huge system presumably containing
billions of stars, and indeed on the clearest nights and the sharpest scene, the smallest
amount of turbulence in the atmosphere, he could actually see in his best photographs
some of the individual stars of the Andromeda nebula.
So this wasn't a nebula, this was a galaxy, a huge stellar system in its own right, an
island universe, as Immanuel Kant had said in 1755, although at that time there was really
no evidence that these nebulae were galaxies outside our own Milky Way galaxy, but here's
one of these galaxies now, not just a little smudge of gas and dust in our own galaxy, but
a giant collection of gravitationally bound stars far outside our galaxy.
And if you look at deep pictures of the sky, you see galaxies all over the place, in fact
one can estimate that you can see something like 50 to 100 billion galaxies with today's
most powerful telescopes.
This was an enormous expansion, not of the universe itself of course, but of the human
perception of the universe.
Galaxies are the fundamental building blocks of the universe, just as stars are the building
blocks of galaxies.
And it is fitting to put galaxies on t-shirts given their great importance, so in fact I
have lots of t-shirts that have galaxies on them, especially this beautiful whirlpool
galaxy here.
Alright, well it turns out there are two main classes of galaxies that Edwin Hubble classified,
having discovered that these nebulae are systems outside our own galaxy, he started to systematically
classify them.
And he came up with two main classes, one are the spirals that sort of precipitated this
whole debate.
The spirals are like the Milky Way galaxy in general form, but they have differences in
shape depending on which galaxy you look at.
And so here's a schematic showing a bunch of spiral galaxies, and you notice a few things.
Some of them have fairly open arms like this one, and a fairly small central region.
Others have a bigger central region and more tightly wound up arms.
Some have a bar going through the center which is a relatively straight thing like this,
and then the arms hanging out off of the ends of the bar.
And then some look different presumably because they're seen from the side, so here's one
of these galaxies seen from the side rather than face on.
And others are seen at some intermediate angle.
So let's take a look at some of these things.
Here's a beautiful galaxy, one of my favorites in a picture taken from the ground.
Here's another one, the Whirlpool galaxy that has a companion gravitationally interacting
with it, and I mentioned before that it is the interaction of companions with galaxies
that sometimes help to produce the grand spiral arms seen in some of these galaxies.
Here's another one, nice galaxy with a couple of background galaxies.
Here's some bright background galaxies, and if you look closely you can see lots and lots
of fainter, more distant, smaller looking galaxies all over this photograph.
So galaxies are just all over the place, along the line of sight to nearby bright ones.
You can find little galaxies in the background all over the place.
That's a pretty one right there.
Here's one of the Ajan galaxies.
You can see in fact some dust blocking our view of many of the stars in the disk or plane
of this galaxy, and that effect is beautifully seen in this example where there's a lot of
gas and dust along the plane of this so-called sombrero galaxy blocking our view of many
of the distant stars there.
I like that galaxy a lot.
So these are generically the spiral galaxies, and they have a disk with arms, and new stars
are forming pretty continuously out of nebulae, clouds of gas and dust primarily within those
arms.
And then they migrate away from the arms, and so the disk has a mixture of old and
young stars, but in particular the arms contain the young stars because that's where the nebulae
are able to form the arms.
Old stars are present almost exclusively in the halo and in the bulge, the central part
here you can see, especially in the side view of spiral galaxies.
The central bulge and then this vast halo around a galaxy tends to have almost entirely
old stars, no new young stars.
Occasionally there might be a young star found in the bulge region, but almost never.
So if you look at these galaxies you can classify their shapes, and often the arms come out
of the nucleus, but as I mentioned earlier in some of the cases the arms come off of
the end of a relatively straight looking bar.
And so these are a variant known as the barred spiral galaxies.
There's an example, here's another example, I like this one a lot, there's this bar that's
relatively straight, and then the arms come off of the end of the bar.
Usually there are two arms, sometimes they split up into four or more, but often spiral
galaxies have two main arms.
Now our own galaxy is thought to look something like this, this is an idealized view of our
own galaxy as I mentioned in a previous lecture.
The actual maps of clouds of gas and their distribution in our own galaxy aren't nearly
as regular looking, but when we piece things together we think that our galaxy may look
something like this, and it's got two major arms which then split up into a larger number
of more minor arms.
Okay, well those are the spiral galaxies.
Now let's move on to the next major class that Hubble defined, the elliptical galaxies.
And here's a schematic of what they look like, they're kind of boring compared to spiral
galaxies, they either look roughly circular or spherical presumably, or elongated to varying
degrees.
They don't have a disc, they don't have arms, they have very little gas and dust in general
and no nebulae, so there's very little active star formation going on right now in elliptical
galaxies, and indeed you look at the stars and you can see that they are old stars, there
are very few young massive stars in elliptical galaxies.
Probably they existed long ago, but they've all died out as supernovae or whatever, gamma
ray bursts, okay?
So what's left over are the low mass, long lived stars.
The biggest elliptical galaxies are huge, they could be more than three times the size
of the Milky Way, perhaps 300,000 light years across and containing up to 10 trillion stars.
You know our own Milky Way has perhaps a few hundred billions, something like that, so
the biggest elliptical galaxies are giants.
Most elliptical galaxies are actually relatively small and indeed they're called dwarfs and
they have perhaps a million to ten million stars and they might be five to ten thousand
light years across, perhaps six thousand light years is a nice little average.
So here are some elliptical galaxies, there's one and you can actually see the individual
stars in this galaxy, pretty boring looking, no nebulae, no arms, kind of just blah, but
that's not to say they're not important, they are.
There's an amazing one, this is one of these very massive elliptical galaxies, this is one,
this one actually is in the center of a big cluster called the Virgo cluster and in its
center, as I'll discuss later, we have evidence for a supermassive black hole three billion
times the mass of our sun, nearly a thousand times more massive than the supermassive black
hole in our own Milky Way galaxy.
So those are the elliptical galaxies, okay?
Now there's another class of galaxies called the irregular galaxies and they are relatively
minor number in today's universe right now, nearby, but as we look far away and back in
time we will find that they're progressively more of these irregular galaxies.
An example nearby is the Large Magellanic Cloud, which orbits our own galaxy, and the
Small Magellanic Cloud.
You can see that these things have no distinct spiral or elliptical shape, they're sort
of more irregular, they've got blotchy appearances and they've got in general a fair amount of
gas and dust from which new stars are forming.
So those are the irregular galaxies.
There are also peculiar galaxies and they differ from the irregular's in that the peculiar
ones usually do have a fairly distinct spiral or elliptical shape, but they have one or
more peculiarities associated with them.
So here's an example of a ring galaxy, it's sort of got a nuclear region here which looks
more or less like a spiral galaxy, then it's got these little arms coming out to a ring
way out here, and this peculiar shape is thought to have been caused by a gravitational interaction
with two neighboring galaxies here.
Here's another peculiar galaxy, it's a spiral galaxy but it has a very large amount of gas
and dust especially on one side blocking our view of a lot of the stars, so that's kind
of a weird one.
It's a beautiful galaxy, it's called the black eye galaxy.
Here's an elliptical galaxy which differs from normal ellipticals in that it has a lot
of gas and dust, especially going through a plane right here.
Now usually elliptical galaxies don't have much gas and dust, so that's a weird one.
For a lot of years astronomers thought that this was actually two colliding galaxies but
we now think that that's not the case.
Maybe there's a galaxy that was eaten by an elliptical galaxy and that's what caused
this region of gas and dust, maybe a spiral galaxy got consumed by this elliptical galaxy
but it wasn't two ellipticals that crashed together because two ellipticals wouldn't
have had gas and dust and so that doesn't explain the formation of that structure in
the middle there.
Here's another elliptical galaxy with once again a lot of gas and dust, this time in
a more chaotic distribution than in the previous galaxy, so that's a weird one.
Here's one that looks basically like an edge on spiral galaxy but there's a plume of material
coming out of it, here's a deeper view.
There's all this gas coming out from the plane of the galaxy toward either direction here
and we think what's going on there is that there's a huge burst of star formation going
on in this galaxy and all the winds from the massive stars and the supernovae are blowing
gas out of this galaxy perpendicular to its plane because that's the path of least resistance.
Here's a pair of galaxies called the mice and we think that they are a result of a gravitational
interaction between two spiral galaxies as is shown here in this computer animation.
We stop the animation for a minute and show that it looks a lot like the observed mice
and then we can let the computer go forwards in time and predict what the mice will look
like billions of years in the future and we think they will merge into a single galaxy
like this one, maybe with not that detailed shape but something like it.
So those are the peculiar galaxies.
Now there's one final class and that's sort of a cross between a spiral and an elliptical.
It's called an S0 galaxy, sometimes called a lenticular galaxy.
It's got a bulge and a disc like a spiral galaxy but in that disc there's not much gas
and dust and there are no arms and there's very little evidence for the formation of
new massive stars either in the recent past or right now.
So here's an example of an S0 galaxy.
This one is seen edge on and you can see the big bulge and the disc here and there's a
little bit of gas and dust.
You can see that narrow little black stripe there which is a little bit of gas and dust
in this galaxy but certainly not as much as in typical spiral galaxies.
So this is sort of a cross between an elliptical galaxy and a spiral galaxy.
Now Edwin Hubble tried to put these galaxies into cubby holes, into pigeon holes that
he could then arrange in certain ways and in particular he had this so-called tuning
fork diagram where he had the ellipticals arranged at the left from the ones that look
roughly circular.
He called those E0s to the ones that look more elongated.
Those are the E5s and he even had some E7s and then he had the S0 or lenticular galaxies
which were sort of a cross between a spiral and an elliptical.
And then on one branch of this fork he had the normal spirals S, A, S, B, S, C and then
the barred spirals S, B, A, S, B, B, S, B, C.
And he thought there might even be an evolutionary progression from ellipticals to spirals or
maybe the other way around.
We now think in general there isn't such an evolutionary progression although we will
see later on that some spirals do merge together forming ellipticals eventually but a single
lone spiral will not later on turn into an elliptical nor will an elliptical on its own
turn into a spiral.
So it's not an evolutionary sequence in that sense.
Going back to the tuning fork here you can see that the S, A, S, B and S, C's are arranged
in order of decreasing size of the central bulge region.
The S, A's having the biggest bulge, S, B's a smaller bulge and S, C's an even smaller
bulge and moreover the sequence of decreasing bulge size also seems to correspond to the
greater and greater openness of the arms.
See the S, C's have less tightly wound arms in general than the S, A's.
Moreover the S, C's have more gas and dust and more active star formation than the S,
A's.
So in that sense the S, A's are closer to the ellipticals and the S, 0's and they don't
have as much star formation.
So this was a nice way to classify these things and then try to understand how they form and
evolve.
The S, B's, the barred spirals have the same general sequence from little A to little B
to little C. You have a decreasing bulge size, a more open set of arms and more gas and dust
from which new stars are forming.
Well galaxies tend to be social creatures not because they think about it or anything
but because gravity binds them together and indeed they are formed out of primordial clouds
of gas that collapse and form many galaxies in about the same place.
So our own Milky Way has several prominent companions, the Magellanic Clouds, shown here
and our Milky Way actually has six or seven other smaller companions which are harder to
see.
There are dwarf galaxies like this one, the Leo I dwarf and you can actually see the individual
stars in it very easily.
It's very nearby and very distended like this and it's hard to recognize these little dwarf
galaxies because they sort of merge with all the other stars that you see in the sky.
Our nearest big neighbor, the Andromeda Galaxy also has two main companions, there's one
of them and there's the other one and it too has another half dozen smaller companions.
Now if we take a view from our Earth past the Chandra X-ray Observatory, past Venus,
past Mercury, past the Sun, we're going to go out and see now sort of in the powers of
ten fashion, progressively bigger views of the universe all the way out to the local
group of galaxies, the nearby galaxies to our own.
So now we're passing by nearby stars in a nebula and now we're going to pass through
a cluster of stars in our own galaxy and then we'll pass through a bunch of other stars
in nebulae and now we're going to go a little bit above the plane of our galaxy so we can
see it more clearly.
It's still nearly edge on in this view but we're sort of above the plane and going farther
and farther out, we will start seeing additional galaxies, our companions and other members
of our so-called local group of galaxies consisting of us, the Milky Way and our immediate
companions, Bandromeda Galaxy and Bandromeda Galaxy's immediate companions and then a few
other galaxies thrown in for good measure and this small loose cluster is called the
local group and it contains about three dozen galaxies or so.
So we live not just in a binary system with Bandromeda Galaxy but with lots of other smaller
galaxies thrown in, in a loose cluster known as the local group having a diameter of a
few million light years and there are other similar small groups of galaxies like this
one here consisting of four main galaxies and some other smaller ones and here's another
group of galaxies.
So galaxies tend to come in groups and then there are the bigger clusters, the Virgo cluster
of galaxies which spans about 15 degrees in the sky, contains about a thousand galaxies,
it's a much bigger cluster than our own little local group and it's about 60 million light
years away, this is the nearest big cluster and only a few of its galaxies are shown here
and then there's the Coma cluster of galaxies about 300 million light years away containing
over 10,000 galaxies, nearly every blob you see in this photograph is a galaxy in the
Coma cluster, not a star in our own galaxy, there's a star in our own galaxy and there
are a few others here but all these other blobs are galaxies in a cluster and here's
a really striking cluster of galaxies containing several tens of thousands of galaxies gravitationally
bound together, the clusters are an amazing set of structures containing vast numbers
of galaxies but they too appear to be clustered in even bigger configurations called superclusters
spanning 50 to 100 million light years and if you plot our position down here at the point
of this pie diagram and you plot a certain region of the sky, here's an arc across the
sky and if you look at the distances of various galaxies in these directions here, so distances
along this axis, some direction in the sky is along that axis there, you can see that
each of these dots is a galaxy or a cluster of galaxies and they themselves then are clustered
in superclusters separated from each other by voids, vast empty regions and if you look
at three dimensional projections of certain regions in the sky and sort of rotate them
like this, you can see the clusters upon clusters which are themselves grouped in superclusters,
this is one region of the sky toward a structure known as the Great Wall and here's another
region of the sky toward a structure known as the Perseus Pisces supercluster and you
can see all those dots are galaxies and clusters of galaxies and they tend to congregate in
larger structures separated by relatively empty voids and as I'll discuss later, supercomputer
calculations can now reproduce at least approximately the observed structure in our universe, clusters
of galaxies and superclusters arranged along bubbles or filamentary structures surrounding
relatively empty regions that we call voids.
Well astronomers have come a long way since the days when they thought that our galaxy
was the only galaxy in the universe, the whole universe itself.
We now know that there are hundreds of billions of galaxies spanning billions of light years
of space and this has been a giant leap in our understanding of our cosmic origins and
of our place in the universe.
