Galaxies, the building blocks of the universe, are composed primarily of stars, or so people
thought until a few decades ago.
There's now strong evidence that most of the mass in galaxies and clusters of galaxies
may be dark matter, material that gravitationally binds the galaxies and clusters of galaxies
together, but does not emit any significant amount of electromagnetic radiation, and
so it can't be seen.
Now the first evidence for this came actually over half a century ago when Fritz Zwicky studied
clusters of galaxies such as this one, and figured out that the galaxies within them
are moving around at incredibly rapid speeds so fast that these clusters of galaxies would
go flying apart unless there were extra material gravitationally binding them together, more
material than corresponding to the visible stars in galaxies alone.
So here's Fritz Zwicky again who figured out that massive stars collapse and then explode,
producing neutron stars.
Well he in the 1930s realized that clusters of galaxies couldn't remain gravitationally
bound unless there were a lot of additional material.
80 to 90 percent of the material might be dark, invisible, not seen at least with the
optical telescopes that were being used back then.
Nor can that material be seen easily with other kinds of electromagnetic radiation.
So anyway, he measured the comacluster of galaxies in particular 300 million light years
away, and from the spectra of the galaxies in the comacluster he got their radial velocities,
their motions toward us and away from us, and he assumed that the transverse velocities
are of similar size, so he could get the space velocities and he figured out that wow this
thing would get ripped apart.
Could it be that these galaxies are just passing through the night and happen to be close together?
Well there are so many clusters of galaxies in the sky that probably they are physically
bound objects rather than chance superpositions of a bunch of galaxies passing through the
night.
Another indication of dark matter came many decades later.
See Zwicky was largely ignored in the 30s and beyond for what he said because he was
this crazy guy that didn't make much sense in many other discussions and so why should
people believe him?
So he was ignored, but then decades later there was this additional evidence that came about
as a result of studies of the rotation curves or orbital speed versus distance from the
center for spiral galaxies starting with our own Milky Way.
Now if we look at the rotation curve of the solar system, that is the orbital speed versus
distance, you can see here in this schematic that Mercury moves with a speed of 50 kilometers
per second, Venus 35, Earth 30 and Mars 25 kilometers per second and Jupiter and Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune move more slowly still.
If you plot the orbital speed or the speed of revolution on the vertical axis versus
the distance from the Sun, in this case in astronomical units on the horizontal axis,
you can get the positions of the planets on a curve here and this curve follows a one
over square root of the distance mathematical relationship.
So here's Venus up here and then Earth and Saturn and Jupiter are down there and the
curve connecting those observed data points is mathematically represented by something
proportional to one over the square root of the distance.
All right, well you can get this inverse square root law if you have a single central mass
dominating the gravity of a structure like the solar system.
So in the case of the solar system, the Sun is very massive, it's a thousand times as
massive as Jupiter, it's 330,000 times as massive as the Earth, all the planets have
negligible mass compared to the Sun.
So gravitationally the Sun does dominate the solar system.
So if we go back to Newton's version of Kepler's third law and we ignore the mass of the planets
in comparison with the mass of the Sun, then we have that the orbital period of a planet
squared is proportional to its distance or semi-major axis cubed and the constant of
proportionality is 4 pi squared over G and over the mass of the Sun.
Now if the orbit of a planet is roughly circular and that's roughly correct, then the circumference
of the orbit, 2 pi r, that is the distance traveled in one period, must equal the speed,
the orbital speed, v multiplied by time, that is the time it takes a planet to orbit
the Sun, so 2 pi r equals vp, that's just distance equals speed times time.
If we now divide by the speed, we get that the orbital period is 2 pi r over v and plugging
this expression for the orbital period back into Kepler's third law, you can solve for
the mass of the Sun in terms of the distance of a planet, the orbital speed squared and
G, Newton's constant of gravity, and then rearranging, you find that the orbital speed
is just the square root of G times the mass of the Sun over the distance of the planet
and this is proportional to 1 over the square root of the planet's distance.
So distant planets move more slowly than nearby planets according to a law that says
that their speed is proportional to the inverse of the square root of their distance and so
you get the curve that I had before that nicely fits the points.
Now let's consider the Milky Way galaxy, viewing it edge on like this, we can get the rotation
curve and if we schematically look at the orbital speeds of the stars, I showed this
a few lectures ago, I showed that most of the stars are orbiting with a speed of around
200 kilometers per second, except in the very center where they're orbiting more slowly,
of course at the very, very center where the supermassive black hole is, they're orbiting
very quickly but that's not shown here, but basically most of them are orbiting at 200
kilometers per second.
So if you plot the rotation curve of the Milky Way galaxy, the speed of rotation is on the
vertical axis, the distance in thousands of parsecs, where a parsec is 3.26 light years,
is given along the horizontal axis and the sun is up here about 7, 7.5 kiloparsecs away
from the center and it's moving with a speed of 200 kilometers per second.
And indeed, much of the galaxy is rotating with that speed.
Now that rotation curve is in stark contrast to the rotation curve that I just showed for
the solar system, where you have a 1 over the square root of distance type law instead
of a flat rotation curve.
So see this one declines with distance instead of remaining flat.
Well, in the case of the solar system, we understand the rotation curve as being due
to the gravitational influence of a single dominant body, the sun.
Clearly, in the case of the Milky Way, this isn't the case.
There isn't a single dominant mass.
The Milky Way's mass must be more distributed.
Now you might say, well, I just told you about a supermassive black hole in the middle of
our galaxy having a mass of almost 4 million suns.
Doesn't that dominate the dynamics of our galaxy?
No, it doesn't, because 4 million solar masses, though large, is small in comparison with
the mass of all the stars.
Suppose you consider just the first 4 billion stars out of hundreds of billions.
4 million out of 4 billion is 1 tenth of 1 percent, and so the central black hole in
our galaxy has a dominant influence over the stars in its immediate vicinity.
But out where the sun is, or even 1,000 parsecs away, or even a couple of hundred parsecs
away from the center of the galaxy, it's nothing.
The central supermassive black hole is just negligible.
So where is most of the mass in our galaxy?
Well, it's distributed over the galaxy, and indeed, in the central region, you can see
this bulge, and you can measure how many stars are there, and there's enough mass in the
bulge to account for the observed speeds of the stars.
But it turns out that as you go farther out into the disk of our galaxy, there becomes
too few stars to account for the observed rotation.
We can calculate the mass of the Milky Way galaxy out to a certain distance r by using,
once again, Kepler's laws, or Newton's version of them.
Now it turns out that the mass enclosed within a circle of radius r from the center of our
Milky Way galaxy is equal to the orbital speed v squared multiplied by the distance
from the center divided by g.
And you can figure this out just by using Newton's laws of motion and universal gravitation.
And you have to take into account the fact that only the stars interior to the orbit
of the sun or whatever star you're considering matter.
The ones outside that orbit don't matter as long as they are uniformly distributed,
and this can be proven, and Newton proved it, and I will just assume it for now.
So let's take a look at how this is derived.
Let's go back to Newton's form of Kepler's third law, m plus little m times p squared
is 4 pi squared over g r cubed.
It's the same sort of calculation we just did.
If the mass of the orbiting star, little m, is negligible compared to the mass of the
galaxy within its orbit, big m, then you can ignore little m in comparison with big m,
and you get big m p squared equals 4 pi squared over g r cubed.
Again, for a circular orbit, the circumference 2 pi r is equal to the speed v multiplied
by the time t, the orbital period, in this case denoted by p.
Solving for p and substituting, you get that the enclosed mass within that orbit is equal
to v squared r over g.
Now if you go to the flat rotation curve, and you ask yourself, what does m equal v
squared r over g imply?
It implies that the mass enclosed within progressively bigger orbits grows linearly,
that is in direct proportion to the radius of the orbit, so you go twice as far out,
and you enclose twice as much mass.
Four times as far out, you enclose four times as much mass, and indeed if you look at the
plot of the rotation speed of our galaxy versus distance from the center in thousands
of parsecs, here is the observed plot.
Again, it's flat, so you go twice as far out as our sun's distance, you go out to say
15 kiloparsecs instead of seven and a half, and you'd have twice as much mass.
If you go four times as far out, say to 30 kiloparsecs, you have four times as much mass.
But if you look at what would be expected from the stars alone, you see that in fact
the expected orbital speed of not just the sun, but of stars farther out, is smaller
than the observed speed.
So here for the sun, the orbital speed should have been about 150 kilometers per second
if the only mass influencing the sun's motion were the mass associated with the visible
stars within its orbit.
It should have a speed of 150 kilometers per second, but the observed speed is 200.
So there's not enough visible stars within the sun's orbit to account for the motion
of the sun.
There must be dark stuff there, and the problem gets worse as you go farther out.
You see as you go farther out from the center of our galaxy, the difference between the
observed rotation curve and the expected rotation curve based on the visible matter only increases.
This discrepancy increases more and more and more, and as you go out way far from the
center of our galaxy, the observed speeds are twice as big as those anticipated from
just the observed material.
So clearly there's not enough stars at the large distances from the center, and you can
actually see this nicely in this photograph here where you go far out, and the number
of stars starts declining.
It's very faint out there in the outer outskirts of our galaxy, yet the rotation curve is still
remaining flat.
So there's a lot of matter influencing the few stars that are orbiting way out in the
outskirts of our galaxy.
This material must be dark matter, the stuff that's causing the extra motion of the observed
stars.
It's sometimes called the missing mass, old textbooks in particular called it the missing
mass, and that's a misnomer.
The mass is there, it's the light that's missing.
We don't see what's out there, but clearly there's something out there because it's
gravitationally influencing the stars that are out there.
Moreover, through more detailed studies of the motions of stars, you can tell that most
of that dark matter can't be in the disk or plane of the galaxy.
It must be in a halo, a vast halo surrounding our galaxy.
So if you look at a schematic of our galaxy, here's the plane, and here's the bulge, here's
this halo of globular clusters.
We think that the dark matter is out here where the globular clusters are, but not within
the globular clusters, more uniformly distributed, and moreover we think that the halo extends
far out, even beyond the globular clusters, because even way out here where there's only
a few stars in the disk of our galaxy, you can tell that they're moving very rapidly,
200 kilometers per second, yet that's so far out that out there you don't even see globular
clusters anymore, you don't see any visible matter hardly in our galaxy.
So there must be dark matter way out there whose presence increasingly dominates the
farther out you go.
Remember I said that in the very central regions of our galaxy, there's enough material to
account for the orbital speeds of stars?
That's fine, but as you go farther and farther out, there's a greater and greater mismatch,
and so the dark matter dominates more and more.
The rotation curves of other spiral galaxies show this same general trend.
Andromeda rotates, but it rotates more quickly than it should if the rotation were caused
by the visible stars alone.
Here's the rotation curve measured for the Andromeda galaxy.
You see it remains flat way out here beyond the regions where the galaxy essentially ends.
Now you might say how is the rotation measured out here?
Well there are a few stars and clouds of gas out here, okay?
And you concentrate on those few stars or clouds of gas and you can measure their rate
of rotation, but clearly there's not enough visible stuff out here to account for the
magnitude of that rotation.
So most of the stars are down in here, but most of the mass is out in a vast halo.
And other spiral galaxies show the same thing.
There's an edge on spiral galaxy, and you can use a spectrum to plot the observed rotation
speed as a function of r.
And here it is, the rotation speed is flat out to large distances, and then wiggles around
a little bit more, and on the opposite side of the galaxy, it's again, roughly speaking
flat, it wiggles around.
But basically this plot is showing us that one side of the galaxy, this side, is rotating
away from us and the other side is rotating toward us.
So this is a spinning disc with one side rotating toward and one side away, but the rotation
curve aside from bumps and wiggles basically is flat.
And Vera Rubin was the first to realize this and the really important implications of this
observation.
She said there's a lot of dark matter in the outskirts of galaxies in particular, less
of it closer in, but especially far out, there's all this dark matter causing the rotation
curves to remain flat.
And kind of like Zwicky decades before her, she was ignored or largely forgotten for a
few years.
Okay, then people began to notice and now she's quite celebrated.
Zwicky was ignored for decades when he found the same sort of evidence in clusters of galaxies.
Well now, you know, dark matter and trying to figure out what it is is one of the hot
topics in astrophysics.
One hails the discoverers of these rotation curves and Zwicky's work and all that as
great stuff, but they weren't properly recognized at the time they did this work.
There's evidence for dark matter, not just in spiral galaxies, but in elliptical galaxies
as well.
You can measure the motion of stars in a big elliptical galaxy like this one, M87.
And they're moving around too quickly compared with the amount of gravity expected from the
visible stars.
If you look at pairs of galaxies like this, they are interacting with speeds that are
too big to have been produced by only the visible stars alone.
That is, there's not enough gravity or little groups like this.
The galaxies are moving around too quickly to be under the gravitational influence of
the stars alone.
There must be dark matter.
And I had already mentioned that from the work of Zwicky long ago, we already knew that
clusters of galaxies are indeed dominated by dark matter.
Nowadays we can tell that there's a lot of hot gas in clusters of galaxies, and that
hot gas would quickly evaporate away if there weren't a lot of matter holding it in.
So when you look at a cluster of galaxy like this at x-ray wavelengths, you see that it's
immersed in a glow, this orange glow.
So let's zoom in on some of the individual galaxies of this cluster.
There they are.
It's a visible matter, but as we zoom out, more and more of the cluster is being dominated
by dark matter.
And you can tell because this orange glow is hot x-ray emitting gas, and that gas would
not remain gravitationally bound to this cluster of galaxies if there were only the gravitational
influence of the visible stars.
There has got to be an extra pull holding that hot x-ray emitting gas in, otherwise
it would all spread out and be lost by the cluster of galaxies.
Now gravitational lensing also provides a lot of evidence for dark matter.
You will recall that if you have two objects co-linear, that is along the same line of
sight, then the foreground object can bend or lens or focus the light of the background
object.
And if things are perfectly aligned, you can get an Einstein ring.
And this focusing is caused essentially by the warping of space, and that's a prediction
of general relativity that we've already encountered.
So in a perfect case, you get an Einstein ring like this, but in general, when distant
galaxies are being lensed by another galaxy or a foreground cluster of galaxies, you get
a series of arcs.
Well let me show you a little animation here where light from a distant galaxy is being
focused or lensed by mass, including dark matter in a foreground cluster.
Now we align things and look at what we see, and in addition to the galaxies that are doing
the lensing, you can see these little arcs, these streaks, which are the background galaxy
that has been lensed into a bunch of arcs, which are all parts of these Einstein rings.
So a galaxy lensed by a foreground cluster of galaxies tends to produce a bunch of arcs
like this, and if you have a bunch of galaxies being lensed by a foreground cluster, you
get more arcs.
And studying the brightness and distribution of those arcs can tell you not only about
the luminous matter in the foreground cluster, but also about the dark matter.
So here's a visible foreground cluster and a bunch of background galaxies.
We can tell that they're farther away through methods that I'll describe soon, but these
are background galaxies arranged in arc-like configurations centered on this cluster.
And from the brightnesses and the distributions of these arcs, you can tell how much matter
is in the cluster.
Not just the visible matter, but the dark matter as well.
Here's another cluster where you can see the foreground galaxies, and then faintly you
can see all these little arc-like structures centered in like concentric rings or parts
of rings around this cluster.
And from an analysis of those rings, you can tell that this cluster of galaxies, the lensing
cluster, is dominated by dark matter, not by visible matter.
Ninety percent of the mass in that cluster is dark.
If it weren't there, it wouldn't cause the amount of lensing that we actually observe,
so we know it's there.
So gravitational lensing provides a beautiful probe of dark matter.
Here's a nice little close-up of one of those clusters of galaxies where you can see background
galaxies lensed into parts of circles, these little arcs here.
And again, that tells us not only about the gravitational properties of the visible matter,
but also that there's dark matter there as well.
So clusters of galaxies are dominated by dark matter.
Ninety percent of their matter is dark.
Some of it may be a little bit visible because it's hot and in its X-rays.
And indeed, recently it has been found that perhaps ten percent of the dark matter does
glow at X-ray wavelengths.
It has a temperature of maybe a million degrees, up to ten million degrees.
And if you look at the proper wavelengths of the electromagnetic spectrum, in particular
in the X-rays, you can see some of this previously dark form of matter.
But that's only ten percent of the ninety percent.
Most of it does not glow at any wavelengths that we've looked at so far.
But if you look at little groups of galaxies like this, for example, you can see now faintly
X-ray emitting gas, having a temperature of say a million degrees.
And that gas is part of the dark matter that binds together little groups like this one.
And indeed, here's an X-ray picture of one of those little groups, and you can see the
faint glow from the million degree gas.
Okay, well, eighty percent or so of the material is dark and hasn't been detected in any form
of electromagnetic radiation.
What could it be?
One general class of models are the so-called machos, massive compact halo objects.
Now, these are not clones of Randy Savage, the macho man, okay?
Machos are an astrophysical object out in the halos of galaxies, not, you know, not a
wrestler or other type of person, you know, who likes to be macho.
All right, so anyway, machos include stellar mass black holes, not the supermassive black
holes thought to be in the centers of galaxies.
We know about their presence, and they're not flying around in the halos of galaxies.
So though they're dark and they're massive, they're not part of the halo.
So they're not machos.
But stellar mass black holes could be machos, or old and dim white dwarfs, or old and dim
neutron stars, anything that has mass but doesn't glow very much.
Brown dwarfs could be machos, they're hard to see.
Living planets could be machos, because, you know, if they're free-floating, they're
not near a star, and so they don't shine very much by reflected light.
So you might find these machos by studying their gravitational influence on light.
And in particular, if you look toward the lines of sight of the large and small Magellanic
clouds, they are about 170,000 light years away and 210,000 light years away, respectively.
So you're looking through a large fraction of our Milky Way's halo when you're looking
at the Magellanic clouds.
And if there are machos flying around between us and the clouds, occasionally those machos
might go along the line of sight to one star in each of the large or small Magellanic clouds,
you know, and a few nights later some other macho might pass between us and a star in
one of these two clouds.
So there are lots and lots of stars in the large and small Magellanic clouds.
They form a good background of stars which we can use to search for machos.
So here's a schematic.
There's the Earth in the plane of the Milky Way galaxy.
Here's the halo of the Milky Way galaxy.
The large and small Magellanic clouds are out here in the outskirts of the halo.
If there's a bunch of machos flying around, occasionally a macho would be precisely along
the line of sight to a star, either in the large or small Magellanic clouds.
And as that macho moves through our line of sight to that particular star, it will bend
or focus the light from that star, causing the star to brighten.
So if you plot the brightness of the star versus time, it'll remain constant for a while.
And then right as the macho is flying through the field of view, it magnifies or amplifies
the light from the star, and then it declines as it moves out of the line of sight.
And then the star remains constant again.
And this brightening is independent of wavelength.
That is, the amount which the star brightens at blue wavelengths should be the same as
the amount by which it brightens at red wavelengths, because the warping of space is not dependent
on the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation, which you're looking at.
So this brightening should be independent of wavelength and have this distinctive signature,
a rise and then a symmetric fall, all right?
Well you can check whether this method is working by looking at stars toward the bulge
of our galaxy.
And here if we go through and look through a star cluster at the central part, or bulge
of our galaxy, we'll be looking at a region where there are lots of stars.
And this one right here, watch this one right here.
See that?
Ooh, it brightened just when a macho passed between us and that background star.
That macho focused the light from that star.
And we've seen this effect, and we've found some brown dwarfs and free-floating planets,
and even some solitary black holes using this method, all right, especially toward the bulge
of our galaxy.
Now, toward the large and small Magellanic clouds, they've also seen events like this.
There's only one chance in 10 million that any particular star will get lensed by a macho.
But there are tens of millions of stars in the clouds, and so you watch them long enough
and a few of them will brighten.
And that's been good.
You know, astronomers have detected that brightening.
Unfortunately, the astronomers doing these studies have determined that most of the lensing
objects have been not in the halo of our galaxy, but rather in the large or small Magellanic
clouds themselves.
In other words, stars in the clouds can lens each other just like a macho along the line
of sight could lens a star.
They can lens each other, and so easily 80% of the events that they've observed have
been these lensing events caused by stars in the clouds lensing each other rather than
a macho lensing a star in one of the clouds.
So we can say that at most 20% of the dark matter in the halo of our galaxy consists
of machos.
Just 20%, okay?
What's the rest?
Well, maybe it's what I call golf balls or rocks, little objects the size of golf balls
or rocks that, you know, exist in great abundance and make up a lot of matter.
But it's hard to see how such objects could form.
We don't know of any way that rocks or golf balls can or bricks, you know, can just form
out in the halo of a galaxy, you know.
Moreover, there are additional studies that show that very little of the dark matter could
consist of objects containing normal neutrons and protons, normal matter.
It turns out that most of the dark matter must be some sort of weird little particle,
a weakly interacting massive particle or a wimp.
So there are wimps to be compared with machos.
And wimps are predicted to have been produced shortly after the birth of the universe, the
Big Bang.
And if they're still hanging around in great abundance, they may be what most of the dark
matter is in our universe.
And as I'll explain later on, there are now searches underway to try to directly detect
these weakly interacting massive particles or wimps.
