We now enter the third major part of this course, cosmology, the study of the universe
as a whole.
In this first unit, consisting of eight lectures, I'll introduce cosmic expansion as a tool
for determining the distances of distant galaxies and allowing us to study the evolution of
galaxies, how galaxies change with time.
Because by looking at ones that are very, very far away, we're looking at them as they
were in the past, and we'll be able to compare them with the galaxies of today and determine
how, at least statistically, galaxies evolve.
Then later on, I'll move into a study of the structure and evolution of the universe
as a whole, not just of the galaxies within it.
Now, cosmology is one of the grandest subjects, the study of everything, the whole thing,
the big shebang, you know.
What is the shape of the universe?
What is its size?
When was the universe born, or has it existed forever?
What will be its eventual fate, far in the future?
I'm sure many of you have heard that the universe is expanding.
Will it expand forever, becoming colder, dimmer, darker?
Or will it someday re-collapse in on itself, a big crunch to be compared with the big bang?
What are these, what's going to happen to the universe?
What does it consist of?
These are among the deepest and most profound questions that humans have ever asked.
They've fascinated humans for, I think, as long as we've had the capacity to have such
thoughts, and they fascinate us now.
People are interested in this stuff.
Look at the headlines of major national magazines, Time Magazine.
When did the universe begin?
People want to know.
This is a fundamental question of our origins.
How the universe will end, well, gee whiz, that's a bold statement.
They don't even have a question mark on this one.
Peering deep into space and time, scientists have just solved the biggest mystery of the
cosmos.
Well, that was a few years ago when we thought we had the answers.
We now are not quite so sure that we know how the universe will end.
But anyway, these are major, major questions that people are interested in.
Another aspect of cosmology is this business of how galaxies form and evolve.
Galaxies are the building blocks of the universe.
It behooves us to understand where they came from and where they're going.
Look at these grand spiral structures.
How did they get there?
Were they always this way?
Did they just form this way or did they evolve from something more kind of chaotic looking?
The galaxies, of course, are all over the place.
You look everywhere in the sky and you can see them with large telescopes.
Of course, with your naked eye, you see mostly stars in our Milky Way galaxy.
And there are only a few galaxies that you can see outside our Milky Way, the Andromeda
galaxy, the large and small Magellanic clouds, and one additional galaxy, which is sometimes
faintly visible.
But if you look with large telescopes, you can see thousands of them.
Here's one of my favorite photographs from the Hubble Space Telescope.
This is part of the so-called Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
And nearly every splotch of light you see in this image is another galaxy, not a star
in our own galaxy.
There's a few stars in the Milky Way here.
There's one of them, there's another, there's a third one over there.
But in fact, I could count them on the fingers of two hands, perhaps.
Everything else in this picture is another galaxy.
Now if you count them, there's about a thousand of them or so.
Indeed, astronomers are paid to sit around counting galaxies.
It's a really cushy job, you know, it's a lot of fun.
But really, we learn about the structure of the universe and it's hard work as well.
We count the galaxies and in this picture, there's about a thousand of them.
Now this picture is just a tiny fraction of the sky.
If you hold a grain of sand at arm's length, just a small grain, and imagine how big it
looks, that's the fraction of the sky covered by this photograph.
Just like a grain of sand held at arm's length.
Yet this typical fraction of the sky has something like a thousand galaxies in it.
If you extrapolate over the whole sky, you conclude that within the realm of great telescopes
like the Hubble Space Telescope, there's something like 50 to 100 billion galaxies.
And that's just in the parts of the universe that we can see.
We now have good reasons to think that the universe extends far, far beyond the parts
that we can see.
There may even be an infinite number of galaxies.
So how did they form?
How did they evolve with time?
These two are among the questions of cosmology.
The most profound, deepest questions that humans have asked, or at least among the most profound
and deep.
Well these questions represent the epitome of the human intellectual desire to understand
our origins.
Remember I said at the beginning of the course that much of astronomy is trying to understand
where we came from and where we are going.
Not in a biological sense, but more in terms of the origin of the elements of stars, of
planets, of the things that led to our existence.
And sometimes people think that well astronomers, and in particular cosmologists, are somehow
trying to eliminate the necessity of God, or somehow determine why He, she, or it created
the universe in the first place.
Now we're not trying to do that.
Astronomers and other scientists are not trying to do that.
As in the rest of this course, astronomers and physicists are simply trying to discover
the fundamental laws of physics and use them to understand how the universe works.
How does it tick, you know?
We are not claiming to determine the purpose of the universe, whether it had a special
creator, why humans exist, or what your moral values should be.
These are not the kinds of questions that we're trying to address.
Those questions are more in the domain of theology, philosophy, and metaphysics.
And in general, there is no conflict between science and religion, despite some many people
thinking that there is somehow.
They address different questions, and the rules of the game are different.
Religion is based on faith, it's what you believe.
Science is based on experimental and observational verification of hypotheses.
Scientists are trying to figure out how the universe works, not the why the universe is
here in the first place, or how you should conduct yourself, or whether a special creator
created humans in particular and other animals.
That's not what we're trying to understand.
Those physicists and other scientists who are religious have seen in general no fundamental
inconsistency between their religious beliefs and their quest to understand nature, how
the universe works.
So let me end this aside by noting that here in our study of cosmology, we will see in
the end that some of the conclusions, in fact, based on the process of science, by their
very nature end up removing themselves from the realm of science, because as far as we
can tell, they're not testable, at least not by any techniques that we have so far.
Maybe in principle somehow they're testable, but we haven't figured out any such way to
test them.
So some of the conclusions, especially near the very end of the course, will have that
nature that they are untestable, yet they were based on the process of science.
This can end up blurring the distinction between religion and science.
I mean, there's not everything that scientists can answer.
There are many questions we can't answer, and the distinction becomes blurred.
And I will try to point out the relevant parts of the course where the conclusions we've
come to by their very nature, at least temporarily, remove themselves from the realm of science.
I'll try to be clear when that happens.
Okay, well, before I move on to cosmology itself, let me point out that there's a lot
of confusion among the general public between cosmology, the study of the structure and
evolution of the universe as a whole, and cosmetology, the study of hairdos and facials.
They have the same root, cosmos, all that there is to make order of.
But like astronomy and astrology, which also have the same root and had a common origin,
they now have rather distinct meanings.
The difference in their spelling is interesting, actually.
Cosmetology is cosmology, but with an extra ET, spell them out.
Cosmetology is cosmology with an extra ET, like the extraterrestrial.
Well, I'm not sure of the significance of that, okay, I think it's just coincidental.
But to give you an example of this confusion that I've seen when speaking to people and
just reading things, here's an ad that a colleague of mine placed in my mailbox some time ago.
Make cosmology your career, training and supervision in hairstyling, blow drying, permanent waves,
coloring and frosting, scalp treatments, body and skin care, style cuts and basic cuts.
Or foother, notice, foother, information and interviews, call that number.
Well, classes started the first Monday and March, but they probably have such classes
nearly every quarter or semester at your local university or other institution.
Well these guys, these ad writers, clearly need a lesson not only on the difference between
cosmology and cosmetology, but they need a lesson in spelling and proofreading.
Because in addition to foother there, you see hairstyling, hairstyling, ever heard of that?
And coloring with an OU, well I'll allow the last one because in fact it's the British
spelling and my own thesis advisor was British so I'll allow that.
But anyway, if you want to get to the cutting edge of cosmology and make it your career,
sorry for the bad pun, as I and many of my colleagues have done, I urge you to take such
a course and you know, next time it's offered, learn all about the universe and how to figure
out how it works on the largest scales.
Alright, well, joking aside, let's now proceed with some real serious cosmology.
The story begins really in the 1920s with Vesto Schleifer, who noticed that with few exceptions
the spectra of the spiral nebulae show a redshift.
In other words, you see the normal sorts of chemical elements in the spectra that you
find in stars in our own galaxy, but their whole pattern is shifted to longer wavelengths
or redder colors.
And there's a few exceptions like Van Drometa Galaxy is actually blue shifted if you look
at its spectrum and a number of the galaxies in our local group are blue shifted, but beyond
the local group the spectra are redshifted.
So if you look at the spectrum, you let the light go through a prism and you spread it
out into its component colors or wavelengths.
There are these absorption lines and there may be emission lines from nebulae that are
glowing in the galaxy.
And if you plot then the apparent brightness versus the wavelength or color, you get this
curve which astronomers and physicists call the spectrum.
Now at the top here you see the spectrum of a galaxy which is not redshifted at all.
In other words, all of these absorption lines and emission lines are at the wavelengths at
which we observe them in laboratory gases at rest.
But the one over here at the bottom is redshifted by a tenth.
That is, all of the lines are there in all of the normal patterns, but they've been
shifted to redder wavelengths by 10%.
So a line that normally appears at 6,000 angstroms might be at 6,600 angstroms.
And some other galaxy would have the same lines, but again at a different redshift, a
different amount to the redder or longer wavelengths of the spectrum.
But the patterns are all the same.
All the elements are the same, it's just their spectra have been redshifted.
That's what Vesto Schleifer noticed.
Edwin Hubble took it a step further.
In 1929 he used the newly derived distances of some of the spiral nebulae, derived from
studies of the Cepheid variable stars and how bright they appear to be and all that.
And he showed that the observed redshifts of these galaxies are proportional to their
distances.
The more distant galaxies have greater redshifts of their spectra than the nearby galaxies.
Now all these galaxies, mind you, are so nearby that we are seeing them right now.
I mean, they might be millions of light years away, so technically we're seeing them as
they were millions of years ago.
But compared to the 14 billion year history of the universe, looking back a few million
years is essentially nothing.
So let's simply say that the nearby galaxies we're seeing right now.
And later we'll have to take into account the fact that more distant galaxies we see
as they were in the past.
So right now redshift is proportional to distance.
So here's a nearby galaxy, it has a certain redshift.
A more distant galaxy, which typically looks fainter and smaller, has a larger redshift.
And an even more distant set of galaxies like the Virgo cluster shown here is even more
redshifted.
The redshift seems to be proportional to distance.
So let me show you some early spectra of galaxies.
Here is a galaxy in the Virgo cluster, and here's the spectrum.
There's a bunch of comparison lines here due to laboratory gases at rest.
And this galaxy was thought to be 24 megaparsecs away, that's 24 million parsecs, each parsec
being 3.26 light years.
The more modern distance is 19 megaparsecs, but this is an old slide.
And you can see here two absorption lines of ionized calcium, which are called H and
K. Not to mean that these are hydrogen and potassium, but simply the terminology given
for these particular lines of singly ionized calcium.
It's weird, I know, but that's the way it goes.
Anyway, they're shifted a little bit, and this tiny arrow shows the amount of shift
redward compared to where those lines appear in the laboratory gas at rest.
Here's a galaxy 300 megaparsecs away, and you see the same pair of lines, but they're
shifted even farther to the red.
Here's another set of galaxies, 780 megaparsecs away, and now the redshift is huge.
Look at that.
The same pair of lines, but way off in the middle of the optical spectrum, not in the
ultraviolet or violet part as they were initially.
And then finally, here's a galaxy that's over 1,000 megaparsecs away, 1,220 megaparsecs
away.
And these lines, which started out in the violet or near ultraviolet part of the spectrum,
have been shifted way off to the bluish-green part of the spectrum.
If you plot the observed brightness of the light versus wavelength, you get the continuum
and you get these absorption lines, and here I've shown just the hydrogen absorption lines.
And in a nearby galaxy, the shift is zero or nearly zero.
If the galaxy is more distant, then you see a noticeable redshift, delta lambda, delta
lambda being the observed wavelength minus the wavelength it would have had if it were
produced by a gas at rest in your own laboratory.
So the hydrogen alpha line is shifted, hydrogen beta is shifted, and hydrogen gamma is shifted.
What Hubble noticed was that for an even more distant galaxy, the same pattern of lines
is shifted even more toward the red part of the spectrum, longer wavelengths, lower frequencies.
Delta lambda becomes bigger or is seen to be bigger for the distant galaxies compared
with the nearby galaxies.
Now we can define this shift in wavelength, delta lambda, divided by the wavelength at
which the line would have appeared had it been caused by a laboratory gas at rest.
That ratio, delta lambda over the rest wavelength, lambda naught, we will call z, the redshift.
So z is delta lambda over lambda naught, that is, it's the observed wavelength minus
the rest or laboratory wavelength, that quantity divided by the rest wavelength.
Now suppose the redshift is due to motion along our line of sight, suppose it's due
to a radial velocity, then we know that the Doppler formula tells us that delta lambda
over lambda naught is v over c, that is, this shift divided by the rest wavelength is equal
to the speed of the object moving away from you divided by the speed of light.
So under this interpretation, because redshift increases with distance, you would conclude
that speed of recession increases with distance as well for a bunch of different galaxies.
So at the present time, the more distant galaxies have bigger redshifts and hence bigger speeds
of recession than the nearby galaxies.
Well's original plot is shown here, where the speed of recession is along the vertical
axis and the distance in megaparsecs is along the horizontal axis.
Interestingly, Hubble had the wrong units on his y-axis.
He gave speeds in terms of kilometers instead of kilometers per second.
Nowadays, we would dock students five or ten points on an exam if they did that, but even
the greatest astronomers sometimes make an error, a typo of this sort.
Hubble of course knew that the units of speed are kilometers per second.
But anyway, you can see here that with a lot of scatter, in general, it does appear to
be the case that the more distant galaxies are moving faster than the nearby galaxies,
although there's so much scatter here that it was a little bit of a leap of faith almost
to conclude that this relation is really real.
Later, Hubble and his assistant, Milton Humason, made a more expanded plot by measuring galaxies
that were farther away.
And now you can see quite clearly that the more distant galaxies are moving away from
us faster than the nearby galaxies.
This was the Hubble and Humason plot published in 1931, and for comparison, Hubble's original
data are in this lower left-hand corner.
And you can see that now the relationship between distance and velocity is much more
convincing.
Now, a diagram that a colleague of mine plotted in mid-2003 is given here, it's based on a
bunch of distances determined from type 1a supernovae in a manner that I'll describe
later, and it shows this relationship really, really well.
That is, the more distant galaxies are moving away faster than the nearby galaxies.
And the original Hubble plot of 1929 falls in this lower left-hand square down here.
So we've come a long way in the past many decades.
And even more recently, in mid-2006, my colleague gave me a revised version of this plot.
He was a postdoctoral fellow who worked with me for a while, Sarabja, and he now shows
this plot with 95 supernovae instead of just 80, and the relationship is even tighter.
And now you can see some of the uncertainties plotted in the distances.
We don't know the distances of the galaxies perfectly well, but nevertheless, this relationship
is very linear and goes very far out to distances of many hundreds of megaparsecs, billions
of light-years.
If you look at this relationship, speed is proportional to distance, and the constant
of proportionality is now known as Hubble's constant, H. And its value right now is given
by H naught.
The value can actually change with time.
H can change with time, so we say that its value now is H sub 0 or H naught.
So this is the constant of proportionality between the observed speed of recession and
the distance.
Among the latest values are that the constant of proportionality is something like 71 kilometers
per second per megaparsec.
I'll define what I mean by that more clearly in a few minutes, but it's 71 kilometers per
second per megaparsec.
That's what I've assumed for a number of years.
Just very recently, the number has been revised to more like 73, perhaps, with a comparable
uncertainty, plus or minus four.
Well, I don't want to change all of my graphs and stuff that I've made laboriously with
a number equal to 71, and 71 and 73 to within the uncertainties are about the same anyway.
So I will assume for the rest of this course that the Hubble constant is 71 kilometers
per second per megaparsec.
The true value might be closer to 73, but the uncertainty is still four or five.
Okay, so what do we mean by this?
Well, if a galaxy is 10 megaparsecs away, then the Hubble constant, 71 kilometers per
second per megaparsec multiplied by 10 megaparsecs, gives you 710 kilometers per second.
That is, a galaxy that's 10 megaparsecs away is observed to be moving away from us at 710
kilometers per second.
A galaxy that's 20 megaparsecs away from us is moving away from us with a speed of 720,
well, is moving away from us with a speed of 20 megaparsecs multiplied by 71 kilometers
per second per megaparsec, or a speed of 1420 kilometers per second.
Now usually, you measure the recession speed, and you know the distance somehow, and you
determine Hubble's constant.
So Hubble's constant is this relationship, the quantitative relationship between the
observed speed of recession and the distance of a galaxy right now.
Now if you look at it, V equals H naught D, you might think that if Hubble's constant
is constant, then as the distance of a given galaxy grows, its speed of recession will
increase as well, because if V equals H naught D, and D is increasing, then V should increase
as well.
Well it doesn't.
Hubble's constant actually changes with time, it actually decreases with time in most reasonable
universes.
And so the speed of any given galaxy at best remains constant, or you would think maybe
it should slow down with time because galaxies are pulling on one another, okay?
But Hubble's law alone, as this is called, does not itself imply that the speed of a
given galaxy should increase or decrease or anything.
It just says that right now, given a certain Hubble constant, galaxies that are farther
away are moving away from us more quickly than galaxies that are nearby.
Well there are competing interpretations for the redshift.
What if it's gravitational?
What if light is trying to escape from galaxies and becomes gravitationally redshifted?
The problem with that hypothesis is that all parts of a galaxy have the same observed redshift
aside from that caused by the spin of the galaxy, but when you take that into account,
all parts have the same redshift, and if it were gravitational you wouldn't expect that
to be the case, because different parts would have different gravitational fields, and there
would be a different redshift.
Moreover, different galaxies in the cluster have the same redshift, except for the slightly
different radial velocities, which Fritz Zwicky measured and all that, you know, but those
are the velocities associated with the gravity of the cluster.
If you remove those, all the galaxies in the cluster have the same redshift, and if it
were gravitational you wouldn't have expected that.
Another alternative is that light somehow becomes tired on its way toward us through
the vast distances of intergalactic space.
Maybe it becomes tired and loses energy and becomes redshifted.
Well when you look at the light curves of supernovae, here's a star in a nearby galaxy
that brightened and faded.
You can plot that observed brightening and fading on a graph, and it shows, as this red
line here, the observed brightening and fading of a nearby supernova.
Well if you now observe distant supernovae, you find that they brighten and fade more
slowly than the nearby supernovae.
So what we observe is that distant supernovae brighten and fade more slowly than nearby supernovae.
You can measure the distant supernovae with great telescopes like Hubble and some ground
based telescopes, and you can accurately measure these light curves, and it is an observed
fact that the more distant supernovae take a longer time to brighten and fade.
If light were getting tired along the way, there would not be this observed relationship.
That is, the light curve of a supernova should rise and decline just as quickly for a distant
supernovae as for a nearby one.
There should be no difference in the light curves.
If instead the redshift is caused by expansion of the universe, those distant galaxies and
the supernovae within them are moving away from us.
From our perspective, their clocks should run more slowly than the clocks here nearby,
you know, and the brightening and fading supernovae is like a clock, it takes a certain amount
of time.
Well in an expanding universe, that time will be dilated for distant supernovae at a large
redshift and not dilated for the nearby ones.
Since we observe dilation of the time scale of brightening and fading for the distant supernovae
versus the nearby ones, we conclude that the redshift is caused by expansion, not by
tired light.
So the universe appears to be expanding.
Finally you could say, well what if, you know, these things really are getting tired,
but the supernovae somehow give us the wrong result?
Well you can look at what's called the surface brightness of galaxies as a function of redshift.
The surface brightness is the brightness per unit area, and in an expanding universe, at
a progressively greater redshift, the brightness per unit area declines quite dramatically.
But in the tired light hypothesis, the brightness per unit area declines much less.
And when you look at galaxies at progressively greater redshifts and you ask what their surface
brightness is, you find that indeed the surface brightness appears to be consistent with an
expanding universe where the redshifts are an indication of recession speed rather than
a universe where the light is simply getting tired.
Moreover, the quantitative amount of dimming of the surface brightness is consistent not
with galaxies zooming like bullets through some pre-existing space, but rather with galaxies
that are moving away from us because space itself is expanding.
It's not that there's this universe through which all these pellets, all these galaxies
are zipping.
No, it's that the space in between us and distant galaxies is expanding, and that is
what is causing the recession.
And you can tell that because, again, if you look at the surface brightnesses of galaxies
at different redshifts, in an expanding universe, the surface brightness declines quite a lot
with increasing redshift.
In a tired light universe, it declines very little, and if galaxies were simply moving
through a pre-existing space, the surface brightness would decline in a manner intermediate
between these two extreme examples.
And what we observe is that the surface brightness declines in a way consistent with expansion
of space, not consistent with movement of galaxies through some pre-existing space.
So space itself is expanding.
Now, finally, you could ask, is everything expanding?
Well, no, you aren't expanding despite what you might think after a big lunch, but that's,
you know, maybe you did expand because that's not the universe's fault, that's your fault.
We're not expanding because we're held together by electromagnetic forces that keep us bound
together.
Similarly, we are bound to the Earth by gravitational forces, and the Earth itself is bound, and
it's not expanding.
And individual galaxies are bound by gravity, they're not expanding.
And clusters of galaxies are bound together, they're not expanding either.
Really it's the space between very distant clusters of galaxies that's expanding.
On smaller scales, clusters, galaxies, stars, planets, people, all those things are held
together by forces that overcome the tendency of space itself to expand.
So when we say that the universe is expanding, what we mean is that the space between extremely
distant galaxies and clusters of galaxies is what's expanding.
On smaller scales, where things are held together by other forces, things aren't expanding.
And it's this expansion of the universe that is the fundamental observation of cosmology
and which will play a central role in the remaining lectures of this course.
