In the previous lecture I introduced the expansion of the universe, one of the most monumental
discoveries of all time, and a central theme of cosmology.
Now expansion is a tough concept, and to help you understand it better, in this lecture
I'll expand on it.
No matter which galaxy we look at, we see that it's moving away from us, it's receding
away from us, and at the present time, the most nearby galaxies are moving away more
slowly than the more distant galaxies.
So here's a relatively nearby galaxy, it's moving away with a certain speed, the more
distant galaxies are moving away faster.
Now there are some exceptions.
Galaxies in our local group are gravitationally bound together, so they're all kind of rumbling
around like this, and some might be moving away from us, and some might be moving toward
us, but there's no organized recession away from us.
So for example, the Andromeda galaxy, the nearest big galaxy to our own, is actually
moving toward us at something like 100 kilometers per second.
So if Edwin Hubble had only looked at the Andromeda galaxy, he might have concluded
that the universe is collapsing rather than expanding, alright, so you've got to look
at other galaxies.
Local group galaxies are bound together.
Even galaxies that are pretty far away but relatively nearby, like the Virgo cluster
shown here, 60 million light years away, are affected by the gravity of the local group.
So the Virgo cluster, though it's moving away from us at something like 1200 kilometers
per second, it would have been moving away from us by 150 or 200 kilometers per second
more, that is, 1350 or 1400 or so kilometers per second, had the Virgo cluster and the
local group not been attracting one another.
So if they were massless particles, massless galaxies, and with no reason to attract each
other, then they would have been moving away from us more quickly than they're observed
to.
And this is called a deviation from the uniform expansion of the universe, a deviation from
the so-called Hubble flow.
The Hubble flow is the uniform expansion of the universe.
So for nearby galaxies, you have to take into account these gravitationally induced deviations.
And for Andromeda, the gravity is so strong that it doesn't even go away at all, okay,
it's coming toward us.
So there are these deviations.
Now for the most nearby galaxies, you can understand that the gravity within, say, the
local group is so strong that it overcomes any tendency at all for the universe, for
space to expand.
It's like a spring that's so tight that you can't budge it.
You can't pull it apart at all.
That's the galaxies in the local group.
They're so bound to each other that we can't pull them apart at all.
The Virgo cluster is, in a sense, connected to us by a spring that's able to be stretched
by the expansion of space.
That's the kind of analogy you might have.
But the spring pulls back a little bit, all right?
So it's not being stretched out as quickly as it would have been had the spring not been
pulling back in on itself, all right?
All right.
Well, now let's go to this uniform expansion.
Let's forget about the deviations.
And you say, all right, the nearby galaxies are moving away with a certain speed, and
the more distant galaxies are moving away faster.
This is kind of like what a bird would see after a few seconds if the bird were to look
down at a whole big pile of tennis balls that I had kicked.
Suppose I kick a pile of tennis balls.
Some of them will have been given a small amount of energy, so they're moving away slowly.
Those will have been given a large amount of energy, so they're moving away quickly.
And after a while, this expanding set of tennis balls looks something like this.
Here's my foot where it kicked them, and there are all these balls moving away from me.
And the more distant balls are moving faster than the nearby balls because, after all,
they were given a bigger kick.
So this observed distribution of galaxies and their speeds is suggestive of an explosion
with a center.
In this case, my foot kicking a bunch of tennis balls, or, for example, some fireworks.
There's an explosion with a well-defined center, and all the shrapnel go out, for example,
and little bits of shrapnel that are given only a small amount of energy move out in
a given time by a smaller distance than bits of shrapnel that have a large amount of energy
given to them.
One characteristic of an explosion with a central point of explosion is that the more
distant parts are moving faster than the nearby parts, because to have gotten that far away,
they had to have been moving faster.
So the observed recession of galaxies suggests that there was an explosion a long time ago,
a big bang, let's say, centered on us.
Look at the diagram.
It looks like it's centered on us.
Well, that's a bit strange, isn't it?
I mean, why should all the other galaxies be moving away from ours?
Are they lactose intolerant?
Milky Way Galaxy.
OK, sorry, bad pun.
Or maybe they just don't like us.
Is it something we said, or do we smell?
When I give this lecture at my home institution, UC Berkeley, or Cal, I say, are we from Stanford?
Cross Bay Rival.
Fine institution, just not quite as fine as Cal, but anyway, sorry to all of you who
might be Stanford grads, but anyway, great place.
Well, no, we don't think that there's anything like this going on.
We don't think that other galaxies don't like us or whatever.
We think that, in fact, there may not be a center to the universe.
And indeed, even this observed recession of galaxies doesn't necessarily imply that there
is a center or that we are at it.
And indeed, there's observational evidence that suggests that, to the contrary, there
is no center.
If you look at this diagram, and if there were a center, you would notice that near
to the center, in a box, say, centered on the center, there are a lot of tennis balls or
a lot of galaxies.
Farther away, if you draw a box of the same size, there are fewer tennis balls or fewer
galaxies.
And farther away, in a box of a given size, there would be even fewer galaxies or tennis
balls because a given number of them is spreading out into an even bigger, progressively bigger
volume.
And so any given subset of that volume is going to have a smaller and smaller number
of galaxies or tennis balls as you go farther out.
So if our galaxy were at the center, there would be a clear prediction.
Larger galaxies spread out more and more as you look farther and farther away.
And per unit volume, there should be fewer and fewer galaxies as we look to greater and
greater distances.
Is that the case?
No.
The number density of galaxies, the number of galaxies per unit volume, remains about
the same no matter where you look in the universe if you spread out over the clusters and superclusters
and voids and all that.
In other words, take out the known irregularities.
Beyond that then, is there a decrease in the number of galaxies as you get farther away
from us?
No.
They're all about the same.
Moreover, we see no other region in the universe that could call itself the center because
we see no other region where the galaxies appear to be concentrated in such a way.
So in fact, we think that there is no center to the universe, no unique center, at least
not in any of the physically accessible dimensions.
And I'll have a lot more to say about that later.
This is a really packed lecture.
Let's give a couple of demos to maybe clarify what I'm talking about here.
Here's a simple one-dimensional universe where the space is represented by this rubber hose
and the galaxies are the ping-pong balls.
Space can expand, the galaxies themselves do not because they're gravitationally bound.
While I expand this space, and from our perspective on this yellow ping-pong ball, all the others
are moving away.
And indeed, the more distant ones are moving away faster than the more nearby ones because
there was more rubber between us and the more distant ones than between us and the nearby
ones, and each piece of rubber, each little part of it, expands.
So we say that we live in an expanding universe, apparently centered on us.
But that conclusion doesn't depend in any way on our choice of which ping-pong ball to view things from.
I could choose that one or that one.
And from their perspective, all the other ping-pong balls are moving away as well,
with a speed that at any given time is proportional to their distance.
So here's a simple one-dimensional universe that has no unique center.
Yet each of the galaxies thinks that it is at the unique center.
But they're all wrong.
There is no unique center.
And by the way, of course, you could make this into a circular universe like this to make
it finite if you're bothered by an infinite rubber band, an infinite universe.
Well, okay, let's now take a three-dimensional example of this phenomenon.
If we have a loaf of raisin bread where the dough is uniformly filled with yeast, and
there are raisins that don't expand because they don't have any yeast in them, and you
let the thing bake for a while, it'll grow bigger, and all of the raisins will get a greater
distance away from all of the other raisins.
Here are a bunch of markers.
These two are, say, a centimeter apart, and those two are two centimeters and three.
And after a while, those same raisins are two, four, and six centimeters apart.
From the perspective of any raisin, all the others are moving away from it.
So it could call up its neighbors and say, hey, I'm the center of the universe.
This one here could say, well, no, you're not.
You're not the unique center because all the other raisins are moving away from me, too.
And this raisin here would say the same thing.
Now, you might say, oh, this raisin is near an edge, and that's weird or something.
But let's forget about the edge.
The universe is either infinite or it wraps around itself in such a way that there is no edge.
Okay, so here I've drawn an edge, but it's not central to our discussion.
In fact, it's confusing, but it's hard to draw an infinite universe on a finite sheet of paper.
So let's go back to our raisin bread here.
Let's let it bake for an hour and note the original separation between two raisins, five centimeters and 10 centimeters.
We let it bake for an hour and let's suppose it doubled in size.
Now these raisins are separated by 10 centimeters and 20.
What do we observe?
Well, for the raisin at the left, its final position after one hour is 10 centimeters from us.
Its initial position was five centimeters.
So it moved 10 minus five or by advanced mathematics, five centimeters in one hour, hence an average speed of five centimeters per hour.
The one on the right started out at 10 centimeters.
After an hour, it's at 20.
It moved 20 minus 10 or 10 centimeters in one hour for an average speed of 10 centimeters per hour.
So you see the Hubble law, that is that the more distant ones are moving faster than the nearby ones, is satisfied in such a universe.
And the reason it's satisfied is that every bit of dough, just like every bit of the rubber band, expanded.
And the more dough there was between two galaxies to begin with, the more expansion there is and the greater is the apparent recession speed.
Well, you might still ask yourself whether there is a center somewhere that you just can't see.
And I'd like to illustrate this with another demo, a spherical balloon whose rubber stretches and on which there are stickers which represent the galaxies that don't stretch.
So let me expand this balloon, the universe, not too much because I'll get a little bang.
And you can see all these stickers moving away from one another.
Each sticker sees the others moving away and indeed each sticker sees the more distant ones moving faster than the nearby ones because there's more rubber that's stretching.
Each of them thinks that it's at the center.
Each of them is wrong. There is no unique center, at least not in the physically accessible dimensions.
Now what I mean by that is the following.
This is a curved universe. It's a two-dimensional space.
That is, suppose the laws of physics are constrained to operate only on the surface of the balloon.
So you can go forwards and backwards or left and right or any combination of those two motions.
But out of the balloon or into the balloon are forbidden.
This is a hypothetical universe, okay?
It's two-dimensional. You can only go in these two directions, not up and down.
And it curves around itself and the dot creatures could figure that out by, for example, going in one direction and ending up where they began.
Or drawing large triangles and measuring their geometrical properties and things like that.
I'll discuss that more later.
But they would figure out that they live in a finite, not an infinite, but a finite universe that wraps around itself.
And they would conclude, after enough thought, that there is a center.
But where is it? It's the center of the balloon.
Now is that part of this hypothetical universe as I've defined it?
No. The center of the balloon is not part of the surface.
Therefore, it is not part of this universe, or at least of the dimensions that are physically accessible to these dot creatures.
It's in a mathematically real and distinct dimension, but that dimension is not physically accessible.
That is a really interesting concept.
Let's try to take a look at this by drawing some circles.
If we look at a circle as a one-dimensional example of the two-dimensional surface I just showed you.
A circle is like a one-dimensional universe.
I can go one direction or the other direction.
But suppose I'm forbidden by the laws of physics from going along the radial direction or the up and down direction.
That's like a one-dimensional closed or finite universe.
Now the equation in Cartesian coordinates for this circle is x squared, the distance from the origin,
plus y squared equals r squared, the square of the radius.
Each of the points along this circle satisfies this equation.
That's the equation of the set of points known as the circle.
You can also write it in polar coordinates.
In polar coordinates, a dot on the circle is some radius r from this origin, the center of the circle,
and the angle from the x-axis is denoted by theta.
So if you have all points at a given radius r and spanning all possible values of theta, 0 to 2 pi all the way around the circle,
again you will describe the set of points known as the circle.
In each case you can see that two variables were needed to describe this circle, this one-dimensional structure.
You needed x and y or r and theta.
Two coordinates were needed to describe a one-dimensional curved path.
This means that this one-dimensional path wraps around a second mathematical dimension.
And in the case of the circle, the origin is not part of the circle.
It's not in one of the physically accessible dimensions, rather it's in the dimension used to mathematically describe that hypothetical universe, the circle.
In the case of the sphere, we can represent the surface of the sphere by an equation,
x squared plus y squared plus z squared equals the square of the radius.
This is just an extension of the Pythagorean theorem to three dimensions.
And all dots on this sphere satisfy this equation.
The sphere itself is two-dimensional, it's a two-dimensional curved surface.
You can only go forward and backward or left and right, you can't go in and out, remember that.
But the center of the sphere is not in the surface, yet clearly it exists because there had to be three dimensions,
x, y, and z, describing this surface.
And the origin of coordinates here, r equals zero, is this point that's not in the sphere.
In polar coordinates, you can say that all the points are at radius r,
and theta runs the course from zero to two pi, and phi can go from zero to pi.
With this set of points, you describe the full sphere.
Once again, one needs three coordinates, r, theta, and phi, or x, y, and z,
to describe a fundamentally two-dimensional surface whose center is in a mathematically well-defined but physically inaccessible dimension.
Now, if we live in a three-dimensional analog of a sphere where a volume bends around some fourth spatial dimension,
the equation for our sphere would be something like x squared plus y squared plus z squared plus w squared equals the square of the radius,
w now being this fourth dimension around which we curve.
And this is called a hypersphere, and I can't really imagine what a hypersphere looks like
because I live in the normal three dimensions and can't put myself into this fourth spatial dimension from which I could view the hypersphere.
It's sort of like the dot creatures. They can't really imagine what their sphere looks like,
but they can imagine a circle, which is a one-dimensional counterpart to their two-dimensional surface.
So in a similar way, the sphere is a two-dimensional counterpart to this three-dimensional volume in which we live,
but you'd have to put yourself into the fourth dimension to actually see the hypersphere.
So I don't know how to imagine it, but I can help you gain some visualization of it by drawing a hypercube in a hyperspace.
Let's first draw a line segment such as that shown here.
If I want to turn that into a square, I just take a copy of itself,
displace it to the right, let's say, along a dimension perpendicular to the dimension of the line segment,
and then join the ends, and that gives me a two-dimensional square.
Now, if I want to make a cube out of the two-dimensional square, I make a copy of itself, displace it in the perpendicular direction,
and join up the corners. That gives me a cube. In fact, here's a cube.
All right, I just took a square, made a copy, displaced it, and joined up the corners, and then sort of filled it in.
Well, this we can visualize nicely from our three-dimensional space, but we can also draw its projection onto a sheet of paper.
And here's the projection or shadow of a three-dimensional cube onto a two-dimensional surface.
You take the square, you make a copy of itself, and instead of displacing it in the perpendicular direction or dimension,
which you cannot do in this case, because you're confined to the sheet of paper,
you displace it along a diagonal and then connect up the corners.
That gives you the shadow or the projection of a cube onto a two-dimensional sheet of paper.
So to make a hypercube, I would need to take a cube, make a copy of itself, displace it into this fourth spatial dimension,
which is physically inaccessible, and then join up the corners. That would give me a hypercube.
But I can't do that because I can't displace it into this other dimension. Where is it, you know?
But I can do the next best thing. I can make a copy of the cube, displace it along a diagonal in this room,
and then connect up the corners. That'll give me the shadow or the projection of a hypercube onto this three-dimensional room.
All right? I hope that helps you to some degree in visualizing hyperspace. I think it helps me a little bit, but I'm not sure.
Well, let's go back to the expansion of the universe. I mentioned that the universe could be finite and curving around itself
like a balloon or a hypersphere or something like that, but it could also be infinite.
And you might ask, does expansion make sense in an infinite space? What is infinity anyway?
And how can we come to some, you know, gut feeling for what it means?
It turns out that the universe can expand even if it's infinite. It just becomes less dense with time.
Now, let me illustrate this with the counting numbers. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and so on. They clearly go on for infinity.
But now I can strike out all the even numbers, and I have 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, and so on.
They clearly go out to infinity as well. There are no fewer of them than there are the counting numbers, but they're in a sense less dense.
The even numbers are missing. Now let's strike out all of them except 1, 11, 21, and so on.
Those go out to infinity as well. You never stop counting, right? But a bunch of numbers are missing, so in a sense it's less dense.
But they're still infinite, and mathematically all of these sequences can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the counting numbers,
and so all of these infinities are mathematically the same size, even though there's a bunch of numbers missing in some of the ones that I wrote down.
So in a similar way, the universe can be infinite and growing, quote, unquote, not becoming a bigger infinity mathematically,
but just becoming less dense, like these numerical examples.
Now suppose we thought about universes that might be more dense than ours, okay?
Could there be a more dense universe than ours that's still expanding?
Indeed we can. If we look at the set of fractions, the rational numbers, that is a set of numbers that is more dense than the counting numbers,
but in fact it's still what we call a countable infinity. It can be placed into one-to-one correspondence with the counting numbers,
and so there are no more fractions, rational numbers, than there are counting numbers, yet there's clearly a greater density of the fractions.
I mean between 0 and 1, for example, there's one-half, one-third, two-fifths, eleven-thirteenths, and so on, and between 1 and 2 there's an infinite number as well,
and there are all these infinities, but it's still the same size.
But the rational numbers are more dense than the counting numbers in this sense.
So let me convince you that I can come up with a scheme to count all the rational numbers and not miss any of them.
Let me write them down in a table like this. One, which is one over one, two over one, three over one, four over one, and so on.
That's just the counting numbers. There's an infinite number of them there.
Now let's write one-half, two-halves, that's the same thing as one, that's okay.
One already appeared, but no one said I can't write down the numbers twice or more.
Anyway, three-halves, four-halves, five-halves, six-halves, seven-halves.
There's an infinite number of them there.
Now one-third, two-thirds, three-thirds, and so on.
One-fourth, two-fourths, three-fourths, and so on, and so on, and so forth.
Now each row has an infinite number of numbers.
Each column has an infinite number of numbers.
You might think that infinity times infinity gives you a bigger infinity than the counting numbers.
Right? You might think it makes sense, right?
Well, in fact, it's not a bigger infinity, it's still a countable infinity.
And there are a number of schemes you could use to keep track of all these fractions and not miss a single one.
Here's one scheme. You start with the number one, you go on a loop like this.
There's number two, number three, number four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve.
Now I already counted that one, that's the same thing as one-half, but that's okay.
I can count them more than once.
Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one, and so on along a set of diagonals.
Will I miss even a single number?
No, I won't.
That means that all of these fractions can be put into one-to-one correspondence with the set of counting numbers,
and that means that the rational numbers are no bigger an infinity than the counting numbers.
Even though they sure look bigger to me, I mean I must admit, okay?
Now, given that mathematical infinities are so weird, you know, you have an infinite number of rows,
an infinite number of columns, but it's still the same infinity.
That whole set is the same infinity as the counting numbers.
That's already so weird that if you can accept that, you surely should be able to accept the concept of a universe that's infinite,
but still expanding, okay?
You know, that's the way it goes.
You know, infinity is just a hard thing to get a hold of, and later we'll even see that there are bigger infinities
which will be relevant to some of the things we say about dark energy and the birth of the universe,
but for now I'm just telling you even the countable infinities like the counting numbers and the rational numbers
already are kind of hard to understand.
So we're now convinced that the universe is expanding, and if we extrapolate this observed expansion backward in time,
we could come to the conclusion that the universe may have had a beginning where the matter was very dense
and for whatever reason started expanding from a point called the singularity, okay?
When everything was really dense, possibly even infinitely dense, although if you include quantum physics,
probably it's not infinitely dense, probably it's just really, really dense, okay?
Now, the universe that's expanding is like an expanding gas.
When gas is expanding, they cool. That's what you have with a fire extinguisher.
You have all this compressed gas and it expands and it cools.
So if you compress gas, it heats, and this suggests that the universe began in a very hot and dense state
because as this whole coordinate grid is expanding, as space is expanding, it's also cooling.
So if you extrapolate backward in time, you could say that when the universe was small and very dense,
it was also very hot.
And at time equals zero when this denser, infinitely denser, very dense singularity existed,
maybe the temperatures as well were infinite or nearly infinite, very high in any case.
A hot birth to the universe, a hot big bang, where for some reason that we're still trying to understand,
the universe came into existence and has been expanding ever since, growing bigger, less dense, and cooler.
Well, this idea that everything is expanding and that we can use this expansion then to study the history of the universe is great.
But before we get to that point, I want to now, in the next seven lectures, utilize the expansion of the universe, Hubble's law,
to get the distances of galaxies and to know then how far back in time we're looking,
because the more distant a galaxy is, the longer it has taken for light to reach us.
The greater is the so-called look-back time.
So suppose we have some really distant galaxies that are so far away that we can't see the Cepheid variables or anything else in them.
Can we derive their distances in some other way?
Indeed we can.
We can use the known expansion of the universe, Hubble's law, with the known Hubble constant, and I'll tell you later how we derive it, to get the distance.
If you measure the redshift of a galaxy, z, by looking at its spectrum, that's just delta lambda over lambda naught.
You can measure that.
You can then compute the recession speed, v, from z equals v over c, which at least works at small redshifts.
It doesn't work at large redshifts.
You have to use a more correct relativistic formula.
But at least at small redshifts, the speed of recession divided by the speed of light is just equal to the redshift.
So now v equals zc, but we know from Hubble's law that v equals Hubble's constant times d.
So since you've measured the speed of recession, and suppose you know Hubble's constant, you can determine the distance of the galaxy d.
And again, this simple formula works for small redshifts.
You need a more complex relativistic formula for larger redshifts.
So observing galaxies at different redshifts, we can tell their different distances.
And since light travels at the speed of light, no faster, we can tell, in fact, how far away those galaxies are and how long it has taken for light to reach us.
So here's a table of redshifts and the so-called lookback time.
At a redshift of zero, the lookback time is zero. The object is here.
At a redshift of 0.1, the lookback time is already 1.3 billion years.
At a redshift of 0.2, it's 2.4 billion years.
And at progressively bigger redshifts, the lookback time is a progressively larger number of years,
up to something like 13 or 14 billion years the age of the universe.
And in newspaper articles, then, when they tell you the distance of a galaxy that an astronomer has measured,
what they're really telling you is the lookback time, how long it has taken for the light to reach us.
And by looking at progressively larger distances, we're looking progressively farther back in time,
and we see a movie of the past history of the universe from which we can learn something
about how it evolved and how the galaxies within it evolved.
