at the end of the last lecture I showed
a table for the relationship between the red shift of an object and its look back time.
That is, how long it has taken for the light emitted by that object to reach you so that
you're seeing it right now.
Light travels not at an infinite speed, rather fast speed of course, but it is finite, and
so it takes time for light to travel from there to here.
And the look back time is that time into the past that we are looking for an object at
redshift z.
If the speed of light were infinite, we would see the entire universe as it is right now.
And that might be kind of cool, you could see the whole thing.
But assuming that our region is typical of other regions, it's much more interesting
to look at those other regions as they were long ago in the past, because then you can
come to some understanding of how typical regions of the universe evolve with time.
So here is this table once again, redshift versus look back time.
And if you look at fairly large redshifts, like one, say, you're looking back nearly
8 billion years of time, or redshift 2, 10.3 billion years of time.
By redshift 4, you're looking back at 12 billion years, and at redshift 7, nearly 13 billion
years back.
Now the universe is only about 13.7, let's say roughly 14 billion years old.
So you can see that as you look at objects having progressively larger redshifts, you're
seeing farther back into the past, back to nearly the time when the universe was born.
Now in newspapers, you'll often hear that astronomers discovered a galaxy 4 billion light
years away or something like that.
That corresponds to redshift 0.4, according to this table, 4.3 billion light years.
We say that that's the distance of the object, but it isn't really the distance, because
remember, during the time that the light has been traveling from that galaxy to us, the
universe has expanded.
So really the galaxy was closer to us than 4 billion light years when the light was emitted,
and now it is farther from us than 4 billion light years.
And 4 billion light years is some average representative distance.
Most precisely, it is the time it has taken for the light to travel.
The distance of the galaxy at any particular time is, of course, changing, and could be
hard to figure out.
But the one thing that you do know is how long the light has traveled.
So this is really a look back time, we call it.
So if we have this movie of the history of the universe afforded to us by the finite
speed of light, you can ask yourself interesting questions.
Looking at typical galaxies today and what they look like, say representative groups
of galaxies, let's look at representative groups of galaxies at redshifts of 0.1, 0.5,
1, 1.5, 2, and so on.
If those representative groups evolve from one into another, then getting these snapshots
of the universe will tell us roughly how representative galaxies evolve.
Just like looking at babies and adolescents and adults and older people will tell you
roughly how the typical human evolves.
And the evolution of galaxies is one of the central questions of cosmology.
Here it is, headline of Newsweek Magazine, galaxies.
How the universe began and how it might end, those two are fundamental questions of cosmology.
All right, so let's begin by reviewing what galaxies look like today.
As I said a few lectures ago, they come in two major classes.
First the majestic spiral galaxies with old stars in the halo and in the bulge regions,
new stars forming in the arms, and a mixture of old and new stars in the disks of the galaxies.
Here's a beautiful spiral galaxy, M101.
This is the one in fact which was thought to be rotating by Adrian von Mann and leading
Shapley to the wrong conclusion that it is nearby.
It is rotating, but you can't see over a human lifetime that it's rotating.
It's a much too smaller rotation.
Here's the Andromeda galaxy, M31.
And here's one of my favorites, M51, a beautiful whirlpool-like spiral a few tens of millions
of light years away.
This is just a gorgeous object.
And here we can see the Hubble Space Telescope panning across it, showing the intricate patterns
of gas and dust in the arms and the nebulae from which star clusters form.
You can see pockets of stars here which are the clusters.
Going farther away now from the plane of the galaxy, we begin to see the spiral structure.
And the rotation you see in this animation is not the actual physical rotation of the
galaxy of course.
It's much much slower, but it's done here for dramatic effect.
This is a beautiful two-armed spiral and it has this companion galaxy helping to drive
the spiral pattern.
I should mention that these M numbers that I've been giving, M101, M31, the Andromeda
galaxy, M51, they stand for Messier after Charles Messier, who in the 1770s was hunting
for comets.
And he kept on stumbling across these little fuzzy things in the sky that confused him.
But they were there at the same location night after night after night.
So he made a catalogue of them in order to prevent himself and others from getting confused
with comets in the future.
And we now know that this catalogue of about 100 objects consists of star clusters, nebulae,
galaxies, and other diffuse objects.
There's another catalogue, a much bigger catalogue consisting of thousands of galaxies.
It's called NGC, or the New General Catalogue, and it was compiled in 1888 by J. Dreyer.
And it consists of thousands of galaxies discovered by many, many astronomers, but Dreyer compiled
them all into a very useful catalogue.
And there are many other catalogues of astronomical objects.
But in the next few pictures you can see NGC 2997, or NGC 1512, a beautiful spiral with
a ring of star formation on the outskirts, and NGC 3310.
These are all galaxies in this NGC catalogue.
Then there are the elliptical galaxies, the other major class of galaxies today.
And they have a roughly spherical or elliptical distribution of stars, mostly old stars, very
little gas and dust in most of these elliptical galaxies, not as much rotation as in the spiral
galaxies.
And here you see NGC 205, a companion of the great Andromeda spiral M31.
Well, to get some idea of at least how galaxies evolve in a statistical sense, as I said,
we need to compare them, the nearby ones, with the appearance of distant galaxies.
So we need to first find distant galaxies, and that's hard to do.
How do you find them?
I mean, they're faint.
They're fuzzy.
They're tiny little things, okay?
So some astronomers have taken deep pictures of the sky and found faint little fuzzy objects
and then gotten spectra of them in the hopes that these are distant galaxies.
And some of them are.
But we also know that our universe is filled with intrinsically small puny, scrawny galaxies
that are nearby, so you end up wasting your time getting spectra of the wrong object and
then finding out that, gee whiz, it's a nearby galaxy rather than a distant galaxy.
So you'd like some sort of a better selection technique that improves your odds for finding
a distant galaxy.
So what some astronomers did was that they consulted existing catalogs of objects made
at other wavelengths.
And in particular, there were very useful catalogs of objects made using radio telescopes in
England.
Cambridge University had a set of radio telescopes with which they were finding all sorts of interesting
bright radio emitting sources in the sky in the 1950s and 60s and 70s.
And some astronomers took the positions of those radio emitting objects, got deep photographs
of those positions, and then saw whether there's an optical counterpart, and then got a spectrum
of that.
And the hope was that some of these radio galaxies are very distant luminous galaxies
that we are seeing, even though they're very, very far away, because they're very luminous.
And so these were candidates for distant luminous galaxies.
They are actually active galaxies, and I'll be discussing active galaxies in a couple
of lectures.
Now a pioneer in this field was Hiran Spinrad, my colleague at UC Berkeley.
And after I arrived at Berkeley in 1984 as a postdoctoral scholar, we worked for a couple
of years on getting spectra of these various sources from the Cambridge catalogs.
And one of the ones for which we got a spectrum with the three-meter reflector at Lick Observatory
ended up having a redshift of 1.8, which back then in 1985 was the highest redshift ever
found for a distant galaxy.
Since then, Hiran Spinrad and his students have been looking at other even more distant
galaxies, and here's an image taken with the Keck telescope of an object in the sixth
Cambridge catalog, 6C0140 plus 326.
That tells you it's rough coordinates in the sky, and it has a redshift of 4.41.
Wow, I mean, that one's a whopper, okay?
Interestingly, while studying this galaxy, they found another even more distant galaxy
called RD1 with a redshift of 5.34 and a slightly smaller redshift galaxy, BD3, right next to
it at redshift 4.02.
You can tell that that one is at 5.34 redshift because here's its spectrum, brightness versus
wavelength or color, and you can see a bright emission line corresponding to hydrogen with
electrons going from the second to the first energy level.
That produces a line called Lyman alpha, and its normal rest wavelength is 1,216 angstroms,
whereas the observed wavelength was way out here just beyond 7,700 angstroms, so it's
been redshifted by 534 percent.
That's a whopper.
The Hubble Space Telescope has provided incredible, amazing views of some of the distant galaxies
that are being found by Spinrad and others who work in this field, and in particular,
the Hubble Space Telescope took some very deep images, the first of which was the Hubble
Deep Field, where they looked in a part of the sky for about 10 consecutive days and got
some really, really fantastic pictures of galaxies extremely far away.
So here you can see an animation of where the Hubble Space Telescope was looking.
It was looking in the general direction of the Big Dipper or Ursa Major, zooming in on
that part of the sky.
What they did was they chose a part that was devoid of bright stars because they didn't
want the bright stars saturating their image.
And so here's a representative part of the sky away from bright stars in our own galaxy,
so we can look deeply into that location, not being contaminated by bright stars, and
see these galaxies here, roughly 1,000 galaxies in this particular photograph, and just a
few stars in our own Milky Way here.
There's one of them.
Really, there's very few others.
All the other little dots and blurs you see here are other galaxies.
I mean, it's mind-blowing how many galaxies there are out there and how many you can see
with these great telescopes.
Now just to make sure that this northern Hubble Deep Field was representative of small patches
of the sky, Hubble then turned its gaze a few years later to a representative field
in the South Celestial Hemisphere.
So it reoriented itself and looked down deep into the Southern Hemisphere, took a long
exposure, and found that indeed the Southern Hubble Deep Field has overall similar properties
with a few small differences from the Northern Deep Field.
So then spectra were obtained with larger ground-based telescopes.
After all, Hubble is a fine telescope for getting good images of an object because it's
above the Earth's atmosphere and the blur caused by the turbulence in the atmosphere.
But it is only a 2.4-meter diameter telescope.
So it doesn't gather as much light as today's 8 or 10-meter telescopes sitting firmly fixed
to the ground.
So with the two Keck telescopes, for example, you can gather a lot more light with the 10-meter
diameter pieces of glass than you can with the Hubble Space Telescope.
And so with Keck, you could get spectra, and hence redshifts of a bunch of these galaxies.
And here are lots of redshifts shown for galaxies in the Hubble Deep Field.
You see some of them are at fairly low redshift, like 0.3, others at 2.76 right here, or even
3.23.
Here's one at 3.22.
A whole range of redshifts, OK?
Now the Europeans have a great set of telescopes in Chile.
They have a set of four 8-meter diameter telescopes, which collectively are called the VLT, the
very large telescope.
And they were able to get excellent spectra of galaxies in the southern Hubble Deep Field.
So they made diagrams similar to the one that I just showed that was made from the Keck
telescope, where they had a bunch of redshifts for galaxies in the southern Hubble Deep Field.
More recently, the Hubble Space Telescope was used to take an even deeper picture of
the sky, the so-called Hubble Ultra Deep Field, in the constellation Fornax.
Now that's in the southern hemisphere, next to Eridmus, the river.
So here you can see the orbit of the Hubble Space Telescope, and it looked at this region
of the sky south of Orion.
There's Orion up there, Sirius was off to the lower left, looking deep down then in
the south into the constellation Fornax, choosing once again a rather blank part of the sky.
One can look deeper and deeper and deeper as the exposure time builds up, and see ever-faint
galaxies, some of which are just scrawny, faint galaxies nearby, but many of which are
among the most distant galaxies ever seen.
There we are, zooming in even farther back into the universe, to fainter and fainter
levels.
Well, in Lecture 71, I showed you only a part of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, a part containing
about a thousand galaxies, and I said that extrapolating over the whole sky, there's
something like 50 to 100 billion galaxies in principle visible to the Hubble Space Telescope.
Here is the whole Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
It's got a diameter of about one-tenth of the diameter of the full moon.
So it's about three arc minutes on a side, and in this full Hubble Ultra Deep Field,
you see about 10,000 galaxies, not just one or two thousand, like in the subset that I
showed you in Lecture 71.
So look at all these things, they're all galaxies.
The things with spikes, the bright things with spikes, are stars in our own galaxy,
and the spikes are not caused by the stars themselves, but rather by the diffraction
pattern or the interaction of the light with the telescope structure that holds up the
mirrors that end up imaging the light.
So anyway, just the bright things with spikes are stars.
Every other little thing there, every fuzzy little thing is another galaxy, and I've
looked at images like this countless times, and I still am completely awed by the number
of galaxies.
Indeed, I'm just overwhelmed by the number of galaxies, and thinking that they all have
tens or hundreds of billions of stars.
They're all like Milky Ways, or Milky Ways in the process of formation.
There's a vast, vast universe out there, I mean, it's just unbelievable.
Let's pan across the Hubble Ultra Deep Field to get a better sense of its full glory.
There's some bright, relatively nearby galaxies, but then panning away, we see some very distant
blobs, hardly visible even in the deep image formed by the Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
I mean, I wish we could look at each and every one of these galaxies in great detail, but
they're not sufficient resources, and plus, even with the greatest telescopes, some of
these things are just a blur.
That's why we'd like even better telescopes in the future.
Getting red shifts of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field with the Keck telescopes, and especially
the telescopes in the south, the European VLT, we can get now a map of the distribution
of the galaxies in the Hubble Ultra Deep Field.
So if we now zoom toward the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, the galaxies that are flying
past us are all at the correct distances.
In other words, all these galaxies have had their red shifts measured, and so we know
their distances.
So now we're not just zooming in on a picture of the Ultra Deep Field, like going from high
up to low down above a table.
Here we're actually zooming through space in the direction of the Ultra Deep Field, and
the galaxies that are zooming past us are the ones that we pass up on this fantastic
cosmic voyage, this journey through the vastness of space.
So these galaxies are now plotted at their correct relative distances.
And at the very end here, there looks like there's very few galaxies.
That's because when you go out to 11, 12, 13 billion light years, it becomes hard to
see the galaxies, and even harder to get enough light to get their spectrum.
So we simply don't have spectra of as many galaxies at 12 billion light years away as
we do at three or four, and that's why it looked like the density of galaxies was declining
near the end of that animation.
Really there are lots of galaxies out there, we just haven't gotten their spectra.
Well with so many galaxies out there, how do you know which ones to concentrate on?
If you try to take spectra of all of them, you know, you won't get enough telescope time.
So you want to choose the most likely candidates for the highest red shifts.
And one way of doing that is by realizing that, well, first of all, because of the high
red shift, the most distant galaxies are going to look red.
So you want to look at the reddest galaxies.
Even if they have a lot of star formation going on back then and look blue intrinsically,
the huge red shift, the huge stretching of light caused by the expansion of the universe
during the time that the photons were flying toward us has caused those photons to stretch
to longer wavelengths.
So you look at redder galaxies.
They also look particularly red because there's intergalactic hydrogen, as you can see, between
us and our telescopes and the distant galaxy.
There are all these clouds of intergalactic hydrogen, and that hydrogen absorbs a lot
of the light.
In particular, the electron in the ground state can jump up to the second energy level
and absorb an ultraviolet photon, a Lyman-alpha photon, having a wavelength of 1,216 angstroms.
And there's so many clouds of gas between us and that distant galaxy, and all these
clouds are at different red shifts, so the Lyman-alpha absorption becomes scattered all
over the place throughout the spectrum, blue word of the Lyman-alpha emission that might
be associated with the galaxy itself.
So all these intergalactic clouds selectively blank out the Lyman-alpha photons corresponding
to the red shift at which these clouds are sitting.
And so you get all sorts of Lyman-alpha absorption lines which tend to diminish the blue and
ultraviolet light of these distant galaxies.
So what you do is you look for galaxies that look relatively bright at, say, visual and
red wavelengths, but then in the blue and ultraviolet there's very little light because
they're both at high red shift, and a lot of that ultraviolet light has been absorbed
by intergalactic gas.
And Chuck Steidel at Caltech has really sort of invented and perfected this technique.
He shows here a set of images taken through different filters, and the boxes are around
some galaxies that you should focus your attention on.
Here's the field taken through a red filter, that is, it passes red light and blocks everything
else.
Here's the same field taken through a green filter, that is, it passes green light and
blocks everything else, and you can see the galaxies in those boxes are still easily visible.
But now let's take a look at an image taken through an ultraviolet filter.
The objects in those boxes have basically disappeared, whereas the other more nearby
objects are still visible.
Now the ones in the boxes have disappeared because they're at such a high red shift that
that ultraviolet light has been absorbed by these intergalactic clouds of gas.
And so Chuck Steidel is a world leader in finding extremely distant galaxies by taking
pictures of the same part of the sky through different filters and seeing basically what
disappears in the UV.
He calls these galaxies the UV dropouts, okay?
They dropped out from UV radiation.
So here's a picture of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field where, using this technique, astronomers
have identified a bunch of distant galaxies, or at least candidates for distant galaxies.
And they're circled here.
They look kind of red, and if you were to image the field through ultraviolet filters,
you would find that these guys completely disappear, almost completely disappear.
So those are candidate high red shift galaxies, and of course you need to get a spectrum to
make sure that it's really at high red shift.
Now a nice telescope for looking at these distant galaxies is the Spitzer Space Telescope.
Like the Hubble, it's up in orbit around the Earth, and it can point at galaxies and get
images of them and then transmit the information through radio waves to the Earth.
New commands are sent from the Earth to the telescope telling it where to point.
And this telescope is designed to work at infrared wavelengths, and it gets a great
view of not only the plane of our Milky Way galaxy, which glows in the infrared because
of warm dust heated by stars, but it also gets a great view of very distant galaxies
whose ultraviolet or even visible light might have been diminished by absorption through
intergalactic gas, but the infrared light is still visible.
And the Spitzer Space Telescope is named after Lyman Spitzer, one of the real pioneers
in urging astronomers in the federal government to build great space telescopes up in the
sky.
Well, if you look at the Hubble Ultra Deep Field with both Hubble and Spitzer, you can
see some galaxies that are probably very, very distant.
Here in this circle at visible wavelengths, you see not much of anything.
In the near infrared, that is just barely infrared wavelengths in a picture taken by
Hubble, you can see a blob.
And then in the true infrared, or the far infrared, imaged by the Spitzer Space Telescope,
you can see the object glowing very brightly.
And here are close-ups of the same three fields.
There in the visible, you don't see the object at all.
In the near infrared, it becomes visible, and in the true infrared, it becomes easily
visible, and so that's a very distant galaxy.
You can also find distant galaxies by utilizing the fact that gravitational lensing due to
foreground galaxies and clusters of galaxies can magnify or amplify the light of those
distant background galaxies.
So light is coming from a distant galaxy, it passes through and around a cluster of
galaxies which lenses or gravitationally bends the light, and if you zoom in on the image
then, you can see the arcs that are formed, those are the images of those distant background
galaxies, and they have been magnified by the gravitational focusing effect.
And here are a few still pictures showing gravitationally lensed galaxies, lensed by
this foreground cluster, and in the inset, you can see some faint red blobs which, given
their faintness and their color, suggests that they are very high red-shift galaxies.
And the only reason we can even see such distant galaxies is because their light has been amplified
through this gravitational lensing effect.
So with these gravitationally lensed galaxies, we have the chance of seeing much fainter,
more distant galaxies than we otherwise would have had there not been nature's magnifying
glass placed along the line of sight.
So here are all these arcs, oh they're beautiful, I mean look at that, that's part of an Einstein
ring, and then there are these smaller blobs and things, those are galaxies that wouldn't
have been visible had we not had this cosmic magnifying glass.
Here's some more of them, all these little bits and pieces of galaxies, look at this
one, all stretched out into an arc and magnified.
So with this magnifying glass, astronomers have seen some very faint galaxies up to redshift
six and beyond.
The record is redshift 6.6 in mid-2006.
So we've now learned how we find distant galaxies and we can compare how they look with the
appearance of nearby galaxies.
But it's not so simple, there are some subtleties involved.
Remember, when you're looking at a high redshift galaxy, the visible radiation that you were
seeing corresponds in fact to intrinsically ultraviolet radiation as emitted by that galaxy,
because that radiation has been stretched or redshifted due to the expansion of the
universe as the light came from that galaxy to us.
So it's not fair to look at a visible image of a distant galaxy like this one and say
oh, that looks really weird compared to nearby galaxies, because you're looking at this image
using a wavelength that's intrinsically ultraviolet, whereas your comparison sample of nearby
galaxies might have only been photographed at visible wavelengths, right?
You can't compare ultraviolet with visible because things might look different.
And indeed, here's some nearby galaxies imaged at ultraviolet wavelengths and they look a
lot weirder than the pictures of these same galaxies imaged at visible wavelengths.
And here's a specific example.
Here's a galaxy imaged at visible wavelengths.
And in the ultraviolet, there's this ring, which stands out clearly if you show only
the ultraviolet filter image.
So here in the ultraviolet, you see just this ring, so if that's the only picture you were
to take, you'd think the galaxy looks like that.
But the galaxy actually looks like this if you take a picture combining ultraviolet and
visible light.
So you have to watch out.
You have to compare galaxies through filters that are sampling the same light in the rest
frame of the galaxy before you can make valid comparisons.
So for example, you can compare the visible pictures of distant galaxies with ultraviolet
pictures of nearby galaxies, and then you're comparing apples and apples.
Or you can compare optical light or visible light images of nearby galaxies with infrared
images of distant high redshift galaxies like this one, so that you are looking at the rest
frame optical or visible light and you're comparing oranges and oranges in this case,
and that's fair.
Now the other great thing that has happened in the last decade or so is that the development
of supercomputers and of linked computers, small computers but all linked together, parallel
processing, has allowed astronomers to make huge calculations of tens of millions of particles,
either stars or galaxies or clusters of galaxies.
You can watch how these objects evolve through their gravitational interactions and compare
their results of the numerical simulations with the observed properties of the universe.
So the calculations from supercomputers, combined with the fantastic images and spectra from
the great arsenal of telescopes we now have, really allows us to study in detail the evolution
of structure in the universe.
