The evidence for the existence of supermassive black holes in the centers of many galaxies
is now very strong.
We have seen that stars and gaseous disks are being pulled at tremendous speeds by something
in the middle, something with a very strong gravitational field, and astronomers like
to call this thing the monster, but we now think it's the supermassive black hole in
the middle of a galaxy.
And if that supermassive black hole has material to eat, like a gaseous disk surrounding it,
then we call that feeding the monster, kind of feeding this black hole, this voracious
black hole swallowing material.
Because the material, of course, is being swallowed, but before it goes behind or beyond
the event horizon, it glows because it gives up a lot of its energy.
So quasars are, of course, the most extreme form of this activity of active galactic nuclei
that have giant black holes accreting material.
And we have seen that even a quiescent quasar has the chance of being reborn if a new supply
of fuel is somehow pushed toward the central region where the black hole exists.
So even today's quiescent galaxies, if they merge with other galaxies, could have material
channeled toward the central region, causing the black hole to glow again, or the region
surrounding it more correctly to glow again, and making it appear active again.
And indeed, in the detailed images Hubble is able to provide of at least the most nearby
quasars, which are only a couple of billion light years away, we see a lot of evidence
for interactions where the galaxy is sort of merging with another galaxy, and that merging
process sends fuel toward the central black hole in one, or in some cases both, galaxies
causing the thing to glow.
So that's the general phenomenon of quasars and active galaxies.
In this last lecture on the subject, I will tie together a few odds and ends, making it
more clear why we think there are black holes and disks and jets of gas there, and also
showing some of the utility of quasars as probes of the universe.
Now even if you have a galaxy that isn't merging with another galaxy, yet it has a supermassive
black hole in the middle, there could be a flare associated with that black hole.
If the black hole tidally disrupts a star that gets too close to it, that star can get
torn apart, and the material of that star can at least in part go into a disk, into orbital
motion around the black hole, and get swallowed by the black hole, and in that process flare
up or glow.
So maybe only a small part of the material of the star actually gets captured by the
black hole and eaten by it, the rest of it might go flying away.
But that small part may be enough to cause a rapid flare by, you know, a factor of ten
or twenty or thirty maybe in brightness of the central part of the galaxy.
So here in fact is an x-ray image of the central part of a galaxy, which is glowing,
but at a different time, sometime earlier, a few years earlier, a different x-ray satellite
saw that this particular nucleus was much brighter.
One time it was brighter, another time it's fainter, and then still later it may have
remained the same, you know, it just had one flare, but is otherwise an inactive galaxy,
right?
Here's a normal galaxy that isn't doing much, and then one time it flared.
And a few other cases like this have been found where apparently inactive galaxies that
are just sort of sitting around, not showing much of anything interesting, just flare up
and then die down.
And that really sounds like a single star got torn apart.
So here's a star in the vicinity of a black hole, and it gets close to the black hole,
gets torn apart, part of its material becomes this accretion disk that glows, and then the
accretion disk gradually gets eaten by the black hole.
But while the accretion disk is still there and glowing, you have this flare up of activity.
And that's actually then been seen at X-ray wavelengths by the Chandra X-ray Observatory
and by another observatory called ROSAT that observed the sky for many years at X-ray wavelengths.
And they saw a number of these flares, maybe a few.
And if you calculate how often a supermassive black hole in the middle of a galaxy should
tightly disrupt a star, indeed you find that maybe a few times in a decade or something,
some galaxy out there will tightly disrupt the star.
And that's about the frequency with which these flares have been seen.
There's been a few flares seen with the Hubble Space Telescope as well at ultraviolet wavelengths.
The interpretation of those flares is a little bit more controversial than the X-ray flares
that have been seen with Chandra and ROSAT.
Now material escaping from the vicinity of a black hole we have seen often goes along
a highly collimated or highly focused jet.
It's like water squirting out of a hose.
Something is causing that material to come out in a very narrow beam.
If we look at the top view of an active galaxy, we might see an accretion disk face on like
that.
But with a side view, we see that it's very thin.
And if there are magnetic fields threading the accretion disk, maybe they are able to
channel material along the axis of rotation, which is also the axis of the magnetic field,
in a way that causes this very tight focusing.
We're not exactly sure how a magnetic field in an accretion disk would do that right now,
but it would be similar to the mechanism we've already discussed when talking about pulsars,
where we had a magnetic field that wasn't aligned with the axis of rotation, but a beam
of radiation came along the magnetic field outward like this in two directions.
And then that whole thing rotated around an axis of rotation and caused this lighthouse
effect where it intersected our line of sight and caused a flash.
Well here what we're saying is that the magnetic field and the axis of rotation are aligned
and so the radiation is channeled along the axis of both the field and the axis of rotation
because those two are coincident.
So you don't get a pulsing phenomenon, you don't get a lighthouse effect, but you see
this collimated stuff coming out which then emits radiation.
And maybe in some cases the collimation is helped out by a physical nozzle like the one
shown here where you have a thicker accretion disk forming a well or a nozzle along which
the matter can be ejected and clearly the narrower the nozzle, the more highly focused
or narrow the beam will be.
The stuff has a hard time escaping out through the accretion disk and so it goes along a
jet perpendicular to it.
So some combination of magnetic fields and a physical obstruction like with one of these
nozzles is thought to occur in these objects with jets.
Now when you have a star that gets tidally disrupted and contributes to the accretion
disk, it could also contribute to the outflow from the vicinity of the black hole that is
from this jet.
So here's an artist's animation of what might happen if you have an active galactic nucleus
with an accretion disk, but then there's a star next to it and the star gets tidally
disrupted and then some of its material in this case, most of its material seem to have
been accreted and it contributed to an outflow of this relativistic material of this very
highly moving material perpendicular to the accretion disk.
And indeed we have seen cases where as shown in this artist's animation, following the
flare up of an active nucleus, you also see a more extended jet.
So the jets seem to go along with specific accretion events and if more material is accreted
before crossing the event horizon, it can contribute to the activity seen in these monstrous
jets coming out of some active galaxies.
And a few lectures ago I showed you this one, NGC 6251, which the popular press called
the Cosmic Blowtorch, and here you see that in the very middle there's this highly focused
beam of radiation coming out, extending a few light years on this scale, but then looking
at the bigger picture, that highly focused beam extends over hundreds of thousands of
light years and then over a scale of millions of light years, you can see that it still
has the same general direction, but eventually it starts becoming decolomated, that is defocus
more fuzzed out.
And we think that these jets only last a few million to a few tens of millions of years
and quite possibly they get rejuvenated by accretion episodes or events where a clump
of material or even maybe a star got disrupted by the black hole, although a jet of this
magnitude probably needs a more constant source of accretion in order to feed such a
gigantically large volume of space.
We're talking about millions of light years here.
So let's discuss in more detail the evidence for accretion discs and jets and the formation
of these highly focused or accolomated jets.
The galaxy in general is spinning, we've seen that most galaxies and most galaxies and especially
galaxies with discs spin, so material that's coming in toward the center will generally
not be coming in along a purely radial trajectory, that is it won't be coming straight into the
black hole, it'll be sort of missing it a little bit.
And as it comes closer in, it speeds up because of the conservation of angular momentum which
we've encountered several times.
And moreover interactions between galaxies are rarely along a radial direction, they
never come in like this straight on, they always come in at an angle and sort of miss
each other and then spiral in toward each other.
So rotation or spin would be naturally expected in a lot of these galaxies.
But actual evidence for a disc has been hard to find.
Here's one example where a disc may be present and emitting gas, you have the spectrum of
an active galaxy, apparent brightness versus wavelength, and in addition to these narrow
emission lines produced by gas pretty far from the black hole, there's this underlying
very broad line, it has a bump here and then it has another bump right there and it's contaminated
by these other narrow lines.
Anyway, this double humped structure for what we think is the hydrogen alpha emission line
is in fact what you would expect if there were a disc of gas, because if you had a spinning
disc of gas, part of that disc would be coming toward you and so it would appear blue shifted
and part would be coming away and that would appear red shifted and that's what causes
these two bumps in the profile, the blue shifted one and then the red shifted one right there.
So some of us think that that might be evidence for a disc.
More direct evidence for discs comes at x-ray wavelengths where you can peer closer into
the center of the galaxy where the speeds are higher and the gas is more compressed and
the gravitational field is generally stronger.
In some galaxies, x-ray astronomers have found evidence for really rapid motions in
the very central region, relativistic motions that is close to the speed of light and in
fact that gas is so close into the black hole but just a bit outside the vent horizon that
its light gets gravitationally red shifted and that gravitational red shift has actually
been detected in a few cases where the light must be coming from a very strong gravitational
field.
So the artist's impression would be something like this, clumps of gas are emitting light
just outside the vent horizon and in escaping that light gets gravitationally red shifted
and we can see that gravitational red shift and measure its size.
Another effect that you can see here is that if you have gas orbiting the black hole and
the black hole is spinning and if the black hole drags space around it as I described
some time ago, then that can actually cause the gas to glow even more brightly.
This dragging of space by the black hole heats the gas and causes it to glow more and the
picture I showed in my discussion earlier was of a civilization that dumps its garbage
into a black hole while the garbage truck is in this ergo sphere, the region where space
is being dragged around the black hole very rapidly and I said that the garbage truck
can actually escape with more energy than the energy with which it came in.
Well the analog of that near a real black hole would be the spinning disk of gas and
if space weren't being dragged around it, it would glow a certain brightness.
But if space is being dragged around it, then the theoretical calculations suggest that
the gas should glow more brilliantly as you can see here.
And when the X-ray astronomers look at the central parts of these galaxies, they see
the gas glowing more brilliantly than would otherwise have been the case had there not
been this spin.
So the general picture then is that as you zoom in to the central part of a galaxy with
a supermassive black hole, you not only have this highly spinning disk emitting more energy
than it would have had the black hole not been spinning, but you also then from the
vicinity of the black hole have this emerging jet of gas and the whole thing then is just
an incredibly active, fantastic phenomenon and we're pretty now convinced that jets
and disks do exist within these regions of galaxies even though the disks themselves
have been very hard to see directly.
Now an interesting consequence of these jets is that the material is moving at close to
the speed of light, but it can actually appear to move at a speed faster than the speed of
light.
Now this is a really weird phenomenon.
Here's 3C273 and you can see even at optical wavelengths a jet emerging from it.
But if you look at it at radio wavelengths over the course of several years, you notice
that the distance between a certain knot in the jet, see that the jets have various clumps
or knots in them, the distance between the knot and the nucleus is growing at a rate
that appears to exceed the speed of light.
So here in July 1977 the knot was 62 light years from the nucleus.
Less than a year later it was 68 light years away.
About a year later it was 77 light years away and then just a short time later it was
80 light years away.
The average apparent speed is 8 times the speed of light.
So it looks like there's this blob in the jet moving away from the nucleus at a speed
faster than that of light.
We call that superluminal motion faster than light.
And here's another case where you have a blob coming away from the nucleus of 3C279 and
over the course of time that blob moved farther and farther away from the nucleus at a rate
that appears to exceed the speed of light.
And even in M87, the big bright elliptical galaxy in the middle of the Virgo cluster,
you see this jet with knots in it and these knots appear to be moving at 2.3 times the
speed of light.
So that's really wild.
When this was first discovered people said, whoa, you know, something moving faster than
the speed of light through space, this seems to be a violation of relativity.
Well it turns out there's a number of possible explanations.
One is that these knots that appear to be moving faster than the speed of light do not
consist of the same material at all times.
You know, it's not like there's a cannonball being shot out.
But rather, suppose it's a bunch of lights flashing on and off in an unrelated way, kind
of like a Christmas tree.
And suppose I have it aligned like this, where one part, you know, flashes on for whatever
reason, a light bulb turns on, and then a different light bulb turns on, and then another
one, and then another one, and then another one, and so on.
These could be different light bulbs, that is they're not the same light bulb traveling
through space, they're just a bunch of unrelated light bulbs turning on and off, causing an
apparent superluminal speed, but not a true physical speed faster than the speed of light,
okay?
So that was called the Christmas tree model.
Another model was that maybe there is a beam of light illuminating a screen, and the intersection
of that beam of light and the screen causes a spot to move along the screen.
And that spot can move along the screen at a speed faster than the speed of light as viewed
by a local observer, because it's always different photons hitting the screen.
It's not like there's a single physical clump of material moving faster than the speed
of light, it's just this intersection point of the beam of light hitting this opaque screen,
that intersection point is moving at the speed of light.
Let me give you a little demo here.
I have a laser pointer, and if I flick my wrist and my hand is close to the laser pointer,
then the spot doesn't move very fast across my hand.
But if my hand is farther away, then the same flick of the wrist causes the spot to move
a greater distance in the same amount of time.
Now suppose my arm were light years away, that beam of light intersecting my arm light
years away would traverse a very large physical distance for a given small flick of the wrist.
In fact, if I have it on the wall back there, you can see that the same flick of the wrist
leads to a much bigger distance covered by the dot.
And if the screen is far enough away from the source of the light, that dot can appear
to move across the screen faster than the speed of light, but no physical material is
moving faster than the speed of light.
Just the intersection point of the beam and the screen.
So that's another model.
So those are all possible, but the thing that we actually think is happening inside these
active galaxies that have apparent superluminal motion is we think that you have a beam of
radiation moving nearly along your line of sight at nearly the speed of light.
If you have a so-called relativistic beam moving at 95 or 99% of the speed of light,
but not quite in your direction, then an illusion can occur where it looks like perpendicular
to the radial direction, that is along the direction of the sky.
It looks like this blob is moving outwards very, very quickly, more quickly than the
speed of light.
But it's an illusion caused by relativistic effects.
Essentially, the blob emitting the radiation is nearly keeping up with the radiation.
And by the time the radiation actually reaches you, you see the blob at a bunch of different
positions corresponding to where it is at very different times in its own frame of reference.
But in your frame of reference, those times are very closely spaced together.
The blob appears to go boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, boop, zooming
across the sky at faster than the speed of light.
But it's an illusion.
It's not really anything moving faster than the speed of light.
But the reason we prefer this model is that we already have lots of other evidence for
very rapidly moving jets in the middles of galaxies.
And so, you know, if you just ask yourself, relativistically, what would you see if one
of these things were going nearly but not exactly toward your line of sight?
You should see superluminal motion.
In other words, it's a prediction of models that try to explain the existence or the properties
of these rapidly moving jets.
If some of them are moving nearly along our line of sight, there should be such apparent
superluminal motion.
And indeed, we do see it, OK?
So when you read in newspapers that astronomers have found blobs coming out of quasars or
active galaxies at speeds faster than the speed of light, yes, that's an interesting
observation, but it doesn't mean that relativity has been in any way violated.
In fact, it's the converse.
This is a prediction of relativity if the jet is moving close to your line of sight.
There can be various orientation effects that are less extreme than the one I just described.
Recall the difference between CIFR 1 and CIFR 2 galaxies that I described some time
ago.
CIFR 1 galaxies have these broad emission lines, CIFR 2 galaxies are a different type
of active galaxy that doesn't have broad emission lines.
Well, it could be that CIFR 2s are actually CIFR 1s in disguise, and you simply don't
see the broad lines.
The picture that astronomers have is the following.
You have a massive black hole there surrounded by a gas and dust torus that blocks our view
of the black hole and the surrounding regions if viewed from a direction over here, say.
But you can see the black hole and the surrounding clouds if you view it along the nozzle or
along the direction within the opening angle subtended by this torus.
So if the broad emission lines are produced by clouds of gas very close to the nucleus,
then you will see those lines if you view the galaxy from this direction, either face
on from one side or the other side, and you will see emission from these clouds that move
quickly.
Whereas if you view it from an angle over here, you can't see the clouds emitting the
broadest lines, that is, you can't see the rapidly moving clouds.
You can only see the clouds farther from the nucleus, and those are the clouds that move
more slowly and emit the narrow lines.
So really, CIFR 1 and 2 galaxies might in some cases be the same thing, but in type
2 CIFRs we don't see the broad lines because we're watching them from the side at an angle
close to the angle of the disk, whereas in the case of the CIFR 1 galaxies, we see them
more and on like that.
So that's kind of a unification among different kinds of galaxies.
Some may look different, but it's simply an orientation effect.
CIFR 1s and 2s in many cases may be the same kind of a beast with the same kind of monster
inside, but we're just looking at them from different orientations.
That's the idea.
Well, let me end my discussion of quasars by describing how some of them can be used
as powerful probes of intervening matter in the universe, that is, matter between us and
the quasar.
The first idea is that a quasar way out far away, say at Redshift 3, emits light that
traverses a great distance on its way toward our telescopes, and it passes through clouds
of gas or well-formed galaxies or galaxies that are still forming.
And on its way through that gas, some of the light gets absorbed by the gases in those
galaxies or in the clouds of gas that are forming the galaxies.
And so even if you can't see the galaxies or the clouds of gas that are just flying
around in intergalactic space, you can't actually visibly detect them, you can infer their presence
by the absorption lines, by the fingerprint that they imprint upon the spectrum of the
quasar.
If we look at the spectrum of a quasar, like 3C273, it's got a fairly featureless continuum
as we call it, but then there are these spikes downward.
Those are absorption lines produced by clouds of gas between us and the quasar.
And this quasar isn't all that far away, Redshift 0.16 or so, and there aren't that
many clouds of gas between us and that quasar.
There's a few, and they produce these absorption lines here.
But for a distant quasar, Redshift 3.6 or so, you can see a whole forest of absorption
lines being produced by a multitude of clouds of gas between us and that quasar.
And in this case, most of the absorption lines are produced by neutral hydrogen whose electron
is going from the first energy level, that is the ground state, to the second energy
level.
That process absorbs an ultraviolet photon, a limon alpha photon, having a wavelength
of 1,216 angstroms.
The reason that the absorption lines appear at a bunch of other wavelengths, other than
1,216 angstroms, is that they correspond to clouds of gas at various Redshifts, and we
see the wavelength appropriate to that Redshift.
So this is a really great way of studying intervening clouds of gas and galaxies between
us and quasars when you can't actually directly see those clouds of gas.
Finally, let me discuss gravitational lensing one more time.
It was actually first discovered using quasars.
It was noticed that a few quasars look multiple.
There are two quasars in the sky right next to each other, having exactly the same Redshift
from their spectrum, and exactly the same spectral shape, that is the two spectra looked
identical.
One quasar might be brighter than the other, here A is brighter than B, but the spectra,
the brightness versus wavelength of A and B, not only have the same Redshift, you can see
that these lines are falling at the same wavelengths, but they have the same detailed shape.
Now there may well be gravitationally bound quasars, two quasars bound together like a
binary star, but you would call it a binary quasar.
Then the Redshifts would be nearly the same, but not exactly the same, because there would
be some orbital motion of the two.
More importantly, the two quasars being two distinct phenomena would have differences
in their spectra, no two quasars are exactly alike.
So those would be a case of a binary quasar, but here the spectra looked identical, same
Redshift and same details in the spectrum.
That suggests that you're seeing two images of the same object, and in fact the theoretical
model that was made for this particular object suggested that the galaxy causing the lensing
is not exactly collinear with the quasar and our observer here on earth.
It would be a little bit off to the side here, so for simplicity let's just look at two beams
of light from the quasar.
One gets kind of bent like this, it's not a sharp bend here, this is just an idealization,
but it gets bent toward our eyes and so we think the quasar is over there, that's image
A, whereas image B is produced over here where light is being bent a little bit less by the
galaxy because it's passing farther from the galaxy and it's bent toward our line of sight
and we see image B over there.
So we would think then that the galaxy should be closer to one image than to the other and
ground based images show that that was indeed the case.
Here are the two images of the quasar, a little bit elongated because the telescope
wasn't tracking quite correctly at the time, and here's a little blob sticking out to the
side.
Well if you subtract this image of the quasar from the other one, you can see the blob more
clearly and that was inferred to be the lensing galaxy.
All space telescope images showed the lensing galaxy very well and in fact showed that although
one galaxy is producing most of the lensing, that galaxy is actually in a cluster and you
have to include the gravitational field of the cluster as a whole in order to understand
the details of this gravitational lens.
So this shows you already that lensing gives you the possibility of probing not only the
visible light but also the dark matter because all the matter contributes to the gravitational
field of the cluster and influences the amount by which the quasar images are lensed.
You can sometimes get what are called quads if you have the galaxy lensing quasar and
it's a little bit misaligned.
You can get four images like this and a great example is known as the Einstein Cross.
This was the first of these found but now we know of many of them.
There's the galaxy lensing a single distant quasar and it appears with four images all
with the same redshift and the same details in the spectrum.
Here's another Einstein Cross where there's the lensing galaxy and you have four images
of the quasar and in some cases you have rather complex geometries.
So here's a case with one, two, three, four, five, six images of the quasar being lensed
by this compact triplet of foreground galaxies.
So you can study clusters of galaxies and lensing galaxies and not only their visible
matter but the dark matter as well by studying the configuration of the lensed images.
So you can see that active galaxies and quasars are truly an exciting phenomenon.
They have been wonderful objects to study.
We're learning more and more about them and they are even probes of the universe.
So I'm sure you'll hear more about them in the future.
Stay tuned for further discoveries.
