We've measured the expansion of the universe.
Galaxies and clusters of galaxies are moving away from one another, and we can extrapolate
that expansion back in time to when everything began in a very compressed state, the Big
Bang.
Galaxies have been expanding away from each other, and if we know the current rate at
which they are receding from one another, and we know the history of that expansion
rate, we can calculate the expansion time, the time since the Big Bang.
Now, if the expansion speed has been constant, then that expansion time is particularly easy
to figure out.
It's just the inverse of the Hubble constant.
So here along the vertical axis we have clusters of galaxies moving away from one another.
Any two clusters might be separated by some distance r.
This is arbitrary.
It's different for different pairs of clusters, but generically all of them expand away from
each other by the same factor in some amount of time.
So I can call this the scale factor of the universe, the growing distance between clusters
of galaxies.
Well they started out in the same place, or at least their material started out in the
same place, the Big Bang, and if they're moving away from each other with a speed that doesn't
change with time, then the distance away from each other grows linearly with time from a
time zero to a time now, which we call uppercase t sub zero, or t naught.
And t naught is simply the reciprocal of the Hubble constant.
They might think it's a bit weird that the reciprocal of the Hubble constant gives you
units of time, but in fact the Hubble constant has units of inverse time.
Remember the Hubble constant is some number of kilometers per second per million parsecs.
Well the kilometers are a unit of length and the millions of parsecs are a unit of length.
So kilometers, the unit of length divided by another unit of length cancels out and
you're left with just one over seconds, that is an inverse of time, an inverse unit of
time.
So the inverse of that just gives you seconds or time and you can convert to years and there
are some conversion factors and converting megaparsecs to kilometers and all that, but
when you do it all correctly, you just get units of time for the inverse of the Hubble
constant.
And in particular, if the Hubble constant is 50 kilometers per second per million parsecs,
then the reciprocal of that, if you fix all your conversion factors and all that, turns
out to be 20 billion years or 20 giga years, 20 big G Y R.
If the Hubble constant is 100 kilometers per second per million parsecs, that means the
universe is expanding twice as quickly and to have reached a certain separation, two
clusters of galaxies would have to have been expanding away from each other for half of
the time.
Instead of taking 20 billion years to reach that separation, they would reach that separation
in only 10 billion years, all right?
So the bigger the Hubble constant, the younger is the universe.
Now suppose the speed of recession decreases with time.
This is the usual expectation, I mean galaxies have gravity, they pull on each other, there's
dark matter associated with them, causing them to pull on each other even more.
So the expansion should be slowing down with time, just as an apple tossed in the air
goes up more and more slowly, okay?
So if that's the case and you plot the separation between two galaxies as a function of time,
they recede from each other quickly initially, but then slow down, that is this curve turns
over a little bit, it has a less steep slope with time because the galaxies are slowing
down in their recession away from one another.
And in that case you can see that the true age of the universe, the time since t equals
zero, the big bang, is less than uppercase t0, that is the reciprocal of the Hubble
constant.
So the true age we would expect would be less than the reciprocal of the Hubble constant.
How much less?
Well, for many decades there was a theoretical preference.
Preferred a type of a universe that slows down with time to such a degree that as time
increases to infinity, the rate of separation between clusters of galaxies approaches zero.
That is they're going away from one another more and more and more and more slowly, and
as time goes toward infinity, they separate from each other by zero speed, alright?
Even though they had some finite speed, non-zero speed initially, alright?
I'll tell you why that was a theoretical preference later, but that was a major preference that
theorists had.
And in that case, the true age of the universe turns out to be only two-thirds of the inverse
or reciprocal of the Hubble constant, that's mathematically how it turns out to be.
So if you had a Hubble constant of 50 km per second per megaparsec, then big t0 is 20 billion
years or 20 giga years, but two-thirds of that is only 13 giga years.
If instead, the Hubble constant were 100 km per second per megaparsec, big t0 is 10 giga
years, and two-thirds of that is about 7, 6.67.
And if you take a Hubble constant of 71, my preferred value, and it appears to be roughly
the correct answer, then t0 is 14 billion years, but two-thirds of that is 9.
So theorists expected the universe to be only two-thirds as old as the inverse of the Hubble
constant would tell you.
What's the observed value of the Hubble constant?
Clearly, we need to know that.
Well, through the 1970s and 80s, many astronomers tried to measure it, and they got discrepant
values.
One of the leading people in this area was Alan Sandage, who used many different methods
to measure the Hubble constant and came up with what seemed to be reliable values, and
it was a very difficult measurement to make.
But his value for many years was 50 km per second per megaparsec.
So the inverse of that would be 20 giga years, and two-thirds of the inverse would be 13
giga years.
So one would expect that the universe is somewhere between 13 and 20 billion years
old, 20 if there's been very little slowing down, that is very little deceleration, 13
billion years if you have the theoretical preference of a universe that's slowing down
to just barely a stop, okay?
Well, the 20 giga year maximum age for the universe, based on the inverse of the Hubble
constant, seemed at that time to be roughly consistent with the ages of the globular clusters.
Back then, in the 70s and 80s, and even through to the mid-1990s, globular clusters were thought
to be 14 to 17 billion years old.
We now think that the oldest ones are 12 or 13 billion years old.
I'll get to that in a minute.
But back then, we thought they were 14 to 17 billion years old.
So if the universe hasn't been slowing down a lot, and has an age of 19 or 20 billion
years, that's consistent with the inferred ages of the globular clusters.
On the other hand, other astronomers had different values for the Hubble constant, and Gerard
de Vocalure at the University of Texas, for example, had a value closer to 100 km per
second per megaparsec for the Hubble constant.
In that case, the maximum age of the universe is only 10 giga years, and two-thirds of that
is only seven.
So this is a huge problem.
It's a discrepancy and inconsistency with the measured ages of the globular clusters,
or the inferred ages.
And the problem of a discrepancy between the globular cluster inferred ages and the expansion
age of the universe affected all other measurements of the Hubble constant, which typically fell
between these two extremes of 50 and 100 km per second per megaparsec.
All of the measurements had problems if you took the theoretical expectation that the universe
is only two-thirds of the age that the inverse of the Hubble constant would give you.
Because even with a Hubble constant of 50 km per second per megaparsec, if the universe
has been slowing down a lot, it's only two-thirds of 20 billion years old, or 13 billion years
old, and that expansion age is less than the ages of the globular clusters that astronomers
thought back then, 14 to 17 giga years.
So it seemed like there was this inconsistency.
How could the contents, or at least some of the contents of the universe, the globular
clusters, be older than the universe itself?
I mean, another way of putting this is that you can't have been born before your mother
was born.
It's a physical impossibility.
So the objects within the universe couldn't have been born before the birth of the universe.
So clearly there was a problem, either with the measured Hubble constant, or with the
theoretical expectation that the age of the universe is only two-thirds of the inverse
of the Hubble constant, or with the ages of the globular clusters that were thought to
be correct back then.
All of these things might have been erroneous, and there's been progress on all fronts, in
fact, in the past few decades.
It turns out the globular clusters are younger than we used to think, and there's other interesting
aspects of the expansion of the universe, as well as the Hubble constant that I'll get
to later.
But in this lecture, I want to tell you how the Hubble constant was determined.
So how do you actually go about it?
All right, well, here's Hubble's law in graphical form, simply put.
At a given time, right now, let's say, the more distant galaxies are moving away from
us at a faster speed than the nearby galaxies.
V equals H0D, where H0 is this constant of proportionality.
So in principle, it's simple.
You measure the speeds of recession of galaxies and their distances, then you get H0 is just
the speed of recession divided by the distance.
What could be simpler?
Well, in fact, the speeds of recession are pretty easy to measure.
You just get the spectrum of a galaxy, and you measure its redshift, and that gives you
the speed of recession.
It's the distances that are a problem.
How do you know the distances of galaxies very accurately?
It's hard.
Suppose you say, oh, well, maybe all galaxies are about the same size, physically.
So we can look at how big they appear to be, their angular size, and determine their approximate
distance.
After all, adults are all about the same size, so you can tell the distance, roughly, of
an adult by looking at how big that adult appears to be and saying that that adult is
physically about two meters in height, let's say.
You'll make some errors because not all adults are the same height, but you'll come to a
reasonable approximation of their distance.
But if you look at galaxies, even at the same distance, like the galaxies in the cluster
of galaxies, you see that they have a wide variety of sizes.
Here's a giant one.
Here's one of these cannibal galaxies.
The ones that I called CD galaxies that are eating their neighbors.
That's a big one.
And then look at these other little ones.
They actually are members of this cluster, but they're much smaller than the big one.
So clearly, galaxies come in a wide variety of sizes, and just assuming they're all a
standard size might give you some idea of distance, but you're not going to get very
accurate distances that way because some galaxies are physically bigger than others and look
bigger in the sky because of their physical size, not because of anything having to do
with distance.
It's better to measure brightnesses, apparent brightnesses of objects having a known luminosity.
If you know L and you measure the brightness B of an object, then according to the inverse
square law, the brightness is L over 4 pi distance squared, all right?
So in that case, if you know L and you measure the apparent brightness B, the only unknown
is the distance D. How do you know the luminosity?
Well, you need something that's pretty standard or at least can be calibrated.
We call these things in astronomical terms standard candles.
If you look at a bunch of candles and they all have about the same power, then you call
them standard candles.
If you know what that power is, then you can measure their apparent brightness and figure
out how far away they are.
Now maybe not all candles are the same.
You have some big old candles and some small ones.
Well, okay, you have to figure out whether you're using a standard kind of a candle.
So for example, Cepheids, I said, are not all the same luminosity, but they have a period
luminosity relationship from which we can determine their luminosity measuring the period.
We'll have more to say about that later.
Or supergiants, all the supergiants are roughly speaking about the same power.
And so by looking at their apparent brightness, you can figure out how far away they are.
Or maybe the biggest globular clusters all have about the same size and the same luminosity.
And maybe the brightest Novi are all about the same.
Or maybe the brightest Supernovae are all about the same.
These are all potential candles that could be used to determine the distance of the galaxy
in which they are located.
So here's an example with a supergiant star.
Here's a star in this galaxy whose properties look a lot like those of Betelgeuse in Orion
in our own galaxy.
Now we know the distance of Betelgeuse, there are ways of getting it.
And if we measure its spectrum and everything else and we determine that this other star
in this distant galaxy is just like Betelgeuse but appears much fainter, well you can figure
out the distance of that star and hence the distance of the galaxy in which it's located
by using the inverse square law, comparing the apparent brightness and the known luminosity.
So what kinds of objects are the most standard and can be used in this way?
As I've mentioned before, the Cepheid variables were historically very important.
They are the variable stars whose apparent brightness plotted on the vertical axis in
terms of magnitudes in this case.
Bright is up.
Anyway, the magnitude versus time varies in a way that's easily recognized.
Any light curve, any star that has a light curve like this is a Cepheid variable.
And the Cepheid variables are giant stars, evolved stars that actually happen to be traversing
something called the Hertzsprung Gap in this Hertzsprung-Russell diagram or temperature
luminosity diagram.
Any star that has a surface temperature in this range and a luminosity in that range
will be inherently unstable and will grow bigger and smaller in size and hence its output,
its light output will vary as well.
So Cepheid variables are these evolved unstable stars.
And the point is that the intrinsically more luminous ones have longer periods of variability
than the intrinsically less luminous ones.
So luminosity goes up along this axis.
The average luminosity of the long period Cepheid variables is considerably bigger than the
average luminosity of the short period variables.
So measuring variable stars in galaxies and measuring their apparent period of oscillation
tells you their luminosity, their average luminosity over that cycle of brightening
and fading.
You measure the average luminosity and then you measure the average brightness, compare
the two, and get the distance, okay?
That's the idea.
So the Hubble Space Telescope was built in part to get good Cepheid light curves in
galaxies, other galaxies, more distant than the Andromeda Galaxy.
This was one of the key reasons that the Hubble Space Telescope was built, was to measure
Cepheid's in galaxies accurately and effectively to take the measure of the universe, figure
out how far away galaxies are by figuring out how distant the Cepheid's within them
are.
So here's a Hubble picture of a galaxy and here's another one and we're going to zoom
in on a spiral arm of that galaxy.
Different variables come from massive stars, so they tend to be in or near spiral arms
and here several of them are boxed and we'll zoom in on one of them.
Look very carefully and you might see it brightening and fading, brightening and fading,
brightening and fading.
It's a very subtle effect.
These are hard measurements to make, but it's brightening there and then fading.
It's perhaps a little bit more easily visible in this series of stills, maybe not.
These are again hard measurements to make, but here I would claim on May 20th it was
brighter than on May 16th and brighter than on May 9th, but back on April 23rd it might
have been bright again.
So anyway, these are not exactly effects that are easily visible.
It's not like some supernova going off.
These are tough measurements to make even for the Hubble Space Telescope, but if you're
going to build an expensive telescope, you may as well do the most challenging projects
and this was one of the big challenges.
This was one of the key projects of the Hubble Space Telescope.
And a big result came out in 1994 where the first measurements were made of some galaxies,
one in particular, and the recession speed was compared with the distance of that galaxy
and the astronomers came up with a provisional value for the Hubble constant based on one
well-measured galaxy and maybe a couple of not so well-measured ones.
And they came up with 80 kilometers per second per megaparsec for the Hubble constant, considerably
bigger than sandage's preferred value of 50, somewhat smaller than de Vochelure's preferred
value of 100.
Now the inferred age of the universe was between 8 and 12 billion years, 12 if it hasn't been
slowing down at all, 8 which is two-thirds 12 if it's been slowing down according to
the theoretical preference or bias.
Now at that time, 1994, the globular clusters were still thought to be 14 to 17 billion
years old.
Most astronomers were leaning towards 14 by that time.
Already the numbers were coming down because of improvements in our understanding of stellar
evolution and other factors.
But nevertheless, according to my calculator, 14 is a bigger number than 12 and is certainly
a bigger number than 8, okay?
So it looked like the globular clusters were older than the expansion age of the universe.
And this was a huge crisis in the cosmos, right?
Well, not a crisis for the cosmos or in the cosmos, but a crisis in our understanding
of the cosmos because here's this great Hubble space telescope which supposedly comes out
with the best answer, although the astronomers who did the study said, look, we're basing
this just on one really well-measured galaxy.
Don't take it too seriously, they said, but you know how things go, you know, when there's
a headline and it's cosmic of cosmic proportions, you know, it becomes a big headline and Discover
Magazine had this headline, Crisis in the Cosmos.
The universe is too young and it's headed in the wrong direction.
What do they mean by that?
Is the universe getting younger with time?
No, none of us is getting younger with time.
What they meant by that headline was simply that previous measurements of the expansion
age were more like 13 to 20 billion years and now a better measurement gave 8 to 12
billion years and how can it have, you know, how can it be that with this better telescope
and a better measurement were ending up with a younger age?
So it was a, you know, it was a problem.
But it was exciting also because clearly there's a mystery to be solved here for cosmologists,
you know, if cosmologists had nothing to do it would be boring.
Well one problem as the astronomers who did this study freely admitted is that even with
the Hubble Space Telescope you can't see Cepheids very easily in very distant galaxies.
You can only see them in pretty nearby galaxies like the Virgo cluster, 60 million light years
away.
But even the Virgo cluster is sufficiently nearby that it feels the fact that our local
group of galaxies is pulling on it.
We're pulling on each other.
I mentioned this effect a few lectures ago.
And so the Virgo cluster isn't receding away from the Milky Way as quickly as it would
have been had neither the Virgo cluster nor the Milky Way or the local group had any mass
at all.
In other words, if these were massless clusters, if you know what I mean, they'd be moving
away from each other faster than they do.
They're sort of falling in toward each other a little bit because of the gravitational
attraction.
Gravitational attraction is slowing down the expansion of the universe a little bit.
By 150 to 200 kilometers per second it turns out.
And those kinds of effects are hard to figure out.
We don't exactly know how much mass is in all the different galaxies and we can't quite
figure out how much they're slowing each other down.
So what you really want to measure is the distance of a very distant galaxy which is
not affected by these random gravitationally induced motions of us pulling on them.
You want some object whose recession speed is dominated by the expansion of the universe
not by gravitationally induced motions due to other clusters of galaxies and stuff.
But we can't see Cepheid variables in such distant galaxies.
So what are you going to do?
Well you've got to choose a more luminous standard candle.
And type 1A supernovae, wow those are the ones I like and that many other astronomers
like.
We've learned that some stars, those that are white dwarfs in some cases can blow up
at the end of their lives producing the equivalent of something like a billion suns worth of
energy.
I mean it's incredible.
And with the telescope that my group runs at Lick Observatory we've found many of these
things and we can find some of them in relatively nearby galaxies like this one.
And if we can measure the peak brightness of this relatively nearby supernova and if
it's in a galaxy which is sufficiently nearby that Cepheid's can be used to get its distance,
well then we know the distance of the galaxy, hence we know the distance of the supernova.
If we measure its apparent brightness that allows us to determine the luminosity of the
type 1A supernova.
If we do this for type 1A supernovae in several or a bunch of relatively nearby galaxies that
calibrates the power, the true luminosity of the headlight.
Remember the car analogy, if you know the true power of the headlight and you measure
how bright the headlight appears to be you can get the distance of the headlight and hence
the car, right?
But you've got to first calibrate how powerful the headlight is.
So you find these supernovae in nearby galaxies of known distance that allows you to calibrate
how powerful the supernovae are.
Then you find supernovae in more distant galaxies use their known luminosity and their apparent
brightness to invert the problem and get the distance of the supernova and the galaxy.
Do you see the chain of reasoning?
Okay, that's the idea.
So the supernovae are thought to be all about the same because they come from this white
dwarf that blows up and we measure them to be about the same in nearby galaxies, that
is their standard candles or nearly standard candles.
And some of the galaxies in which we measured them are shown here.
These are galaxies that do have sephiod measurements of distances, indeed our group measured these
galaxies specifically because they were the hosts of some type 1a supernovae.
Here's one supernova 2002 FK and it occurred in this galaxy, NGC 1309 and our group measured
the sephiods in this galaxy and determined its distance.
That allows us to calibrate how powerful the supernova is.
Here's another one, supernova 1994 AE.
We measured then the sephiods in the host galaxy NGC 3370 and figured out how far away
the galaxy is and hence how far away the supernovae is.
Well, when you observe a bunch of supernovae, you find that the type 1a's do indeed have
about the same peak power as might be expected if they're all Chandrasekhar mass white dwarfs
going off.
But they're not all exactly the same.
They're not all 100 watt light bulbs.
Of course, they're much more powerful than 100 watt light bulbs, but if you get my drift,
some are 80 watts, some are 115 watts, they're not all quite standard.
But there's a way of standardizing them.
That is, there's a way of reading the label on the light bulb.
And the way we do that is by watching the objects brighten and fade with time.
It turns out that the intrinsically more luminous ones, the 115 watt light bulb, if you will,
take a longer time to fade than the intrinsically less luminous ones.
See this one here, the low luminosity one, took a certain amount of time to fade to half
its brightness at its peak.
The really luminous one took a longer amount of time to fade to half its brightness.
So by measuring the fading rate, you can read the label on the light bulb.
You can tell which ones are intrinsically subluminous like 85 watts and you can tell
which ones are 110 watts, and you can, in a sense, calibrate them.
You can standardize them.
You can read the label on the light bulb.
So instead of just assuming that you're looking at a 100 watt light bulb, in each individual
case, having measured the light curve, you can say, ah, that's an 87 watt light bulb
or here's a 120 watt light bulb.
And then you can do the inverse square law calculation much more accurately because you're
using the true luminosity of the supernova rather than just some assumed luminosity.
You also have to take into account dust that's along the way and that might extinguish or
obscure part of the light.
But the way we do that is the same way that you look at the setting sun and you see that
it becomes not only dimmer but also redder as its light passes through more and more dust
and smog.
So too, the light of the supernovae passes through smog and reddens as a result.
This is different from the red shift which is caused by an expansion of the universe.
This is a reddening of the light caused by obscuration.
So by looking at the supernovae and measuring their colors, we can tell how much obscuration
they have suffered and we correct for that effect as well.
When you do all that, you get a marvelous result.
Here is the Hubble diagram determined from type 1a supernovae, velocity versus distance
before making any corrections for non-standard luminosity or obscuration of light.
You get a Hubble diagram with a nice straight line here but a fair amount of scatter.
Once you make the correction, you can see that the scatter decreases a lot.
Let me show that again.
Here's the plot before correction.
Here's the plot after correction.
The scatter decreases a lot and it actually affects even the slope of the line.
The slope of the line which is related to the Hubble constant depends on these corrections.
Our final result when we measure the distances of galaxies using supernovae is that the Hubble
constant is 72 plus or minus 7 kilometers per second per megaparsec, somewhat lower than
the 80 that was announced by the Hubble team in 1994.
This is consistent with other methods that have recently been developed and one of which
I'll talk about a lot more later when I discuss the afterglow of the Big Bang, the cosmic
microwave background radiation.
From studies of it, you can get a value for the Hubble constant as well and they get 71
or 73 kilometers per second per megaparsec.
When you combine that measured value for the expansion rate with the history of the expansion,
which I will tell you about in a future lecture, then you come up with the age of the universe
and the age that we've come up with is 13.7 billion years.
That is, the expansion age of the universe is 13.7 billion years.
When you take the modern measurement of the Hubble constant and couple it with information
about the history of the expansion that I'll tell you about next, it turns out the universe
is 13.7 billion years old.
Is there a discrepancy between the ages of the globular clusters and the expansion age
of the universe?
There would be if the globular clusters were 14 to 17 billion years old because that's
more than 13.7, the expansion age of the universe.
But we now think that the globular clusters are only 12 to 13 billion years old.
There have been improvements in theoretical models and in the distances of globular clusters.
So we now think they're younger and consistent with the age of the universe.
So it seems that none of you was born before your mother and no stars were born before
the birth of the universe, which is a good thing.
But we have to make sure that our answer is right and so astronomers are continuing studies
to see whether the ages of globular clusters and the expansion age of the universe remain
consistent.
