We now have a rather accurate determination of the age of the universe, the time since
the Big Bang, and that's about 14 billion years. Some astronomers would say we know
it as well as 13.7 plus or minus 0.2. That's a pretty small uncertainty, and I'll show
you some of the data on which that number is based later on.
The realization that the universe isn't infinitely old and the determination of its age are fantastic
achievements, fantastic astronomical successes of the past century. To get the age, as I
discussed last time, you need to know the current expansion rate, the Hubble constant,
and you need to know the expansion history of the universe, how much the rate has changed
with time. Now it turns out that the expansion rate as a function of time is intimately tied
to the global or overall geometry of the universe, and those in turn are intimately tied to the
fate, the ultimate fate of the universe. So let's ask in this lecture what the global
geometry of the universe might be, what are the various possibilities, and what possibilities
are there for the ultimate fate of the universe. Here we are dealing with the entire universe,
encompassing all of its mass and energy. Now mathematically the best way to treat the whole
universe is using the rules of general relativity, which in fact is the best description of the
universe we know of on the largest scales. The universe has all the energy and matter
within it, so we had better use the best theory possible for studying the interactions of
matter and the expansion of the whole space-time continuum, which encompasses everything that
there is. You've got to use general relativity. And indeed in this photo, Einstein is considering
the possible curvature of the universe. He developed a lot of the equations that went
into what I'll be discussing today, although a lot of other theoretical physicists used
his general relativity to solve the difficult equations as well. These equations can be
rather unmanageable unless one makes some simplifying assumptions about the universe.
Now the assumptions had better be well justified, as best justified as possible using observed
properties of the universe, because otherwise if you make assumptions that are clearly incorrect,
clearly invalid for the whole universe, then you can end up with conclusions that are nonsense.
There's this well-known saying, garbage in, garbage out, and it applies particularly well
to physics, where one can come to all sorts of incorrect conclusions by making the wrong
assumptions. The conclusions might be fine based on those assumptions, but those assumptions
have nothing to do with actual reality. So in the end, what good was the calculation?
In cosmology, we make two fundamental assumptions in addition to the assumption that the general
theory of relativity is the correct, most valid theory for the large-scale properties of the
universe. Those two assumptions are called the cosmological principle, and the first of them
is that on the largest scales, the universe is homogeneous. That is, it has the same average
density everywhere. There may be lumps here and there, but averaged over large volumes,
it has the same average density everywhere. And second, on the largest scales, the universe
is isotropic. By isotropic, it means it looks the same in all directions. There's no preferred
axis. For example, there's no axis of rotation for the overall universe, and there's no direction
along which all the clusters of galaxies are lined up. This assumption of homogeneity and isotropy
better put just the uniformity of the universe on the largest scales. That is the cosmological
principle, and it makes the equations of general relativity much, much more tractable. So let's
look at some examples. Here's the universe, or a representation of one possible universe,
and let's say we can see only those parts that are within this curved dashed circle here, okay?
And the galaxies are all these little blue segments. This would be a universe that's
homogeneous. That is, every volume over a large enough scale in the universe has about the same
number of galaxies in it, but it's not isotropic. It's not isotropic because all the galaxies are
lined up along a preferred direction. So you can tell whether you're looking in this direction
or in the perpendicular direction. So this universe is homogeneous but not isotropic.
This one here, however, is homogeneous and isotropic. If you draw large enough circles
within this dashed observable part of the universe, you will find roughly the same number of galaxies
within each circle, and the orientations of the galaxies are randomly aligned. So looking out
in any particular direction, you can't distinguish it from any other direction. So there's a universe
that's both homogeneous and isotropic. It satisfies the cosmological principle. Now you might think
that the cosmological principle is manifestly incorrect. After all, the universe has all these
lumps. There's us. There's the earth. There's the solar system. Those are all lumps in the universe.
There's our sun and the galaxy and our local group of galaxies and other clusters like the
Virgo and Coma clusters of galaxies. And then on larger scales, there are superclusters and voids.
The universe is absolutely lumpy. How can you say it's uniform? I look in that direction,
it looks very different from some other direction. Ah, but when talking about the cosmological
principle, we're really discussing the very largest scales averaged over spheres, hundreds of
millions of light years in diameter, or maybe half a billion or even a billion light years of
diameter. That's that's what we're talking about. Then the universe starts looking uniform,
homogeneous and isotropic. Any sphere you could draw with one billion, say, light-year diameter,
looks about the same as any other sphere. That's what we mean. Now the evidence for the
cosmological principle on large scales is that the largest obvious structures in the universe
are the superclusters. There are superclusters and voids. But beyond that, we don't really see
superclusters clustering very much. We now have evidence that they do cluster a little bit. But
again, you could then just say, well, let's average over an even bigger volume than the
cosmological principle will still hold. You can average over progressively bigger volumes
and come to a progressively better approximation that the universe looks uniform
over all these progressively larger volumes. Okay, so if we look out in space from our
position here as the observer and we look out into the sky, that's this direction here, this arc,
and if we look out in distance along this direction, redshift or billions of light years,
you can see each dot is a galaxy and they're arranged in clusters and then giant superclusters
and voids. And you have this sort of Swiss cheese like pattern in the universe. And here's a big
thing called the Great Wall. But on the very largest scales, you could draw big circles here
and they all look about the same. Now here you might say the universe looks different
than closer in, but that's just because our knowledge of the very distant parts is more
fragmentary. We can't observe as many galaxies out there. But even from this fragmentary information,
it looks about the same out here as it does in there. So that's the basic idea. And if you
fly through a simulation of the universe like this millennium simulation, we're flying past
many, many galaxies here over distances of tens, hundreds of millions of light years and spanning
even a billion light years. And you can see that though there are little lumps and bumps here and
there, overall the structure looks about the same. So that's the idea. Now the average density
of the universe can change with time and still be consistent with the cosmological principle.
The universe can be expanding and getting less and less dense. That's okay under the cosmological
principle. But you still need to satisfy the idea that at any given time looks homogeneous and isotropic.
The next assumption we're going to make, besides the cosmological principle, is that there are no
large range forces other than gravity. Now electromagnetism is a large range force. You can
have a proton here and an electron a billion light years away and technically they will feel each
other. But since most matter is electrically neutral, only on small scales are electromagnetic
forces typically strong and in fact they are what hold our bodies together. Over large distances
the forces are small because the matter is electrically neutral and doesn't attract each
other or repel or whatever. So only gravity we say acts on large scales. Now Einstein in 1917 had
introduced the idea that on large scales there might be some sort of an extra repulsive effect
and he called this his cosmological constant and he introduced it because at that time the
universe was thought to be static, neither expanding nor contracting. Hubble had not yet
discovered the general recession of galaxies from one another. So astronomers thought well the sky
isn't falling and the universe is static and Einstein himself found a static, unevolving,
immutable universe to be itself an aesthetically pleasing idea. However it was realized of course
that everything pulls and everything else. So for example our Milky Way galaxies should pull
on other galaxies. Now the galaxies weren't known then only the stars were known but the
principle applies to galaxies as well. Basically everything should be pulling on everything else.
So here's our Milky Way galaxy and other galaxies should be pulled toward it by the force between
these two galaxies and so the universe should be collapsing in on itself. It shouldn't be static,
the sky should be falling in a sense and so to prevent the sky from falling Einstein reluctantly
introduced a repulsive effect that he called the cosmological constant usually denoted by the
uppercase Greek letter lambda and he said that he doesn't know the origin of this extra force or
effect but it's just big enough to counterbalance the attractive force of gravity and it pushes
in the opposite direction to that of gravity. So in this case you can have a static universe.
He didn't like the cosmological constant lambda. He would have preferred that the equations of
general relativity give as a plausible solution a static universe without an extra mathematical
term of this sort. This extra term made the equations not incorrect but more ugly less
aesthetically pleasing and moreover there was no laboratory evidence for any repulsive effect of
this sort and finally it implied that the vacuum has an energy density that's non-zero. Now you
were taught on your mother's knee that the vacuum has nothing. It is zilch not a you know it has
nothing and so how can it have an energy density an energy per unit volume and moreover a weird
repulsive sort of energy for which there was no other observational evidence. It seemed kind of
crazy. Finally you needed this fine tuning. The strength of the repulsion had to be exactly equal
to the strength of the gravitational attraction but in the opposite direction in order for these
forces to balance and that was sort of unlikely. It required some fine tuning. It seemed like you
needed some sort of a contrived density in order to make it repel galaxies exactly by the amount
that they attract one another. So Einstein didn't like it but he reluctantly introduced this idea.
Now a dozen years later Hubble discovered that the universe isn't static after all it's expanding.
So the whole physical and philosophical motivation for some sort of a weird energy pushing galaxies
apart vanished because the universe could have started in an expanding state the big bang for
whatever reason and then it just continues coasting. You don't need any additional forces to keep it
coasting once you have started the expansion to begin with and since the universe was no
longer static Einstein didn't need this cosmological constant. He said that you know let's get rid of
it no one needs it. He renounced it and in fact anecdotally he called it the biggest blunder of
his career because had he not insisted on its presence he might have successfully predicted
as some other physicists did do that the universe is unlikely to be in a static state but is probably
expanding or collapsing but he insisted that it's static and George Gamoff a colorful physicist who
was known for exaggerating stories and telling jokes said that Einstein told him that it was the
biggest blunder of his life much less his career you know but we don't really know that Einstein
actually said that. What we do know is that Einstein didn't like the cosmological constant.
So here Einstein is sad that he had ever introduced this idea because had he not done so he would
have predicted that the universe is in some sort of a dynamic state. I don't really know that that's
what he's thinking here but he was reportedly sad about this. So the two assumptions the cosmological
principle and the lack of any large-scale forces other than gravity plus the assumption that the
general theory of relativity is correct leads to the simplification of the equations and to three
possible solutions for how the universe might behave and these were first figured out by the
Russian astrophysicist Alexander Friedman in 1922 and 1924. He died just a year later at the age of
37 of typhoid fever unfortunately but he was a mathematical whiz kid and he shortly after the
publication of general relativity came up came up with these these three possible geometries
and two possible fates for the universe and we will see that geometry and fate are intimately
tied together. Geometry is destiny some people like to say and these three possibilities depend on the
average density of matter which is attractive and also energy which in general relativity is
attractive as long as we don't allow the possibility of repulsive energy that is this cosmological
constant which we are going to ignore for the time being okay we're going to just say suppose it
doesn't exist all right so there are three possibilities that are based on this average
density of matter and attractive gravitationally attractive energy we will define a quantity
called uppercase Greek omega sub matter which is equal to the average density of the universe
rho sub average divided by some sort of a critical density rho critical where critical density is
defined by three times the Hubble constant squared over eight pi g and it changes with time but at
the current time using the current value of the Hubble constant it's about 9.5 times 10 to the
minus 30th grams per cubic centimeter for a Hubble constant of 71 kilometers per second per
megaparsec now that's a weird number it's hard to get some sort of an intuitive feel for that number
let me try to give it to you that number is equivalent to the existence of six hydrogen atoms
per cubic meter so you take a cubic meter and you say if that cubic meter has fewer than six
or more than six hydrogen atoms within it that will dictate the geometry and the fate of the
universe now you might say well this room has one heck of a lot more atoms per cubic centimeter than
that does you know than six but but that just shows that the universe as a whole is very empty
you know if if we're talking about things that depend on whether the result is slightly less
than six or slightly more than six and we know that we're somewhere near this critical density
that shows you just how empty most of the universe is in fact I have a t-shirt that shows this equation
because it's so fundamental to the geometry and the fate of the universe now if the average
density exceeds the critical density that is if omega matter is greater than one then it turns
out that the expansion ultimately stops and then reverses itself so you have a big bang and then a
big crunch or you could say big bang nab gibb which is big bang backwards so you have a birth of
the universe expansion to some biggest size possible and then it stops and then it re collapses
into the nab gibb and that's because the the density of matter is so great that it ultimately
pulls the material back in if instead the density is equal to the critical density so omega matter
equals one according to my definition then the expansion eventually stops it slows down but
eventually stops but doesn't quite turn back around and re-collapse and finally if the average
density is less than the critical density then the expansion slows down with time but doesn't even
come to a complete halt at time equals infinity because there's a not not enough gravitational
attraction between galaxies to ever slow down the expansion to a halt it just slows it down to some
some constant speed which is non-zero and the analogy one can give is throwing an apple up
if i just toss it up like this the mutual gravitational attraction between the apple and
the earth slow down the apple in its upward journey stop it up here and then have it come back down
so big bang big crunch okay if instead i throw this apple faster it goes higher up before coming
back down and in principle i could throw the apple at a speed of 11 kilometers per second
at that speed it would just barely go away from the earth forever reaching zero speed as time
goes to infinity that's the escape velocity neglecting air resistance and if i were to heave it at a
speed greater than the escape velocity then it would escape from the earth easily by that i mean
that when it got really far away infinitely far away let's say it would still be moving with a
non-zero speed that's the idea so the universe is a very similar sort of thing if you plot the
separation between two galaxies versus time in the case where the gravity is strong that is the
average density exceeds the critical density the universe expands for a while reaches a biggest
maximum size and then recollapses in the case where the average density is equal to the critical
density the universe expands forever but just barely it approaches zero speed at time equals
infinity in a less dense universe it slows down less and so it would keep on going up like this
but not reach zero speed at time equals infinity and then in the case of an empty universe there
would be no gravity at all pulling on the galaxies and so the distance traveled by a galaxy
is just proportional to time i i just said that there's no galaxies in the universe but suppose
there are just two so omega matter is nearly zero then then essentially you'd have this this line
here so you can see that in fact the density determines the fate because in the dense universe
it recollapses in a less dense universe it expands forever either just barely or easily now all these
curves intersect in the same place here because the separation between two galaxies is whatever it is
right now it's just some number okay and the expansion rate of the universe is whatever it is
right now that's the slope of this line or at least Hubble's constant is related to the slope of
this line so regardless of the past history or the future of the universe two galaxies a and b
have some current separation are and they have some speed of recession away from each other
and that's related to the slope of the line so that all the curves have to meet here with the same
slope okay now let's consider the global geometry implied by these three possibilities matter density
equal to or or exceeding or smaller than the critical density it turns out that in the case
where the average density is equal to the critical density omega matter equals one this is a universe
that must be described by the laws of euclidean geometry those are the familiar familiar laws
you know on a sheet of paper for example the sum of the angles of a triangle is always equal to 180
degrees and there are other examples as well of euclidean geometry and if you look at euclidean
geometry you'll notice that it's based on an important postulate of euclid the fifth postulate
which says that given a line and a point not on that line there is one and only one parallel
through that point that's parallel to the other line okay so here's a line and a point not on that
line it's the fifth postulate says that you can draw one and only one line through that point
which is parallel to this given line and everything else falls out of that fifth postulate and the
other postulates as well but the fifth one is the really important one in this case then where the
average density is equal to the critical density and omega matter equals one the equations of general
relativity say that geometry on a global that is overall scale is euclidean all right and in the
simplest case such a universe must be infinite in volume now later i'll tell you about special cases
where you can have tori or other things that are not infinite but at least in the simplest case
such a universe must be infinite in volume it expands forever but just barely okay so it it's
slowing down slowing down slowing down and it'll come to a stop at time equals infinity
but you'll never quite reach time equals infinity you know once you reach it there's a little bit
more time beyond that woody allen said eternity is a long time especially when you're near the end
right so okay so the speed approaches zero the temperature and density approach zero because
the universe is expanding but they're only approaching zero just barely okay the next possibility is
where the average density exceeds the critical density that is omega matter is greater than one
in that case the equations of relativity as freedman found show that the universe must be
described by what's called a spherical geometry and in such a geometry euclid's fifth postulate is
violated in the following way given a line and a point not on that line there are no parallels
that can be drawn through that point that is they all intersect this line no matter what you tried
to do so in such an in such a universe euclid's fifth postulate is violated and you get essentially
a sphere you get a finite volume which is closed okay it wraps around itself it has no boundaries
it has no edges you can't fall off the edge but it does wrap around itself like the surface of a sphere
okay the surface of a sphere I've discussed before it's a two-dimensional surface wrapped around a
third mathematical dimension and from outside of it we can see that the third dimension is physically
present as well but but from within that two-dimensional sphere you can't actually tell
what the third dimension is or where is it you can't point to it okay our three-dimensional
volume might be a hypersphere embedded in some four-dimensional space okay now the surface of
the earth is a two-dimensional example of this and if you were to go in one direction around the
surface of the earth you would come back to the point from which you started so there's this great
sign a road sign in california along highway 101 where it advertises casa de fruta just 24,886
miles ahead of you or if you want to go and buy some fruit just make a u-turn and and go 15 miles
behind you okay you but you could in principle just wrap wrap around and and come to casa de fruta
by going all the way around the world now in such a case where you have the spherical geometry
geometry is destiny this is the kind of universe that must eventually re-collapse into a hot dense
big crunch or a nab gib so the universe starts out hot in the big bang expands becomes cooler
and then re-collapses into a hot dense state that's a very very different fate from the
case of the critical density universe that expands forever though just barely getting
progressively cooler more extended less dense okay so in the case of the big crunch here's a
simulation of what the galaxies might do in the future they came to a halt after expanding and then
they crunch back in on each other like that finally there's the case of the universe where the average
density is less than the critical density in that case omega matter the ratio of the two is less than
one and the equations of general relativity show that space is described by negative curvature
not the positive curvature of a sphere but negative or hyperbolic geometry as it's called
and if you look at euclid's fifth postulate you find that in this case given a line and a point
not on that line there are many indeed infinitely many lines that you could draw through that point
that are parallel to the given line and this seems very weird to you because it seems to me at least
you know because we're used to sheets of paper and euclidean geometry and that's what's taught in
high school and all that but but you can have valid forms of non euclidean geometry that violate
euclid's fifth postulate either in this manner or in the manner of the spherical universe now the
simplest case of the hyperbolic universe is open that is it's infinite in volume but there are
certain mathematical cases where it might be finite it expands forever and the speed of expansion
approaches some constant number bigger than zero as time goes toward infinity okay so it's like the
apple tossed at a speed greater than the escape velocity the temperature and density approach
zero and in a case like this you can see the galaxies would move away from each other at a
constant speed so here's a case where there's no gravity at all because the galaxies are almost
massless that's an example of a universe whose density is less than the critical density in this
case it happens to be zero and the galaxies in that simulation were simply what we call test
particles massless particles expanding away from one another but in any case the expansion rate
never reaches zero and certainly never turns back around now the two-dimensional analogs of these
three-dimensional volumes can be represented by a triangle on a flat sheet of paper or a sphere
where you can also draw triangles but as i'll show later their properties are different from those
on a sheet of paper or a horses saddle now a horses saddle is not a perfect representation
of the negative curvature universe because there's a saddle point right here which is clearly different
from other points on this saddle you can tell when you're on the saddle point and so the two-dimensional
horses saddle or potato chip is a rough approximation to what a negatively curved homogeneous isotropic
universe would look like it turns out if you embed a horses saddle into three spatial dimensions
it's not isotropic but if you were to embed it in four spatial dimensions you could make
a two-dimensional analog to a negatively curved homogeneous and isotropic universe but here on
a sheet of paper this is the best we can do but the sphere is a very good analog to a positively
curved space there are no parallel straight lines on a sphere you might think that the lines of
latitude on the earth are straight lines but lines of latitude are not straight lines because
they do not in general connect two points via the shortest distance only along the equator
or along lines of longitude are points connected via their shortest distance by by you know straight
lines lines of latitude in general for example between boston and seattle those lines of latitude
are not straight lines because they're not the shortest distance between two points the straight
lines in a spherical geometry you get when you intersect a plane with the sphere and you get
great circles great circles connect points along the shortest distance but all great circles meet
each other somewhere like the lines of longitude all meet at the poles so in any case it may not be
immediately obvious to you how euclid's fifth postulate is violated on a sphere but it is
because the only straight lines are these lines of longitude and they all meet or the equator which
also meets with the lines of longitude so those are the three possible universes according to
alexander freedman and subsequent physicists who worked on einstein's general theory of relativity
under the assumption of homogeneous and isotropic universes with no long range forces other than
gravity our challenge then is to figure out which sort of universe among these three possibilities
we actually live in
