We have learned that in the absence of long-range forces other than gravity, the mass density
of the universe, of a uniform homogeneous isotropic universe, determines not only its
overall geometry, but also its fate. A dense universe that has a lot of galaxies per unit
volume pulling on each other is positively curved like a sphere and must re-collapse.
So there was a big bang and then a re-collapse ending in high densities, high temperatures,
and ending in fire, if you will. A lower density universe, one whose average density is equal to
a critical value called the critical density, must be flat like a Euclidean sheet of paper,
and must expand forever but only just barely as time approaches infinity the speed of recession
of the galaxy approaches zero. But that universe becomes cold and dilute and dark in a sense an
ending in ice. And finally, a very low density universe, one whose density is less than the
critical density, must be negatively curved, kind of like a horse's saddle but not exactly like it,
and it expands forever easily as time approaches infinity, the speeds of galaxies approach some
constant value which is not equal to zero. Such a universe also ends up being cold, dark,
dilute, also an ending in ice. Now Robert Frost apparently knew of the two possible fates of
the universe, ultimate re-collapse or an ending in fire, or eternal expansion and ending in ice.
He wrote this famous poem, Fire and Ice. Some say the world will end in fire, some say in ice.
From what I've tasted of desire, I hold with those who favor fire. But if I had to perish twice,
I think I know enough of hate to say that for destruction ice is also great and would suffice.
So Robert Frost would prefer the re-collapsing universe, the big crunch or the greck-gnaab
gib. But if he had to perish twice, eternal expansion and an ending in ice would be okay,
and I think that's kind of appropriate given his name, Robert Frost.
All right, well how do we actually go about determining the geometry and the fate of the
universe? In essence, how do we determine the average density of matter and compare it with
the critical density? Let's explore some of the methods used by astronomers. You could go and
directly try to measure the average density, compare it with the critical density, form the
ratio of the two, and that's what we called omega-submatter. If it's equal to one, then that's
the kind of universe that expands just barely forever and is flat. If it's greater than one,
then it's the spherical kind that re-collapses, and if the ratio is less than one, then it's
the hyperbolic or negatively curved kind that easily expands forever. Now it's very hard to
measure the density of the universe. When you look out into space, you see clusters of galaxies and
voids and superclusters. How do you know what's representative? How do you look over a big enough
volume, say a billion light-years, and measure every galaxy? And how do you know how much dark
matter there is? Maybe you can measure how much there is in clusters through gravitational
lensing techniques and other techniques, but there might be more uniformly distributed dark
matter as well, so it's hard to get the average density of the universe. Here's another method.
Suppose you compare the current expansion rate with the past expansion rate. See how much it
has changed with time. Let's look at these curves here for the separation between galaxies versus
time. Clearly in a universe that's dense, the early expansion rate was much faster than it is
now. The slope of the curve is much steeper here than now. So if you measured the expansion rate
and saw that it had changed a lot, decreased a lot, you might conclude that you live in a dense
universe. On the other hand, if the expansion rate has hardly changed at all, you would conclude
that you live in an empty universe or a low density universe. Now it's hard to measure that
expansion rate in the past because you have to look back to very large distances, and large
distances are hard to measure accurately. However, as we will see, you can measure large distances
accurately by looking at very distant supernovae, and this is the technique by which we actually
measure the expansion history of the universe as I will discuss later in this lecture and in the
next lecture. Another method for looking at the or for figuring out the geometry of the universe
would be to look at its geometrical properties directly. For example, you could fire two laser
beams and see if they ever meet. If they do, then you live in a positively curved universe. If they
never meet, then you live in a flat universe. But that's not very practical. How are you going to
follow these two laser beams out to infinity to see if they ever cross, right? Well, there are
simpler ways. You can construct triangles and see whether their geometric properties agree with the
laws of Euclidean geometry or not. So if you draw a bunch of triangles on a two-dimensional sheet of
paper, you will find that regardless of the triangle you draw, as long as it's a fair triangle,
the sum of the interior angles is always equal to 180 degrees. That's just a property of flat
space of a sheet of paper. And in fact, in a cute way, you can see that the angles add up to 180
degrees by making three copies of your triangle, lining up the three angles, A, B, and C, and showing
that, in fact, they define a straight line, which is, in fact, a 180-degree angle. So that's one way
you could do it. You could also draw, then, this triangle on a sphere and notice that the sum of
the interior angles is more than 180 degrees. In this particular case, it's 270 degrees. I start
from the pole here. I draw a straight line along a line of longitude. That's one of these great
circles that I talked about near the end of the previous lecture. I now make a right turn at 90-degree
angles and go along the equator, over to here, a quarter of the way around the globe, and then I come
up back to the pole. In each case, I made a 90-degree turn, and 90 plus 90 plus 90 is 270,
clearly more than 180. Now, the angles don't always add up to 270. Sometimes they add up to less.
If I draw my equator down here like that, and the pole is here, I can draw two great circles that
come up to the pole. These two angles are 90 degrees, so they already add up to 180 total
for those two angles. The total for the triangle is 180 plus whatever this angle was here.
That's clearly more than 180, but not necessarily 270. The point is that on the surface of a sphere,
the interior angles of a triangle add up to more than 180 degrees. Conversely, in a horse's saddle,
negatively curved universe, the angles add up to less than 180 degrees. You could try that kind
of a thing. Now, you might say, how do you make a big enough triangle to adequately sample the
overall curvature of the universe? Turns out there's a way we can do that if we look at the
microwave background radiation, which I will discuss in a few lectures. Well, you could also
look at the geometrical properties by counting the number of galaxies per unit volume as you go
to bigger and bigger distances from us. A two-dimensional example is given here.
Here are the three analogs of homogeneous isotropic universes in two dimensions.
If you draw them like this in perspective and then suppose that raindrops fall on each of these
three universes in a fairly uniform way, covering the surface in a uniform way, on a flat sheet of
paper, you would then say, okay, as I go out to greater and greater distances from some central
viewing point, I will encompass progressively more raindrops in proportion to the square of the
distance from my point of origin, because the area of a circle is pi r squared. So if I go twice as
far out, I will encompass four times as many raindrops. So if you made a bunch of measurements
at progressively bigger distances and found that area is proportional to r squared, you would
conclude that you live in a flat universe. On the other hand, in the case of the positively
curved universe, to flatten it out onto a sheet of paper, you have to cut it up in this way,
and you have extra spaces here that get created when you cut up this intrinsically curved space
and put it on a flat sheet of paper. And the empty pi-shaped regions don't have any raindrops,
so as you go further out, you would find that the number of raindrops increases, but not in
proportion to the square of the radius. It increases at a slower rate, and you would conclude that
you live in a positively curved universe. Conversely, in a negatively curved universe,
if you were to flatten it out onto a two-dimensional plane, you would notice that there are wrinkles
here on top of one another, and so in fact, you get extra dots where those wrinkles are on top
of one another, and as you go farther and farther out, you encompass more and more of those wrinkles,
and so you get more and more dots at a rate greater than in proportion to the square of
the radius. So that's how you might deduce your geometry on a two-dimensional surface.
Now, in three dimensions, it's the same sort of thing. Double your radius. If you live in what's
called a flatter Euclidean geometry, volume is proportional to radius cubed. In fact, it's
four-thirds pi r cubed for a sphere, so the number of galaxies you count should be
proportional to the cube of the distance to which you count them, but in a positively curved space,
that number grows more slowly than in proportion to the cube, and in a negatively curved universe,
it grows more quickly than the cube. Now, in practice, this is hard to do because
you have to go out to a great distance to see enough galaxies and encompass a big enough volume,
and galaxies evolve in physical size, and they merge, and there are starbursts that occur in them.
So, you know, it's hard to say that two billion light years away, you're viewing all the galaxies
that there are, or that the galaxies even have the same properties that they do now, and so it's
hard to actually make these measurements. Another thing you could do is look at the
angular size of a galaxy as a function of its distance. For example, in flat space, if you put
a galaxy farther away, it looks smaller. It subtends a smaller angle in proportion to the
inverse of its distance, okay? But in a curved geometry, the light follows these great circles,
and a galaxy that's nearby might subtend a certain angle. A galaxy farther away will indeed
subtend a smaller angle, but a galaxy very far away will start subtending a bigger angle once
again, because this light from the edges of that galaxy follows these trajectories,
and that happens to enter your eye along the same angle as the edge of this nearby galaxy,
and similarly for the other side of the distant galaxy. So, the distant galaxy can actually look
just as big as the nearby galaxy in a positively curved geometry. So, you look at angular size
as a function of distance and see which type of universe you correspond to. In the negatively
curved geometry, by the way, the distant galaxies look even smaller than they would have in flat
space. But again, galaxies evolve in physical size, and they merge and all that. How do you know
that you're seeing the counterpart of the Andromeda galaxy, you know, four billion light years away?
You don't really know that. Look at these galaxies. They're all weird looking back four billion light
years away. You could also look at the apparent brightness of an object and see how it changes
as a function of distance. In flat space, light rays go out radially and follow the inverse
square law of light. On a sheet of paper, it doesn't look like an inverse square law, but
in a three-dimensional volume, it does. But in a positively curved space, if you go far enough
away from a source of light, the light rays actually start converging again, and so the
object looks brighter than it would have had it been embedded in a flat space, where all of the
rays basically miss you unless they're pointing directly at you. They don't converge the way
they do in a spherical universe if you're in a flat universe. So you could look at the apparent
brightness of an object or a class of objects as a function of distance. But again, how do you know
that those objects aren't intrinsically evolving in luminosity? So that's a problem, okay? They do
evolve in luminosity. Well, one way of avoiding that would be to look at type 1a supernovae, where
we think the white dwarf blows up in the same way, no matter where it is in the universe, no matter
how far back in time we're looking. So in fact, we are using type 1a supernovae to probe the overall
geometry of the universe in this way. But it isn't easy, okay? Then you could look at, for example,
the motions of galaxies and clusters of galaxies. When you look at galaxies and clusters like this,
they have a lot of matter within them, both visible and dark matter. And they pull on each other,
and you can measure these deviations from the smooth expansion of the universe. And from the
amount by which clusters of galaxies perturb one another, you can determine their mass and hence
the average density of the universe. But again, this only takes into account the clumped material,
the stuff that's in clusters. It doesn't take into account any dark matter that might be more
uniformly spread out through the universe. So this problem, this technique has its problems as well.
And then there are other techniques. They're all, you know, useful. They all provide some
constraints, but they're hard. Later, I'll discuss how early in the universe, the lightest elements
and their isotopes were created in what's called primordial nucleosynthesis, the nucleosynthesis
at the time of the Big Bang or shortly thereafter. And the relative amounts of those isotopes of
the light elements depend on how much matter density there is and all that. So there are ways
of doing this, but all the techniques are difficult and uncertain. And it's been hard to really come
up with a good, compelling mass density for the universe, okay, that everyone believes. Now,
through the 1980s and 1990s, the measurements began to converge on a value of omega matter equals
0.3 or so. That is the average density of the universe when you consider everything is something
like 30% of the critical density. And if that's true, the universe should be decelerating somewhat,
but it's below the critical density. So it'll decelerate not so much and end up expanding
forever easily. That is, it won't reach zero velocity at time equals infinity. At least,
that was the prediction. And its spatial geometry should be negative if that's true.
But most of these methods were based on measurements of clusters of galaxies, their masses, their
distribution, how much they're pulling on one another and so on. There were very few direct
measurements of deceleration. So people looked at maps like this, where you have the distribution
of galaxies as a function of spatial position in the sky and distance away from this. And from
analysis of maps like this and clusters of galaxies such as these here, there's a little cluster there,
kind of bound to this cluster here. Anyway, people could figure out roughly that the matter density
is something like 30% of the critical density. But these were not based on direct measurements
of the global geometry or direct measurements of the deceleration. Okay, you'd like to have
these other complementary measurements to see whether omega sub m really is 0.3 or not.
And moreover, an omega matter of 0.3 bothered the theoretical physicists. They said that whatever
the total mass of the universe, it must be such a density, so as to equal the critical density,
there's a strong theoretical reasons for thinking that the total density of the universe is equal
to the critical density. And theorists even said maybe there's normal matter and dark matter and
all that kind of stuff, and maybe then there's some other stuff as well, like Einstein's cosmological
constant. But all of it together should be one, density equal to the critical density. And observers
said, yeah, but we only measure a density 30% of the critical density. And the theorists said, well,
we don't like that. Either you guys haven't taken into account all the dark matter or maybe
maybe there's something else as well. And the reason they had this theoretical preference
is that it turns out that if you have a matter density that's not one or a total density that's
not one, which would be entirely the matter density if you for the time being ignore weird kinds of
energy like the cosmological constant. Anyway, if you if the density isn't one, it rapidly
deviates from one even more. So suppose it's less than one, suppose it's 0.9 of the critical
density, then according to the equations of general relativity, the universe quickly evolves in such
a way that the density relative to the critical density becomes 0.8, 0.7, 0.6 all the way down to
essentially zero. Or if the density started a little bit bigger than the critical density,
it rapidly deviates away from a value close to the critical density. And so
to find the density 0.3 to be reasonably close to one, but not zero or infinity,
would be kind of like walking into a room and finding a pen perfectly balanced. You can do it
if you set it up just right. But if there's any deviations in the balance of the pen, it'll fall.
And if you walk into a room, you will normally see the pen in its fallen state. You will not see
it in the process of falling. The process of falling is very short lived. So if we find a
density of 0.3, and yet it should have been zero or infinity, that's like walking into a room and
finding a pen that's in the process of falling. It's very unlikely. Okay. So the theorist said
there must be some reason that the pen wants to be in this vertical position. There's something
forcing it to be that way so that then when you walk into a room, you see that the pen is standing
up. So the theorist said that the pen standing up is like it's being forced to be that way. And
they have these theoretical reasons then for saying that if the universe has a density of one,
then it'll stay that way if it's precisely one. But if it deviates even a little bit from one,
the pen will fall over very quickly. You see what I'm trying to say? So they wanted the universe
to have a precisely defined density. And then it would stay that way. But if it's not that perfect
density of one, the critical density, then it'll rapidly deviate from that. And so that's why they
thought that it should be one. All right. Well, the observer said, darn it, it's not one, it's 0.3.
So take that. Okay. So clearly to resolve this, we need some other measurements of either the
geometry of the universe or its past history. So let's try to measure the deceleration directly.
Let's go back to this drawing, the spatial separation between galaxies versus time.
If we look at this thing, early in the history of the universe, if the universe was dense,
it was expanding much more quickly than now. Whereas if the universe has a low density,
it wasn't expanding that much more quickly in the past than now. If the observers are right,
an omega matter is 0.3, then the universe should be following a past history equal to this black
dashed curve right here. That is expanding now only a little bit more slowly than in the past.
So let's see if we can measure that expansion rate. Let's convert this theoretical diagram
into an observational diagram. First, let's note that the quantity one plus the red shift
is equal to the distance between the galaxy whose light we are seeing now divided by the
distance that galaxy had when the light was emitted. So clearly, if red shift is 0,
then the distance now is equal to the distance when the light was emitted and the galaxy is
essentially right here. And one equals the distance now divided by the distance when the
light was emitted. But for example, not such a trivial example, if the red shift is one,
then one plus one equals two. And what we're saying is that the light that we are now seeing
was actually emitted by that galaxy when it was half of its present distance from now,
because one over one half is two and one plus one is two, so the equation is satisfied.
So now let's go back to this diagram and let's see how this theoretical diagram can be converted
into an observational version. If we plot a zoomed up version of that previous diagram,
looking at just the earliest history of the universe, we have the separation between two
galaxies versus time. And we now say time equals now is right here, the universe is
some number of years old. So two galaxies are some distance apart from each other now.
Now, if we say that there's some distance apart from each other now, that's saying that at a red
shift of zero, they're at some distance, whatever the measured distance is from one another.
In the past, those two galaxies were at different distances. And so if you look at
representative galaxies at redshift of one and ask what were their distances from us
at that redshift as a function of the kind of past history that our universe has gone through,
you will notice that the time into the past that you're looking at that galaxy, the so-called
lookback time, is a function of the expansion history of the universe. If the universe is dense,
then a galaxy at redshift one is seen at some lookback time given by this arrow looking back in
time. For a less dense universe, in this case the medium or critical density universe, a galaxy
at redshift one is being seen a greater lookback time farther back and hence a greater distance away
because light travels at the speed of light and a greater lookback time corresponds to a greater
distance. A galaxy at redshift one in a low density universe where it's only 30% of the critical
density is seen at an even greater lookback time in the past and hence at an even greater distance.
And in an empty or a nearly empty universe, that same galaxy at redshift one would be seen
even farther back into the past, hence an even greater distance away. So we're essentially
comparing the scale factor now, the distance between two arbitrary galaxies versus the scale
factor at redshift one. Okay, that scale factor was one half of what it is right now. That's what
redshift one means by the definition I gave you. And at redshift one, galaxies in different kinds
of universes, dense versus critical density versus low density versus empty, are at different
lookback times and hence different distances. So clearly the key is to look at galaxies at
different redshifts and see what distances they're at and see then which curves among the possible
curves they actually follow. Let's look at that here. For a given recession speed or a given redshift,
okay, the dense universe has a smaller lookback time and hence a smaller distance
than the less dense universe. And the progressively less dense universes give a larger lookback time,
in other words, a larger distance for a given redshift or speed of recession. So if we can
measure the redshift of a galaxy and if we can also measure its distance and we do that for a
bunch of galaxies at different redshifts, we can see which of these possible curves our actual
universe follows and thus determine the past history of the expansion. Is that a beautiful
argument or what? Okay, so how do you get these great distances? Well, you guessed it,
Type 1A supernovae. They're beautiful. They're luminous. Look at this thing. It goes off in
this galaxy, kablam, brightens to a billion suns and then fades away. If you measure its peak
brightness in a distant galaxy and compare that with the known luminosity of a Type 1A, you can get
the distance of the distant galaxy. And as I said before, they're mostly about the same intrinsic
luminosity because they're always white dwarfs that go off at about the Chandrasekhar limit.
And we can make corrections by reading the label on the light bulb in seeing the small
non-uniformities in the peak luminosity. So here's this diagram of recession speed or redshift
versus distance. You can plot the distances deduced for Type 1A supernovae by comparing
their apparent brightness with their luminosity. And you can do that for galaxies or supernovae
at different redshifts and populate this graph with a bunch of points and see whether the points
follow along the omega matter greater than one curve or the omega matter equals one curve or
the zero matter curve. Well, we would expect based on the measurements of astronomers who
are measuring the mass density of the universe, we would expect that the Type 1A supernovae
would land on this curve here in the diagram because they told us that the matter density
is 0.3 and so the universe should be only decelerating a little bit. Well, in the early 1990s,
two teams, the high redshift supernova search team or HZT and the supernova cosmology project or
SCP, which actually started a few years before the first team that I just mentioned, they started
measuring the distances of distant Type 1A supernovae. They wanted to find a bunch of Type 1A
supernovae at big redshifts and determine which curve they follow along. And I was actually a
member of both teams for a while, but later on my allegiance was primarily to the high redshift
supernova search team and that's the one with which I have worked for most of my career in
cosmology. And here is a subset of the high redshift supernova search team with its team leader,
Brian Schmidt, and I'm back here and Adam Reese was a postdoctoral fellow working under my guidance
at Berkeley in the late 1990s and he was the one who made a lot of measurements of our data.
And contrary to popular perception, these teams weren't always at each other's throats.
Here are Brian Schmidt, the leader of the HZT and Sol Perlmutter, the leader of the supernova
cosmology project duking it out. Well, this was a stage shot. We were in competition, but it was
generally a friendly competition and it was good for science because it improved the techniques
that we used. That is, if one team were taking into account all sorts of subtleties and the other
team was not, then that other team looked bad and it accelerated our progress because each
team wanted to be first and it was a spirited good competition and moreover by two teams coming
up with results, well, people outside of our field could then compare the results and have
greater confidence that we're right. The basic technique we use was to take deep pictures of
the sky like this one at two different times, subtract the earlier digitized picture from
the later one. Normally you just get a bunch of noise when you subtract one image from another,
but if something changed in the image, like if a supernova went off, then you would notice that
as a little clumping here. That would be a supernova candidate. And we found batches of these
supernovae by looking deep in the sky and monitoring thousands and thousands of galaxies.
And here's one of our reports where in 1996, we reported to the Central Bureau for Astronomical
Telegrams, a subset of the International Astronomical Union, a whole bunch of supernovae that were
discovered in this batch mode. And since we could guarantee by looking at large patches of the sky
that we would find lots of supernovae, we could then apply to big telescope time committees like
the Kepp telescope and say, we're going to find a bunch of supernovae, give us time on your telescope
with which to get spectra of those supernovae. And they would give us time because we could
demonstrate that we find lots of these supernovae. And with the big collecting area of the Keck
telescopes, you could get a spectrum of the supernova and tell whether it's a supernova
or even whether it's a specific type 1a. And here's a type 1a. It looks just like a nearby
type 1a. Here's a low redshift type 1a. There's a high redshift type 1a. They look very, very similar.
And when that happened, well, I was a very happy camper. And here you can see the real reason we
build observatories in Hawaii. It's because we like the beach. Not really, you know, they're
a great place to observe from as well. Anyway, the point is, is that we found a bunch of supernova
candidates, got their spectra, confirmed that they're supernovae, and then we could go out,
make a bunch of measurements of them, figure out their distance and see what kind of a universe
we actually live in. Stay tuned to the next lecture.
