To determine the expansion history of the universe, in the early 1990s, two teams set
out to measure the peak brightnesses of Type 1A supernovae, and from those peak brightnesses
to determine their distances and the look-back times, and what they found stunned the world
of physics, and indeed it's revolutionizing physics now.
The bottom line is that Einstein's biggest blunder may have actually been his greatest
triumph, but motivated by the wrong reasons.
So here's a nearby Type 1A supernova in a galaxy whose distance we know through Sethiad
variables or other measurements.
By measuring the apparent peak brightness of this supernova, we can calculate its true
power or luminosity, and comparing that with the peak brightness of distant supernovae,
we can get their distance and hence the look-back time.
So here's a candidate very distant supernova.
In one image, there was nothing there, and in the next image, taken some time later,
there was a little dot.
And you need to make sure that that dot is a supernova, and indeed a supernova of the
right kind, because not all supernovae are standard candles.
The Type 2s, for example, have a wide range of peak luminosities.
So you need to get a spectrum of this little dot seen well in the difference image between
these two, first two images.
And large telescopes, like the two Keck telescopes, have big enough mirrors to gather enough light
from these distant faint little sources to see whether the spectrum is that of a supernova
of Type 1a.
And my contribution to the team's effort was to get those spectra.
Now, sometimes the spectra were fantastic, and as I said, we were happy campers.
But other times, the weather was bad.
When we're flying into Hawaii, the pilot sometimes says, there's Mauna Kea volcano, site of one
of the greatest collections of telescopes in the world.
It is said that there are 360 clear nights per year on the summit of Mauna Kea.
Well, if that's the case, then I always get the five bad ones each year, because it's
not always great up there.
I mean, these are very high mountains, 14,000 feet high, and it snows up there sometimes.
And I remember a few years ago, there was an observing run where I had five consecutive
nights, one of my longest observing runs of the year.
And on the first two, it snowed, and so it was just completely hopeless.
But then it cleared up, unfortunately, it was windy that night, and the wind was kicking
snow off of the surface there, and bringing it up into the air, and it would have fallen
onto the telescope had the dome been open.
So no matter how large a green bill I waved in front of the telescope operator, he wouldn't
open the dome for me, even though it was perfectly clear outside.
So it was frustrating, and you have to be patient.
You have to wait until a clear, calm night, and there's no snow and all that.
But when you've got front page breaking science just ready to be done, it can be very frustrating.
So you can kind of get depressed and be all moody, or you can make lemonade out of a lemon
and do something else, like go skiing or something on the summit of Mauna Kea Volcano.
What you can't do is ski from the summit down to the beach, because the snow ends up melting
about halfway down, even in the coldest years.
Well anyway, we get a bunch of these spectra, and we determine which of the candidates turned
out to be Type 1A supernovae, and then we measure their light curves, and measure not
only the peak brightness, but also the rate of decline, so that we can standardize the
small non-uniformities in the luminosity of the supernovae, as I described in Lecture 78.
And here are three examples of faint Type 1A supernovae that we found.
They are inside these three boxes, and close-ups can be seen down here.
The arrows are pointing to them.
And the punchline is that these supernovae look really, really faint.
And you might say, well, big deal, they're in faint galaxies, distant galaxies, you would
expect the supernovae to be faint.
Well that's true, but these supernovae are so faint that the implied distance is too
high.
They are farther away than they could possibly have gotten given the age of the universe
if the universe were behaving in any of the standard ways that Alexander Friedman had
described in the 1920s.
The distances were too high to even be compatible with a constant expansion rate, let alone
a decelerating rate of expansion.
Let me give you an analogy.
Let's take the proverbial Newtonian apple again and toss it up into the air.
Suppose the universe were only one second old.
Well, after one second, the apple gets to some height above my hand.
This is the big bang here, and a second later I measure where it is.
And it's at some distance, but the apple has decelerated because of the mutual gravitational
attraction between the apple and the earth.
If the earth's gravity were weaker, then the apple would not decelerate as much.
Now I can't make the earth's gravity weaker, but what I can do is throw the apple faster,
and that's sort of similar to making the earth's gravity weaker.
The effect is the same in that in one second the apple gets farther away.
Now suppose I weaken earth's gravity even more, then in one second the apple gets even
farther up, and if I remove the earth altogether and I throw the apple up, it'll have no reason
to decelerate whatsoever.
It'll go at a constant speed, and after one second it'll reach an even greater height
because it hasn't slowed down.
What we're saying is that these supernovae, and hence the galaxies in which they're located,
were farther away than they could have gotten even if the universe had not decelerated at
all.
In other words, these apples were farther away than the distance you get after one second
even if there's no slowing down whatsoever.
Now that is weird, okay?
You might say, all right, well suppose you're assumed age was wrong, suppose the universe
is actually two seconds old instead of one second old, then you would get a bigger distance,
you know, not because of some weird effect, but rather because the age was wrong.
Well, it turns out if that's what you were thinking, good try, but the argument ends
up being independent of the age of the universe.
The apple is too far away compared to the distance it would have gotten even if it had
not slowed down.
It's too far away because it must have accelerated along the way, it must have not decelerated
and not gone at a constant speed, but rather accelerated.
The universe's expansion recently has been speeding up is what the two teams concluded.
And here's how we can conclude this based on the diagram I showed in the previous lecture.
For a given redshift, the distance or look back time depends on what kind of universe
you're in, and you get the smallest distances for dense universes, bigger distances for
progressively less dense universes, and what we're saying is that supernovae at a given
redshift were farther away even than what you would expect in an empty universe that's
not decelerating at all.
And this was true at whatever redshifts we measured, and that's what makes it independent
of the assumed age for the universe.
So I used an assumed age in my analogy just to make it sort of comprehensible that the
apple is farther away than it could have gotten had it not been slowing down, therefore it
must have been speeding up, but the true argument is independent of the assumed age of the universe.
Now this graph here has this curve marked with omega matter less than zero.
That's simply meant to indicate that here's what the universe's expansion history would
have looked like if there were some sort of material with kind of a negative energy,
a repulsive gravity.
We don't know of any such material, so we don't really call it omega matter, but we
can introduce a new kind of an energy like the cosmological constant that Einstein had
introduced in 1917 that countered the force of gravity and he wanted the universe to be
static.
So it's some sort of a new effect making galaxies and the supernovae within them farther
away than would have been expected.
What we're saying is that in the past few billion years, some sort of a cosmic pushing
apart has been dominating over the tendency of galaxies to attract one another, and that
is really, really weird.
The expansion of the universe is currently accelerating with time.
Well, this caused huge headlines, New York Times, wary astronomers ponder an accelerating
universe.
You could just as well say weary, not from all the nights we spent gathering data, but
from all the sleepless nights we spent worrying that we had made a simple mistake in the analysis.
Suppose the computer program had an error like 2 plus 2 equals 5.
That would be bad.
That would be a huge embarrassment and we would probably lose our funding, okay?
The kiss of death in science is when you lose your funding.
Now often in science, you make an error or an error in interpretation, which later turns
out to have been subtle and teaches you something about the universe.
That's good.
That's how science progresses.
The errors that are mathematical or computational, 2 plus 2 equals 5, are an embarrassment.
But a bunch of us on the team did the calculations and got the same results, so we were pretty
confident that we hadn't made a simple error of this sort.
We announced the result in February of 1998, and as I said, there were these huge headlines.
The first headline was astronomers see a cosmic anti-gravity force at work.
Now we use this term anti-gravity hesitantly because people ask us, you know, can we attach
this stuff, whatever it is that's accelerating the universe, to our cars and levitate over
traffic jams?
And no, you can't attach it to anything.
You can't harness it.
It's a property of space, we think, that you see only over billions of light-years.
So we don't really want to call it anti-gravity, but it kind of has the same effect.
Our team leader, Brian Schmidt, said, my own reaction is somewhere between amazement
and horror, amazement because this is not what we expected, horror because for a little
while we were still a bit worried that we had just erroneously interpreted the data.
Now the first person on our team to realize what the data were trying to tell us was Adam
Reese, a young postdoctoral scholar who had joined my group at Berkeley after finishing
his PhD at Harvard University.
And near the end of 1997, he would show me occasionally the results of his measurements
suggesting that the universe is accelerating and that the distant supernovae are too faint,
too far away.
And I thought something must be going wrong.
I said, you know, go back and redo the measurements until you get it right.
But gradually we realized that, you know, what he was measuring was correct.
And Adam was the first on our team to realize what was going on.
There was a big article about the results in Time Magazine with a full page picture
of Adam and it had a headline, Adventures in Anti-Gravity, you know, so he became famous
and justifiably so because he was a very careful, enthusiastic, vigorous astronomer who did
his measurements very carefully and did not just sweep under the rug a result that initially
seemed counterintuitive, not expected, contrary to the establishment.
You know, he pursued it.
By the end of that year, 1998, the editors of Science Magazine proclaimed the discovery
by both teams, who announced it, by the way, essentially simultaneously at the same meeting.
Anyway, the editors of Science Magazine proclaimed this to be the top breakthrough in all of
science, in all fields of science, in the year 1998.
And the cover had this caricature of Einstein who looks surprised.
Not so much because he's blowing universes out of his pipe.
You might not have known that that's where universes come from, but I'll tell you later
that they come out of pipes.
Not really.
That's sort of a joke.
Anyway, but there may be multiple ones.
I'll tell you about that later and that's no joke.
But why he's surprised is that this one universe he blew out of his pipe is accelerating in
its expansion, not decelerating, and that's hard to show in a single still image.
And that was unexpected.
He's doubly surprised because he has this sheaf of papers here where there's an equation
lambda equals 8 pi times Newton's constant of gravity times the density of the vacuum.
What's the density of the vacuum?
It's this cosmological constant that he had introduced in 1917 to make an apparently
static universe.
Remember he said there's some effect pushing out on galaxies so as to make them perfectly
stationary relative to us.
And introducing such a constant actually generalized the solution to the equations of relativity.
For those of you who know calculus, it's kind of like a constant of integration.
It's a natural thing to add.
But it seemed like a mathematical fudge factor because to get a static universe, the value
of that constant had to be precisely tuned to equal the opposite of the attractive force
of gravity and that seemed like a fudge factor.
So recall that Einstein later renounced the cosmological constant and called it the biggest
blunder of his career.
But we now think that instead of being sad, he should have actually been happy that he
had predicted it.
And I don't know what his reaction would be now that we've said that there's this effect
going on of repulsion, but perhaps his reaction would be something like this.
Maybe that's what his reaction would have been had he been around now to hear that we
have resuscitated the whole concept.
Not to make a static universe, but rather to make one which over large scales is expanding
faster and faster with time is accelerating.
So here on Earth, gravity dominates and in our galaxy gravity dominates and in our cluster
of galaxies dominates, gravity dominates.
Over billions of light years of essentially empty space, anti-gravity dominates.
In other words, the up arrow is slightly bigger than the down arrow over large distances,
not over small distances, but over the largest distances in the universe, the up arrow dominates.
And so Einstein predicted this cosmological constant, but was motivated by the wrong reasons.
He was trying to make a static universe.
It turns out the concept was right of some sort of a repulsion.
The motivation was wrong, but well, that's the way it goes.
But the concept was brilliant and could be called his greatest triumph rather than his
biggest blunder.
Well this is a weird conclusion, so it's important to see whether something could be going on
wrong in our measurements or in our interpretation.
For example, what if the supernovae look fainter than expected?
Not because they're farther away than expected, but because, for example, there's dust in
the way blocking some of the light.
Well, as in the case of the setting sun, the dust not only would make the supernovae dimmer,
but would also make them redder.
Okay?
Remember, dust selectively blocks out blue light.
But we had measured the light curves through different filters.
For example, here's the light curve of one supernova in 1997 through a visual filter.
And that same supernova measured through a blue filter, that is one that passes blue
light.
And by comparing the colors implied by these light curves, you can figure out whether the
object is being dimmed by regular dust or not.
And we determined that there's no dust there, you know?
And we could even use some arguments against dust that doesn't selectively remove blue
light over red light, although those arguments were a little bit more tenuous.
So, you know, we were a little bit groping at straws here, but trying to systematically
eliminate all the possible sources of bad interpretation.
Another potential problem is suppose the white dwarfs at very large distances don't explode
in the same way as the white dwarfs nearby, so that the luminosity of distant supernovae
is dimmer than the luminosity of nearby ones.
Then the distant ones would look dimmer not because they're too far away, but rather
because they are intrinsically 90 watt light bulbs or 80 watt light bulbs instead of the
canonical 100 watt light bulbs, okay?
Well, if you look at the spectra, the brightness versus wavelength of nearby supernovae and
distant ones, you find that they actually look very similar here to supernovae, one
nearby, one at a high red shift, at peak brightness.
And the spectra are noisy, but they basically look the same.
And then two weeks later after the supernova has aged a little bit, again, they look the
same.
There are some differences here because there's some contamination from regular stars and
all that.
I won't go into the details, but the point is it didn't look like the spectra were
different and other aspects of the observed properties didn't look different.
And theoretically, the supernovae should explode in the same way, that is, the white dwarfs
go off at the Chandrasekhar limit and so on.
So we felt fairly confident that what we were measuring was not an evolution over time
of the peak brightness of a Type 1A supernova, but rather an extra unexpected distance.
And the data and the analysis were pretty reliable and improved with time.
And gradually, physicists and astronomers started taking us more seriously.
Initially, they didn't take us super seriously, although since there were two groups reporting
the same result, people had to notice and say, hey, there might be something weird going
on here.
If there had been only one group, people would have just laughed us off, I think.
But with time, the data got better and better, and all sorts of physicists started working
on what this effect might be.
And it gained a lot of publicity.
And even Vice President Al Gore wanted to find out more about this weird result.
So he visited my team at the Keck Observatory.
Here I am with Aaron Barth, one of my former students, and Al Gore.
Actually, this was slightly after his term as a vice president.
So he had more time to relax at this point.
But anyway, he wanted to know more about the universe.
So that was kind of cool.
Well, this result that the universe is accelerating was based on the observations of supernovae
at Redshift around 0.5.
That was their average Redshift.
So we're looking back four or five billion years in time.
And so what we would say is that in the last four or five billion years, the universe has
been accelerating.
These supernovae were distant, but you'd like to ask, what would you see if you looked farther
back in time than four or five billion years?
To greater Redshifts than those of the supernovae shown here.
With the Hubble Space Telescope, we could find even higher Redshift supernovae.
And there was one found almost by accident in 1997 in a repeat observation of the Hubble
Deep Field.
So there had been the original Hubble Deep Field, part of which is shown here, and then
a repeat observation in 1997.
And in part of that image, there was an extra little dot.
And that extra dot turned out to be a supernova at Redshift 1.7, by far the most distant supernova
ever found.
And it turns out that another astronomer had a bunch of repeated observations of that section
of the sky that happened to occur right after the supernova went off.
So Adam Rees went back to the archive data set, dug those data out of the archive, measured
the brightness of the supernova, measured its light curve, made the appropriate corrections,
and determined that in fact, looking back in time, 10 or 11 billion years back to Redshift
1.7, the universe appeared to be slowing down, not speeding up.
Now this is based on one supernova, OK, the result that the early universe was slowing
down, not speeding up.
But this prompted us to apply for more time with the Hubble to observe more high Redshift
supernovae.
And we were given the time to do that, and here are three of them.
These three supernovae are at very large Redshifts, around one or so.
And lo and behold, indeed, they confirm that for the first nine or so billion years of its
existence, the universe was slowing down in its expansion, not speeding up.
So it slowed down for a while, in a sense, as it should have.
Then something took over and caused it to speed up, so it's like slowing down, and then
it's like rockets, and they go boom, and they make it speed up.
Now the transition from deceleration to acceleration is mathematically known as a jerk.
It's a change in the acceleration.
So we in a sense had measured the cosmos to be going through a jerk, and the headline
that came up in the New York Times was a cosmic jerk that reversed the universe.
And then right next to this headline was a photograph of Adam Reese.
What a juxtaposition, right?
I started getting these phone calls from people, hey, who's this jerk you work with who reversed
the expansion of the universe?
That's not what we said.
You know, we didn't say who reversed the universe.
A cosmic jerk that reversed the universe.
But anyway, the juxtaposition was funny.
But Adam gained a lot of celebrity through this really fantastic set of observations
of the very early universe.
Adam is a kind of a modest guy and took it in stride, this headline with his photograph
next to it.
So the idea is that if you plot the universe's size versus time, there was a big bang about
which I'll have more to say later, then sort of a slowing down of the expansion.
So the universe is getting bigger with time, but at an ever slower rate.
And then in the last four or five billion years, it has started speeding up with time
or an accelerating expansion.
Now why might it change from deceleration to acceleration?
If the cosmological constant or whatever this stuff is is associated with space itself,
then we would expect that as the galaxies get farther and farther apart, eventually
the repulsion will dominate over gravitational attraction.
And the reason for that is that when the galaxies were close together, the gravitational pull
of one galaxy for another was strong.
And moreover, the amount of empty space between them was small, so there wasn't much stuff
pushing them apart.
But as the universe expanded and those galaxies got farther from one another, their gravitational
attraction for each other declined because they got farther apart, yet the amount of
space between them increased.
So the cumulative effect of this repulsive or repugnant term increased.
And eventually it started dominating over the attractive effects of gravity.
So we actually would expect a transition of this sort if the repulsion is some sort of
a property of space.
Now this revolutionized physics.
People did not expect this, and indeed initially we were kind of ridiculed a little bit.
But now that the data are really great and there's other independent evidence that I'll
discuss later for some sort of a weird stuff, expanding the universe faster and faster.
We call that stuff dark energy, and I'll have more to say about it later.
It's repulsive, so it's not like dark matter, which is attractive, okay, we call it dark
energy.
Anyway, for their leadership roles in discovering dark energy and the acceleration of the universe,
Paul Perlmutter and Brian Schmidt, the leaders of the two teams, and Adam Reese, the person
on Schmidt's team who did a lot of the analysis, were awarded the 2006 Shaw Prize in astronomy.
And many people consider this to be sort of like the Nobel Prize of the East.
It's given in Hong Kong.
And unlike the Nobel Prize, which doesn't exist for astronomy, the Shaw Prize does exist
for astronomy, and so it's a great thing to get.
Jeff Marcy and Michelle Mayor, the discoverers of the first exoplanets of the normal variety,
not the kind that go around pulsars, were given the Shaw Prize in 2005.
So here's a photo of Brian Schmidt celebrating the announcement of the prize with a cigar.
So all right, well, so what's happening to the universe if you plot the separation between
galaxies versus time?
Instead of having a big bang and then a big crunch, or a big bang and slow deceleration,
we actually have a big bang, some era of deceleration lasting perhaps nine billion years, and then
in the last four or five billion years, acceleration took over, lambda or whatever it is, cosmic
anti-gravity took over.
And the implications of this are astonishing.
The expansion of the universe is accelerating for some weird reason, unanticipated, OK?
Moreover, the expansion will continue forever unless whatever this weird effect is, this
dark energy, becomes gravitationally attractive in the future.
I mean, right now it's repulsive, but since we don't know what it is, the mystery of the
dark energy, what it really is, is by many considered to be the number one problem in
all of physics.
Since we don't know what it is, who's to say that it won't reverse its gravitational
effect in the future?
And I'll discuss later some evidence that the early universe was dominated by repulsion
of this sort, which later turned into attraction.
So there's some historical precedent to this, but unless it changes sign, the universe will
expand forever.
Indeed, at an accelerating rate, rapidly becoming very cold, dark and dilute.
And if that's what will happen to it, then we can answer the question, how the universe
will end.
It'll expand forever at an accelerating rate.
Now that headline was back in 2001 when we were confident that current acceleration means
acceleration forever.
But since then, theorists have come up with models of dark energy, as I said, that change
sign in the future.
So maybe someday there will still be deceleration and a cosmic big crunch, we just don't know.
But at the current rate of acceleration, if you want to see clusters of galaxies through
a telescope, like this one here, you'd better do it soon, because within a few tens of billions
of years, those clusters of galaxies will be whisked beyond the range of visibility
of telescopes.
So go look through a telescope soon at your local public astronomy club star party.
Now another implication of the dark energy is that the universe can be closed, that is
spherical and finite, yet still expand forever.
Remember in the geometry is destiny phrase, I said that without these repulsive effects,
a spherical closed universe must be the kind that recollapses.
Well now, if the energy is actually dominated by repulsive dark energy, you could have a
spherical closed universe, that is, the average density is greater than the critical density.
But since most of the stuff is the repulsive stuff, it pushes the sphere apart forever.
So you no longer have the geometry is destiny principle, the universe could expand forever,
ending in ice, and that would please Robert Frost if he had to perish twice.
Moreover, if you combine the current rate of expansion, the Hubble constant, with now
this history of expansion that we have some grasp of, you come up with an age for the
universe of about 14 billion years, and that's consistent with the ages of the globular clusters
of 12 or 13 billion years.
So the globular clusters are not older than the expansion age of the universe.
We have some confidence in that conclusion now because we know the current Hubble constant
and we know something about the expansion history of the universe, and bringing those
together gives us an expansion age, 14 billion years, which is a little above the ages of
the oldest known stars.
The acceleration is a long range repulsive effect.
What is the energy density associated with it?
Well, when you look at the data and you figure out how much stuff is associated with the
dark energy measured in units similar to the omega matter thing that I described earlier,
you find that the omega associated with the dark energy is around 0.7.
So 0.7 associated with repulsion, 0.3 associated with attraction.
The repulsion currently dominates.
The two densities, 0.3 for normal and dark matter, plus 0.7 for the dark energy, adds
up to one.
Well the one, the one is exactly what the theoretical physicists were saying we should
find if we were to take into account all of the total amount of energy in the universe.
Remember the demo with the pen?
They said that the density of the universe has to be one.
And lo and behold, it appears as though it really is one when you take into account both
dark matter and dark energy.
And finally, the physical origin of the dark energy, quantum fluctuations or something
like that, may necessitate a unification of the two great pillars of modern physics,
general relativity on the one hand and quantum physics on the other.
Any unified theory of gravity and quantum physics had better be able to explain the
observed properties of the dark energy.
