We have learned that observations of high redshift type 1a supernovae show that they're
farther away than they should have been in a universe that's decelerating due to gravity
or expanding at a constant rate.
In the past four or five billion years the universe has instead been accelerating due
to some weird kind of dark energy.
Well there are other ways of learning about dark energy and in particular one can study
the echo of the Big Bang, the so-called cosmic microwave background radiation.
I've mentioned it a few times in the past and in this lecture I want to discuss this
afterglow of creation and show its utility for astronomical investigations.
We will see historically that the most important aspect of the CMBR or this cosmic microwave
background radiation was that it played a crucial role in eliminating one of the major
cosmological theories, the so-called steady state theory, which was the big alternative
to the hot Big Bang theory.
Well one can start by saying, does the universe, which is expanding, necessarily have to have
started its existence in a hot, compressed state?
Did it have to start in a singularity, in a hot, compressed state from which everything
then expanded, a Big Bang?
The Belgian scientist and priest Georges-Henry Lemet in 1927 suggested that it does have
to start this way.
Not knowing of the Friedman equations, he independently used Einstein's general theory
of relativity to derive the probable behavior of the universe and he found that a much more
natural solution to Einstein's equations of general relativity was that the universe
is expanding rather than static and Lemet specifically said that it began in a hot, compressed state.
He called it a primeval atom or a cosmic egg that then exploded for whatever reason.
Einstein originally thought that this was crazy, but later thought that this was a very beautiful
hypothesis.
Well it turns out that the observed expansion of the universe suggests, but does not demand
that the universe began in a hot, compressed, primeval atom or cosmic egg.
It could have simply been expanding forever with no beginning in the past and no end in
the future.
Just eternal expansion, not from a singular state at the very beginning at t equals zero,
but going all the way back to t equals negative infinity, whatever that means.
The cosmic expansion alone is consistent with this kind of a universe and this kind of a
universe was called the steady state universe or the steady state theory and it was proposed
by Fred Hoyle shown here along with two of his colleagues Thomas Gold and Herman Bondi.
Hoyle in particular criticized and to some degree ridiculed the primeval atom or cosmic
egg hypothesis that Lemet had come up with and he came up with this somewhat derogatory
term or sort of a joke about what this theory was.
He called it the big bang theory.
He thought it was a little bit ludicrous that the universe would start from a primeval
atom in some sort of a big bang.
And he had a wildly popular BBC radio program called The Nature of Things and that's where
he called this thing the birth of the universe, the big bang.
And ironically the name stuck and that's what people now call the birth of the universe.
They didn't want it to be that way but everyone thought hey, what a great description for
how the universe began as a big bang so that the name has stuck.
So it's named after its most vocal critic actually.
Hoyle's steady state alternative was based on something called the perfect cosmological
principle.
Now you will recall that I said that the cosmological principle states that the properties of the
universe are uniform.
That is more specifically the universe is homogeneous, same average density everywhere
and isotropic.
It looks the same in all directions.
But the density can change with time.
In fact in an expanding universe that had a beginning, an origin and time, the density
decreases with time.
Well Hoyle said let it be a perfect cosmological principle where there's no beginning, no end.
That is the properties of the universe don't change with time on average.
The density doesn't decrease, nothing changes with time.
Now since Hoyle did not disagree that the universe is expanding, he had to postulate
that new matter is constantly being created to keep the overall density constant.
After all if the density of the universe is going down yet you're insisting that the
universe look the same at all times, the perfect cosmological principle, then you have to create
new material continuously and you have to have it form new galaxies which will mingle
among the old galaxies and there will always be and there always has been a mixture of
young and old galaxies.
Now you might think that this idea of continuous creation violates the law of conservation of
energy.
We've been taught that energy and matter can be transformed one to the other, but the
total matter plus energy is conserved, it doesn't change with time.
So Hoyle explicitly is saying that matter is being created out of nothing.
But he felt that this was no more absurd sounding than the Big Bang which says that everything
was created at one time t equals zero.
Later we'll see a way in which that might have happened without violating the law of
conservation of energy.
But for now and back then Hoyle said it sounds ludicrous.
The creation of energy and matter in Hoyle's hypothesis was in fact too slow to conflict
with any experimental measurements of the law of conservation of energy.
After all this is an experimental thing.
How do you know whether energy is being created in your laboratory?
Well if a whole bunch of it suddenly comes up you'd notice.
But Hoyle only required the creation of about one hydrogen atom per cubic meter per billion
years.
I mean would you have noticed if you're an experimental physicist that one day you walk
into your laboratory and there's an extra hydrogen atom sitting around?
No, you wouldn't have noticed.
No experiment then or now or in the future, in the foreseeable future will measure one
atom in a room unless it's radioactive or something like that but not a hydrogen atom.
So you can't use the law of conservation of energy as an argument against the steady
state theory because the law has never been proven experimentally to that degree of precision.
Now the steady state theory as we will see turned out to be wrong but it provided a great
impetus for observational cosmologists to extend and refine their observations and for theoretical
physicists to critically examine their assumptions and to inspire observers to search for new
observational evidence supporting their conclusion that the universe really did begin with a
big bang.
So it's stimulated a lot of important work and it's a great example of how science should
work.
You formulate a hypothesis which then gets tested through observations and only when
you have competing hypotheses are experimentalists and observers stimulated a lot to really
work hard and probe all possibilities to the degree that they should and that's what science
is all about.
So the steady state theory was a great thing in the history of astronomy and more specifically
cosmology and it was not an unreasonable idea.
Hoyle was not crazy when he came up with this.
Now it turns out he was wrong and we now know he was wrong for a number of reasons.
For example the discovery of quasars which exist mostly at high red shifts in the distant
past of the universe compared with now shows that the universe used to look different.
It used to have a bunch of quasars per unit volume and now it has very few or none.
So the universe's appearance has changed.
More recently we've witnessed the evolution of galaxies.
Now today they're beautiful grand design spiral galaxies but if we look back with the Hubble
Space Telescope to a few billion years ago we see these train wrecks, these rather amorphous
looking galaxies that presumably coalesced as I've described before and gradually became
the more regularly shaped spiral galaxies.
So the universe has evolved with time.
Its appearance has changed and the steady state theory couldn't really deal with that
very well.
But you could say well maybe the quasars aren't as far away as their red shifts indicate.
That's what was used, that's the argument that was used in the 1960s and 70s.
I've discussed that before and back then there was no observational evidence for the evolution
of galaxies so that's relatively recent evidence.
So historically it turns out the real fatal blow to the steady state theory and to this
day the strongest evidence against the steady state theory is the existence of an echo,
an afterglow from the big bang now glowing with the temperature of only three degrees
above absolute zero.
That's the temperature, the overall temperature of the universe.
Here close to the sun we have nice warm temperatures.
That's good, that allows us to exist.
But far between stars and galaxies the more representative temperature of the universe
is three degrees above absolute zero and at this temperature the universe itself is glowing
like a black body or similar to a black body and this is now the afterglow of the time
back long ago when the universe was very hot and dense.
It was glowing then as well but more like at optical wavelengths and x-ray wavelengths
and now the glow corresponds to three degrees Kelvin as I'll describe in more detail.
This glow was discovered by Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson in 1964 and 65.
They were using a horn owned by Bell Labs near Holmdel, New Jersey and they were studying
radio emission from the plane of our galaxy.
This 20-foot horn had previously been used to detect reflected signals from the Echo
1 satellite and then to some extent it was used to monitor the subsequent Telstar satellite
but then they wanted to use it for radio astronomy, for studying the galactic plane and it wasn't
being used to study satellites anymore so they were given pretty much free access to
this horn at all times and they could fiddle around with it and tune it for their astronomical
observations as well as they could.
They wanted to detect emission from the hydrogen, the neutral hydrogen in our galaxy and they
knew that that would be faint so they worked very hard to eliminate all sources of confusion,
of noise in their electronic gear, the gear that reads the radio signals and transforms
them into something understandable.
And they found that they could get rid of nearly all of the noise, all the unwanted
hissing except for a little bit and annoying little bit remained and they did not know
where it was coming from.
They did all sorts of things in trying to shield their equipment from radio and TV stations
and all that and nothing that they did worked.
They suspected for a while that the hiss was due to interference caused by pigeon
done on their antenna.
There were five or six pigeons that were sitting around on this antenna and every day Penzius
and Wilson would scare them away but they'd come back and they'd leave a big mess there.
And I told the story in the first edition of my teaching company astronomy course and
I said that I didn't know what happened to the pigeons, maybe they got killed or maybe
they got taken away or they could still live in harmony.
But Bill Norris, the technician who had been working with Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson
wrote to me and said that he not only built a lot of the equipment but took a lot of the
data and helped them out a lot and he knows what happens to the pigeons.
He knows what happened to the pigeons.
They scared three of them away by making loud noises.
But the other two just would remain there, I mean they were making a family or something
and they couldn't get rid of them and every morning they would leave this mess.
So they captured them with a trap and they sent them to another place 40 miles away
where they set them loose but three days later these pigeons came back.
And now when Penzius and Wilson and Bill Norris set the trap, those remaining two pigeons,
they weren't fooled again, okay?
You know the saying, fool me once, shame on you, fool me twice, shame on me.
Even pigeons were smart enough to know that that was a trap.
So you know, Penzius and Wilson were sort of at their wits end as to what to do and Bill
Norris ended up taking a shotgun and shooting these remaining two pigeons because there
really was no way to get rid of them.
And that's unfortunate but at least the pigeons died for a good cause.
Their death resulted in a truly monumental discovery in astrophysics.
So Penzius and Wilson gradually became convinced that this hiss that they had heard from their
radio receiver was real and that it was coming from everywhere in the sky.
And at first they weren't sure exactly where it was coming from.
They thought maybe it's coming from some TV station or radio station.
They thought it was essentially meaningless noise.
They weren't sure what it was but it was just meaningless noise of some sort.
Oops, that's perhaps the wrong image.
What I really meant was this right here where you're just looking at your TV station when
it's tuned to a channel that isn't transmitting, okay, and you see the snow or the scatter
on your TV screen.
It doesn't mean anything.
There's no information content there.
And indeed it turns out that a few percent of the little speckles that you see on your
TV screen are caused by this cosmic microwave background radiation.
But they didn't know that back then anyway.
So they thought, okay, well it comes from some TV station but it turned out not to be
the case.
It was coming from everywhere in the sky and it has the same intensity no matter where
they looked, no matter what time of the day or night, no matter which direction they looked,
it's coming uniformly from throughout the sky.
And it had an intensity which if interpreted as coming from a black body would correspond
to a temperature of that black body of three degrees above absolute zero, okay?
They didn't know that it had the spectrum of a black body at that time but some other
people made subsequent measurements that showed that indeed it does follow a black body spectrum.
So it suggested that the universe is glowing at a temperature of three degrees, okay?
It was a monumental discovery.
This isotropic same everywhere radiation coming from somewhere very far away reaching us and
glowing with the same intensity.
In the early 1990s there was a satellite, COBE, the Cosmic Background Explorer, which
measured the spectrum in great detail.
And if you plot the brightness on the vertical axis versus the wavelength along the horizontal
axis, you get data points which exactly are reproduced by a curve corresponding to a black
body having a temperature of 2.725 degrees, just about three degrees above absolute zero.
And you can see the typical wavelength of these radio waves, the typical waves are millimeters
or so.
And this is sort of comparable to the radiation emitted by your microwave oven.
But there's shields to shield you from the radiation in a microwave oven so you don't
get fried on the outside.
But there's millimeter and centimeter sized waves in your microwave oven.
And so this is called the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation.
Well this radiation suggests that the universe was hot long ago because if it was hot and
there was a lot of radiation corresponding to short wavelengths corresponding to a hot
object.
And then if the universe expands, well the radio waves or the radiation that existed
back then, the optical and x-rays and all that, would expand with the universe.
The radio, the electromagnetic waves are not gravitationally bound.
So they've got this expanding space with the waves themselves expanding.
They're not gravitationally bound like galaxies are, so they can expand with the universe.
And to illustrate this, better perhaps than on that diagram, I'm going to blow up a balloon
gradually and show you that an electromagnetic wave on it corresponding to a photon, stretches
or gets a longer wavelength with time.
See that wave is stretching with space because unlike a galaxy it's not gravitationally bound.
And unlike us, it's not bound together by electromagnetic forces, it's just a wave.
So it expands with the expansion of the universe.
So if the universe started out hot with radiation corresponding to x-rays and then as it cooled
down optical and then infrared and so on, eventually the expansion would transform those
short wavelengths into very long wavelengths, millimeter or centimeter lengths like those
of the observed cosmic microwave background radiation.
So it suggests that the universe was hot and if we look at the production mechanism
of these waves in more detail, we see that for a while when the universe was really hot,
whatever photons existed just sort of bounced around from one electron to another because
when the universe was hot the atoms were ionized, the electrons were not bound to the protons
and the electrons weren't bound to whatever helium nuclei existed.
The electrons just were free to wander around and when you have a plasma like this with
free electrons, electromagnetic radiation or photons does not travel through it unimpeded,
rather it scatters around a lot.
So if you look at the universe when it was hot and ionized, it was also opaque.
That is if you were standing at the left here and looking at an object from the right, then
the object's light would scatter around and go in all sorts of directions and not really
reach your eyes over here, rather what's reaching your eyes is radiation scattered by electrons
from all sorts of random directions.
But as the universe cooled and expanded, by the time it reached an age of around 380,000
years after the Big Bang, it had cooled down to a temperature of around 3,000 degrees Kelvin
and at that point the electrons can combine with the protons to form hydrogen atoms, neutral
hydrogen atoms and similarly the electrons can combine with helium nuclei to form neutral
helium atoms.
Then the universe became transparent because atoms only absorb radiation that corresponds
to the energy differences between their well-defined electronic energy levels, but most of the
radiation doesn't correspond to those energy differences and so it passes through unimpeded.
In this room, full of molecules, we see each other really well, because most of the radiation
travels unimpeded.
If our atmosphere became ionized, then I wouldn't see you guys anymore, because the
photons from you would get scattered in all sorts of random directions before reaching
my eyes.
So after the universe recombined or combined for the first time, but the process is called
recombination, the photons were able to travel through the universe unimpeded and someone
at the left here would be able to see someone on the right because the photons from that
person on the right could travel directly to the person on the left.
So after this process of recombination or the combining of electrons with protons for
the first time, that process is called recombination even though here it's happening for the first
time.
Oh well, that's the way it goes, physics terminology.
Anyway, the photons were able to travel freely through a now transparent universe and 14
billion years later, give or take a little bit, here they are arriving in our eyes or
being detected by the radio telescopes since our eyes aren't very good at detecting radio
waves.
So it's as though these photons come from a fog at a redshift of a thousand that corresponded
to a temperature of 3000 degrees Kelvin and beyond that fog the universe was opaque and
then on this side of the fog it was transparent.
So it's just like this fog, you're looking towards the fog and you can see everything
that's between you and the fog and then beyond where the boundary of the fog is, you can't
see anything anymore because space becomes opaque, okay?
So we're looking back in time to a wall, an opaque wall from which the photons finally
were able to emerge and beyond that wall the universe was opaque because it was ionized
and right where that wall is the universe became neutral and hence transparent and those
photons have been traveling unimpeded for nearly 14 billion years since then.
So you're looking back to when the universe was only 380,000 years old, nearly to the
time of the Big Bang, I mean that's fantastic, okay?
Well these photons travel through the universe, the universe expands, the photons expand and
stretch along with the universe and so finally what you have is this three degree background
radiation. The radiation started out at the wall corresponding to a black body of 3000
Kelvin, at even earlier times the universe was even hotter so the radiation corresponded
to a black body that was even higher in temperature but at the moment of recombination the temperature
was around 3000 degrees so that's the temperature of this wall that we see but the red shifting,
the expansion of space has transformed all those short wavelength optical photons like
those emitted by a 3000 degree object into radio waves.
So here was the spectrum as it was at the time of recombination, it was centered on infrared
wavelengths but there was a nice tail of it going into the optical as well so you would
have been able to see the radiation at an age of 380,000 years if you were around back
then but now all those photons have stretched into the radio region of the electromagnetic
spectrum to millimeter and centimeter sized waves. Because the radiation has the same
intensity everywhere in the sky that is its isotropic this indicates that the early universe
from which the radiation originated was incredibly homogeneous and isotropic that is incredibly
uniform. So on the very largest scales i.e. those sampled when we look at the universe
in this cosmic microwave background radiation lo and behold the universe does indeed look
incredibly uniform. Any direction you look it's the same intensity this is the best evidence
for the cosmological principle the isotropy and the homogeneity of the universe. Now the
steady state theory has no way to account for the cosmic microwave background radiation
it has no plausible mechanism yet the big bang theory naturally predicts it so this is thought
to be the fatal blow to the steady state theory. Now it turns out that this radiation was
predicted in the late 1940s and the early 1950s by George Gamoff and his student Ralph
Alfer and then with a third collaborator Robert Herman they were trying to understand
the origin of the elements and they thought that the elements in the universe were produced
by nuclear reactions early in the history of the universe. Now they were partly right
the lightest elements were produced when the universe was hot right after the big bang
but the heavier elements were produced in stars and that wasn't learned until later
on. But in the late 40s Gamoff and Alfer said well maybe all the elements were produced
shortly after the big bang this means that the universe had to be hot so that nuclear
reactions could occur and they predicted then that given the temperature that was needed
in the universe back then and given how much they think it's expanded the universe should
now have a temperature that they thought was about 10 degrees above absolute zero so they
were a factor of three off but you know they got the right order of magnitude and the spirit
of their calculation was correct even though the details of nucleosynthesis turned out
to be wrong most of the elements are produced in stars later on only a few are produced
right after the big bang. But Gamoff had this idea and Alfer did a lot of calculations and
later Alfer and Herman did a lot more papers on this stuff and in 1948 when they first
submitted their first paper on this they celebrated by drinking a bottle of Quantreau liqueur and
Gamoff who was a colorful figure with a good sense of humor slapped a new label on the
liqueur it said ILM the primordial material of the universe the stuff of which the universe
is made you know and so they were drinking the stuff of the universe you know and this
bottle where he had slapped on a new label can now be found at the Smithsonian National
Air and Space Museum so I encourage you to take a look at it. Gamoff prankster that he
was and jokester that he was convinced his student Alfer to invite another astrophysicist
beta Hans beta B E T H E to be a co-author on their paper even though he had nothing
to do with the study because Gamoff thought that a paper describing the first moments
after creation should have authors Alfer beta Gamoff kind of like Alfa beta Gamma the first
three letters of the Greek alphabet and you know what could be more fitting for a description
of the first three minutes of the universe's existence which is when this primordial nucleosynthesis
of the elements was supposed to have occurred the story gets better independently years later
Princeton physicist Robert Dickey and his student Jim Peebles who did some detailed
calculations independently predicted the existence of the microwave background radiation based
on similar arguments they didn't know about Gamoff's work or they knew about it but it
somehow didn't register and Dickey convinced two of his Princeton colleagues Wilkinson
and Roll to use one of Dickey's telescopes and modify it in a few ways to make it sensitive
to the possible detection of cosmic microwave background radiation and they were working
on finalizing the instrument the radio telescope with which they were going to find this microwave
background radiation and then it turns out that lo and behold they found out about Penzias
and Wilson's measurement meanwhile Penzias and Wilson didn't know what it was they had
measured they were befuddled and the Princeton team said you know guys this is exactly what
should be present if the universe began in a hot and dense state the big bang because
you see Penzias and Wilson didn't know about the Alfa and Gamoff paper either okay so the
Princeton physicists were scooped in a sense they they were trying to make a measurement
and Penzias and Wilson measured it first ironically without really knowing what it was that they
had measured but they were told by the Princeton group Penzias and Wilson later won the Nobel
Prize for their discovery a monumental discovery as I feel they should have they they were very
careful physicists who didn't sweep this tiny amount of noise under the rug they they paid
serious attention to it they didn't know what it was but that's okay that's what theorists
are for Alfa and Gamoff were not given the Nobel Prize Gamoff because he was already
dead Alfa feels to this day very slighted by this by this omission he probably should
have won the Nobel Prize because he did a lot of the early calculations Dickie and Peebles
and Roland Wilkinson well that's the way it goes they just got scooped and sometimes
you're working on something and someone else beats you to the punch but the discovery was
nevertheless monumental and the theoretical work done by Peebles in collaboration with
Dickie turned out to be very important and the Princeton group made some additional measurements
showing that the spectrum was a black body and the rest is history I'll tell more you
I'll tell you more about it in the next lecture
