The
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation, or CMBR, introduced in the last lecture, is of
fundamental importance in cosmology. It implies the existence of an early, hot, dense phase
for the universe, a big bang in a sense from which the universe expanded, and it has no
reasonable explanation in the competing steady state theory of the universe.
The CMBR comes from a time around 380,000 years after the birth of the universe when
the temperature had cooled enough down to around 3,000 degrees Kelvin so that electrons could
combine with atomic nuclei, mostly protons and a few helium nuclei, to form neutral atoms.
And again, this happened at around 380,000 years after creation corresponding to a red
shift of something like 1,100. This combination of electrons with atomic nuclei producing neutral
atoms is a process actually called recombination. Now, if you look at these electrons and all
that atomic nuclei, the electrons were scattering light every which way. The universe was hot
and ionized, it was opaque, and so electrons didn't go from one object to another unimpeded,
even if objects were to exist back then, you know, discrete objects. Whereas when the universe
combined to form neutral atoms, then the space became transparent to electromagnetic radiation
and that radiation was able to travel unimpeded through space. Now, this process where electrons
combine with protons and other atomic nuclei is called recombination, even though here
it was occurring for the first time. And the reason it's called that is that in the
past, physicists had many times ionized gases in their laboratories and then watched the
electrons combine with the atomic nuclei. So they called that process recombination,
but you should understand that here in the universe, at an age of 380,000 years, it's
happening for the first time. Okay, I just wanted to clarify that. I think I did that
in the previous lecture, but I want to make it extremely clear why that term is used. Now,
as I said before, this radiation coming from the Big Bang was predicted in 1948 by George
Gamoff and then the details were worked out by his graduate student Ralph Alfer. About
15 years later, in the early 1960s, Robert Dickey worked out the same thing at Princeton
and with his graduate student Jim Peebles worked out a lot of the details, but they
didn't know about Gamoff's work. And Soviet physicist Jacob Zildovich also figured it
out independently in the 1960s. So this effect was sort of rediscovered theoretically a number
of times and people didn't seem to know about Gamoff's seminal work. And then Arno Penzius
and Robert Wilson actually found the radiation without specifically searching for it. They
were studying the galactic plane and the hydrogen atoms in the plane and they weren't looking
for any afterglow of the Big Bang. They didn't even know about these theories. And the Princeton
group told them what they had found. And in 1978, Penzius and Wilson won the Nobel Prize
in Physics for their discovery. And this is really what you would call a serendipitous
discovery. It wasn't completely accidental. I mean, these people weren't just bumbling
around and this stumbled across them. Rather, they were doing very careful measurements that
led to an unanticipated result. And that's a serendipitous discovery. Accidental is more
where something just sort of hits you in the face and you weren't even very careful about
looking for anything in particular. So Penzius and Wilson really struck a gold mine and set
off a whole industry of measurements of ever greater precision to try to see whether this
radiation corresponded to a thermal black body. And indeed, in 1990, the cosmic background
explorer, Kobe, showed that the spectrum really is that of a black body. It's a perfect black
body as shown here. The data points have considerable uncertainties here at the shortest wavelengths,
but then the uncertainties become very, very small and you can hardly see the dots in relation
to the line. I mean, the dots are right on top of the line. So this almost looks like
what in physics labs we call fudged data where you draw your expected curve and then you dream
up your data points. You know, if I were to see this from a student of mine, I would say,
hey, did you cook up your data to match the theoretical predictions or did you actually
make these measurements? They really did make these measurements and it's just fantastic
how well the measurements agree with the theoretical prediction. And just after finishing yesterday's
lecture on the cosmic microwave background radiation, I learned that the Kobe team leader,
John Mather, of the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center had just been awarded half of the 2006
Nobel Prize in physics. It was for the success of the Kobe mission and in particular for the
measurement of this spectrum. Now the other half of the prize went to Kobe researcher George Smoot,
a professor of physics at Berkeley, for his team's discovery of tiny variations in the CMBR
to be discussed later in this lecture. So these are really very timely lectures.
Now it turns out that the CMBR was actually detected several times in the 1940s,
but its importance had not been recognized. And the detection was through optical observations
of cyanogen molecules, CN. If you look at the configuration of a cyanogen molecule in its
ground state, it's not rotating and it's not really vibrating either, at least not very much,
but it might vibrate. It's as though there's a spring attached to the carbon and nitrogen nuclei.
There's an excited state that is caused by absorption of this CN ground state of a microwave
background photon, and that causes the whole thing to rotate a little bit. So there's this
extra state available in principle in nature if there are photons around that could be absorbed
by the CN ground state. Now it turns out there are also excited vibrational and
electronic energy levels of the cyanogen molecule. Here they are indicated. And if there were no
microwave background radiation, then this excited level wouldn't exist. And the only kind of absorption
of photons that would be possible would be from the CN ground state to one of these excited rotation
and vibration and electronic energy levels. But that would be the only absorption line possible in
the violet part of the optical spectrum. Now with the CNB present, you actually have this extra
energy level at low energy levels and other photons can be absorbed to other, to populate
other excited vibration and electronic energy levels. So you see that you have three possible
violet absorptions instead of just one if this excited rotational state exists. And when you
look at the spectrum of a distant star or a quasar through a cloud of gas containing cyanogen
molecules, you do indeed see three absorption lines, not just one, not just the strong one,
corresponding to this first possible transition. But you see the other two weaker lines corresponding
to these other two transitions. And so that means that the excited, the rotationally excited level
of the cyanogen molecule does exist. And to exist, to exist, there had to have been
microwave photons hanging around for that molecule to have absorbed to get it to that
slightly excited level in the first place. So this shows that there are microwave photons
floating around and the radio astronomers recognize this, but they didn't recognize the
importance of these microwave photons and the fact that they were an indication that the
universe had gone through a hot phase. They thought that the microwave photons might come from
interstellar clouds of gas or whatever. Now it turns out we actually know through further
studies of the cyanogen molecule that the CNB corresponded to a higher temperature in the past
because you can look at these cyanogen clouds at high redshift, say a redshift of one, and you
find that the relative strengths of these absorption lines change. That means that the
relative populations of the various levels change. And when you work out the physics, you find out
that the microwave photons exciting or bathing the sea of cyanogen molecules at redshift one
had to have had a characteristic temperature of 5.5 degrees Kelvin, which is twice 2.75. In
other words, at a redshift of one, the temperature of the universe was one plus one or two times
higher than it is now, because the temperature is one plus the redshift, that factor higher than
2.73, the current temperature. So you can actually tell that the universe used to be hotter
through the analysis of these cyanogen molecules. It's really fantastic, fantastic work.
Now, how do we know that the microwave background photons come from very far away? How do we know
that they're not produced by some local fog or something? Well, there's an effect known as the
Synyaev-Zaldovich effect after two Soviet astronomers, and they predicted that if you were to look
toward the direction of a large cluster of galaxies containing hot x-ray emitting gas, you know,
and we see some clusters of galaxies that are really hot, you can tell because they're emitting
x-rays and stuff. Well, they predicted that the hot electrons in these clusters of galaxies
would scatter some of the microwave background photons as the photons are traveling through
the cluster and boost them up to a slightly higher energy, that is, give them a slight blue shift.
So the photons going through the cluster would be slightly blue shifted relative to
photons in the surrounding regions that don't go through a cluster. That's as long as the photons
originate behind the cluster rather than between us and the cluster. Well, astronomers have searched
for this effect and verified that it does indeed exist. The microwave background photons in the
direction of distant, rich, hot clusters of galaxies are slightly blue shifted relative to the ones
not passing through clusters of galaxies, and this means that the microwave background photons
cannot be produced by a local fog right around us. They must be coming from very, very far away.
So that's fantastic. So we really do think that they come from essentially the origin of the universe,
and that origin was everywhere. I mean, from here, from our perspective, we see photons coming from
a sphere everywhere around us, nearly 14 billion light years in radius, but somewhere else a person
would see a similar sphere centered on, centered on himself, and someone 14 billion light years away
from us would see photons coming from our part of the universe back when we were very young,
14 billion years ago, and those photons are now arriving somewhere else. So the Big Bang was
everywhere. The photons come from everywhere, but the ones we see come from a sphere centered on us,
having a radius of about 14 billion light years. Let's look at the map of the sky in more detail.
Again, I'm going to use the so-called Molvide projection, where here is a map of the earth
in this projection, where you see the whole earth in one oval shape like this, and now we're going
to look at the temperature of the microwave background radiation in more detail. So as an
analogy, let me show you the average temperature of the earth in June of 1992, where blue designates
cold temperatures and orange designates warm temperatures. But of course, for black body
radiation, it's exactly the other way around. Blue objects are those that are hotter than
red black bodies, but oh well, we will follow this convention here because everyone associates
red with warmth and blue with cool things, although that's not the way it is for black bodies.
Anyway, you can see here in a map of the earth that the desert equatorial regions are warm and
the polar regions are cool, and there's a range here of about 100 Celsius degrees over this whole
map. Well, when you make a map of the microwave sky in a similar way, you find that the radiation
is basically the same in all directions. It indicates the same temperature, 2.725 plus or
minus two one thousandths of a degree, so it's extremely uniform indeed. Now, that map I just
showed is not what's directly observed. You have to make some corrections in order to get that map,
and the biggest correction is that if you look at the map, you actually find that a whole
general region of the sky looks a bit warmer, that is blue shifted, and another region looks
a bit cooler, blue in this diagram, but it's actually red shifted, go figure, and so this is
what's actually observed, and the amount by which one whole part of the sky is hotter and another
part is cooler is a few parts in a thousand, about two parts in a thousand actually, and this is
due to the fact that our sun is moving around the Milky Way galaxy at 200 or so kilometers per
second, our Milky Way galaxy is moving around inside the local group of galaxies at a couple of
hundred kilometers per second, and our local group of galaxies is being pulled around by other
groups of galaxies like the Virgo cluster, and those motions are a couple of hundred kilometers
per second, and when you add them all together, our sun's peculiar motion, that is its motion
relative to the smooth expansion of the universe, relative to the Hubble flow, is 600 kilometers
per second, and that compared to 300,000 kilometers per second, the speed of light,
is about two parts in a thousand, and so you see these variations where we're moving toward
the photons in one region of the sky, and we're moving away from the photons in another region of
the sky, so in one region they look blue shifted or hotter, and in the opposite region they look
red shifted or cooler. When you take that effect into account and remove it, then that map I just
showed becomes uniform like this, and you have almost no variations at all, in fact on this
scale you can't see any variations at all, and that's the way things stood for quite some time,
no variations in the temperature of the microwave background at all had been observed that could
not be explained by the sun's so-called peculiar motion through the universe, and to some degree
this was surprising, because if galaxies and clusters of galaxies like this formed from the
gravitational collapse of initial density in homogeneities or variations or ripples in the
universe, then there should be temperature variations in the microwave background radiation as well,
because these slightly over dense and under dense regions affect photons in different ways,
and the photons coming out of these various, the photons coming out of these regions having
a variation in their density will have slightly different temperatures, okay? So if the universe
were as smooth as a baby's bottom or smoother, you know, really, really smooth, and it is,
it's observed that way, you might ask how, how does, how do clusters of galaxies form?
Well, it turns out you don't need very large ripples in the very beginning to get gravitational
collapse to form clusters and superclusters. The, the universe can be smoother initially
than a baby's bottom, a baby's bottom is actually kind of rough if you look at it up close, you know,
the universe can be smoother than a baby's bottom, but it, but it has to have some ripples,
otherwise if there were no variations in the density, you would not have a way of forming
gravitational collapsed objects like clusters of galaxies. So astronomers looked for the visible
signature of, of these ripples, okay? And you might say, well, why, why should there be temperature
variations at all? Okay, corresponding to density variations, there are a number of effects, and
people are quite certain of them, physicists are quite certain of these effects, and they go in
different directions. In some cases, you know, some cases produce blue shifts, other cases produce
red shifts for what looks like similar phenomena, but so it's kind of complicated. But let me,
let me explain one, one of the effects, one of the effects is that if you have an over dense region,
photons climbing out of that gravitational field, out of that gravitational well, lose some energy
and become slightly redshifted. And in an under dense region, conversely, they actually gain some
energy because they see a stronger gravitational field around them. And so in a sense, they're
gaining energy as they go out toward that gravitational field. So someone looking at
over dense and under dense regions should see slight red shifts and slight blue shifts. So
that's one effect. And other effects are that there are these compression waves in the universe,
sound waves about which I'll have a little bit more to say in the next lecture. And regions where
photons got compressed on small scales actually look hotter. All right. So here over dense regions
looked cooler. There are other physical situations where over dense regions can look hotter,
because the compression of the photons heats them more than this gravitational effect.
So it's actually all quite complex. But the upshot is, is that there had better be some small
variations in the microwave background. Otherwise, our entire existence is questionable. Well,
I mean, our existence isn't questionable, but the origin of our existence is a big puzzle,
unless there were these small fluctuations. And so for a long time, physicists and astronomers
looked for these fluctuations and found none to even more and more precise levels of measurement.
They found no variations. And some specific models of galaxy and cluster formation were ruled out
by the absence of visible fluctuations in the microwave background radiation.
But at some level, theorists said, you guys, you observers had better find them pretty soon
with the next generation of telescopes, because if your new telescopes, which are able to measure
these quantities to really great accuracy, if they don't find such variations, then the whole
theory of gravitational instability and the formation of galaxies and clusters of galaxies
would be called into question. And that would be perhaps exciting, really revolutionary.
But it would really mean that we'd have to go all the way back to step one on the drawing board
and say that gravity really doesn't work the way we thought it does. So people were getting a
little bit worried. But in 1992, there was a great breakthrough. Clumps or ripples or variations were
found in the temperature of the microwave background radiation by the COBE satellite.
And this particular set of observations was led by George Smoot, and his team led the analysis
of them, and found that the map of the microwave sky actually does have little clumps or ripples
or inhomogeneities or non-uniformities or anisotropies. These are all terms that are used for these
little ripples or fluctuations. And again, the blue ones are a bit cooler in this diagram,
and the red ones are a bit warmer. So the microwave sky actually does have ripples,
but they're tiny. They're at the level of a few parts per 100,000. So that's even smaller than
the two parts per 1,000 caused by our motion relative to the smoothly expanding universe.
This is a factor of 100 lower in amplitude. So these are these tiny variations. They correspond
to clumps in the matter distribution at early times. And the ones seen by COBE are pretty big.
In this map, you can see that they're actually a sizable fraction of the whole sky. The smallest
ones that we can see with the poor resolution of COBE were about 10 degrees across. So kind of like
your outstretched hand, because COBE didn't have a very sharp vision of the sky. I just could see
these fluctuations, but they were fuzzy looking. So the smallest ones COBE could detect were about
10 degrees in the sky. And those are the seeds from which slightly over dense and slightly
under dense regions in our universe formed. These are much bigger than even the largest super
clusters we can see right now. They're 10 or 20 times bigger than super clusters. So you might
think that that violates the isotropy that I talked about last time, where I said that the
universe beyond the super cluster stage is very uniform. Well, it is. It's really quite uniform.
These are fluctuations at a few parts per 100,000. Those are such slight variations that they do not
kill off the assumption of isotropy. They don't violate the assumption of isotropy that I had made
in a previous lecture. Indeed, the theory predicts that there had better be these little variations,
otherwise our whole existence would be not understood. So this is not a violation of the
isotropy of the universe. If you look at the sky then, you see some small variations that are the
size of, you know, 10 times the size of a super cluster. And there are some bigger variations
that are really gargantuan structures in our universe. And by today, these things have not
really collapsed into anything significant. So we don't see giant super super clusters of galaxies,
because on such large scales, these slight density variations didn't have time to collapse into
anything significant in today's universe. Only the super clusters and smaller objects have had a
chance to collapse into significant perturbations on the smooth overall structure of our universe.
But anyway, the fluctuations are there. And as I'll discuss more later, their ultimate origin
is small quantum fluctuations, small variations early, very early, in the history of the universe.
Shortly after the birth of the universe, it went through a huge growth stage. And during that growth
stage, known as inflation, these fluctuations formed, quantum fluctuations, and then they became the
seeds of clusters of galaxies and super clusters and beyond. And so we came from these quantum
fluctuations. The measurements became progressively better after Kobe. There were a number of ground
based measurements, one known as boomerang, another maxima. I particularly like boomerang because it
was a balloon with a gondola attached and they launched it from the Antarctic. And the Antarctic
air circulation currents basically took it around in a circle coming back 10 days or two weeks later
to roughly the point from which it had started. But during that two week period, they were able
to measure the microwave sky very accurately. And they did this from the Antarctic because
the water content in the atmosphere is very low there. Water tends to absorb microwave photons.
And so you want to observe microwave photons from a region of the earth that has as little water
content as possible. Anyway, boomerang and maxima made even better maps of the sky than Kobe.
And they could see structures on smaller angular scales, typically one degree here instead of 10
degrees like in Kobe. So that's a really great picture of the microwave sky. And in the year 2000,
they published their results and they said that the highest amplitude temperature fluctuations
correspond to angular sizes of about one degree. That's about twice the size of the full moon in
the sky. There are fluctuations on many other scales, but they said the most, the most prominent
fluctuations occur at a scale of around one degree. That's what those little dots are,
the most common, strongest, you know, brightest dots there are about one degree in size.
And they said that this implies that the universe is spatially flat on very large scales. And the way
they came to this conclusion was very interesting. Here's the boomerang map. You can see the actual
data with the typical fluctuations here, blue and red. If space were globally flat, you would
expect the fluctuations to have about the same appearance as they do in the real data. Whereas
if space were positively curved, the fluctuations would look bigger in angular size. And conversely,
if space were negatively curved, they would look smaller. The reason for that is that as I discussed
before, light doesn't travel along Euclidean lines in curved spaces. So you have this giant alien slug
here firing these two laser beams. And if the slug lives in flat space, the initially parallel
beams remain parallel. If the slug lives in a positively curved space, the laser beams not
only come back, but also follow paths that don't look parallel in our usual sense of the word,
the usual Euclidean sense. And in a negatively curved space, again, the laser beams look like
they follow a curved path. So suppose you had something like a meter stick, something that you
knew is a meter long, very, very far away, and you live in flat space. The ends of that meter stick
emit light, let's say, and that light reaches your eyes, and the meter stick subtends some
angle theta in the sky. If instead you live in a positively curved geometry, a spherical type
universe, those light rays follow different trajectories, they are curved, and the extrapolation
of the line of sight direction toward our eye ends up giving you a bigger angle. We discussed this
before when we talked about the apparent sizes of galaxies in a positively curved universe.
Conversely, in a negatively curved universe, these light rays come in at an angle that makes it
look like the meter stick looks smaller than in flat space. So in flat space, a meter stick
subtends a particular angle theta. In positively curved space, that angle theta is bigger,
and in negatively curved space, the angle theta is smaller. And what's actually observed is that
the distribution of these fluctuations shows that the typical ones have a size that
corresponds to what you expect in flat space, not in positively curved space or in negatively
curved space. We know quite robustly the physical size of what corresponds to like a meter stick
far, far away. It's basically the distance that sound could have traveled in the first
380,000 years of the universe. That distance is relatively independent of your specific model
for the origin of the universe, and so you know how far sound waves could have traveled. You know
how big your meter stick is independent of the details of the physical model for the origin
of the universe. So you know how big your meter stick is, and you look at how big it appears
to be, and that then tells you the overall geometry of the universe. And most recently,
a satellite known as the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, or WMAP, named after David
Wilkinson, one of the pioneers in the studies of the microwave background. Anyway, this WMAP
satellite measured the structure of the cosmic microwave background radiation better than before,
even better than Boomerang and Maxima. The data are shown here, and the three possibilities are
demonstrated, where you would expect variations of a particular size in a flat space, larger looking
variations in a positively curved space, and smaller looking variations in a negatively
curved space. And the observations correspond to what is predicted for a flat space. When you
look at these observations, that's what you see. And this is a fantastic confirmation that the universe
on large scales is basically flat. We may live in something that's overall a giant sphere or some,
you know, horses saddle or something like that, but if so, the scale over which the universe curves
is much, much larger than the distance over which we can see. So over the distances that we can see,
the universe looks flat. Just like in Kansas, the Earth's surface looks flat, but you know it's
curved. I hope you know that. But it looks flat because you're seeing only a tiny fraction of it.
So in a similar way, the parts of the universe that we can see are flat. That implies that either
the universe really is flat globally, or it's so big that we see only a tiny fraction which
locally looks flat. And this has grand implications for much of cosmology.
