I would now like to discuss the fundamental contents of our universe and specifically
the contributions to our knowledge made by studies of the cosmic microwave background
radiation.
That radiation provides so many details about the fundamental contents of our universe,
it still amazes me how much they get from these studies.
Now the CMBR I said last time tells us that the universe is flat on very large scales.
That is if you look over very, very large distances, parallel lines remain parallel,
they don't curve around or anything like that.
And that indirectly provides very strong supporting evidence for the presence of the dark energy
that is currently accelerating our universe and whose presence was first somewhat directly
seen from studies of distant type 1a supernovae.
WMAP in 2003 showed how flat the universe is, really quite flat over the distances to
which we can see.
But we already knew this to be the case back in 2000 or 2001 when the results of boomerang
maxima and other ground based missions were being published.
Specifically those missions showed that the fluctuations in the cosmic background radiation
had the angular scale expected if light travels along Euclidean straight lines.
And that then demands according to general relativity that the average density of all
the stuff of the universe divided by the critical density is equal to 1.
That is omega total where the total consists of everything that there might be in the universe
is equal to 1.
Studies of clusters of galaxies and their motion and things like that already told astronomers
that the contribution of matter and normal energy to omega is 0.3, okay?
We knew that.
So the difference between 1 and 0.3 by advanced mathematics is 0.7.
70% of the universe is something else, something other than normal matter and dark matter and
normal energy.
That's consistent with the supernova results which showed that 70% of the universe consists
of dark energy, which is a repulsive sort.
Well the microwave background radiation measurements also suggest that.
Let's go through this a little bit more carefully.
The 70% that's not matter is called omega sub lambda, or if you don't believe in cosmological
constant, omega sub x, where x is just some unknown quantity.
And it's not really that important that you understand the details of how omega is defined
in the case of omega lambda, but if you want to know, it's a ratio similar to that which
I previously defined for omega matter, namely omega lambda is lambda c squared over 3 H
naught squared.
Recall omega m was the average density rho divided by the critical density, and that
critical density was 3 H naught squared over 8 pi g.
Again it has things like the Hubble constant and stuff like that.
So that's for those who want to know the technical details.
Suffice it to say that omega lambda is sort of in the same units as omega matter, a measurement
of the contribution of the cosmological constant or whatever the dark energy is to the total
contents of the universe.
Let's look at a plot of omega lambda or omega x on the vertical axis versus omega matter
on the horizontal axis.
The supernova observations tell us that the universe exists somewhere in this yellow
shaded region of this plane.
In other words, you might have omega lambda of 0.7 and omega matter of 0.3, but the supernova
results themselves are also consistent with omega lambda of say 1.5 and omega matter of
around one or so.
That's a consistent point for the, as far as the supernova measurements are concerned.
You could be anywhere in this region, so you might say it doesn't give very good constraints.
But in combination with knowledge that omega matter is 0.3, which we get from studies of
large scale structure, we see that the intersection of omega matter 0.3 in this plane and this
yellow cigar shaped region constrains you to a much smaller area.
And then if you in addition include the constraints from the microwave background, which tell
you that the universe is somewhere in this blue shaded region, a flat universe, you see
that all three of them intersect in a region consistent most with omega lambda of 0.7,
omega matter of 0.3.
This was the concordance model that emerged by the year 2000 or 2001.
30% of the contents of the universe is normal matter, dark matter, normal energy, that kind
of stuff, and 70% is some sort of weird stuff.
And according to the supernova 1A measurements, the weird stuff is so weird that in fact it
is accelerating the current expansion of the universe.
Well what if you were a skeptic?
What if you said, well the supernova results might be wrong and maybe the CMBR results simply
indicate that there is some 70% of other stuff, but it is not repulsive, it is not accelerating
the universe.
What if you were a skeptic?
You might say maybe that extra 70% is some new form of dark matter.
Well if it's slowly moving dark matter, called cold dark matter, hot would be stuff that's
really rapidly moving around.
If it's cold dark matter then it should be in clusters of galaxies and we should have
measured it by now through gravitational lensing or the motions of clusters that they induce
on one another through gravity or whatever.
So since we only see omega matter of 0.3 associated with the clusters, this must be some sort of
stuff that's not associated with clusters that's more spread out.
And that might be hot dark matter, dark matter that moves relativistically, that is at speeds
close to but not quite at the speed of light.
Well if it were hot dark matter the problem is, is that it would wipe out structure on
small scales and in this animation that's running right now, we see the formation of
structure in the universe as time progresses, that is redshift goes from large values down
to smaller values, and you can see structure forming.
The smallest dots here are individual galaxies and they're merging to form clusters of galaxies
and then ever bigger clusters and so on.
In some cases the galaxies merge into pairs before merging into a big CD galaxy in a cluster
here, in other cases the galaxies come in sort of one by one and they're all kind of
merging in like this.
And if there were hot dark matter in great abundance in the universe, it would smear
out the formation of small scale structure on the largest scales.
That is, it would, if you get what I mean, wipe out the formation of the smallest scales
like clusters of galaxies like this in the large scale structure of the universe.
Here when we're talking about small scales, we're still talking about, you know, tens
of millions of light years and stuff, you just have to have the right frame of reference.
But anyway, hot dark matter would wipe out the formation of these filaments and clusters
of galaxies and we wouldn't see the universe the way it is if it were mostly filled with
hot dark matter.
So it's probably not hot dark matter.
Now that animation I showed, the computer simulation, was showing dark matter.
But we've learned before that luminous galaxies tend to form at the peaks of the distribution
of dark matter just as snow is seen at the peaks of mountains, even though there's a
whole underlying backbone there.
So although that computer simulation was done for dark matter alone, the visible universe
would also not appear the way it actually looks in the sky if there were a lot of hot
neutrinos, for example, zooming around and smearing out the structure.
We just wouldn't see the universe the way it is if that were the case.
So the dark extra stuff is not hot dark matter.
And we would say that according to the supernova observations, it's some entirely new phenomenon,
dark energy.
But you might say, well, is there really evidence that this extra stuff, this dark energy, exerts
a repulsive effect that stretches out space faster than one would expect had it not been
there?
Yes, there is such evidence.
Again, if you look at, say, the map of the universe provided by the WMAP satellite, shown
here in its relative orientation to the sun and the Earth, it's beyond the Earth's orbit,
we see the little fluctuations in temperature that were mapped so exquisitely by WMAP.
And we think those arose as a result of quantum fluctuations in the first blink of an eye of
the universe's existence.
And then they grew as a result of inflation that I'll talk about later, and finally, gravitationally
collapsed into galaxies and clusters of galaxies and the structures on large scales that we
see today.
So if you ask yourself if there's in addition, then, dark energy causing a further stretching
of space, will it affect the growth of galaxies and clusters of galaxies?
And indeed it does.
Here's a computer animation where you see the gravitational collapse of clusters and
superclusters in a universe that only has cold, dark matter, and you see the clusters
and superclusters forming, but the details of the formation and how they look differ
from what you would get if you, in addition to the cold, dark matter, included dark energy
of a repulsive sort.
And you can once again see the formation of structure through the gravitational collapse
of material in primordial or primeval fluctuations in density.
And although in broad terms, this structure that you see here artificially rotating just
so that you can see different perspectives.
Here resembles what we saw in the previous animation.
In detail, you can tell that the repulsive energy is forming or is allowing slightly
different structures to form.
And here's another simulation where we're now counting down in redshift, where again
you see the formation of large scale structure and the details of what you get in the end
depend on whether you did or did not include dark energy in your numerical computations.
And the fact is that those computations of the growth of large scale structure that include
repulsive dark energy in addition to gravitationally attractive dark matter end up with results
that look a lot more like the observed structure in the universe.
So if you only include cold, dark matter, you get things that look about like what we
see.
But if you, in addition, include the effects of dark energy, the resemblance of the final
results in the computer simulations to what is actually observed is greater.
And so that's why we think that there really is this dark energy and it affects the growth
of large scale structure.
There's another observational effect associated with the microwave background that suggests
that dark energy is actually stretching space at a faster and faster rate.
And that is that if you look toward clusters of galaxies and you look at the energy of the
microwave background and you remove the effects of the Sinayev-Zoldovich effect, where recall
hot gas scatters microwave background photons and makes them slightly more energetic, remove
that effect.
We know how to do that.
Then what you notice is that in the direction of clusters of galaxies, photons are slightly
more blue shifted than in the directions away from super clusters of galaxies.
The super clusters of galaxies tend to produce a slight excess blue shift of the photons.
And the way this occurs is that if you have an expanding universe that's not accelerating,
a photon falling toward a super cluster gains some energy as it falls into the gravitational
well or gravitational field of the super cluster.
So it starts out, say, green and becomes violet.
I'm exaggerating the effect a lot.
But when it climbs out of that gravitational well, the violet photon loses the same amount
of energy as it gained on its way in, and so it comes out green.
So in a universe that's expanding but does not have dark energy, that is the total omega
of the universe is equal to just what's in matter, there's no shift in microwave photon
energy.
The blue shift on the way in is equal to the red shift on the way out, and so there's
no net shift.
But if you now include a stretching effect, an extra stretching effect caused by dark
energy, then the amount of energy gained by the photon on its way in when it became blue
shifted is bigger than the amount of energy it loses on its way out, because on its way
out is a bit later in time than on its way in, and the super cluster has had a chance
to stretch more, its gravitational field becomes weaker, the depth of this well becomes shallower
in a sense, and so the photon loses less energy on its way out than it gained on its way in.
And so there's a slight net blue shift of the microwave background photons in the direction
of super clusters.
Because the super clusters are not so tightly bound the way a galaxy is that dark energy
doesn't affect them, dark energy does affect them, the super clusters are slightly expanding
due to the dark energy, and if it weren't there they wouldn't be, and we see the presence
of extra expansion of the super clusters and we attribute that to dark energy causing them
to become bigger and bigger with time.
So that's in addition then evidence that this omega x really does correspond to something
like the cosmological constant, something that is not only different from dark matter
but causes a repulsive effect, a stretching of space, which is really weird.
So by 2003 there was really a lot of evidence for this dark energy, and in particular the
WMAP map of 2003 shows you all these fluctuations shown here on a Mulvida projection.
If you look at it in more detail you see all the little hot spots and cold spots, and if
you look at the sizes of those hot spots and cold spots and you ask yourself what did they
imply for the shape of the universe, it's flat as I've said many times before, and WMAP
actually said well omega total is 1.0 plus or minus 0.02, so it really is quite flat.
WMAP also showed that omega matter is around 0.27, if you subtract 0.27 from 1 you get
0.73 for the dark energy content, and that's consistent with the supernova 1A results which
gave 0.72 for the dark energy content.
So the supernova teams by this time were feeling totally vindicated, you know, it's a great
feeling.
When I announced for our team the result in February 1998 at a meeting in Los Angeles
there was this, you know, great headline in Science Magazine, Astronomers See a Cosmic
Antigravity Force at Work, and that launched a whole bunch of headlines in other newspapers
and magazines, but the scientific community didn't really believe us very much, you know,
they thought oh, you know, these guys, maybe they got this result and it's good that two
teams got it, but it's probably wrong.
But five years later with the publication of all the microwave background measurements
and all the other measurements supporting dark energy, it had become a pretty compelling
case and so we felt pretty good about what we had done in 1998.
Now let me go back to this beautiful WMAP map of 2003 and tell you a little bit more
about how it shows us the contents or the fundamental contents of the universe.
Here it is over the whole sky in the Mulvida projection.
If we look at it as though it were a sphere around us rotating, here's what it would
look like, so here now is what I was talking about before, that we see the microwave background
radiation coming from all directions around us.
We seem to be in the middle of a sphere, although any other observer anywhere else in the universe
would see broadly speaking the same thing.
Anyway, you can see the sphere and we're just letting it rotate around us here to get a
better perspective and you can tell that there are small hotspots and cold spots and
there are larger hotspots and cold spots and there are very large hotspots and cold spots.
If you plot a graph of the square of the temperature deviations of those hotspots and cold spots
on the vertical axis versus the scale over which you are looking from say a few tenths
of a degree all the way up to 90 degrees and remember one degree is about the size of two
full moons put next to each other, then you can see that on certain scales the temperature
fluctuations have a higher amplitude than on other scales and here at one degree in fact
you have the peak of the distribution, those are the biggest fluctuations.
This is called the power spectrum of the temperature fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background
and for technical reasons you actually measure the square of the temperature fluctuations
and these are measured in microkelvins squared but if you take the square root of a thousand
you get 30 or something like that so these are fluctuations of 30 millionths of a degree
or three one hundred thousandths of a degree on top of this three degree fundamental temperature
of the universe. They are measuring fluctuations of a few hundred thousandths of a degree and
there is the spectrum of fluctuations. What produces these ripples, these variations,
what are they? We think that they are acoustic waves or
sound waves set up early in the universe by quantum fluctuations in density, effectively
ripples in the fabric of space time set up by quantum fluctuations which then cause compression
and rarefaction waves in this plasma of the early universe. Remember before recombination
photons were trapped in the plasma, they could not travel freely through it, they kept on
being scattered by electrons so there was a fluid in the universe consisting of photons,
dark matter, normal matter mixed together and they were all kind of sloshing around because
there were these sound waves set up by initial fluctuations early in the history of the universe.
Compressions and rarefactions. Now the over dense regions had gravity pulling in but
photon pressure or radiation pressure was pushing out so there is an attractive force
and there is a restoring force, that is the kind of thing you need to keep a sound wave
going alright and photons gained energy in these compressed regions but then they tried
to push out ok. So this fluid of the universe was sort of
sloshing around there were all these sound waves zooming around and you know to discuss
them in detail and all that we can learn from them really would take a couple of lectures
I'm just giving you a very short summary of studies of the microwave background radiation
here but they really provide a lot of evidence because the mixture of normal matter and dark
matter and photons in this early fluid the details of the mixture end up dictating the
detailed spectrum that finally comes out the spectrum of these sound waves or acoustic
oscillations and indeed you can even sort of listen to the early universe if you turn
these acoustic oscillations into something that's audible to the human ear and you can
hear the universe sort of humming around early in its history and in particular there
are certain waves that were more present than others just as in a wind instrument you have
a fundamental where there's a wave of compression right where you're blowing into the wind
instrument and at the very end there's a rarefaction and in between the gas is at intermediate
densities and then there's the first overtone where you get you know a compression a rarefaction
and then another compression then there's the second overtone and so on in a similar
way these sound waves moving through the early universe had had regions of maximum compression
and maximum rarefaction and the maximum compression region is called the fundamental it is the
region where material was falling in getting compressed and it reached a maximum state
of compression right at 380,000 years right when the universe went through recombination
okay and the first overtone had a compression and then a full rarefaction and at that moment
when it reaches most extended state that's when recombination occurred and that's when
the photons could start traveling freely through the universe they weren't trapped in this
plasma anymore okay and then the second overtone is a region which had a compression a rarefaction
and then another full compression and at that moment recombination occurred and the photons
were able to travel travel freely and so no more deviations to their structure were made
after that so so if you look at the spectrum it tells you the amplitude of the compressions
here's the first compression here's the first compression plus one rarefaction there's one
compression one rarefaction and then a second compression and so on the relative strengths
of all these fluctuations tell you about the details of the early universe and what kind
of stuff was in it and it's marvelous how much you can learn from a detailed study of
the spectrum of the microwave background temperature fluctuations okay and in 2003 the WMAP team
reported on their first results in 2006 they had an update on their studies and that update
pretty much confirmed what they had said in 2003 but the numbers were now more refined
more accurate and you know probably more more reliable and they come up and they came up
for example with a Hubble constant of 73 plus or minus 3 kilometers per second per megaparsec
they came up with an age of the universe of 13.7 plus or minus 0.2 billion years that's
a really small uncertainty it's so small that actually you have to watch out a little bit
they're assuming certain things when they come up with that number and their and that uncertainty
if you make other assumptions the uncertainty grows a little bit but but hey 14 billion
years is the age of the universe and we know that pretty pretty solidly now and the spectrum
of the fluctuations tells you that omega matter is 0.25 and omega of the dark energy
is 0.75 those are updated numbers now slightly refined over what we used to think they were
and moreover the matter component the omega matter is only 0.04 if you look at the stuff
that's normal neutrons and protons and what we call normal matter 0.04 of that 0.25 is
the normal stuff 0.21 must be some sort of exotic dark matter weird stuff not normal protons
and neutrons maybe wimps weekly interacting massive particles that's the that's the main
contender so here's a pie chart of the types of matter in the universe and energy dark
energy is 75% of all the stuff of the universe cold dark matter probably wimps or something
like that is 21% and normal atoms most of which don't glow constitute only 4% of the
stuff of the universe now of those 4% omega matter of 0.005 that is half a percent of
the 4% is stuff that glows stars and nebulae and things like that glows optically okay
3% omega matter 0.03 is the stuff that we used to think of dark matter but but it's
been found recently to glow at x-ray wavelengths at millions of degrees or something like that
I think I mentioned that before half a percent might be in machos but not that much because
not many machos were found in the halo of our galaxy maybe a third of a percent is in
the form of neutrinos there's not much hot dark matter that is dark matter moving around
very quickly so so only 4% of the universe is normal atoms and and only half a percent
is the stuff that we can actually see and then the rest of the universe the 96% is dark
energy and some sort of dark matter that's weird it's not protons and neutrons so 75%
is dark energy 21% is weird stuff 4% are the normal atoms of which we are made we are in
a sense the debris of the universe the afterthought of creation that's not to say we're not important
okay we are but we're not the dominant stuff of the universe by a long shot and indeed even
most of the atoms in the universe in the normal matter don't glow at optical wavelengths the
way the sun and nebulae glow they glow if anything at x-ray wavelengths well what is the dark
matter that most of the universe consists of if you remove the dark energy we would like
to know what it is both the cold dark matter that's not normal atoms and the hot dark matter
and the wimps and all that so at Berkeley around 15 years ago we set up a center called the
center for particle astrophysics where we wanted to study both the machos and the wimps and we
designed a t-shirt for the center of particle astrophysics that looked like this it had a spiral
galaxy the whirlpool galaxy and then some sort of weird particles coming out and our our motto was
if it's not dark it doesn't matter right so we were only interested in the dark matter not the
luminous stuff who cares about the stuff that glows let let other astronomers look at that I
mean I care about the stuff that glows okay but I also care about the dark stuff and in particular
they wanted to find the machos and they set up these experiments to look toward the Magellanic
clouds and they didn't find very many machos that was a great success of the project but it came up
with an unanticipated result there aren't that many machos and they also wanted to look for
wimps weekly interacting massive particles now there are many experiments in laboratories set
up to look for wimps they're all hard to find but to give you a flavor of what's being done
Bernard Satellay the leader of the Center for particle astrophysics had several experiments
looking for wimps cold dark matter in the form of wimps and his labs consisted of two underground
caverns nearly half a mile between beneath the earth's surface to shield them from cosmic rays
and other radiation that might interfere with their sensitive devices and they had these these
detectors that they called zip detectors and they're made out of silicon and germanium the
kind of stuff that you make transistors or solar cells out of and these zip detectors were sort of
hockey puck shaped little units like this that were stored in an apparatus that looks like this see
the hexagons went into those little holes there and the whole thing was basically placed in a
refrigerator like this keeping it at a temperature two one hundredths of a degree above absolute
zero that's amazingly cold okay that's one good refrigerator and the idea is is that these little
zip detectors will occasionally have a wimp interact with them the wimp hits an atomic nucleus sets
vibrations in this little detector that are detected by thin films of tungsten metal that are
just barely superconducting the extra energy given to the tungsten atoms by the vibration that was
set up by the wimp interacting with the detector converts the superconducting tungsten into just
a normal conductor the tungsten is just barely a superconductor and at that with that extra
energy it changes its resistivity its resistance okay and you can measure that transition from
a superconductor to a normal conductor and that then would be an indication or a possible
indication of a wimp so how do you know you've got a wimp well a charged particle interacting
with the detector would also dislodge an electron and that electron can be measured by a metal
grid on one side of the detector so you can tell when charged particles hit versus neutral
particles and wimps shouldn't dislodge electrons because they don't have an electromagnetic
interaction so that's how you discriminate against the charged particles there may be
neutrons as well that cause an interaction but you get rid of those by shielding the whole
device in a bunch of old lead lead from an old ballast of a ship that whose radioisotopes have
had a chance to decay away so there's no contamination and plus the whole thing is deep
underground so in the end you can figure out which ones are the wimps and it's amazing that of all
the experiments running in the world not a single one of them has ever definitively detected a
wimp so here's something like 20% of the matter energy content of the universe we think it's
wimps produced by the Big Bang but we've never discovered them we've never actually seen them
directly that's pretty disconcerting it's also disconcerting that 75% of the universe's energy
is dark energy and we don't know what it is there's an awful lot left to be done in the
world of astrophysics and physics before we truly understand the universe
