The evidence for dark energy, or some other effect that is currently accelerating the
expansion of the universe, is compelling.
Though it was first shown through studies of high redshift type 1a supernovae, there
is now other evidence from other types of studies, primarily associated with the cosmic
microwave background radiation that provide fairly strong supporting evidence.
So we think something weird is going on with the universe.
Maybe dark energy, maybe some other effect, we're not sure.
So I have this t-shirt, it says dark energy, get it, dark in RG, and the accelerating universe,
the accelerating universe.
My wife came up with that, pretty good, huh?
And indeed, the license plate of my car is dark in RG, dark energy, get it, all right,
we like it.
You could just say dark energy, may the force be with you to paraphrase the remarks of many
villains in Star Wars, in particular Darth Vader of course, and the Emperor.
Back to the serious stuff.
Dark energy is shaking the foundations of theoretical physics.
Some people think that the nature of the dark energy is the number one unsolved problem
in theoretical physics.
And this lecture and the next one are going to be pretty intense, okay?
I'm going to talk about possible physical mechanisms explaining the dark energy, what
it is physically at the microscopic level.
Don't worry if the details are overwhelming, okay?
Some of this stuff is fairly abstract and obscure.
Try to get the general idea of what I'm saying, much of it I'm sure will change in the future
anyway because there are hundreds, if not thousands of physicists worrying about what
this stuff is, and they keep on coming up with new models anyway, so what they think
right now is not going to be probably what they think five or ten years from now.
The important point to take away initially, however, is that dark energy is not the same
thing as dark matter.
These are regrettable terms.
You might think that, oh, given E equals MC squared, which you may have learned on your
mother's knee, maybe dark energy is the same thing or a different kind of dark matter.
That's not the case.
Dark matter pulls, it has a gravitationally attractive effect.
Dark energy, whatever it is, pushes, it stretches space more and more quickly.
Some people call it vacuum energy or funny energy.
There's a headline that came out when cosmologists in 1998 convened to discuss the supernova
observations.
Cosmologists ponder the missing energy of the universe.
Well, it's not missing, it's there.
We know that it has an effect.
But this view graph from one of the talks said funny energy in the universe.
See that funny energy in the universe.
Theoretical physicists are very smart, but they sometimes can't spell.
Or maybe that's just a typo or a raito, if that's what you would call it.
Anyway, the simplest example is the cosmological constant.
But there are many other candidates, only some of which are shown on that view graph.
Let's start by considering the general theory of relativity.
In general relativity, there's a counterintuitive effect, and that is that normal outward pushing
pressure actually adds to the gravitational attraction of a body.
So for example, on earth here we have the mass of the earth, which gravitationally attracts
me.
But also there's the pressure of the earth, the outward push of the earth.
That actually warps space and time around it as well, and causes the local gravity to
be a little bit stronger than it would have been had there been no pressure.
So if I put myself on a scale like this, especially near a neutron star where the effect is actually
significant.
And if I take the pressure into account, I weigh a little bit more than if I don't take
the pressure into account.
And this actually limits the stability of neutron stars.
At a certain mass they become unstable, because in a sense the gravitational force pulling
them in is stronger than it would have been had you ignored the outward pressure.
On the earth the effect is utterly negligible.
But these two sources of gravity, matter and energy density, rho, okay Greek lower case
rho, and pressure P both contribute to the gravitational field of an object.
So you have the normal energy and matter rho, and outward pressure P, positive P both contribute
to attractive gravity.
So in the expansion of the universe, if you consider the possible sources of deceleration
for this expansion, you have not just the galaxies pulling on each other due to their
matter and their energy, their normal energy, there's the possibility of something with
the pressure also contributing to the deceleration of the universe.
And in fact in general relativity the rate of change of the expansion is proportional
to the negative of the quantity rho C squared plus 3P, that is the normal matter and energy
density multiplied by the speed of light squared plus three times the pressure of whatever
substance you're considering.
And in most cases the energy density and the pressure are both positive, so they add together
to form a positive number, the negative of a positive is a negative, and the rate of
change of the expansion is negative, i.e. the expansion rate is slowing down with time.
That's for normal matter and normal energy and normal pressure.
But suppose we now consider something with negative pressure, P less than zero.
And let's suppose we specifically consider pressure more negative, that is less than
negative one-third of the energy density or the normal matter density times the speed
of light squared.
Then if P is more negative than negative one-third rho C squared, then the quantity rho C squared
plus 3P is negative, a negative of a negative is a positive, and that means the rate of
change of expansion is increasing, i.e. the universe is accelerating with time, if you
look at that equation.
Well we think that dark energy is some sort of a substance like this.
It has a positive energy density rho, so it's like normal matter and normal energy in that
sense, but it has a negative pressure P, and that negative pressure when multiplied by
3 more than compensates for the positive energy density, and this then causes the universe
to accelerate.
Now negative pressure is weird stuff, okay?
What is negative pressure?
Well normal outward pressure of the earth pushing on me, for example, keeping me from
falling to the center of the earth, that's fairly intuitive, we can think about that
on a daily basis.
Negative pressure is like the inverse of that.
If I stretch a rubber band, it's pulling in.
It's not pushing out on me the way the earth is, okay?
It's pulling in, so that's kind of a negative pressure.
So in general relativity, a negative pressure is associated not with extra gravity, but
with sort of an anti-gravity effect, an effect opposite to that of gravity.
But the analogy of negative pressure in the rubber band stops there.
The rubber band when you stretch it doesn't cause the universe to accelerate, okay?
But the stuff of the cosmos may well cause it to accelerate.
And if the universe is filled with this negative pressure substance causing it to accelerate,
this is reminiscent of something I'll discuss a little bit later in this course, right near
the very end of the course, and that is the first few moments after the birth of the universe.
An exponential growth phase called inflation, where the universe grew to a truly gargantuan
size in a very minute amount of time as a result of being driven apart by some sort
of a dark energy having a negative pressure of this kind.
So it just went whoosh and became truly gargantuan in a very short amount of time, like a balloon
being blown up instantly from nearly zero size to arbitrarily large.
So that's the general idea according to general relativity.
Now what could this dark energy be?
What is the substance that has this negative pressure?
One idea is that the dark energy may result from a non-perfect cancellation of what's
called quantum fluctuations, fluctuations in the vacuum where you have virtual particles
literally created out of nothing due to quantum physics.
And you'll recall that I already discussed this to some degree when I considered the
evaporation of black holes in lecture 64.
We considered Werner Heisenberg, who came up with one of the fundamental ideas of quantum
physics, the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which in one form states that the uncertainty
in the energy of any physical process that you measure, that you observe, multiplied
by the uncertainty or the length of time over which you make the observation, is greater
than Planck's constant, a very small number divided by 2 pi.
So any real observation is confined or constrained by this equation, delta E, delta T is greater
than or equal to Planck's constant H over 2 pi.
But you can have virtual particles forming out of nothing if the amount of energy that
forms multiplied by the time over which it forms is smaller than Planck's constant divided
by 2 pi.
These are called virtual particles.
And this is sort of like a temporary quantum violation of the classical law of the conservation
of energy.
Or you can think that maybe the energy was borrowed from the vacuum and left a little
negative energy whole.
That would mean that the positive energy fluctuations exactly cancel the negative energy fluctuations,
leaving no net energy, a very attractive hypothesis that many physicists liked.
So here are these virtual particles spontaneously forming out of nothing, living for a short
time, and then annihilating each other, electrons and positrons, protons and antiprotons, neutrinos
and anti-neutrinos, quarks and anti-quarks.
This is all going on everywhere as we speak, not just in a vacuum, but in the air of this
room, in the very structure of the atoms themselves, inside the atoms, this is actually happening.
And although the particles themselves are virtual, you can't isolate any pair of them
and say, oh, there it is, you know, Fred and Jean, they were a pair of virtual particles,
you know, let's go and study them.
You can't do that because they're virtual.
They don't last long enough to be noticed individually.
But they can, paradoxically you might think, have an effect on the properties of matter.
For example, in the whole theory of quantum electrodynamics developed by Richard Feynman,
Julian Schwinger and Sin Itorodotomonaga, for which they won the Nobel Prize jointly
in 1965, the Nobel Prize in Physics.
They said that these quantum fluctuations really are occurring and they affect the structure
of atoms.
And Feynman was probably the most colorful and well-known spokesperson for this whole
field of quantum electrodynamics.
He was much less formal than some of his other fellow physicists who developed much of the
mathematical tools for quantum electrodynamics.
Feynman did know the math, but he also had a very intuitive feel for how the universe
works.
Indeed, of the people I've known, of the physicists I've known, he's among the top,
if not the top, in terms of having a truly intuitive feel for how the universe works.
I was a student of his in two graduate classes at Caltech and I tried to soak in as much
of his knowledge as I could, and especially to soak in his intuitive way of thinking about
the world, okay?
And it's funny, there's one student, Jeff Richmond and I, who like to ask questions
in these classes, and he very much liked these questions.
He encouraged questions, but most of the other students in the class were afraid of asking
a question and appearing dumb in front of the great Feynman, and perhaps more importantly
appearing dumb in front of their peers.
But Feynman pleaded for questions, and I asked a lot of questions and he liked me, I didn't
care whether other people thought I was dumb, and you know what, I'll tell you a secret.
When you have a question, more likely than not, half of the other people in the room
have the same question, or if they thought about it a little bit more, would realize
they don't understand it either, and should be asking the very same question.
So ask questions, okay, be sure to ask questions.
I did, and as a result, Feynman invited Jeff and myself to some private lunches where we
together, the three of us, discussed interpretations of quantum physics and other fascinating topics.
So I cherished the time that I spent back then soaking in the insights of this great
physicist.
Well, he and others came up with this theory of quantum electrodynamics, which basically
says that the interaction between two particles is mediated by virtual particles, in particular
virtual photons, in the case of electromagnetic interactions.
If you draw time along the vertical axis and space along the horizontal axis, two electrons
interact or feel each other by exchanging a virtual photon, or many virtual photons.
And this is known as a Feynman diagram.
And this is the very simplest kind, there are many much more complicated kinds, but
by considering such diagrams and writing down the mathematics associated with such diagrams,
you can figure out the electromagnetic forces between protons and electrons, or electrons
in an atom, in a multi-electron atom, and things like that.
And there's this very interesting observation that was made by Willis Lam in 1947.
He found that the energy levels of the electrons in the hydrogen atom are not exactly where
you would expect them to be, based on normal classical physics.
They're almost the right energy levels, but you look at these electronic energy levels
in the hydrogen atom, and out to something like the seventh decimal place, the numbers
match theoretical predictions, but beyond that there's a slight mismatch, which is
now known as the Lamb shift.
And quantum electrodynamics explains the Lamb shift.
It basically says that unless you include the effect of these virtual photons and stuff,
you won't get quite the right prediction for the expected energy levels of the hydrogen
atom or any other atom, frankly.
And there are many effects that contribute to this slight difference, but the main one
is that virtual photons actually interact with the electron and change its effective
mass.
And so that changes its energy levels because the mass, its inertia is different from what
you thought it was by some tiny amount due entirely to these quantum fluctuations.
Now Lamb won the Nobel Prize in physics in 1955 for his discovery of this slight change
in the energy levels that you can explain through quantum electrodynamics, and it wasn't
explained until a number of years later.
So let's go back now to these quantum fluctuations, and we're mindful that we really do think
that they're real and that they have an effect on the universe, even though they're virtual
and that no single one can be isolated or studied.
So many physicists had simply assumed that there are just as many negative energy fluctuations
as there are positive energy ones.
So as I said before, you can think of a positive energy fluctuation as borrowing energy from
zero from the vacuum, leaving a little pit, a little hole of negative energy, and so the
positive energy exactly cancels the negative energy, and in that sense the virtual particles
do not even manifest themselves as a violation of the law of conservation of energy because
for every positive one there's a negative one, and the net effect is energy equals zero.
That's what many physicists assumed for a long time, even though they didn't have a
very good mechanism for making these negative energy holes.
They just sort of said, let it be, we're trying to figure out how it might be, but we're not
sure how it might be.
You know, there's no real theory that explains it very well, but that's the way it might
be.
Well, suppose instead of perfect cancellation of the positive energy fluctuations in negative
energy ones, suppose you had a slight excess of positive energy ones over negative, okay?
Then you'd have a slight excess of energy, and that kind of energy due to these quantum
fluctuations interestingly has the desired property of a negative pressure.
Indeed, the pressure of such a net energy is equal to the negative of its energy density
rho multiplied by the speed of light squared, so the effect of this stuff on the expansion
of the universe would be if you put rho C squared minus 3 rho C squared into this equation,
you'd get a negative of a negative 2 rho C squared, which is positive 2 rho C squared,
which is greater than zero, and the expansion of the universe accelerates rather than decelerates.
Because remember, the rate of change of expansion is proportional to the negative of rho C squared
plus 3p, okay?
In this case, that whole quantity is a positive number and the universe accelerates.
Wow, pretty groovy stuff, okay?
Pretty heavy going.
Well, you might say, what's the experimental evidence that virtual particles can actually
change or alter the energy of the vacuum and the pressure of the vacuum?
Maybe virtual particles change the energy levels of hydrogen atoms, but why should they change
the overall energy or pressure of the vacuum?
There is, in fact, strong experimental evidence that this is the case, and it's known as the
Casimir effect, named after Hendrik Casimir, who predicted it in 1948, and it was experimentally
confirmed about a decade later.
If you take two highly conducting thin, grounded metal plates, okay, so they have no free charges
on them because they're grounded, they're electrically neutral, and they're in a vacuum,
and they're thin and nearly massless so you can forget about gravitational effects, and
you set them up like this, remarkably enough, they move toward each other, they attract
one another.
Now, why should they do that?
They're electrically neutral, there's no gravity, there's nothing else going on, they're far
enough apart from each other that the nuclear forces, the strong and weak nuclear forces
that I'll discuss later, don't come into play, so what's going on?
Well, it's the virtual particles, folks.
Here are these two grounded plates, and virtual particles form all over the place, outside
the plates and within the plates.
But recall from lecture 20 that particles also have a wave property associated with every
particle is a wave, a quantum wave, a probability distribution, and it turns out that outside
the plates, the wavelengths of those waves can be anything, they're unconstrained, any
value whatsoever, short, long, don't care.
Within the plates, you can have an infinite number of waves, but they are constrained
to have a node at either end, that is they fluctuate a lot in the middle here, say, but
they're not fluctuating, they're not flapping around at the ends.
These are what's called standing waves, you get them in a wind instrument, for example
with two closed ends, if you have a tube with two closed ends, the molecules can vibrate
back and forth a lot in the middle of the tube, but they can't vibrate back and forth
at the ends of the tube because the ends block them if it's a closed tube.
So you get a standing wave, and you can have half of a full wavelength, or one full wavelength,
or three halves wavelengths, or two wavelengths.
You can have these multiples as shown here, where the wavelength is 2L, where the L is
the length of the tube, or in this case the separation between the two plates, divided
by N, where N is an integer, 1, 2, 3, and so on.
So in between the plates, you get these standing waves, like in a wind instrument, and they're
set up by the fact that because these plates are highly conducting, electric charges would
be set up at the place where a wave is oscillating around if it were oscillating, and the electric
charges exactly cancel that oscillation.
So in the end, you have no oscillation of the electric field where the plate is because
electric currents would get set up in this highly conducting plate that would cancel
out any oscillation.
That's the microphysics of why these boundary conditions occur.
So you might say, okay, well, you still have an infinite number of waves in between the
plates, and you have an infinite number outside the plates, so the pressure pushing out and
the pressure pushing in should be the same, and the plates shouldn't move toward each
other.
Well, your intuition is wrong.
There's an infinite number of waves between the plates, but that infinity is a smaller
infinity than the one outside the plates.
Let me illustrate.
Infinity is a weird thing, okay?
We discussed this before when considering the expansion of an infinite universe.
I said that even if it's infinite, it can still expand by becoming less dense, and I
said that, well, that's sort of like the counting numbers where you have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so
on, and then you consider only the odd ones, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and then maybe every 10th one,
1, 11, 21, 31, and so on.
Those are all countable infinities, but they become progressively less dense, okay, and
that's how the universe expands in a sense.
Mathematically, you can think of it that way.
Or you can think of the rational numbers, another countable infinity, and recall that
I had set up the numbers in this grid, 1 over 1, 2 over 1, 3 over 1, and so on, then
1, 1, 2 halves, 3 halves, and so on, 1, 3rd, 2, 3rds, and so on, and I said that I can
count systematically all of these numbers without missing a single one ever.
I might count some of them more than once, that's okay, but I won't miss any.
That's the important part, and the way to do that is to start up here.
That's the first one.
Here's the second one.
There's the third one.
There's the fourth one.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and so on.
So in other words, dense though the rational numbers are, the infinity that they compose
is the same size as the countable infinity of the counting numbers.
So those two infinities are the same size.
They're just as many rational numbers as there are counting numbers, even though to
me it still looks like there are more of them, right?
We've got an infinite number of rows and an infinite number of columns.
Seems to me that infinity times infinity should be a bigger infinity, but it's not.
Those are all countable infinities, but there are uncountable infinities as well.
An uncountable infinity is one that cannot be put into one-to-one correspondence with
the counting numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and so on.
It's a bigger set of numbers, can't be expressed in one-to-one correspondence with the counting
set of numbers the way the rational numbers can, for example.
Now one such set is the irrational numbers, pi and e and things like that, spread of pi,
the irrational numbers.
And for simplicity, I'm gonna consider only the irrational numbers between 0 and 1.
So that's a restricted subset of the irrational numbers.
Let's suppose we can list all of the numbers in this interval.
We assume that we can list all the numbers.
And so the first number might be 0.25794 and so on.
The second number in my list might be 0.7409961, and I'm just gonna assume that they're countable.
In other words, I can make a list that's infinitely long that has every single irrational
number between 0 and 1 in it.
The table that we have looks something like this.
The first digit is in the first row in the first column, so it's digit a sub one one.
In the first row and second column you have digit a sub one two, first row third column
a sub one three and so on.
The third row and fourth column digit is a sub three four down here.
Okay, so each of these digits can be associated with something between 0 and 9.
Now let's write a number, 0.b1b2b3b4 with the restriction that the b's can be anything
you want except that b sub i is not equal to aii.
So b1 can be any number between 0 and 9 except the value of a11, b2 can be any number other
than the value of a22 and so on.
So let me write down such a number, 0.6239473.
The first digit, a six, differs from the first digit of my first number, a two.
The second digit, a two, differs from the second digit of my second number, a four.
The third digit, a three, differs from the third digit of my third number, a seven.
Those digits could have been anything as long as they differ from the digits in the corresponding
position in this list of numbers.
I claim that number and many like it is not in the list of all numbers that I wrote down,
yet I assume that every single irrational number was expressible and countable in a table
like this.
If I found one or a bunch that are not in that table, that means that that infinity
is bigger than the counting numbers.
The irrational numbers constitute a bigger infinity than the counting numbers.
Wow, that's a weird thought, okay?
So in a similar way, the number of states, the number of standing waves between the plates,
the Casimir plates, that's a countable infinity, one, two, three, four, five and so on, because
a lot of the waves are missing, can't fit them in.
But outside the boundaries of the plates, any waves are possible, including those that
in a sense correspond to the irrational numbers, irrational wavelengths, okay?
So there are more of them outside the plates than between the plates.
They exert a greater push inward than the push outward of the waves between the plates,
and the net effect is pushing the plates in, okay?
Well something like that is what the cosmological constant or the dark energy might be.
It might be an incomplete cancellation of the positive and negative quantum fluctuations
where you're subtracting one infinity from another, but one of them is bigger than the
other, and so you get an incomplete cancellation.
A positive total energy remains.
That positive vacuum energy has the property of having a negative pressure, and that negative
pressure causes the universe to expand at an accelerating rate.
All lengths double in a given time interval, one centimeter turns into two, then each
of those two turns into four, then the four turns into eight and so on.
The growth becomes exponential if something like this is dominating the energy of the
universe.
Now the universe is not growing at an exponential rate yet because there's still considerable
amounts of dark matter resisting the exponential growth of the universe.
Remember the dark matter and the normal matter have an omega, a contribution of about a quarter,
0.25, and the dark energy is about three quarters, 0.75.
So the dark energy dominates over the attractive dark matter, but the dark energy isn't the
only game in town.
There's some resistance to the tendency for space to expand.
And so right now the universe is accelerating, but not at an exponential rate.
It's not yet exponentiating, but as it gets bigger and bigger, the dark matter particles
will get more and more spread out from one another because in a sense the box is expanding,
the size of the universe is getting bigger, and there's a finite number of dark matter
particles in the box.
But as the universe expands, the amount of dark energy increases because it's a property
of space.
Every cubic centimeter has these vacuum fluctuations.
As the universe grows, there are more and more cubic centimeters, they dominate over
the dark matter more and more, and eventually the universe's expansion exponentiates, doubles
for every small unit of time, a runaway universe, which if this process continues, has no end.
