Last time I discussed how the dark energy that appears to be accelerating the expansion
rate of the universe may be due to quantum fluctuations in the vacuum of space.
Little tiny pairs of virtual particles and antiparticles that flip into and out of existence
simply because of the uncertainty principle.
If they weren't doing that, we would know the energy of each point in space at all times
and that's simply forbidden by the laws of quantum physics and so these virtual particles
come in and out to, come into existence and out of existence and create this energy which
if there's a net positive amount of it has a negative pressure that accelerates the
stretching of space.
I mean now that is really weird stuff.
The positive energy of these quantum fluctuations, if the quantum fluctuations of a positive
sort outbalance the negative fluctuations, those fluctuations have this pressure, this
negative pressure which in general relativity is like an anti-gravity, it causes an actual
repulsion of space, space gets bigger and stretches.
That's the idea at least of the quantum fluctuation theory for the expansion of the universe at
an accelerated rate.
Now these fluctuations being a property of space grow in total number as space grows.
The more space gets bigger, the more of these quantum fluctuations there are.
They are a property of the vacuum and so it actually sounds like you're adding energy
to the universe because as the universe's volume gets bigger and bigger, there are more and
more of these quantum fluctuations and if the positive ones outweigh the negative ones
and there's a net energy per unit volume being gained, then as there's more and more volume
it looks like the energy of the universe is increasing but it turns out that as the universe
expands, no additional energy is being introduced by these quantum fluctuations because their
positive energy is exactly balanced by a negative gravitational energy.
Now let me explain what I mean.
If I drop an apple from rest like this, it's kinetic energy, energy of motion initially
is zero and I can define its gravitational energy to be zero, it's just some arbitrary
constant.
If I drop it, the apple picks up kinetic energy, energy of motion but I'm not creating energy
out of nothing, it actually picks up energy of motion at the expense of an ever-growing
negative gravitational energy as it gets closer and closer to the center of the earth.
So initially it has zero units of kinetic energy and zero units of this gravitational
potential energy, then it picks up one, two, three, four, five units of kinetic energy but
also negative one, two, three, four, five units of gravitational energy.
So in fact the sum of the two energies is zero, you are not changing the energy of the
system in a similar way.
A universe that's growing due to the cosmological constant, due to these quantum fluctuations
is not increasing in energy, okay, despite the fact that it seems like it might be.
All right, well this is an interesting hypothesis but there are two major problems with it.
The first is that this cosmological constant that we measure from observations of Type
1A supernovae and also the cosmic microwave background radiation is very small.
This sub lambda is 0.75.
Now recall that omega lambda is just lambda c squared over 3h naught squared.
You don't have to worry about that, it's just a way of defining the energy density associated
with this weird stuff in units that are similar to those used for omega matter, which is the
average density of the universe divided by the critical density.
So when you do a simple calculation, which physicists call a back of the envelope calculation,
and I've gotten right here, a back of the envelope calculation for what omega lambda
should be, if not infinite, then at least it should be as big as around 10 to the 120th
power.
10 to the 120th power is 1 with 120 zeros after it.
That's 20 orders of magnitude bigger than a Google, which is 10 to the 100th power,
spelled G-O-O-G-O-L, not G-O-O-G-L-E like the company.
Anyway, it's a huge number, and we measure omega lambda to be only 0.75.
That's the biggest error ever in theoretical physics, right?
It's 120 orders of magnitude off.
Now you can bring that number down to maybe 10 to the 50th power if you play with things
a little bit, but that's still a huge discrepancy.
10 to the 50th power versus 0.75, holy cow.
Never has there been such a huge error in theoretical physics.
The worst prediction ever.
And this disagreement between the prediction of omega lambda and what actually exists in
reality was known long before the Type 1A supernova measurements, in that we know just
based on our existence that omega lambda can't be that big if it were, the universe would
have expanded so quickly early on that no galaxies would have formed, no stars would
have formed, and we wouldn't have formed either.
So not even knowing that it's 0.75, just knowing that it's not 10 or 100 or 1,000 already puts
the observed universe at disagreement with the theoretical predictions.
So for many decades, physicists had simply assumed that some as yet unknown principle
that will emerge in the correct theory of elementary particles almost magically yields
omega lambda of exactly 0.
In other words, there's some principle, super-duper symmetry or something, that makes a perfect
cancellation between the positive energy quantum fluctuations and the negative energy quantum
fluctuations, giving you precisely 0 for the net energy.
Now they had no mechanism for doing this in detail, but they just assumed that this must
be what's going on, otherwise the observed value would be so large that we wouldn't
be here to observe it.
So when we astronomers announced that the value is actually more like 0.75, the problem
just seemed completely intractable.
This was in 1998.
We said, oh, it's not 0, it's 0.75 or 0.7 or whatever we said at the time.
And some of the theoretical physicists said, well, that's ludicrous.
The number can't be close to zero, but not precisely zero, because that would require
a perfect but not quite perfect cancellation of all these quantum fields, of all these fluctuations.
A cancellation that's perfect to one part in 10 to the 120th power or something.
And they had absolutely no mechanism for achieving that, so they said it can't be.
And indeed, one very eminent theoretical physicist said that you guys are wasting telescope time.
The universe cannot possibly be behaving in such a manner.
It cannot be that omega lambda is a number that's slightly bigger than zero, but not
zero.
And I said, well, look, this is going to be an observationally settled question.
Either the universe is accelerating or it's not.
Maybe we've made a mistake.
Maybe we'll learn something else that's interesting and subtle about the universe.
But I'm not going to just believe some theorist who says that I'm wasting telescope time just
because they think they know how the universe works.
I mean, look at the history of physics.
We've often thought we know how the universe works and we were wrong, right?
So let's go and do some more observations, was my philosophy and that of my observational
colleagues.
The second big problem was, why are omega lambda and omega matter roughly equal right
now?
Now, omega lambda is around 0.75, omega matter is around 0.25, the ratio is around three.
So why do I say they're roughly equal?
Well, three is close to one, right?
It could have been a ratio of a million or a quadrillion or one, one billionth or whatever.
It could have been any ratio under the sun.
And yet it's a ratio of energy densities that's remarkably close to unity.
And it's especially interesting because if you look at the history of omega matter and
omega lambda, they both should be changing with time a lot.
And we are right at the crossover point or near it where they are roughly equal.
So let's look at the fractional energy density along the vertical axis versus time in billions
of years.
Here we are right now.
The vacuum omega lambda dominates omega matter by about a factor of three or two and a half,
something like that.
And yet in the past, omega matter was much bigger than omega lambda.
And in the future, omega lambda will be bigger than omega matter by large factors.
These densities evolve with time.
So when you look at the whole past history and future of the universe, at most times
the densities will differ by a lot, by a large ratio.
So the fact that they're at a ratio close to unity right now is a little bit surprising.
It suggests some sort of a fine tuning.
Something makes them be that way.
And similarly, something makes omega lambda a very small yet non-zero number right now.
There's got to be some theoretical foundation that produces this.
And quantum fluctuations give no real insight to that.
So theorists were seeking a more natural solution to the dark energy problem, something that
would first of all result in a small value for omega lambda but not zero.
And let's call it omega x now, because it's not strictly speaking the cosmological constant
in these new theories I'm about to discuss in this lecture.
So call it omega x is 0.75.
That's a small number.
And we seek theories that force it to be that way, maybe for a longer interval of time.
So then it's not so strange that we happen to be living at a time when the two densities
are roughly equal, because suppose they're roughly equal for rather long periods of time
for some physical reason, then it's not surprising we live at one of those times.
Well, the most extensively investigated alternative to quantum fluctuations is a set of theories
generically called quintessence, sort of like after Aristotle's celestial fifth element,
the material of the heavens.
Now he called it the ether, but the medieval Latin translation was quintessence.
And that was in addition to the normal four elements, earth, air, fire, and water, which
together are associated with four qualities, hot, dry, wet, and cold.
And this kind of a chart that Aristotle based on the ideas of the Greek philosopher and
pedigrees of Akragas had been in existence for something like 1,000 years.
For 1,000 years people thought that these were the elements of the universe, and that's
the way it is.
And of course now we know that there's the periodic table of the elements, and there
are quarks, and electrons, and neutrinos, so things have become much more complicated
since then.
But modern quintessence is named after this Aristotelian fifth essence, and it's like
an extra, a new energy field.
And it happens to be repulsive, like the quantum fluctuations, but it's not strictly speaking
the quantum fluctuations.
And it can be thought of as a latent heat of space associated with an unbroken or a
recently broken symmetry.
Now he might say, whoa, hold on, whoa, this is really heavy stuff.
What am I talking about, you know, latent heat associated with some unbroken symmetry
or something?
Well, let me define my terms.
By symmetry, I think you all know that something that's symmetric looks the same from a number
of dimensions, from a number of directions.
And a spherical droplet of water, in a sense, has the most perfect symmetry, because a perfectly
spherical droplet of water looks the same from all directions.
Doesn't matter which angle you're looking at it from, so it's perfectly symmetric.
Usually you think of snowflakes as being more symmetric the way the term is commonly used.
But here we use the term in a different way in that snowflakes are indeed symmetric, they
have hexagonal symmetry.
But if you look at a snowflake like this one from the right, it looks different than
if you were to look at it exactly from the top on this screen or from the side or something
like that.
So a snowflake, this one or that one there, has certain symmetries associated with it,
in this case, hexagonal symmetries, but its appearance does depend on the direction from
what you're looking at it.
And so it's less symmetric in that sense than a sphere of water, a droplet of water.
So a droplet of water has the most perfect symmetry, it's more symmetric than an ice
crystal.
Now, what do I mean by latent heat?
Well, in going from water to ice, both at a temperature of zero degrees Celsius, there's
a certain energy, a latent heat, that must be released.
Both the water and the ice might be at zero degrees Celsius, but the water clearly has
more energy within it, and that's what's causing the molecules to jiggle back and forth and
remain in the liquid state.
In the crystalline state, there's less energy, and so the molecules can assemble in a more
stationary way in a crystal.
So when you look at a bunch of ice, and you ask yourself, what do you need to do to water
to get it to turn into ice?
You have to remove a whole bunch of energy, and that's what your freezer does, it removes
the extra energy of water, this latent heat, which you have to remove in order to turn
water into ice.
Now sometimes, if you're careful, you can cool water below the freezing temperature
of zero degrees Celsius, but it won't freeze.
That's super-cooled water.
It has extra energy despite its zero-degree temperature, and that extra energy is what
keeps the molecules from assembling themselves into a crystalline structure, okay?
So that's the idea.
There's this extra-latent heat, and if you were to super-cool a substance, it would have
this extra energy, and in the quintessence models, that extra energy associated with
the, in a sense, the molecular motion in my example, but it's really just associated
with this super-cooled state of unbroken symmetry, that extra energy is what accelerates the
universe.
Let me give you a little example that might help illustrate this.
Here I have a super-cooled solution.
It's called easy heat.
Push the button, feel the heat.
Anyway, you can get this in camping stores, funny saying, I guess, but anyway, you get
this stuff, and at room temperature, it's normal temperature, and it's a liquid, but
it would like to be a solid, okay?
It would like to be a solid at room temperature.
It's just that this thing was heated in a pot of boiling water until it turned liquid,
and then one cooled it slowly and carefully, and it remained a liquid, but its preferred
state would be a solid.
So I claim there's a bunch of latent heat trapped in this solution of sodium acetate
that keeps it in the liquid form.
If I perturb the system a little bit, and there's a little metal disc conveniently placed
in this package that allows you to perturb it by bending the disc and inputting some
energy into the system and getting it to actually transform into its preferred state, then you
will see a crystal form out of this solution.
It'll solidify, and in the process, it'll release a tremendous amount of heat, and so
you can use this on camping trips to keep yourself warm.
So let me now go and perturb the system, and you'll see that, in fact, if I put a little
bit of energy into the system, the solution is turning opaque.
It's turning white into a crystal like this.
You see it growing there?
It's turning opaque as it is changing phase from the liquid state to the solid state,
and ooh, it's releasing heat.
It's releasing energy.
Oh, it's getting kind of hot.
It's like a hot potato.
Now initially, it's kind of squishy.
It's still partially liquid, but as that heat goes out into the room or into my body, it'll
gradually solidify into a very hard rock, a crystal.
Let's do that again.
Here again is the super-cooled solution.
This is analogous to an unbroken symmetry in the universe associated with something.
I'll tell you what in a few minutes.
It's got extra energy associated with it.
That extra energy, in the case of the universe, might accelerate the expansion.
That's where the analogy stops.
This extra energy here doesn't accelerate this package of easy heat solution.
It doesn't take over the world.
It just sits there, so it's not a perfect analogy.
But now I will perturb the system and look at that stuff grow.
It's turning into a solid and releasing a lot of heat, the heat that was associated
with the liquid state of the sodium acetate and water molecules in this package.
It definitely gets warm.
That's the idea.
There's a phase transition, and during that phase transition, the extra or latent heat
gets released.
Now let us plot some graphs that illustrate what I've been saying.
At a high temperature, the lowest energy state is a state of unbroken symmetry.
In this plot, I have energy versus some symmetry parameter, which I will call phi, the lower
case Greek letter phi.
At high temperatures, at a temperature above some critical temperature, you've got a curve
like this with the ball at the bottom of the hill.
This ball represents the state, the physical state of the system, and it's a state of unbroken
symmetry, of perfect symmetry, like water, a sphere or a droplet of water.
If I were to try to break the symmetry, in other words, go to a positive or negative
value of phi, that would require energy, and the ball doesn't like to roll up hill, so
it doesn't do that.
It stays at the bottom of the hill in the valley there, in the perfect state of unbroken symmetry.
That's at high temperatures.
That's like this heat solution if you put it into a pot of boiling water.
It achieves a ball at the bottom of this valley here, and that's its preferred state.
But as you cool the system below some critical temperature, the character of the energy versus
symmetry parameter curve changes.
And although you may have a local minimum in the curve at a state of unbroken symmetry,
the global minimum, the state of lowest energy, in this case zero energy, occurs in a broken
symmetry phase.
So that's what I meant when I said that sodium acetate solution actually wants to be a crystal
at low temperature, at room temperature.
It likes to be in this crystalline state of broken symmetry.
So it likes to be at the bottom of the hill here in this value, where phi is not equal
to zero.
In other words, symmetry has been broken.
It likes to do that.
But if left undisturbed, it could be at the top of this hill in this little dimple.
That is, the ball could remain in this dimple.
If you cool the substance slowly, don't perturb it much, then it can stay in the liquid state,
though it would prefer to be in a state of broken symmetry.
The extra energy associated with the unbroken symmetry is this quantity here.
That's the stuff that kept the solution liquid at room temperature.
And we're claiming that that's the stuff in quintessence models that will accelerate
the expansion of the universe.
That's the idea.
So the system can remain symmetric if it has the right shape, if it's got like a little
dimple there.
All right?
That's symmetric until perturbed.
But if you perturb the system, the ball can pop out of that dimple, roll down the slope,
breaking the symmetry, and releasing the light and heat.
That's like the liquid starting to crystallize, okay?
Now different substances have different curves.
It's harder to super cool water than it is to super cool this sodium acetate easy heat
solution because water's energy versus symmetry breaking parameter curve, though not exactly
like this, I can schematically show you that it doesn't have much of a dimple at the top.
So in fact, any little perturbation on that ball, if you tweak it ever so slightly, it
will start rolling down the hill toward its preferred state of broken symmetry at low temperatures,
okay?
Now in some cases, the curve is very flat.
So you have, for example, a case like this where the ball might start rolling down the
hill, but initially it's a very gentle hill.
So as symmetry is being broken, as phi is getting bigger and bigger and bigger, for a long time
that state of broken symmetry is still dominated by a very large latent heat.
And if that latent energy has the property that it stretches space, there's a large amount
of time over which this breaking of symmetry process can stretch the universe into a very,
very large entity.
So that's the idea, okay?
Now there are literally hundreds of models of this quintessence, many of which are just
variations on this theme.
And there are other models which deviate from this general theme, but it gets really kind
of complicated.
Okay, so I'm not going to go into that, and moreover, I don't really understand that material
very well.
Look, I know which end of the telescope to look through, but I don't understand a lot
of these theories very well.
Listen to these lectures a couple of times, get the gist of what I'm trying to say.
This is heavy-duty stuff, okay?
This is really heavy-duty stuff.
Now I will have more to say about this later when I consider the birth and early expansion
history of the universe, because this early expansion history is reminiscent of the accelerated
expansion we are now seeing, and they may be explained in a similar way.
But in newspapers, you'll read about other theories like K-essence and spin-tessence
and n equals eight super-gravities and all sorts of bizarre-sounding things, and these
are just, you know, fanciful ideas by theoretical physicists, most of which will end up being
wrong.
Hopefully one of them will end up being right, and the way we can tell which one may be is
right, or more correctly, the way we can rule out ones that are wrong, because you can never
know what the truth is, right?
Truth is for philosophers and theologians.
Physicists and astronomers are trying to always get a better working model of the universe
and eliminate wrong theories, okay?
So the way to do that is to look in more detail at the expansion history of the universe as
probed by the redshifts and distances of type 1a supernovae, see how the expansion rate
has changed with time, and eliminate those hypotheses that quantitatively disagree with
the observations, that's the idea.
So let's go back to our graph of the distance between two galaxies, this scale factor we
can call it, versus time.
These different expansion histories will lead to different predictions for the graph of
observed peak brightness of a supernova versus redshift, the Hubble diagram, okay?
Or distance versus redshift, because you can convert the peak brightness into a distance
using the inverse square law.
So by observing distance supernovae, hundreds or even thousands of them, we can look back
in time and see which of these curves the universe is following.
And there are a number of groups trying to do this now with supernovae.
I'm a member of a group called essence, like quintessence, but also Sn little s is like
supernova and then the plural, you know, supernovas, instead of using the Latin plural supernovae,
you could say supernovas, and so it's sns, which is essence, and we're just trying to
be clever.
And it stands for equation of state, supernovae trace cosmic expansion, well that's a bit
of a stretch.
Equation of state, then super, we use the e, we use the n, supernovae, we forget about
the t in trace, and then we use the c, and we use the e.
So it's a bit of a stretch of an acronym, but it sounds good.
And what we're trying to do is measure what we call the equation of state parameter of
the universe.
Now that's called w, w is basically the pressure of this weird stuff, whatever it is, divided
by its energy density, that is, it's mass or energy times the speed of light squared
divided by the volume, the density.
And the density goes as volume to the minus one plus w power.
So for example, for normal non-relativistic matter, w is zero, the density goes as the
inverse of the volume.
And that's simple to understand, if you have a thousand particles in a box and the box expands
and there's still a thousand particles, the density is going in proportion to the reciprocal
of the volume, right?
Bigger volume, less dense.
Turns out w is one-third for photons because the photons stretch with the universe.
W is minus one for the cosmological constant.
And in that case, one plus minus one is zero, negative zero is still zero, anything to the
zero power is one, so the density remains constant if the dark energy is the cosmological
constant and that's what I said before, it's a property of space itself, doesn't matter
how much space you have, the density remains constant.
For quintessence models, w is not equal to negative one.
So we would like to measure w and first and foremost just see whether it equals negative
one or is clearly inconsistent with negative one.
We can determine the value of w by measuring lots of supernovae at various high red shifts
and our initial results and those of other teams are that w is consistent with negative
one.
There's no clear deviation of w from negative one according to the observations right now.
And there's also no clear evidence that w is changing with time.
It might change with time.
In generic quintessence models, it does change with time, all right?
So it appears as though based on the data we now have that this vacuum energy, the quantum
fluctuations provide, if anything, at least as good an explanation for the dark energy
as any of the quintessence models.
There may be quintessence models, and indeed there are, that happen to have a value of
w close to negative one.
So the fact that we measure it to be negative one doesn't prove that the dark energy consists
of vacuum fluctuations.
It might be a sort of quintessence that yields nearly the same answer.
But at least we can already rule out forms of quintessence that have values of w very
different from negative one.
Interestingly, there are certain types of quintessence models that give values of w more
negative than negative one.
This is a very weird situation because it means that the vacuum density, instead of remaining
constant, increases with time, gets stronger and stronger.
And that means that eventually the vacuum energy density will become so dominant that,
although right now clusters of galaxies are perfectly well bound by gravity and they don't
care about the dark energy density because there's not enough of it to expand them, gravity
dominates.
But if the negative energy density gets stronger later on, then eventually it'll dominate
the gravity within clusters.
Clusters of galaxies will go flying apart.
Later on, it'll dominate the gravity in galaxies.
Galaxies of stars will go flying apart.
Then it'll dominate the gravity in planetary systems like the solar system.
So the solar system will go flying apart.
Then it'll start dominating the gravity within people and will fall apart and then the very
atoms of which we exist, which have empty space, will start being dominated by the vacuum
energy or the quintessence and the atoms themselves of which we are now made will get ripped apart.
This is called the big rip.
It's an incredible expansion of space that keeps on accelerating and not only does it
accelerate over large volumes, but it starts accelerating over very small volumes as well,
going all the way down to atoms.
Now don't be alarmed.
The data don't seem to support the big rip hypothesis right now, although we don't know
for sure.
But in any case, even if the rip happens, it won't happen for a very, very long time.
This is a very slow process.
It's also possible that the character of the dark energy or the quintessence will change
in the future and instead of being gravitationally repulsive and stretching space as it does
right now, it'll maybe someday become gravitationally attractive.
And if omega of the total amount of stuff in the universe slightly exceeds one, then
in fact after some amount of expansion, the universe will stop and recollapse, like in
the simple Friedman equations that were worked out in the 1920s.
And André Linde at Stanford University in particular has several possible models for
the dark energy that have this property that someday the dark energy becomes gravitationally
attractive and the universe will recollapse in on itself.
But if this happens, it won't happen for at least 30 or 40 billion years, so you can
still go out to eat next Tuesday or whatever.
Anyway, these various explanations of dark energy are rather abstract, difficult to comprehend,
still incomplete.
Our understanding is still so limited that we don't even know whether the universe will
expand forever or someday recollapse.
Right now it looks like it'll expand forever, but we still need to do a lot of research
to make sure that that's the case.
