Dark energy is really weird.
The material I covered in the past two lectures is pretty complex, abstract, hard to understand,
had a hard to get an intuitive feel for, view the lectures a few times, try to get an idea
of what I'm talking about.
I actually don't even understand these theories very well myself, and many of them are quite
speculative and certainly not complete or final, so you can expect many changes in the
future, just get some general idea of where the state of the field is right now, which
is what I'm trying to describe.
Now to get a much more complete understanding of the dark energy, we will probably require
something like a theory of everything, a unified theory of the fundamental forces and particles
and fields of physics.
That's what we mean by a theory of everything or a toe.
Toes attempt to unify all known forces, particles, fields, things like that.
Now they do not claim to immediately explain all physical phenomena.
You have to do a lot of work to get from the fundamental equations to an explanation of
the huge diversity of intrinsically complex but beautiful, the consequences of all these
perhaps fundamentally simple equations or laws.
The equations and laws themselves may be simple, but the complex manifestations of that simplicity
are what the universe is all about.
Having a theory of everything does not mean that it'll be the end of science, as some
people have claimed.
I think it's actually the signal of the beginning of a much more complete understanding of the
physical world when we can go from the fundamental equations after much work to an explanation
of all the wonderful variety in the universe.
Anyway, the point here is that dark energy presents an opportunity to test these theories
of everything.
Any such theory that is categorically inconsistent with the presence of dark energy or can't
explain even some of its basic observed properties must be wrong and hence can be eliminated.
There could be huge numbers of these theories of everything and if there's no way to tell
which one has some chance of being correct, then we're nowhere, but dark energy provides
a chance to eliminate some of these theories because dark energy may be one of the few
remaining results in today's low energy universe that stems from interactions of fundamental
particles and fields that are left over from the time of the Big Bang, perhaps, you know.
Protons and electrons and all that are, of course, fundamental particles, but we don't
see it any way right now of using all those particles to discriminate among the many candidate
theories of everything that are in existence right now.
Dark energy might provide such a discriminant and that's the whole process of science.
You have to falsify certain hypotheses and get rid of them, figure out which ones remain
and have some chance of explaining the physical world.
Moreover, some of the potential causes of dark energy that I was discussing might be directly
related to important concepts in these theories of everything.
For example, the symmetry breaking that I discussed may actually be the breaking of the symmetry
in some grand unified force or a force that explains everything.
So let's spend this lecture in the next one discussing theories of everything and how
we might formulate one and test for its consequences.
We want to fundamentally unify the known forces in nature.
Now, traditionally it is said that there are four fundamental forces in nature.
The first and to us most obvious is that there's gravity.
We're held to the earth, the earth is held in its orbit in the solar system, there are
galaxies of stars and so on.
Gravity acts on all matter and all energy and it has an infinite range but as we will
see it's very, very weak but it acts on everything.
The next most familiar one is electromagnetism, that's actually what holds your atoms together
in your body as well as the atoms themselves together and it's a very strong force.
It's roughly 39 orders of magnitude stronger than gravity.
That is the electromagnetic force between a proton and an electron in a hydrogen atom
is 10 to the 39 times bigger than the force of gravity between a proton and an electron.
So the force of gravity is inconsequential to atoms themselves.
Electromagnetism however only acts on charged particles.
Most of us, all of us are generally electrically neutral so we don't attract each other electromagnetically
in general although we do exhibit a small gravitational interaction with one another.
Then there's the strong nuclear force.
Now this is what binds the protons and neutrons together in the nucleus of an atom and it's
100 times stronger than electromagnetism.
In fact it turns out that the strong nuclear force is the residue or the residual effect
of something we consider more fundamental and stronger called the color force and that's
what binds quarks together in protons and neutrons.
Each of them consists of three quarks and they're bound together by this color force
but the residual of the color force is what binds the protons and neutrons together in
a nucleus and that's called the strong nuclear force.
It has a very short range just the radius of a proton or so, 10 to the minus 13 centimeters.
And finally most unfamiliar of all to most people is the weak nuclear force.
It's about a millionth of the strength of the electromagnetic force although its strength
is not as well quantified.
And it has a very short range, perhaps a thousand or ten thousand times smaller even
than the range of the strong nuclear force.
And it governs certain types of radioactive decay.
For example a neutron sitting around on a lab table typically decays into a proton, an
electron and an anti-neutrino after about 15 minutes.
Neutrons sitting alone are unstable particles.
They stabilize inside the nucleus of an atom where there are lots of friends hanging around.
Their neutrons and other protons interacting with neutrons stabilize them so they don't
just decay away into other particles.
So the idea of unification theories is to try to see whether we can understand these
different forces as being actually different manifestations of some greater more unified
more fundamental force.
But great strides have been made in the past few decades in unifying electromagnetism and
the weak nuclear force into something now called the electroweak force.
And this is a major success of what's called the standard model of particle physics.
You bang together protons at a hundred to a thousand times the proton's rest energy
in huge particle accelerators and you find that in fact the electromagnetic force and
the weak nuclear force become essentially indistinguishable from one another.
That is in high energy interactions you can't tell the difference between electromagnetism
and the weak nuclear force.
It's only in today's low energy world where protons don't generally go crashing into
each other at a hundred or a thousand times their rest energy.
It's only at these low energies that the forces seem different.
And here's an analogy.
I have here a quarter and it's got heads and tails.
Two different aspects of the same coin.
In today's low energy world you can tell the difference between heads and tails.
But if I spin the quarter like that it's a symmetric unified entity.
You can't tell that there's a heads or a tail.
It's just spinning.
It's symmetric.
All right.
Let me do it faster.
Higher energy works better.
Very high energy makes the quarter fall off the table.
So in a high energy universe it's spinning, it's symmetric.
You can't tell the difference between the heads and the tails.
Indeed it's neither one.
But as it loses energy it lands either heads or tails and usually it'd be fifty-fifty for
a whole bunch of quarters.
But the point is that at low energies you get two different manifestations of an underlying
symmetric unified object, the spinning quarter.
Now there's a historical precedent to this.
In 1865 James Clark Maxwell modified a little bit, but in a fundamental way, one of the
four known equations of electricity and magnetism.
And playing around with them he actually unified them.
He mathematically combined them and showed that electricity and magnetism are fundamentally
related.
They are not two separate forces.
They are the electromagnetic force.
And depending on how you look at it you see either electricity dominating or magnetism
dominating, but it's really the electromagnetic force.
So this is so important that I have this equation, that I have this t-shirt as I've shown before.
And God said, and there's Maxwell's equations as they are collectively called, and then
there was light.
I mean it was a magnificent unification of these equations, explaining then a very
important phenomenon.
What is light?
Okay, well it's these equations, it's these forces, it's these fields working together
in a unified way, and that's just beautiful.
That's what physicists want to do.
They want fewer equations from which everything can be derived if you know how to use and
apply those equations in the appropriate way.
So some decades ago electricity and magnetism on the one hand and the weak nuclear force
on the other hand got combined into this electroweak force.
And for this work Stephen Weinberg, Abdus Salam, and Sheldon Glashow won the Nobel Prize
in Physics in 1979.
Weinberg is perhaps the best known among the public because he's written some popular
books on the subject, the first three minutes and other such books.
So if you look at this unification of forces, the electroweak unification has already been
achieved.
The weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force are basically one and the same thing,
but in today's low energy world they look different.
The next desired unification would be the so-called grand unified theories which would
unite the strong nuclear force and the electroweak force into some sort of a grand unified force.
Such a force and such a theory is suspected to be present in nature, but has not yet been
proven.
And as in the case of the spinning quarter, you probably need to go to very high energies
in this case to actually see the strong nuclear force and the electroweak force unified together
like the spinning quarter where they look the same.
Observational tests of this unification may be proton decay.
The grand unified theories that exist right now all generically say that the proton like
the neutron is a fundamentally unstable particle, but though the neutron decays after typically
15 minutes, the proton might not decay for 10 to the 40th power years, and it's really
a long lived particle.
The experimental lower limit is a few times 10 to the 33 years.
The universe is only 10 to the 10 years old, so not many protons have decayed.
That's the grand unified force.
But then what we'd really like is to unify that with the gravitational force and have
some super unified force, the force of the theory of everything.
Some sort of a supersymmetry could bring it all together and maybe make it even greater
than the grand unified force, which by the way already has certain symmetries and supersymmetries
associated with it, and the grand unified force already makes the prediction that not only
are protons unstable, but that there are other weird supersymmetric partners to particles
called selectrons for the electrons and snotrinos for the neutrinos and fotinos are the partners
of the photons.
Well, that's the grand unified force, but maybe there's an even grander force, the theory
of everything force that brings it all together and has additional predictions like the predictions
of the grand unified force, something that could be observable.
Not that selectrons or snotrinos or fotinos have ever been observed, not that proton decay
has ever been observed, but at least those are testable predictions of the grand unified
force.
And similarly, we would like to have testable predictions of some super unified force, the
theory of everything force.
Paraphrasing JRR Tolkien, what we would like is one force to rule them all, one force to
find them, one force to bring them all, and in the darkness bind them.
We want a t-shirt that has one equation on it, okay, from which everything else can
be derived.
That's the goal.
Physicists love to have t-shirts with equations on them and the fewer, the better, really.
That makes the universe more beautiful.
We like to say that we don't want to memorize lots of things.
We want to know a few things and then derive everything else from that knowledge, okay?
Well there are two major problems.
There are two huge obstacles on the path to the discovery of the super unified force.
The first is, why is gravity so weak?
I mean, this is a real enigma.
Gravity is incredibly weak.
I already told you that, you know, between a proton and an electron in a hydrogen atom,
for example, the gravitational force is 10 to the 39 times weaker than the electric force.
That's hard to even grasp.
Let me give you an analogy, all right?
Here's a little tiny magnet, just a tiny little magnet, okay?
And here's a big screw, it's a pretty heavy screw.
This little tiny magnet holds up the screw, like that, and wins the tug of war with the
gravitational force of the earth trying to pull the screw down.
This tiny magnet is stronger than the entire earth trying to pull on this screw.
You can get one of these out of a speaker or something, you know, and it's stronger,
it's more effective than the earth in holding up this screw.
That gives you some idea of this factor, 10 to the 39 that I just mentioned.
So gravity is very weak.
If you wanted the gravitational force between a proton and an electron in an atom to be
comparable to the electric force, protons and electrons would have to have 10 to the
19th power times the mass of a proton.
They'd have to be enormously massive for the gravity to be comparable to the electromagnetic
forces.
And this mass, 10 to the 19th times the known rest mass of a proton is known as the Planck
mass.
And there's no clear way of unifying gravity with the other forces of nature when typical
particle masses are like the electron or the proton or the neutron, and yet we would require
particle masses of 10 to the 19th to approach any sort of grand unification.
We're so far from grand unification, or the theory of everything I should say, that we're
not, you know, it's not even funny in a sense.
Another major problem is that the two great pillars of modern physics, general relativity
and quantum mechanics, though they work beautifully well in their appropriate realms, they are
fundamentally, mutually incompatible with one another.
They are in violent disagreement in certain circumstances.
Quantum mechanics is incredibly successful at describing the properties of matter on
very small scales when you don't have much mass there, molecules, atoms, subatomic particles,
the Casimir effect, those kinds of things, quantum fluctuations.
General relativity is incredibly successful at describing the universe over large scales
where large amounts of mass, like clusters of galaxies, are involved over giant volumes.
We can understand the gravitational bending of light, for example, due to a warping of
space-time.
But there is no theory for large amounts of mass in a small volume, okay?
There's no quantum theory of gravity where you have to bring the two together.
And you might say, well, so what?
When do we ever get a large amount of mass in a small volume?
Never happens, you might say.
Ah, not true.
The singularity in a black hole, classically at least, has a large amount of matter in
a very, very small volume, so you'd better have a quantum theory of gravity if you want
to understand the singularity in the black hole.
Another example, possibly the birth of the universe.
If the universe has a non-zero total mass and energy, and it might not, it might be
zero, I'll tell you about that later.
It's related to the falling apple that I discussed in my previous lecture, but anyway, suppose
it has a bunch of matter, initially all that stuff was compressed together in such a small
volume that you really need to consider both general relativity and quantum mechanics.
So at the time of the Big Bang, you probably need both theories.
But even without the Big Bang and black holes and singularities, the incompatibility is
severely troubling because it is pervasive.
It actually affects all of empty space.
Empty space is messed up by this incompatibility, this violence between relativity and quantum
physics.
Quantum physics predicts that there should be tiny little particles zipping into and
out of the universe, just virtual particles coming in and out of existence all the time.
And that's, again, according to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which we've discussed
a number of times.
Over smaller and smaller distances, which can be probed over progressively shorter time
scales, the uncertainty in the energy progressively increases because the uncertainty in the energy
multiplied by the uncertainty in the time is always greater than Planck's constant over
2 pi.
So if you're probing tiny spatial scales, which can be probed over very short intervals
of time, delta t is small, delta e must be large, the uncertainty in the energy must
be large, and therefore the energy must be fluctuating at all times in a chaotic, unpredictable
way.
Because if it were not so, you would be able to determine the energy of every point in
space and know what it is, and that is not allowed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Even if you're not looking, it's not allowed because nature can't know the energy of every
point in space.
The uncertainty principle says that even nature doesn't know.
For example, nature doesn't know where the electron is in an atom unless someone makes
a measurement.
It's a fundamentally uncertain world, and that's just the way it is.
Now this energy changes quickly and chaotically over time through the creation of virtual
pairs of particles, like these that I've shown many times.
At every point in space, these things are occurring all the time, and if you probe space on smaller
and smaller scales, the theory predicts that larger and larger amounts of energy are being
chaotically created and annihilated.
And according to general relativity, any energy is also associated with space-time curvature.
So the space-time curvature is extreme and chaotically fluctuating, and general relativity
can't deal with that.
General relativity only deals with smooth variations, both spatially and temporarily.
It does not deal with chaotic, giant fluctuations in the quantum foam, as it's sometimes called.
Space is teeming with activity, roiling with energy, like a chaotic, continually changing
relentless foam.
And if you extrapolate this known physical process down to the smallest imaginable scales,
point-like particles, point-like distances, in fact you get infinite energy fluctuations,
hence infinite curvature in space-time, and all hell breaks loose basically.
You just can't deal with it.
Neither theory can deal with it, really.
So if you look at a sheet of graph paper from afar, it looks smooth.
You just see the grid lines.
They all look nice and smooth.
And you zoom in to one of the squares, and you see a whole bunch of smaller grid lines,
and they look smooth.
And then you zoom in to one of those squares, and that looks smooth.
Keep on zooming in again, and again, and again.
And you will see small ripples, which get progressively bigger as you zoom closer and
closer in, examining the structure of space on progressively smaller distances.
It's got all these little pits and valleys and peaks, and they're all changing with time
in a chaotic way.
And this is happening at all scales, but it especially is happening on these tiniest scales
because that's where the energy fluctuations are the biggest.
Now, we effectively reach the unknown at scales of order 10 to the minus 33 centimeters,
the Planck length, because at that scale, the associated particle energies of all these
things being created out of nothing are something like 10 to the 19th times the mass of a proton,
that is the so-called Planck mass.
And at that mass, gravity becomes just as important as the other forces, because you
are now creating particles having the requisite mass, 10 to the 19th proton masses.
So gravity becomes just as important as everything else, instead of incredibly weak as it is
in today's universe.
But when gravity is as important as everything else, you have to have a complete theory not
only of everything else, but of gravity as well, working with all these other theories,
and that's what the unified theory of everything is all about, and we don't have that yet.
Well, you might say, OK, the only real problem is if you go down to zero space, point-like
particles, no dimension, no volume, then the fluctuations become infinite.
You might say it's not a problem if the fluctuations aren't quite infinite, or is it?
Well, there is a problem, and we encountered it when we studied the dark energy.
If you calculate the amount of energy associated with quantum fluctuations even on the Planck
length and Planck mass scales, you come up with an energy for the vacuum of 10 to the
120th power, that is, omega of this x, of this dark energy, is 10 to the 120th power
if you go all the way down to Planck scales.
But we know that omega x is not 10 to the 120th power, it's 0.75.
So there's a real problem there, you know?
If you allow the fluctuations to occur at the Planck scale, not even zero scale, but
at the Planck scale, you still have then a predicted energy of the vacuum, 120 orders
of magnitude bigger than what we see.
It's that back of the envelope calculation again, that's all we're talking about.
On the other hand, if you say that, oh, well, the fluctuations are borrowing energy from
the vacuum and leaving a precisely negative hole exactly equal to the size of the positive
energy fluctuation, but negative, so that they add up to exactly zero, then you would
say the energy of the vacuum should be precisely zero, and once again, there's a problem with
the measured vacuum energy, the dark energy that's accelerating the universe.
Its omega value is 0.75, it's not zero.
So you either have an infinite number or 10 to the 120th power or something like that,
or you have zero and neither of them agrees with measurements.
So what are we going to do?
How are we going to rescue this?
Well, we can at least maybe avoid the infinite energy and infinite curvature fluctuations
by appealing to a theory called string theory, which says that you can't talk about infinitesimally
small points or even regions of space.
Space itself and the particles that occupy space have a minimum size of order of the
Planck length, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, and anything smaller is forbidden, it doesn't
make sense to talk about it.
It's like letters in a word, you can't talk about what's part of a letter, it's just
the letter.
So these particles then are thought to be little packages of energy in a loop, a string,
a little one-dimensional in the simplest models, string of energy, I mean, people describe
it all in terms of really hairy mathematics, and then we try to give words and symbols
and pictures to try to explain what the mathematics is saying, but the mathematics is the fundamental
thing.
The English or Swahili or French words may not be adequate to describe what the mathematics
is saying, and these pictures that we draw are not really adequate either.
But nevertheless, we'll draw the pictures, all right?
So the idea is that all particles are like a little string, a little loop, and different
kinds of particles are different modes of vibration of this little package of energy
called a string.
So you might have a mode that looks like this at the left here, and then another one where
it's oscillating in some other way, and then some other type of oscillation, these are
all different kinds of particles.
Just as when you have a violin string, and you pluck it in different ways, you can get
different notes depending on how the string is vibrating.
You have the fundamental, the first overtone, the second overtone.
These sound different even though you're just plucking a string in each case.
Well here, you have packets of energy in a little one-dimensional loop, either closed
or maybe they're open-ended, just a little wiggling around piece of string type thing,
and they're wiggling around on the plonk scale in what turns out to be other dimensions.
Stay tuned to the next lecture, and that's what particles are.
And if you can't go to scales below 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, if the strings smear
out the structure of space on smaller scales, then at least you get rid of the infinite
fluctuations in energy and spacetime curvature.
You get rid of the infinities.
You're still left with the problem that the vacuum energy should be 10 to the 120th power
because everything is fluctuating at the plonk mass scale, and the vacuum energy is just
the plonk mass to the fourth power, it turns out.
That's what that back of the envelope calculation tells you.
But at least you get rid of the infinities, and that's considered a great triumph.
So the goal of string theory is to explain all physical properties of forces and particles
with no unknowns.
There should be just one way in which the universe is built.
The stuff of all the matter and forces is the same.
There's this wonderful unifying framework, and all it is is a bunch of these strings
with different vibrational patterns or modes, just like musical notes.
The problem is that you expect the typical particle energies in string theory to be 10
to the 19th proton masses, like the plonk mass.
That's kind of like a grain of dust or a million bacteria.
That's about what 10 to the 19th proton masses is.
And we have not seen such particles.
Now you might say, okay, we've not made particle accelerators that can generate such huge energies.
That's true.
But we've not seen them coming from outer space either or anywhere else.
But you know, you might say, okay, they're just hard to find.
They're rare.
They're not created in today's low energy universe.
All right, I'll grant you that.
How do you get the masses of the observed particles, the proton, the electron, the photons, things
like that?
How do you get those?
Well, in string theory, they say that a lot of these vibrations cancel out, and that tends
to lower the expected masses of the particles.
In supersymmetry, you get vibrations of two different types, and they tend to cancel each
other out.
And, you know, you have the kinds of successes that people had in grand unified theories,
where they came up with selectrons and neutrinos and squarks and fotinos.
That is, the supersymmetric partner particles in grand unified theories are reminiscent
of the partner type vibrations in string theories or super string theories.
The different kinds of vibrations come in pairs and they tend to cancel each other out.
So that's how string theorists claim you get down to low particle energies.
And if you have a complete cancellation, you get a massless particle, and that's called
a graviton, a carrier of the gravitational force, if you will.
But the trouble is, is that none of these string theories has yet explained any of the
observed particle masses, not a single one other than the hypothetical graviton, which
has never been observed.
So they've not explained any of the known particles, and they have not made any predictions
that can uniquely test the string theories.
That is, go and observe such and such in the laboratory, and this will eliminate certain
hypotheses or support certain classes of string theories.
They haven't come up with testable predictions.
So a lot of physicists don't like string theory.
They think it's really just speculation, just bordering on, you know, metaphysics, really.
So what's so alluring about string theory?
It's mathematical elegance, it's aesthetics.
Certain relationships seem so appealing that some physicists think that they must be right,
and that's the allure, the elegance, and the mathematical beauty of the theory.
The historical precedent is general relativity.
Einstein felt that it's so beautiful that it must be right.
Nature just had to choose that theory, and that's sort of what string theorists feel.
So let's see in the next lecture what some of the predictions of string theory might
be and if those predictions are indeed testable.
