Attempts to unify all four forces of nature are being made by many physicists now.
And although there are a number of hypotheses floating around, the leading set of theories
goes generically under the name of string theories.
These are these ideas that particles come in little fundamental packets of energy, almost
shaped like a one-dimensional string.
And it's the different vibrational modes of that string that correspond to different particles
like neutrinos or electrons or the up quark or whatever.
They're all different modes of vibration of this fundamental little package of energy.
Now it turns out that for the vibrations to work, and to explain at least anything,
you know, in these string theories, the vibrations have to occur in additional unseen dimensions.
Spatial dimensions that don't correspond to the normal x, y, and z backwards, forward,
left, right, and up, down.
But additional spatial dimensions to which we don't have physical access in our macroscopic
scales, you need these additional dimensions for the math to work out.
And in fact, you need not just one or two additional ones, you need a total of ten dimensions,
including time, so three known spatial ones, time, and then six additional ones, or really,
in the most modern string theories, they work best with eleven total dimensions.
So the three known spatial ones, time, and seven additional ones.
You need all these additional dimensions to make things work.
And the eleven dimensional sort of favorite leading theories now are not even called string
theories as much anymore.
I mean, they're generically string theories, but specifically they're called M theories.
They're an extension of string theories, where now the M stands for like a membrane.
Instead of the package of energy being a one dimensional string, it actually might be
a two dimensional membrane flopping around, okay, so it's membrane theory.
Some people call it mystery theory, or mother of all theories.
No one really knows what the M stands for, but I think it stands for membranes.
And you don't necessarily have two dimensional membranes.
You could have membranes in three dimensions, or four dimensions, or in general, P dimensions.
And the P dimensional membranes are called P brains, okay?
Now all these extra dimensions are not visible to us, because supposedly they're wrapped
up on size scales comparable to the Planck length, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
That is the minimum size below, which you can't even realistically talk about the physical
properties of nature, according to these string and M theories.
So an example of this is a sheet of sandpaper.
Looking from high above, it looks like a two dimensional plane.
You might think it's colored a little bit orange or white or whatever, there might be
little speckles in it, but that could just be little markings on it.
You don't see any more than just two dimensions when you look at it from high above.
But if you swoop down low, and especially if you look at it under a magnifying glass,
you can tell that it's granular.
That two dimensional sheet of paper actually sticks up in a third dimension, like little
warts on a smooth two dimensional plane.
So normally you don't see those little grains because you don't look at the sandpaper through
a sufficiently powerful magnifying glass.
Or you might have a thin garden hose stretched across your yard.
From far away, it looks just one dimensional, it's just like a little string.
And if you had ants crawling along it, for example, and they hit up against one another,
they'd have to turn around and go the other way because there's no way around the ants
if the garden hose is truly a one dimensional curved line.
But if instead the hose is wrapping around another dimension as hoses do, then the ants
could actually, well if they hit each other, one of them could go left, the other one could
go right, and they could pass each other up and get to the other side.
It's a much more interesting universe for them if they have these other dimensions that
they see but which we from far away might not see at all, alright?
So this sounds kind of crazy, but there's a historical precedent.
In 1919 Theodore Calusa suggested that there are four not three spatial dimensions.
And the reason he suggested this was that he had found that electromagnetism comes naturally
out of the equations of general relativity if those equations are expressed with four
spatial dimensions instead of three.
Is that cool or what?
Gravitational waves are ripples in three spatial dimensions, but Calusa found that electromagnetic
waves can be thought of as ripples into a fourth spatial dimension.
It was an amazing idea.
So in addition to x, y, and z, there's some direction, w, and I can't point to it, but
mathematically you can describe it and you can write it down with equations and the oscillations
in that fourth dimension could be interpreted as electromagnetic waves.
That was in 1919.
Now seven years later Oscar Klein refined this idea.
He said, well, the reason we don't see this fourth dimension spatially is that in fact
it's curled up on too small a scale for us to see.
It's like the grains on a sheet of sandpaper.
You can't see them very easily looking at it from far away.
So Klein said that this extra dimensional is wrapped up on tiny scales possibly as small
as the Planck length, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
And thus emerged the Calusa Klein theory.
It was intriguing, but then it was forgotten or ignored by most physicists because it was
apparently in conflict with the known data, the properties of the electron, for example,
and other particles.
But the problem was that the Calusa Klein theory was decades ahead of its time.
The other forces of nature, the strong nuclear force and the weak nuclear force, weren't
known yet.
So in a sense they were comparing the predictions of the theory with only an incomplete understanding
of even the observed aspects of the physical world.
And other dimensions were not sufficiently explored at that time.
Calusa Klein theory stopped with only four spatial dimensions.
What if he went up to five or six or seven?
Then there might have been better agreement with the observations.
And so it was too far ahead of its time.
But it's been resuscitated now half a century later.
Not with just four spatial dimensions, but with something like 10 plus one dimension
of time.
And the math works out best right now, as I said, with these 11 dimensions in total.
Some other predecessors of this theory had 26 dimensions.
Those were called supergravity theories.
Now as I say, it's 11.
And three of those spatial dimensions are macroscopically large, X, Y and Z.
The other seven are curled up on the Planck scale.
Why are seven curled up?
Why are only three macroscopic?
We don't know.
And what shape are the curled up dimensions?
There are thousands of possibilities for each choice of the number of curled up dimensions.
We have thousands of possibilities of their shapes.
For example, the curled up dimensions could be one of them might look like just a one
dimensional loop like this, a circle.
It's one dimensional because you can only go forwards or backwards.
You can't go in or out, up or down.
So this is a one dimensional loop.
And at each point of space, there could be one of these loops sticking out like little
warts out of your skin, but you don't see them.
Or the dimensions might look like a donut.
This is a two dimensional surface encompassing a volume, but the surface is two dimensional.
This one is not very smooth, but the idea is you'd have these smooth donuts sitting
at every point in space.
Or you might have something simpler, a bunch of spheres sitting around at each point in
space.
These are the extra dimensions and these are the shapes of space in those extra dimensions.
That's the idea.
Now the mathematics ends up being quite complex, and what they come up with, with seven curled
up spatial dimensions, is a generic class of spaces called kalabiyao spaces.
These are derived by mathematicians who studied them because of the intrinsic interest of
shapes of this kind, but it turns out they may be relevant to these string theories.
And they consist of six or seven spatial dimensions curled up in complex shapes that might look
something like this, and the shape might look different depending on your direction
of viewing it.
And there can be many different kinds of these shapes.
They have these representative mathematical forms or equations that describe them, but
they're complex, and these are just primitive representations of what these shapes might
look like projected on a two dimensional sheet of paper.
But no one really knows intuitively what these things look like.
They're described by a bunch of complex mathematics, but they sure do look fun, don't they?
I mean, I like to play with some balls that look like that, you know, instead of just
regular old spherical balls.
So that's the basic idea behind string theory, and then its successors, membrane or M theory.
Well, I mentioned last time that there are painfully few experimental tests or predictions
that can be tested in the laboratory and which can distinguish between these different theories.
They all predict the graviton, the quantum carrier of the gravitational waves or gravitational
force.
Now, you might say, why do you need that?
Didn't Einstein say that gravity is just a curvature of space-time?
Yeah, yeah, but that's the whole point.
You know, we're saying gravity doesn't work when you have a large amount of mass in a
small volume.
You need some quantum theory of gravity.
You need the super unified force, and there we think that you'll need some aspect of quantum
physics because quantum physics has been so successful in other explanations of natural
phenomena.
And in quantum mechanics, quantum physics, there's always a carrier of a force.
For example, electromagnetic forces are mediated by or carried by photons, all right?
If you have two stationary protons, they feel each other through the exchange of virtual
photons, and that's how they feel each other.
So in a similar way, we think gravity acts in a quantum field approximation or description
through the exchange of gravitons, and they're massless, and they are predicted generically
by these theories, but in fact, a number of other theories predict gravitons as well.
And moreover, all the string theories predict gravitons, so even if you do find a graviton,
that won't help distinguish which of the many, many thousands of string theories is more
likely to be correct because they all generically predict the graviton.
And also, the graviton was sort of thought to exist even before string theories came
along.
Well, you have more exotic predictions, like they predict the number of quantum states
in a very specially constructed, tiny theoretical black hole.
They can calculate how many states there should be, and if you were to measure such a black
hole, you would find a certain number of quantum states.
Well, all right, we're not likely to find a black hole of this sort anytime soon.
They also say that there should be these supersymmetric partners of particles, like electrons and
squarks and all that.
But that's not unique to string theories, grand unified theories that weren't attempting
to unify gravity with the grand unified force, they also have these supersymmetric particles.
And also, there are these ideas that there may be fractionally charged particles, but
these are not really generic to all string theories.
That's actually good.
If you found fractionally charged particles, you could throw out certain classes of string
theories.
So that might be a prediction, but no fractionally charged particles have been found that clearly
signify that string theories are on the right track.
So a lot of physicists don't like string theories because they seem to be more fantasy.
There's just so few, or maybe even no, predictions that can be tested in the lab.
And one of the basic aspects of science is that any hypothesis has to be experimentally
or observationally testable.
Well, here's where dark energy comes into play.
Any string theory that categorically denies the possibility of dark energy must be wrong.
Unless, of course, that theory provides an entirely new framework with which to explain
the accelerating universe, or if we're being fooled by the dark energy interpretation, provide
a completely different way of looking at or interpreting the acceleration of the universe.
Maybe it's forces from the outside pulling us out rather than some dark energy pushing
us out from within.
That's what I mean by a new framework.
Now in the original versions of string theory, all of the extra dimensions were curled up
on tiny scales, like these Calabi-Yau spaces.
But actually, more recent string theories suggest that some of the dimensions might
be macroscopically big compared to the Planck scale of 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
And it's even possible that gravity works partly or mostly in one of these other dimensions.
You know, gravity we think of as working in the solar system, or here on Earth, or in
the galaxy, or whatever.
But suppose gravity actually resides mostly in another spatial dimension, and only some
of it leaks in from this other spatial dimension, which could be of many different sizes.
But for now, let's just forget about the size.
It's just existing in another dimension, and it leaks into the three spatial dimensions
to which we normally have physical access.
So that might be an explanation for why gravity is so weak.
If the electromagnetic forces and other forces feel the usual three dimensions, but not this
fourth dimension, yet gravity resides mostly in this fourth dimension, and only a little
bit leaks into the three XYZ dimensions, maybe that's the explanation for why gravity appears
so weak.
An interesting analogy is the book written in 1884, Flatland by Edwin Abbott.
He describes the adventures of A-square, who lives in a two dimensional world along
with other animated two dimensional geometrical figures like triangles and hexagons and things
like that.
And on the first day of the year 2000, a spherical creature from 3D space land takes Mr. A-square
away from the plane and shows him the true three dimensional nature of the larger world.
Well A-square speculates that even the 3D creature from space land may itself be a small subspace
of a bigger four dimensional universe.
Well we would like to do experiments which are preferable over divine intervention of
the sort described in Flatland, where someone comes and tells you what's really going on.
So how can we actually test for these other dimensions?
One idea is that if gravity exists mostly in other dimensions, and only a little bit
exists here, then maybe we can do experiments which sometimes allow gravitons to escape
to their preferred other dimension.
If that's the case, then you might find an apparent violation of the law of conservation
of energy in a reaction, because the energy of the incoming reactants might be greater
than the energy, the total energy of the outgoing products, and the deficit in energy was a
graviton or several gravitons that went off into this fourth dimension.
That would be kind of cool.
Here's an analogy.
Suppose you're playing a two dimensional game of billiards, and forget about the fact
that the balls stick up out of the table.
Just restrict your attention to the two dimensional surface.
And you're allowed to only measure the energy of the balls on this two dimensional surface.
So you've got the cue ball, and you hit it with some energy, and it hits a stationary
yellow ball there, and you know the energy with which you hit the cue ball, and you watch
them bounce off of each other, and then they come to rest, and well they came to rest because
of friction against the surface, but if you measure them before they came to rest, you
could measure the energy of the two balls after they hit, and compare that with the energy
of the incoming ball before it hit.
And what you would find in this case, if you restricted your attention only to the two
dimensional plane of the billiard table, you'd find that the final two balls have a little
bit less energy than the sum of the cue ball and the stationary initial ball.
And the reason for that is that when the balls hit, when they collided, you heard a sound,
right?
There was a crack.
That means sound waves went through the air in this room, into the three dimensional space.
In other words, not restricted anymore to the two dimensional space of the billiard table.
And the collision also generated some heat.
It radiated some energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation.
So some energy was lost from the system, from the two dimensional plane of the billiard table.
We see it here from our grand position up above.
But if you were only measuring it from within that table, you would lose that energy.
But you could deduce, perhaps, that it went into some other dimension by noticing that
there's this apparent violation of the law of conservation of energy.
That's the idea, okay?
So if we do this kind of an experiment by colliding protons and antiprotons together
with incredible speeds, as is done, for example, at Fermilab, where they have this ring, and
it's evacuated, and they can speed up protons and antiprotons to gargantuan speeds, almost
the speed of light, but not quite the speed of light, and they crash them together, and
they watch the whole plethora of particles that are created in this collision.
And if you're careful to measure every single particle and make a sum of the energy of all
the particles together after the collision and compare that with the energy before the
collision, maybe they'll find a deficit of energy, which might be caused by a graviton
going off into some other dimension.
Now they haven't found such deficits yet, but they're doing these experiments.
And at CERN, the European National or International Laboratory for Particle Physics, they are,
in 2007, going to finish the Large Hadron Collider, and they will crash particles together
with incredible speeds, and they might find some of them leaking off with gravitons going
into another direction, dimension, so that's an idea.
There have been some other proposed tests.
For example, the supernova explosion, 1987A, was measured to have a certain energy, and
that energy rules out a fourth spatial dimension, where there's only four, not five or six,
because you would get a huge loss of energy if there were only one additional spatial
dimension.
So there can't be only one additional one, because otherwise the loss of energy into
that dimension would have cooled the supernova more than it was observed to have been cooled,
and you wouldn't have been able to explain the observed energy of the supernova.
Interestingly, with more spatial dimensions in this particular case, like five or six,
you get less of the energy of the supernova going off to these other dimensions for a
technical reason.
So this experiment, or this observation, is not yet incompatible with five or six or
seven spatial dimensions.
It's only incompatible with four.
You get too much of a loss of energy if you have only one extra spatial dimension.
With two extra spatial dimensions for a total of five, the numbers are a bit ambiguous,
and with six or more, definitely we're okay.
There are other ideas.
If the gravitational force exists as a result of stuff in another dimension, then it might
spread out in such a way that is not compatible with the 1 over r squared law for gravity.
That law arises for the same reason that light spreads out and looks fainter in proportion
to the square of the distance.
We've seen this diagram many times where for bigger and bigger spheres, the light is spreading
out more and more, and a given point source of light looks fainter according to 1 over
r squared law.
Well if gravity spreads out in three dimensions, you get naturally the Newtonian 1 over r squared
law.
But suppose you had gravity spreading out in only two dimensions.
The circumference of a circle is 2 pi r, so the same number of lines of force, if you
will, spread out over a progressively larger circumference whose circumference grows in
proportion to r, so in a sense the number density of those lines of force is proportional
to 1 over r, not 1 over r squared.
So that would be the law of gravity in a two-dimensional plane.
Along a one-dimensional line, the lines spread out, the lines of force spread out along the
line, and you get no diminishing of the strength of gravity as you get to farther distances
along that line.
So different gravity laws would be expected depending on how much gravity is spreading
out, and that depends on how many dimensions there are.
So here's an interesting example.
Suppose you have a cylinder like this, like a flat sheet of paper, which is big along
one dimension, but you curl it up, you wrap it up around another dimension, and let's
say we have a gravitating object, this point here in the middle, and now I'm going to draw
circumferences of, I'm going to draw circles around that thing, and you can see that for
a while you get one of these 1 over r laws for gravity.
You get a bigger and bigger circumference, and yet the same number of lines of force,
so the number of lines of force per unit length of that circumference becomes smaller and
smaller, and you feel that gravity is getting weaker.
Well out at a certain distance, the lines of force are now filling all of space rather
than spreading out through space, so at that point bigger and bigger circles are intersecting
the same number of lines of force, and the strength of gravity starts becoming independent
of distance from the gravitating object.
So in a test like this, if you were to probe gravity on very small scales, you might see,
in fact, that the force law deviates from 1 over r squared on certain scales.
Now we know that 1 over r squared law is correct in the solar system.
It works for trajectories of planets and spacecraft and things like that.
So in the solar system, we can already rule out a four-dimensional space over which gravity
can act, because you would really mess things up.
Now some people have pointed out that two spacecraft that NASA launched in the early
70s, Pioneer 10 and 11, and which visited Jupiter in the case of both 10 and 11 and
Saturn as well in the case of Pioneer 11, people have pointed out that there's an anomaly
in their current positions.
They should have been in a slightly different place than they're observed to be, and that
corresponds to the equivalent of a slight acceleration toward the Sun.
It's not that they're going toward the Sun, but compared with where they should have been,
the difference is as though there were a slight acceleration toward the Sun, and they said
that that means that we don't understand gravity at solar system scales.
So here are Pioneer 10 and 11 way out there beyond the orbit of Neptune now, and they're
not exactly where they should be.
The trouble is that if gravity were not working as we think it does out there where the Pioneer
spacecraft are, then the orbit of Neptune would have been completely wrong as well.
We would have noticed deviations in the observed and predicted positions of Neptune, and yet
we see no such deviations.
Neptune behaves as though it's living in a one over R squared universe.
What I think is happening, and many other physicists think is happening, is that it's
not that gravity is wrong, it's that there's some problem, there's some other force acting
on these spacecraft, and all that's required to move these things into a slightly wrong
position is the equivalent of a 60 watt desk lamp radiating energy.
That's essentially what this thing needs to be doing.
It's got a source of heat, it's got a power generator inside that's producing 2,000 watts
of power, and all you need to do is radiate that power slightly anisotropically by slightly
different amounts in different directions.
For example, if you had 1,030 watts going in the outward direction and only 970 watts coming
in the inward direction, there'd be a difference of 60 watts and that could produce the observed
anomaly in the pioneer spacecraft positions.
The radiator fins have been exposed to the sun for decades, and only one side is exposed
to the sun, the other one is always in the shade, and so their radiative efficiency or
their emissivity could well have changed with time.
Such a small anisotropy is not at all out of the question, or there may be other problems
in our interpretation, we don't know everything about these spacecraft.
As Carl Sagan used to say, extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence.
Before you go and say that we definitely know that gravity isn't working on solar system
scales, you'd better be pretty sure that there isn't a more humdrum sort of everyday plausible
explanation.
Well physicists in laboratories are now checking for deviations from the 1 over r squared law
at smaller scales, not the scale of our solar system where we think it's already been ruled
out, but on scales of order one millimeter or less.
There are certain predictions that on a scale of a tenth of a millimeter or a millimeter,
you might actually start seeing the deviations of gravity from a 1 over r squared force if
there's actually five spatial dimensions.
If there are five spatial dimensions, then gravity should decline according to 1 over
r to the fourth, not 1 over r squared, because there's more dimensions into which the lines
of force, so to speak, can spread out.
And five dimensional spreading out of gravity is also consistent with some theories for
what the dark energy might be.
So there's a number of experiments going on in the world, the one with which I'm most
familiar is at the University of Washington where they have a ring having ten holes drilled
in it and it is suspended on a very fine tungsten wire and it can freely rotate and you can
tell whether it's rotating by shining a laser beam off of a mirror and measuring to what
point that laser beam is reflected.
So if this pendulum, this torsional pendulum isn't rotating at all, then the laser beam
comes to one point and if the pendulum starts rotating or twisting, then the laser beam
goes to another point.
Well, what they have underneath the ring that has ten holes drilled through it are two rotating
disks, the first of which is thin and has ten holes drilled in it.
The one below it is thicker and it has ten holes as well, but they are in a sense in
between the locations of the ten holes in the top disk.
If you rotate both of these together, then the top disk can pull on this ring in a way
that changes with time, it gets modulated with time ten times per rotation period because
sometimes the holes are lined up so there's less gravity and sometimes the holes are
lined up with the places where there's matter and so there's more gravity and so there's
a twisting on this ring and it should oscillate back and forth ten times per rotation period
of the disk if gravity is pulling on the thing in this way.
Underneath the top disk, there's this other disk that's set up in such a way that if gravity
were to follow a 1 over r squared force, it would exactly cancel the effects of the top
disk and so there'd be no oscillation of this torsional pendulum.
You'd get an oscillation if the force law is not 1 over r squared, but you'd get no
oscillation if the force law is 1 over r squared because the rotations of these two disks would
counterbalance each other in the net effect on the ring.
Here's a photograph of their apparatus.
They have not detected any deviations from the 1 over r squared law at the two tenths
of a millimeter level or bigger.
If there are deviations from 1 over r squared, they have to occur on spatial scales of less
than two tenths of a millimeter.
That's kind of cool.
They're trying to get down to a tenth of a millimeter these days.
They're testing possible deviations of gravity on those scales.
What about the largest scales?
Might there be really big dimensions?
For example, suppose our universe is embedded in some bigger hyperspace and maybe there's
dark matter out there pulling on us and that's really what the dark energy is.
It's not really energy from within, it's something pulling on us from out there.
Or maybe there's some other effect of this hyperspace.
Or maybe the universe wraps around in such ways that, for example, we here in a galaxy
can feel the gravity of another galaxy that's technically very, very far away, but the gravity
travels through this other dimension, through a shortcut, if you will.
That may even be an explanation for what the dark matter is in our universe.
There's gravitons leaking through these shortcuts, through these extra dimensions.
These are wild-sounding theories.
This is fantastic stuff.
It can actually make your head hurt, perhaps, but I actually think this is so much fun.
What I really hope is that someday we will have experimental evidence confirming at least
some of these wild possibilities.
Stay tuned for the future.
