We now enter the third and final unit of the last major part of this course, cosmology.
I will discuss what happened early in the life of the universe, as well as very speculative
ideas concerning its actual birth and what may have preceded it, in fact.
I'll also explore the even more speculative ideas regarding the possibility of multiple
universes, universes outside our own, perhaps embedded in some far grander hyperspace, a
concept known as the multiverse.
In the last lecture, I discussed the end of the universe and what we think will happen
far, far in the future, if it expands forever, or at least expands for a very long time.
That was all based on fairly well-established physics, the lives of stars, the formation
of degenerate objects, the decay of protons, even though we don't know how long it'll
take them to decay, and then the evaporation of black holes.
This is all fairly well-understood physics, although the exact time scales are speculative,
and the details of what will happen would be speculative as well.
But at least it's based on well-established physics.
In a similar way, we actually think we can go back in time to nearly t equals zero using
well-established physics.
This is not pure speculation.
Now when we get to multiple universes and the actual birth of the universe, that may
be pure speculation based on some ideas of physics, but I'll get to that later on.
Just considering backwards in time, we think we understand the physics of gases, of hot
gases in thermal equilibrium, that is all at the same temperature, reasonably well.
So we think we can actually go back pretty far with reasonable certainty.
So in the early universe, the gases consisted of just particles and antiparticles and photons,
all kind of flitting around together, particles annihilating with antiparticles, forming photons,
forming new particles and antiparticles, everything was in equilibrium.
Everything was at the same temperature, and there were very few fundamental laws governing
the physics of this hot gas, and that's why we think we can go so far back in time with
reasonable confidence.
The universe early on was relatively simple.
Now compare this with a complex problem like Earth's weather, which is affected by factors
such as local heating and ocean currents, cloud formation, continents, mountain ranges
and so on.
The Earth's weather is really complex, there are a lot of variables, and we don't have
a good handle on them.
It's actually easier to predict the properties of the early universe than it is to predict
the weather.
Well, how far back can we go?
We can easily go back to a time of one second, because conditions were similar at a time
of one second, to those in the central regions of stars, and we understand the nuclear physics
in stars.
We've pretty much accounted for the abundances of the various elements in the universe, and
they were produced in stars, and we understand how stars grow and expand during their lives,
and things like that.
I mean, we've seen many stars go through their evolution at different stages, and we can pretty
much understand that, and given that the physics of the gas is in the early universe at a
time of one second was similar to that in the central regions of stars, in a similar
way we think we can understand the physics of the universe at a time of one second.
But we actually think we can go back substantially farther in time, easily even to a trillionth
of a second.
That's 10 to the minus 12 seconds, because at those times the temperatures of the gases
were very high, you know, around 10 to the 16 degrees Kelvin, but we can reproduce such
temperatures in particle accelerators here in labs on Earth.
So we, you know, given that we can actually explore the properties of gases in accelerators
by banging protons together at unimaginable speeds, well we can apply that knowledge to
our understanding of the early universe.
How about if we go back to something like 10 to the minus 35 seconds?
Well that sounds like a pretty incredibly short time, but you know, maybe we can extrapolate
our known laws of physics back to that time.
After all, all that's different is that the temperatures were higher, of order 10 to the
28 or 10 to the 29 degrees Kelvin, I mean those are incredibly high temperatures, but
you still have a bunch of particles and antiparticles and photons in thermal equilibrium, so to some
degree we think we understand those kinds of gases.
On the other hand, there are physical events that occur at such unimaginably high temperatures
that cannot be explored in our laboratories by colliding particles together, because we
can't possibly reach such high energies to collide particles with such incredible violence
to reach temperatures of that sort, and so given that we can't experimentally test such
conditions and given that the physics might become more complex, we don't know everything
down to time scales of 10 to the minus 35 seconds, so we have considerably more uncertainty
at that point.
On the other hand, turning this problem around, we can learn about conditions in the early
universe and the physics of very hot gases by seeing what kinds of effects those gases
and those conditions had on the current large-scale properties of the universe, so in a sense
the universe is our great particle accelerator in the sky, and by measuring the properties
of the universe and trying to understand how those properties came about as a result of
physics in the early universe, we can come to a better understanding of the physics in
the early universe.
You might think that not much action happens at times of 10 to the minus 35 seconds.
You can't drink a cup of coffee in 10 to the minus 35 seconds, for example, but it's important
to understand that a lot of things could have happened.
Though that's a very short time, objects, particles were very, very close together,
and the interaction distances and time scales were so short that in 10 to the minus 35
seconds, lots of stuff could have happened.
There was a lot of chances for interactions in things to happen, so you have to keep that
in mind.
Well suppose we want to go back even further to something like T equals 10 to the minus
43 seconds, the Planck time.
Can we do that?
This is an almost inconceivably short time, and I would claim that at this time we don't
know much about the universe.
We essentially know nothing about the universe at earlier times, but even at 10 to the minus
43 seconds, the Planck time, I said in the past few lectures that we need a quantum theory
of gravity, because at those times temperatures were 10 to the 32 degrees, typical masses
of particles were 10 to the 19 proton masses, the space time curvature associated with those
masses was huge.
We don't yet have a quantum theory of gravity.
The typical length scales were the speed of light times 10 to the minus 43 seconds, which
is roughly 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, the Planck length that I discussed a few lectures
ago.
Everything becomes chaotic and unpredictable, time and space may be packaged or quantized
in bundles, possibly even at timescales of 10 to the minus 43 seconds and length scales
of 10 to the minus 33 centimeters.
Some physicists postulate that there is just this space time foam of packages of time and
space flitting into and out of existence.
This is a lot of hand waving.
Notice how much I'm waving my hands.
We really don't know basically what happened at the Planck time or before that.
There's no fully self consistent theory of quantum gravity at this time.
String theory may be the leading candidate, or at least has the largest number of practicing
researchers.
It's the big fad now.
I'm not saying that to denigrate it, it might end up being true, but right now there's very
little evidence that string theory is true because there's nothing much with which we
can compare it.
It doesn't make many testable predictions that we can test it in present day laboratories.
Maybe it'll work out, maybe it won't, but there are other competing theories of everything
as well, and I don't have time to go into all of them.
They have some specifically different predictions from string theory, and so given the great
uncertainty at the Planck time, let's just not discuss it any further.
I think it's an interesting topic, but I won't discuss it any further.
I'll limit myself to times a factor of a million longer, 10 to the minus 37 seconds and beyond.
That's really where I'm going to start.
In fact, for right now, I'm going to start at more like 10 to the minus 35 seconds, where
we're beginning to feel somewhat comfortable, although there are some uncertainties in the
physical models.
We don't have a complete understanding of conditions back then.
All right, well, let's start by considering this long time interval, 10 to the minus 35
seconds, up to 10 to the minus 6 seconds, a millionth of a second.
Temperatures went from 10 to the 28 degrees Kelvin down to 10 to the 13 degrees Kelvin
during this time while the universe was expanding.
There was an equilibrium among particles, antiparticles, and photons.
Particle-antiparticle pairs annihilated each other, producing high-energy photons, and
conversely, high-energy photons spontaneously formed particle-antiparticle pairs.
The diagram, one might draw something like this, particle-antiparticle pairs spontaneously
forming photons, and conversely, photons becoming particle-antiparticle pairs.
It's just going on all the time.
It's an equilibrium.
The process is an equilibrium process because there are just as many pair creations as there
are annihilations.
And the main fundamental particles we thought we think were in existence at that time were
the quarks.
They were plentiful, and they were unbound.
Quarks are kind of a funny name.
They were given, they were, they were christened quarks by Murray Galman, who won the Nobel
Prize in Physics in 1969 for his studies of elementary particles.
And I guess he was just struck with the word quark.
It comes from Finnegan's Wake by James Joyce, and it goes something like, you know, three
quarks for Mr. Mark.
Sure he hasn't got much of a bark, and sure any he has, it's all beside the mark.
And Murray Galman liked that little passage from Finnegan's Wake and decided to call these
little particles quarks.
So that's, that's where the name comes from.
Now the quarks consist of up and down quarks, and they are bound to each other by gluons.
And also normal matter has neutrinos and electrons.
So normal matter has up and down quarks, electrons, and electron neutrinos.
Those are the four things that compose normal matter.
You can have other kinds of matter formed by other kinds of quarks as well.
But most of the stuff we're familiar with is made out of this normal sort of matter.
And up quarks have a charge of two-thirds of the electronic charge, plus two-thirds,
and down quarks have a charge of negative one-third of the electron charge.
So a proton is two up quarks and one down quark, bound together by these gluons, okay?
Notice two times two-thirds is four-thirds, minus one-third gives you three-thirds, or
positive one electric charge, which is what the proton has.
A neutron consists of two down quarks and an up quark.
The two down quarks give you a negative two-thirds charge in total, and
the up quark gives you a positive two-thirds, and so you end up with zero.
And indeed, the neutron has zero charge.
So this theory suggests that if we could look at individual quarks,
we would actually see fractional charges.
So that's something that string theory had better explain,
if it's to explain quarks and other fundamental particles.
Besides the up and down quarks, there are four other flavors of quarks.
Those are the charmed quarks and the strange quarks, and
then the top and bottom, or sometimes people call them truth and beauty.
And these quarks come in three colors, blue, green, and red.
Now that's just to distinguish them all.
These names are whimsical.
They don't reflect the real character of each quark.
You can't taste the flavor of a quark.
You can't see the color of a quark.
These are just whimsical terms to distinguish between what we call
different quantum properties of these quarks.
They behave differently depending on whether they're red, green, or blue, or
whatever.
So I have this t-shirt, one quark, two quark, red quark, blue quark,
patterned after a Dr. Seuss rhyme.
And off to the left here, there's a whole poem about quarks.
My, oh my, what a lot of funny particles go by.
So this is one of these purely academic t-shirts that you can get, and
it's kind of fun.
Learn some physics, wear a t-shirt, you know.
So in this mixture, this early mixture of quarks and gluons and photons,
there were all these reactions going on, quarks and
anti-quarks, combining to form high energy photons, gamma rays,
very high energy gamma rays.
And then the gamma rays spontaneously reform quarks and gluons and stuff.
There was this equilibrium mixture.
But at some stage during this time interval, 10 to the minus 35 seconds,
up to 10 to the minus 6, a slight imbalance of quarks over anti-quarks
must have formed.
That is an imbalance of matter over anti-matter.
And it doesn't matter which one formed more, you know, matter or anti-matter.
We would have just called that one matter and the other one anti-matter.
Doesn't matter if you get what I mean.
Anyway, we owe our existence to this slight asymmetry.
By one part in a billion, there was this slight excess of quarks over anti-quarks
formed.
And we don't know exactly what sort of reactions were going on.
But physicists in laboratories have produced reactions that don't conserve
the amount of matter versus anti-matter.
For example, there's a particle known as the neutral kaon.
And the decay of the neutral kaon was shown to have a preference,
a slight preference of matter over anti-matter, for example.
So if conditions were suitable for the decay of neutral kaons early in the universe,
then that's maybe what happened.
Val Fitch and James Cronin won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1980 for this discovery
of a slight preference of matter over anti-matter in the decay process.
But something like this may have happened.
We don't know that it was the decay of the neutral kaon.
It might have been some other, you know, kind of a decay.
But when we asked James Cronin for a picture of the apparatus with which he and Val Fitch
did their experiment, he wrote back and said, great discoveries sometimes have humble beginnings,
especially when the discoverers are not aware that they are making a great discovery.
Because of this fact, we do not have an attractive picture of the neutral kaon apparatus.
I am sorry about this, OK?
So they don't have a picture of the thing with which they did the experiments.
All right, well, let's now go down to 10 to the minus 6 seconds, a millionth of a second.
Temperatures were 10 to the 13th degrees at this point.
Protons and neutrons in their antiparticles at this relatively low temperature can no
longer form spontaneously out of photons, OK?
Photons can form out of the annihilation of protons in their antiparticles and neutrons
in their antiparticles.
But at a temperature of 10 to the 13 degrees, the typical photon energy is too low to recreate
protons and neutrons and things like that.
So at this point, protons and neutrons and their antiparticles annihilated for the last
time, producing a sea of high energy photons, gamma rays, all right?
And those gamma rays did not reform protons and neutrons from that point onwards because
the temperatures and energies were too low.
Now, because there had been this slight imbalance of matter over antimatter created earlier in
the universe, there was a slight excess of leftover matter after all the protons and
antiprotons and neutrons and antineutrons annihilated each other.
So there were some extra protons and neutrons left over because of the extra matter quarks
produced earlier at earlier times.
And the protons were slightly favored over the neutrons at this stage because the protons
are less massive by a small amount than the neutrons.
And so in a sense, it was easier for photons to keep creating some protons for a little
bit of extra time after the neutrons stopped being created out of photons.
So the proton to neutron ratio was around 4 to 1 at this time of 10 to the minus 6 seconds.
And from that point onward, the neutrons and protons could sort of convert one into another.
For example, a neutron could combine with a neutrino to form a proton and an electron.
Or a proton and an electron could combine to form a neutron and a neutrino.
Or a neutron and a positron could combine to form a proton and an antineutrino.
And finally a proton and an antineutrino could combine to form a neutron and positron.
So there was this interconversion between protons and neutrons going on during this time.
But again, there was a slight favoritism.
The protons were favored over the neutrons because they have a slightly lower mass and
they're easier to create.
So the proton to neutron ratio settled at about four to one at this point.
The universe kept on expanding, kept on cooling, and now let's consider what happened at around
one second.
Well, temperatures were around 10 billion degrees at this point.
And at this point, the temperatures are so low that photons do not spontaneously create
electron-positron pairs anymore.
Above that temperature they do, but below it they don't.
So although electrons and positrons had been spontaneously annihilating each other and
then forming at earlier times, at this point onwards, or from this point onwards, electrons
and positrons annihilated each other for the last time, and no new electrons and positrons
could be formed.
So this annihilation of electrons and positrons forms photons, even more photons, contributing
to this sea of photons that we now have.
That is what's going to become the microwave background radiation after the universe expands
by a very large amount.
And there was a remainder or an excess of electrons that hadn't been balanced by anti-electrons
because of this slight asymmetry of matter over antimatter.
Those became free electrons.
They were not yet bound to atomic nuclei because neutral atoms had not yet formed.
At this stage, neutrons, which are unstable particles, started decaying into protons,
electrons, and anti-neutrinos, as can be seen in this diagram.
And we then ended up with a ratio of more like seven protons to one neutron because
of this extra decay.
Now, at these times, one to ten seconds, particles would slam into each other and they could form
a bound state, a heavier nucleus for a short time, but then another particle would crash
into them and unbind them.
So there were no bound states of heavier nuclei than just protons or neutrons at that
point.
But when the universe became only a billion degrees in temperature, which was around one
hundred seconds after creation, collisions among these protons and neutrons could cause
bound particles that would then last for a long time.
Additional collisions wouldn't break them apart.
And so at this time, one started the era of primordial nucleosynthesis.
So for example, a proton and a neutron could combine to form a deuterium nucleus or a deuteron,
as it's called, plus a photon.
Deuterons could combine to form a light form of helium, helium three, plus a neutron.
Deuterons could also combine to form tritons, an unstable form of hydrogen and a proton.
And then you could get normal helium formed as well.
But the first step is the formation of the deuterons.
And the joke in physics is that deuteronomy is the early formation of deuterons.
And the study of this process is also known as deuteronomy sometimes, the earliest creation
of stuff.
All right, well, the formation of helium occurred when the proton to neutron ratio was around
seven to one.
And if you go through a calculation, you figure out that that means that helium ended up being
about 25% of the universe by mass.
And the remaining 75% was hydrogen.
A tiny, tiny, tiny sliver of lithium was formed, but not much.
And no heavier elements were formed because basically densities and temperatures were
too low and didn't last very long at a high value for heavier elements to form.
So all the heavier elements formed later in stars, and primordial nucleosynthesis ended
at a time of around 10 minutes after the Big Bang.
So when did the first stars form?
Well, after the ending of primordial nucleosynthesis at T equals 10 minutes, the universe was still
a hot plasma.
It had electrons not bound to atomic nuclei, but there were a bunch of nuclei like hydrogen
and helium and deuterium and things like that.
But they weren't neutral.
The atoms had not yet formed.
The electrons were all just floating around freely.
So the universe was opaque.
And it remained that way until the time of recombination, around 380,000 years after the
Big Bang.
So it was this hot, expanding plasma.
Now eventually, upon recombination, neutral atoms formed, and they too then continued
to expand and cool.
But it took a while for the density in homogeneities that were present early in the universe to
start collapsing enough to form actual stars.
It took some time for them to do that because the gases have to cool.
Unless they cool, they can't collapse down into a small, gravitationally bound object.
So when did they cool enough?
Well we think that the first stars may have formed about 200 million years after the Big
Bang.
And the time between recombination, 380,000 years, and the first stars, 200 million years
or maybe 300 million years, that time interval is sometimes called the dark ages.
Now that's not to be confused with the dark era that I described in the previous lecture
where I said that after about a Google years in the future, black holes will have all evaporated
and only elementary particles and a few long wavelength photons will exist.
That was the dark era that will mark the end of the universe.
But the dark ages are the time between recombination, 380,000 years after the Big Bang, and the
creation of the first stars, 200 or 300 million years after the Big Bang.
And we call those the dark ages because there was no light from stars and no light from
quasars.
The only light that there was was light from the Big Bang, from this hot plasma that had
preceded this stage.
Well eventually the neutral gas started to clump and it formed these clumps that contracted
into stars and an artist's view of the star formation in the early universe is shown here.
We haven't actually detected it yet, we haven't seen the very first stars, but at some point
they must have started popping off, glowing brightly, living their lives, producing supernovae
and ejecting new heavy elements into interstellar space, forming these vast clouds that now
have not just hydrogen and helium in them, but carbon, oxygen, iron, uranium, all the
heavy elements that are produced through nucleosynthesis in stars.
Because the primordial nucleosynthesis only got you up to hydrogen and helium and tiny
amounts of lithium.
Everything else was formed in the nuclear furnaces of stars, that's the idea.
Now those first stars, those first few generations of stars produced a lot of ultraviolet radiation,
especially if the stars were very, very massive.
And this led to a reinization of the universe.
The universe was neutral at this point, because this is after the time of recombination, but
the massive stars that formed in the first few generations ionized the universe with
ultraviolet photons.
So not all the stars were massive of course, but the massive ones produced some ultraviolet
photons and all these photons go flying through the universe and the ultraviolet ones get
absorbed by hydrogen and ionize that hydrogen.
And so you had an epoch of reinization.
And indeed, to this day, most of the hydrogen in the universe that's not in neutral clouds
of gas within galaxies is actually in an ionized state.
The medium between the galaxies is ionized hydrogen and we think it was ionized by these
earliest generations of stars.
And the satellite W map could measure roughly when those first massive UV emitting stars
formed because after reinization, there were some free electrons floating around and some
of the cosmic microwave background photons get scattered by those electrons and that
changes the detailed properties of the observed cosmic microwave background radiation.
And from an analysis of the detailed properties, the W map astronomers figured out that the
first generation of stars probably formed maybe starting 200 million years after the
Big Bang, maybe more like 400 million.
It's a little bit ambiguous.
The analysis that was published in 2003 suggested that the first stars were formed 200 million
years after the Big Bang.
The 2006 reanalysis suggested that the main era of reinization occurred around 360 million
years after the Big Bang.
The reason for the uncertainty is that we don't know how sudden the onset of massive
star formation was early in the universe.
Was it very sudden or was it gradual?
If it was sudden, then the universe got reinized all in one bang.
If it was gradual, then the reinization occurred over a long period of time and the data are
still not good enough to tell us exactly when the reinization occurred.
But presumably this sort of era, 200 to 400 million years after the Big Bang, is when
the first stars were born.
And many astronomers are now trying to observe them.
A recent issue of Time Magazine describes their quest.
Have we actually detected those first stars through direct observations?
Some astronomers claim that we have.
Here is a recent result where you see a bunch of stars in an image taken by the infrared
Spitzer Space Telescope.
And when you subtract all the bright stars, there appears to be this yellow underlying
glow, which those astronomers who did the analysis interpret to be clusters of the first
or second generation stars.
And you don't see the stars individually, you just see their soft glow because this
is still kind of a blurred image and these objects are very, very faint.
So these might be collectively the first stars, but a number of other astronomers don't agree
with that interpretation.
The analysis is very complex and tricky, so it's hard to come to an unambiguous answer.
What we do know is that the highest redshift galaxies that have been observed are around
redshift 6.6 or so.
Here's one marked with an arrow that's at a redshift of around 6.5.
There are a few others with redshifts suspected to be around 7, although the light is so faint
that a definitive spectrum has not yet been published.
There was one much publicized announcement of a redshift 10 galaxy, but that turned out
to be a false alarm.
There were details in the analysis that weren't quite unambiguous and so they came up with
the wrong answer.
Now what we do know is that the beginnings of the universe were marked by a production
of lots of dust, so these massive stars produce dust in their outer envelopes when they expanded
to become red supergiants.
Because when we look far back in time, we can see at high redshifts dusty galaxies that
are almost dark at visible wavelengths, but when you look at them in the infrared, they
glow brightly, and that means that there's a lot of dust there that's been heated by
ultraviolet radiation from hot stars, and that those dust particles are now glowing
in the infrared.
When you take that into account, the fact that we don't see a lot of the early star
formation because it's cloaked in dust, you come up with a model of the star formation
rate in the universe that differs from that that we had thought a few years ago.
A few years ago, we thought that the star formation rate peaked at around four billion
years after the Big Bang, so here's the old model of star formation.
The new model of star formation has the star formation rate peaking perhaps one billion
years after the Big Bang.
So here's the first era of stellar birth, and that's when lots and lots of stars were
being born, and then gradually the star formation rate actually subsided with time.
And now, 14 billion years later, the star formation rate in today's universe pails with
what it was very early on between times of around 200 million years to a billion years.
And though we've seen old galaxies with the Hubble Space Telescope and we've seen the
afterglow of the Big Bang with WMAP and some hints of the first stars with WMAP, I think
it'll take something like the James Webb Space Telescope for us to get a clear picture
of the oldest galaxies, looking back to when the universe was perhaps only half a billion
years old, because those old galaxies are far away, highly redshifted in shrouded in
dust and glowing primarily in the infrared.
I hope that the James Webb Space Telescope will be launched in the year 2013.
It will be a fantastic device with which to study the earliest formation of stars and galaxies.
