The Big Bang Theory, which postulates that the universe began long ago in a very hot,
dense, compressed state, and then for some reason started expanding and cooling and has
been expanding and cooling ever since, has been incredibly successful. It doesn't say
that the Big Bang was an explosion in some pre-existing space. It says that it was space
itself that got created in some way that we don't yet understand, but that since then
it's just been expanding, cooling, becoming neutral, forming stars, supernovae, galaxies,
whatever, and this whole paradigm, this whole foundation has led to an incredible agreement
with the observations. Let's look at some of the successes. First, the universe is expanding.
Well, you could say by design it was expanding. I mean, that's part of the Big Bang Theory.
I mean, it wouldn't have been a Big Bang had it not been expanding, so you might not think
that that's a very big success. But it's more than just that it's getting bigger. We can
tell that space itself is growing larger. It's like a coordinate grid where you have
the galaxies and the space itself between the galaxies is getting bigger. It's not that
the galaxies are zooming through some pre-existing space. And I gave you the evidence for this
some time ago. In an expanding universe where the space itself is expanding, as you go to
progressively bigger red shifts, the surface brightness or the brightness per unit area
of a galaxy decreases quite rapidly. Whereas if you had a universe where galaxies were
moving through a pre-existing space and the Doppler shift or, you know, the red shift
of the spectra were due to a Doppler shift because of the motion through some pre-existing
space, then the surface brightnesses of high red shift galaxies wouldn't be as low as in
an expanding universe. The expansion of space actually drops the surface brightnesses to
some degree. And the observations of distant galaxies agree with what you calculate if
you take an expanding space rather than just some pre-existing space through which the
galaxies are moving. And under the theory of general relativity, indeed it should be
the space that's expanding. So this is consistent with general relativity. Big success number
two. The universe has a finite age. It's not infinitely old. We can tell that its age is
around 14 billion years. The latest numbers have been 13.7 plus or minus 0.2. I emphasize
that that uncertainty is a statistical uncertainty. The 0.2 billion years is just a statistical
analysis of the data. There could be systematic effects that will end up changing that number
to 14.5 or 15 or 12 or whatever in the future. But, you know, those are due to effects that
we don't yet understand. The statistical effects, which we do understand, are very small and
give a very small uncertainty. But I wouldn't be surprised if the number in absolute terms
changed in the future. Nevertheless, it's some finite number. It's not infinity, okay?
And it's not even all that great a time. It's only about 14 billion years old. And we know
of no objects that are clearly older than that. The globular clusters are 12 to 13 billion
years old. The other oldest stars we've seen, some of the white dwarfs are of a comparable
age. There's nothing clearly older, or at least much older, than these oldest stars.
The microwave background is certainly older, but not much older, okay? So all these things
are consistent with a finite expansion age for the universe rather than an infinite expansion
age. Third success, the universe looked different in the past. It has been evolving. It's not
a steady state universe where you at all times have a mixture of old and young galaxies with
new galaxies forming out of material that just came out of nowhere. No, it looks like the
material was created long ago, and most galaxies were formed long ago. Some might be forming
now from material that hadn't quite yet coalesced into galaxies. But no new material has come
into existence. And in general, galaxies long ago look different from those now. So here's
some spiral galaxies now at nearby distances, beautiful, well-formed spirals. When we look
back in time to high red shifts using the Hubble Space Telescope and the Spitzer Space
Telescope, we instead see that the galaxies look more like train wrecks. They look more
disorderly, and it took them a while to come together and form the grand design spirals
and the beautifully well-formed ellipticals that we see today. So the universe has been
evolving. And moreover, quasars were visible in the distant past and are very rare nowadays.
So the universe is changing with time, and that's a central prediction of the Big Bang
theory. The fourth success, and this is a huge one, is that there's a sea of photons
left over from the hot, dense beginning, the Big Bang. This is the cosmic microwave background
radiation. We've seen it. It has no other plausible origin that we've been able to come
up with. Moreover, the COBE satellite shows that it has a perfectly black body spectrum.
It corresponds to a single temperature, 2.725 degrees. And that's about the temperature
expected for an initially hot universe that has been expanding for 14 billion years. So
that all comes together. A fifth success related to what I just talked about was that this
microwave background radiation has little ripples, little variations or fluctuations
in its observed temperature. The WMAP picture of the universe nicely shows that, where you
have small, hot and cold spots, well, they look small here, but these are actually the
seeds from which giant superclusters of galaxies formed and the voids between them. And maybe
the very smallest ones correspond to what we now observe as big individual clusters at
best, but most of them are superclusters and giant voids. And you can do numerical simulations
of the collapse of material from these initial fluctuations going over the course of 13 billion
years, as shown at the lower left there. That's the time in billions of years ago. You can
see material collapsing and forming filaments and clusters and superclusters. In between
them, there are voids. And the actual observations of the real distribution of galaxies and clusters
in the universe resembles, in close detail, what we get from these massive numerical computations
with supercomputers and with many computers linked together. Here we see things from different
perspectives because they've artificially rotated the whole universe, but really we
don't think the universe itself is rotating. The sixth big success of the Big Bang Theory
is that the observed abundance of helium in the universe, about 25% by mass, is equal
to what is expected if the helium were formed during this process of primordial nucleosynthesis,
where in the first 10 minutes of the universe's life, the lightest elements and their isotopes
were formed. Protons, deuterons, tritium nuclei, which then decayed because they're unstable,
helium-3, helium-4, and a little bit of lithium. These are the elements of primordial nucleosynthesis,
and they were produced during the first moments of creation, the first few minutes after the
Big Bang. Then the universe expanded, and we would expect the relative amounts of those
elements to be roughly constant in the universe. So everywhere you look, helium should be
about 25% by mass. Of course, a little bit more has been made since then by stars, but
the dominant amount of helium was produced by the universe itself in primordial nucleosynthesis,
and so that abundance of helium should be uniform throughout the universe, and it's
observed to be so, and at about the right level, 25% by mass. That's a stunning achievement.
The heavier elements, carbon, oxygen, iron, silver, gold, they were produced deep in the
nuclear furnaces of stars, and then ejected into the cosmos by titanic explosions, supernovae.
So we would expect, then, that the abundances of the heavy elements might be splotchy. They
might vary from one place to another. For example, in this supernova remnant, the abundances
of the heavy elements would differ from the abundances in clouds that didn't get ejected
by a supernova. So the heavy elements have a splotchy distribution of relative abundances,
and the light elements have a smooth distribution. It's a great success.
Well, the Big Bang Theory has all these achievements, all right, and it's ironic that Fred Hoyle
came up with the somewhat derogatory term for it when he was being critical of it and
was joking about it. He called it the Big Bang, but that's the name that ended up sticking,
and this theory has really stood the test of time in many respects. We think it's correct
or nearly correct. In fact, we like it so much that one staff member of our UC Berkeley
Astronomy Department even designed a sweatshirt to celebrate the Big Bang and also to celebrate
our department. UC Berkeley Astronomy is a Big Bang, and there it is, all these galaxies
and things whizzing away from one another. Now, that's not to say that the Big Bang
Theory is complete and is without problems. It does have some problems, at least in its
standard form, the form that existed for many decades. The first major problem is that the
incredible smoothness observed for the universe by the microwave background satellites is
not explained. It doesn't have a natural explanation in the standard Big Bang Theory.
You have to postulate that the universe began incredibly smooth, incredibly uniform, all
at the same temperature. To illustrate this problem, consider us here. We are seeing microwave
background photons coming from all directions from a distance of around 13.7 billion light
years. So here, from the right, we see these photons coming in, reaching us for the first
time from this vast distance, and the ones from the left reaching us for the first time
from this vast distance. In all directions, the temperature given by the microwave background
radiation is 2.725 degrees Kelvin. Now, that leads to this very, very uniform map for the
temperature of the universe. If you don't look at the smaller wiggles, which are a few
parts per 100,000, the temperature of the universe is very smooth. And the small wiggles
we understand, they are the density clumps from which giant superclusters of galaxies
and voids later formed. But the basic smoothness is not understood. And the point is the following.
If photons are reaching us from that side of the universe after 13.7 billion years, and
photons are reaching us from the other side of the universe after 13.7 billion years,
clearly photons from one side could not have traversed all of space and gotten to the other
side. So the different parts of the universe have never been in communication with one
another. There's never been any light signal or any other form of signal, and all of them
travel at slower than the speed of light, that could have informed one region of the
universe what the other region's temperature is. Okay, let me give you an example. If you
turn on a radiator in a room, it takes a while for the whole room to warm up because
the radiator heats particles right next to it, and then they jiggle around and they bump
into particles next to them, which then bump into adjacent particles. And it takes a while
for the information that there's a radiator in the room to spread throughout the whole
room. It travels at some finite speed. And the maximum speed for any signal to travel
is the speed of light. Postal service or carrier pigeons or particles moving and bumping into
one another are all slower. So if not even light signals could have traversed the universe,
how could different parts of the universe know that they should be at the same temperature?
They've never communicated with one another. They've never had a chance to reach thermal
equilibrium by some understood physical process. The standard Big Bang theory has to assume
that different parts of the universe were born with the same temperature, because in the standard
Big Bang theory, the universe is always bigger than the distance that light or any other signal
could travel up to that point in time. And this observed smoothness of the universe has to be
taken as a given initial condition in the standard Big Bang theory. It has no other physical
explanation. And physicists don't like that. They like there to be a natural explanation for nearly
everything, not just saying, let it be so. It might have been so. Maybe that's the way the
universe was created, but it leaves us with an uncomfortable feeling. The other problem
with the standard Big Bang theory is that the universe is observed to be pretty darn flat.
Omega total, as measured by the WMAP satellite, is 1.0 plus or minus 0.02. And if you take the
standard equations of the standard Big Bang and extrapolate them back in time, you find that the
universe must have started out incredibly flat to something like one part in 10 to the 15th
in order to have remained so flat to the present time. The problem is that in the standard Big
Bang theory, the curvature of the universe rapidly deviates from flatness if it wasn't flat to begin
with. So suppose Omega were slightly bigger than one a long, long time ago, then with time
that deviation from one would rapidly grow to a very large value of order 100,000 at the present
time. Or suppose Omega were a little bit less than one, that is the condition for flatness
early on. Then it would quickly deviate to smaller and smaller values, being perhaps 10 to the minus
four or 10 to the minus five now. But in fact, we observe Omega to be roughly one right now.
For it to have deviated so little from one by this advanced age for the universe,
it had to have started out incredibly finely tuned, very, very close to one. It's sort of like
this pen. I try to put it upright and normally it falls. That's the natural tendency for it to
fall. That is, it's like Omega deviating from one. That's the natural tendency of things. I can set it
up very precisely and it won't fall if there's nothing pushing on it. But this pen has a flat
top. It was relatively easy for me to do that. If I were to try to do it with a pencil, it would be
hard, really hard. I mean, I could do it if there were no molecular motions in this room,
nothing hitting it, my fingers not jiggling or anything. I could make it stand upright,
but it would be awfully hard. And any slight deviation would make it fall after a short time.
In the standard Big Bang, a value for Omega equal to one, that is flatness of the universe,
is unnatural. The natural state is to deviate from one. So why should the universe be so flat right
now? Big problem with the standard Big Bang. You have to just say, well, it started out with
Omega exactly equal to one, 1.0015 decimal places or something like that. And then okay,
then it can remain close to one even up to the present time. But why should it have started out
so incredibly flat? In initial condition, people say, well, we're uncomfortable with that.
In 1980, Alan Goothe and Andrei Lindey, who was then in Russia, the Soviet Union as it was back
then, independently came up with a brilliant idea. They said, suppose the early universe started out
much, much smaller than an extrapolation of the Big Bang would have led you to think.
Suppose it was much smaller. And then suppose it went through an incredible exponential expansion,
a very rapid expansion where the size of the universe doubled for every tiny time step,
like every 10 to the minus 37 seconds or something like that. The tiny little initial volume could
have been uniform. That is, homogeneous and isotropic at the same temperature in thermal
equilibrium. For a tiny volume, there was plenty of time for little signals to travel back and
forth. And for all parts of this little tiny volume to tell each other what their temperature
should be, like the heat spreading out through a room, okay? The tiny volume was uniform. And then
it expanded, whoosh, and it remained uniform. I mean, the temperature went down very quickly,
precipitously, but it remained the same everywhere. The temperature decreased by the same amount
everywhere, because the universe expanded by the same amount everywhere, and it was initially in
thermal equilibrium, so it maintained thermal equilibrium. Well, that then would explain why
different parts of the universe look the same temperature, because long ago, they did have
a chance to all come to agreement. That is to thermal equilibrium. It's great. What about the
flatness? Well, if the universe started out tiny, but then inflated to some giant region much, much
bigger than the part of the universe that we can see, then the part that we can see looks flat,
because it's only a tiny fraction of all that there is. And all that there is might be some giant
hypersphere or a horse's saddle or something like that. But if our part of the universe, if our
observed part is only a tiny fraction of all that there is, then it will look flat, regardless of the
shape of the overall universe. Inflation theory says that we see only a tiny fraction of all that
there is, and hence it looks flat. Now, this is a refinement of the standard Big Bang theory
that applies to the first blink of an eye of the universe's existence. This all happened at times
like 10 to the minus 35 seconds. It is not the downfall of the Big Bang. You sometimes see newspaper
articles that say that Big Bang theory has been overthrown, and that's not true. It's been refined
and extended. We now think that the first fraction of a second differs from an extrapolation of the
standard Big Bang. To get some idea of what I mean by incredibly rapid exponential expansion,
suppose we take the following examples. Put one penny on the first square of a chess board,
two on the second square, four on the third, eight on the fourth, 16 on the fifth, 32,
and so on. Double it each time. By the time you're on the 64th square, you've got 10 to the 19th
power cents or 10 to the 17th power dollars. 100 million billion dollars is what you've got on
that 64th square if you started out with one penny and doubled each time. Or let's say you
start out with one grain of rice on the first square and you double it each time. By the time
you get to the 64th square, you've got a mountain of rice easily big enough to cover all of Manhattan
up to above the height of the Empire State Building. Exponential growth is very, very rapid,
and if the universe went through a period of such sustained exponential growth, its size
could become just humongous, arbitrarily large, really. This graph of the radius of the observable
universe versus time nicely illustrates what inflation can give us. At the present time,
the radius of the observable part of the universe is roughly 10 to the 27th meters. If we extrapolate
that back in time, you can see that the radius of what is the currently observable part of the
universe used to be smaller. If we go all the way back to something like 10 to the minus 40 seconds,
then you can see the radius right here, but that radius was too large for light or any other signal
to have been able to traverse it and bring the whole universe into equilibrium. If instead,
at that time, say 10 to the minus 40 seconds, the radius were far, far smaller way down below
10 to the minus 50th, say 10 to the minus 52 meters, something like that. And then if that
small universe that came into equilibrium because it's so small expanded exponentially
during what we call the inflationary period, it could have gotten very, very big and joined
up with the inferred radius of the currently observable universe back when the universe
was something like 10 to the minus 35 seconds old. So the point is, it starts very small,
reaches equilibrium because there's enough time for signals to go back and forth and
tell all parts of that tiny volume what temperature they're at. Then this whole thing expands to a
much larger size, joins up with the extrapolation of the standard theory, and from that point onward
remains the same as the standard Big Bang theory. So you see the modification that inflation is
talking about occurs only in the first blink of an eye of the universe's existence. So that was a
graph of the radius of the observed part of the universe going back in time. If we admit that
the observed part of the universe might be only a fraction of all that there is,
you'll get a graph that looks something like this. Here's the standard Big Bang equations
extrapolated back in time. But if we say that actually very early on the universe was much
smaller than the standard Big Bang theory would have said, and then went through a period of
exponential growth, inflation, you can see that that little tiny volume can become much, much
bigger than the part of the universe that we can see. In other words, the total universe may be
gargantuan compared with the parts that we can see. The universe can grow by a huge factor,
and different inflation theories give different numerical values for the expansion factor. We
don't really know how much it might have expanded because again, we don't know the physics of those
gases very well. And different inflation theories give vastly different amounts of expansion. In
one case, the biggest I've seen, the expansion factor in a blink of an eye was 10 to the 10
to the 12th power. That was the factor by which the universe grew. I mean, it's just enormous
after just a short time. And according to sort of more reasonable, or maybe you shouldn't call
them more reasonable, but according to less extreme versions of inflation, you can easily get a universe
that's huge, truly huge compared with what we can see. In fact, it's quite possible that the ratio
of the radius of the total universe to the radius of the observable universe, so the radius of
everything there is compared to the radius of what we can see, 14 billion light years in each
direction, may well be larger than the ratio of the radius of what we can see to the radius of a
proton. Now a proton is this little tiny thing and all that we can see is 14 billion light years in
all directions. What we're saying is that all that we can see might be like a proton in all of that
there is. Is that amazing or what? I think it's amazing. Okay, we're a drop in the bucket. We're
a drop in a vast ocean, really, compared to all that there is. Now you might think, wait, wait,
this implies expansion faster than the speed of light. And that would make Einstein sad because
he said nothing can expand faster than light. Well, it turns out that this exponential growth of the
universe's size is not a violation of special relativity because space itself is expanding.
And what relativity prevents is information traveling through space at a speed faster than
that of light. So no particles can travel through space faster than light, but space itself can
expand faster than the speed of light. So here's a simple example. Here's my one-dimensional universe.
I can expand it. Suppose that I look at two ping pong balls that are initially more than 300,000
kilometers apart. Okay, so they're separated by this vast distance. And now let's suppose that in a
very short amount of time, a second, I stretch this universe so that all distances double.
Each centimeter becomes two, each kilometer becomes two, and so on. Well, in that case,
two galaxies that were initially more than 300,000 kilometers apart will after one second be more than
600,000 kilometers apart, meaning that they will have receded from each other at more than
300,000 kilometers per second. But that's not a violation of special relativity because
this expanding universe cannot be used to transmit information from one galaxy to another
at faster than the speed of light. Indeed, space is expanding very quickly. So if anything, any
signal, any information that's trying to travel from this galaxy to that one is going to have a
harder time reaching that one because they're expanding away from each other so quickly. So
expansion faster than the speed of light is possible. This may have perplexed Einstein,
and he may have been quite surprised to learn of these theories where we now have
space expanding by a humongous factor and the universe growing into a truly large entity.
This was something that was not realized until really the 1980s or so, that there could be
this exponential expansion. Well, there's a wonderful song in the Monty Python album,
The Meaning of Life. It's called The Galaxy Song, and they talk about how we're in a galaxy,
and there are many other galaxies, and the galaxies are rotating. It's a great, fun song,
and it's mostly accurate, actually. But there's one place where they say that the expansion of
the universe is limited by the speed of light, and it isn't really. The universe itself can
expand faster than the speed of light. You just don't see those parts that are moving away from
you faster than the speed of light. Now, if the universe expanded by enormous factors like this,
perhaps even by a factor of a Google, 10 to the 100th power, or maybe even a Google Plex,
10 to the Google power, then that means that there are essentially a huge number of physically
independent regions. They are now physically independent, but they all started out in the
same place in this small little bundle, which came into equilibrium and then went whoosh,
and it expanded faster than the speed of light, and now you have all these independent regions.
That is, they're no longer communicating with one another because the faster than light expansion
brought them far, far away from each other. Yet the laws of physics are the same in all of these
independent regions. Now, some physicists have said that if our observable part of the universe
has a finite number of particles, it's thought to be of order 10 to the 80th power within a 14
billion light-year radius, and if there's only a finite number of ways in which a finite number
of particles can be arranged and can interact and so on, then there may be other volumes of the
universe in which exactly the same thing is happening and has happened throughout the distant past
as in our observed volume of the universe. So there are other little volumes out there
in which the same thing is happening right now. I'm saying the same exact things,
and there may be other patches in this giant universe where I've said the same thing up to now,
but then I decided to scratch my head. In other words, small deviations from what this universe is
doing, copies of ourselves or near clones of ourselves, a very provocative idea discussed by
Max Tegmark, a former graduate student of mine. Well, he helped teach a course that I taught.
He was a teaching assistant for it, and now he's a professor at MIT, and he discusses this
provocative idea in the May 2003 issue of Scientific American, and he says that really,
basically, if there's only a finite number of possibilities for arranging this finite
number of particles, and if the universe is really truly huge, then there should be copies of ourselves.
Well, I thought about this fair amount, and I don't think it's correct, but I'm not sure.
The reason I don't think it's correct is that there may be an uncountable number of possibilities
for how you can arrange particles and have them interact in different ways and all that,
because in fact, there are irrational solutions to the equations of physics, and I
told you before that the irrational numbers are an uncountable infinity.
Moreover, our volume of space is not completely isolated from all other volumes. We may not
see beyond 14 billion light years, but objects, stars, and particles near the edge of our observable
part of the universe, can see and interact with objects beyond the distance to which we can see,
because they're out there, and they see farther beyond the regions we can see, and so it's not
fair to say that the universe consists of a whole bunch of independent volumes in which you can only
arrange the particles and their interactions in a finite number of ways. There may be an uncountably
infinite number of ways, and so that would, at least to me, give the reassuring thought that
there isn't a copy of me doing exactly the same things that I have done during my life
somewhere else in the universe. I don't want that to be the case. I want to be unique. I think all
of you want to be unique, and my view is that we probably are regardless of the size of the universe.
