Inflation of a minuscule universe to a gargantuan size in the first blink of an eye of its existence
sounds like a pretty wild idea, right?
But inflation, or something like it, something with a similar effect, is widely accepted
by cosmologists these days, because it removes some of the unphysical arbitrary sounding assumptions
of the standard Big Bang theory, and it also produces testable predictions that in fact
agree with observations.
Well, why should inflation have occurred?
And how did it get started?
How could it cause such a crazy sounding thing?
A clue perhaps is provided by dark energy, and the current accelerated expansion of the
universe.
After all, inflation sounds very much like, but more extreme than, what we seem to be
observing today, that the high redshift supernovae are farther away than expected, as though something,
some sort of a dark energy with a repulsive nature, has accelerated the expansion of space,
pushing galaxies and supernovae farther away than would have been expected.
That sounds a lot like inflation, but in a less extreme form.
People used to say to Goethe and Linde and other proponents of inflation, well, you know,
that sounds good, but we know of no types of energy that have this repulsive effect on
space that make it grow ever faster.
And Goethe and Linde would say, yeah, that's true, but maybe someday some experimental evidence
will be found.
Well, we now have that evidence.
In today's universe, there appears to be some sort of stuff that's accelerating its expansion.
So if we look at a modern view of the history of the universe, there was a beginning, which
I'll discuss in this lecture, and then some sort of quantum fluctuations, which made minor
variations in the density of the material.
Then there was this rapid growth, inflation, and it made those quantum fluctuations grow
as well.
And they became the seeds for the formation of giant galaxy clusters and superclusters
and voids.
For a while, the first few hundred million years, there were no stars, but then the first
stars formed perhaps two or four hundred million years after the Big Bang, and then they coalesced
into galaxies and then clusters of galaxies and superclusters and voids.
The growth of this large scale structure during the normal expansion phases.
But then in the last few billion years, an accelerated expansion seems to have started
up again reminiscent of, but much weaker than, the initial, very rapid inflation of the universe.
That's the idea.
Well why inflation happened?
We don't really know.
But the concepts and physical mechanisms may be similar to those that I covered when
I discussed quintessence and models for the dark energy of the currently accelerating
universe.
Recall, I said that quintessence is an energy field that is repulsive and in a sense can
be thought of as the latent heat of space associated with an unbroken or a recently
broken symmetry.
That was kind of wild stuff, but I gave you examples of what might be happening and I'll
repeat those today to try to reinforce the notions because this is very hard stuff.
One possibility is that the unbroken symmetry of the grand unified force and then the breaking
of symmetry when it's split into the strong nuclear force and the electroweak force is
what drove inflation.
Now this specific mechanism was historically the first one presented.
It is not necessarily the one that is believed by inflationary cosmologists these days, but
I'm going to discuss it because it's the simplest idea and it has a lot of the key aspects
of modern day inflation.
So let's look at this unification of forces.
We know that at some time in the past the electroweak force was the unified version of
the weak nuclear force and the electromagnetic force and perhaps this is what was going on
when the universe was only 10 to the minus 12 seconds old with a temperature of 10 to
the 16 degrees Kelvin.
Even farther back in time when the universe was 10 to the minus 37 seconds old and a temperature
of 10 to the 29 degrees Kelvin, you could say that that's 26 orders of magnitude hotter
than hell if the temperature of hell is the melting point of sulfur which is around a
thousand degrees.
Anyway, at this incredible temperature the electroweak force and the strong nuclear force
should have been unified into this grand unified force and before that perhaps there was a
super unified force that included even gravity as well, but we don't know that at this time.
So I'm going to go down to just the grand unified force where we have maybe some understanding
of what was going on at a time of 10 to the minus 37 seconds after the birth of the universe.
Temperatures were huge.
10 to the 29 degrees.
There was this equilibrium between high energy photons and particle, anti-particle pairs
and the photons would produce pairs and then the pairs would annihilate each other and produce
photons again and everything was in equilibrium, in thermal equilibrium and at least three
of the forces, strong nuclear force, weak nuclear force and electromagnetism were unified.
They were basically the same.
They were symmetric like the spinning quarter, high energy.
Now the idea is that as the universe cooled below 10 to the 29 degrees Kelvin at a time
of 10 to the minus 37 seconds, the strong nuclear force should have become a different
manifestation of this unified force and the electroweak force would have broken off as
well.
In other words, there should have been a split.
There should have been the symmetry breaking because in that way the universe would have
achieved a lower total energy.
It's kind of like water freezing at zero degrees Celsius.
It loses its latent heat and achieves a state of lower energy for a given temperature, zero
degrees Celsius.
This is a phase transition.
So now suppose the universe at an age of 10 to the minus 37 seconds didn't split off
this unified force into the electroweak and strong nuclear forces.
Suppose at that age and at that temperature when they should have split off, they didn't.
Suppose it's super cooled and the force remained unified.
In that case, the universe would have contained too much energy for its temperature, like
water cooled below zero degrees Celsius but it doesn't freeze, or for example, like the
heat solution that I discussed a few lectures ago.
Here is the package of heat solution that turned into a crystal.
It's rock solid.
It's at room temperature, it's a crystal, and that's its preferred energy state.
Perhaps the energy is gone from it.
But at room temperature, I can also have a super cooled form of this solution.
It's metastable.
It'll remain this way unless it's hassled, unless it's perturbed, and there's a little
disc here with which I can perturb the system.
It's got this extra energy that keeps it in the liquid state at room temperature, even
though its preference would be the solid state.
It's got this extra energy.
Going back to the diagram that I showed a few lectures ago, at a high temperature, the
preferred state of the solution is to be symmetric, liquid.
At a low temperature, it prefers to be a solid, a state of broken symmetry.
But the ball can remain in this little dimple for a while that is in a state of unbroken
symmetry as long as it doesn't get perturbed very much.
Now, once it gets perturbed and gives up its latent heat and turns into a solid, you can
once again bring it to the liquid state by putting it in a pot of boiling water and giving
it back some energy.
That's how you reuse these things, and you can use them on camping trips to keep you
warm.
But the preferred state is one of globally the least energy.
The ball rolls down the hill.
And it can be up in this metastable state with an extra energy, a latent heat associated
with it.
Now, the idea is that maybe the extra energy or latent heat of the supercooled universe,
that is the one where the unified force remained dominant and didn't break up into the strong
nuclear force and the electroweak force, maybe the energy associated with that supercooled
state, is what drove inflation, that extra energy.
Now here, that extra energy doesn't cause the universe to inflate, lucky for us, okay?
But in the case of a supercooled universe where you have the unified force that didn't
break apart, that kind of energy could inflate the universe.
Well, the early inflation of the universe may have been what gave the big bang the bang.
In other words, that was the launching of the apple.
The inflation is what got the universe going.
It was propelled by a repulsive energy, an energy of this so-called false vacuum.
It's a false vacuum because it has an extra energy associated with it, sort of a launching
of the apple.
And then when it turned off, you know, when the launching stopped, well, that's when the
regular expansion, the normal standard big bang theory took over, right?
That's when it started being dominant because the initial launching lasted only a tiny fraction
of a second.
And from that point onwards, the standard big bang is just fine.
This is similar to the whoosh of the universe that we think is beginning to happen given
the increasing dominance of the dark energy of the present-day universe.
Now, at some point, the transition to a broken symmetry, that is, gran unified force separate
from electroweak, happened.
The latent heat at that point was released.
The ball rolled down the hill, releasing all that energy.
That is the energy that then formed all the photons and particles and antiparticles in
our universe.
And that's the stuff from which, at a stage of 10 to the minus 35 seconds, I described
previously our standard big bang theory works just fine.
Starting from 10 to the minus 35 seconds, and I said, going to 10 to the minus 6, let's
say, there are all these particles and photons and thermal equilibrium, where'd they come
from?
They came from the latent heat associated with that previously unbroken supercooled
symmetry.
That's the basic idea.
Now, the predictions of inflation are spectacular.
First of all, it, as I've explained before, it comes up with a natural solution for the
apparent uniformity or homogeneity and isotropy of the universe.
The universe is the same in all directions because it used to be really small.
It came into equilibrium.
It was all one thing that was all in thermal equilibrium, and then it expanded by a tremendous
amount.
It cooled, sure, but it cooled the same amount everywhere.
All parts were uniform because they started out uniform.
The universe also looks flat because it's huge, and being so huge, any small part of
it looks flat.
And so, for sure, omega total has to be one because, in general relativity, flat space
corresponds to omega total of one.
And that's what various observations like WMAP in particular show.
Other things that inflation takes care of.
There are few, if any, what's called magnetic monopoles.
A magnetic monopole is like a lone north or south pole of a magnetic field, of a magnet.
Okay?
Now, with normal magnets, you always have a north pole and a south pole.
But why aren't there lone north poles and south poles?
Why do they always come in pairs?
In some theories of the early stages of the universe, massive magnetic monopoles should
be produced in great abundance, and we don't see them.
Not a single one has ever been discovered.
Well, maybe they were formed, and then they got inflated away so that there's only sort
of one of them, maybe, or two per observable volume of the universe.
They all got inflated away, so the density is very small now.
Next prediction.
The universe is much bigger than we can observe.
And there's some evidence for that in that as we look out 14 billion light years in all
directions, the universe looks the same.
And if we were to place ourselves at those positions right now, it would be a bit weird
if we found ourselves near some edge where suddenly things start looking different.
No, probably out there, if you look out 14 billion light years in every direction, you
still see basically the same stuff.
In other words, we think that the universe has no edge, or at least if it were to have
an edge, it must be way beyond what we can see, because we see no evidence for any inhomogeneities
on that scale when we go to such big, big distances.
And finally, the distribution of matter over various size scales in the universe, as measured
particularly well by looking at the variations in the microwave background radiation.
Those things are beautifully explained through inflation theory.
You have the dawn of time, and in the first tiniest fraction of a second, there are quite
a few quantum fluctuations that give rise to density variations in the universe, small
over dense regions and under dense regions.
Then there was inflation, and it expanded those small inhomogeneities into the sizes
from which then superclusters of galaxies and voids could have emerged through just the
action of gravity, as we have seen many times by looking at the results of the numerical
simulations, the various calculations with computers.
Now, in inflation theory, the total energy of the universe is zero.
By that I mean that the matter and the antimatter and the photons all together have an equal
amount of energy, but opposite in sign to the gravitational energy associated with all
these things.
As an example, if I drop this apple, okay, I've said this before, the energy starts
out zero in terms of its energy of motion, and it picks up energy of motion, but it does
so at the expense of negative gravitational energy.
So when you add the two together, kinetic plus potential, you get always a constant
value.
Well, in the case of the universe, when you add up all the energies, particles, antiparticles,
photons, and gravitational energy, you get zero.
The total energy of the universe appears to be zero or very close to zero.
That's what we observe.
Lucky for us, there are positive and negative parts.
There's you and me and the world.
We're all positive energy, but the gravitational effect of us on everything else in the universe
is an equal and opposite amount of gravitational potential energy.
So it's like an apple falling.
The total energy of the universe can be zero.
It could start out with zero and be zero now, just like the energy of the apple starts
out zero and is zero throughout its flight down to my, throughout dropping down to my
hand here.
It doesn't change.
So if the energy of the universe is zero, all you need is a tiny bit of energy or something
to get it going.
Now here's where we get kind of speculative.
One had good reasons to be, you know, introduced.
And it has made predictions that seem to have been verified.
It explains things that were a puzzle and it predicted the distribution of size, scales,
and things like that in the universe.
In other words, it's a well-grounded theory and it has observational consequences that
appear to have been confirmed.
The speculation comes when we ask ourselves, where did the little bit of energy from which
the universe started come?
Where did it come from?
What got the whole thing going?
What was there before time equals zero?
These are the frontiers.
And unfortunately, in these sorts of frontiers, there can be very few, if any, testable predictions.
So, the conclusions we might come to, though based on the process of science and based
on known quantum physics and general relativity and the merging of these theories and all
that, the process can lead to conclusions in a scientific way.
But the conclusions themselves may not be testable, at least temporarily.
And so by their very nature, they may temporarily or permanently remove themselves from the
realm of science.
So take what I say from here on with a bit of a grain of salt.
These are speculations.
But one logical possibility is that what produced the energy before inflation was a quantum
fluctuation out of nothing.
Nothing at all.
Recall the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which says that you can make virtual particles
of energy delta E as long as you do it for a time delta T such that the product of those
two is smaller than Planck's constant divided by 2 pi.
Well, if one such fluctuation of virtual particles appearing out of nothing lasted sufficiently
long for conditions conducive to inflation to appear, then inflation could have taken
over from that point onward, made a gigantic universe out of that quantum fluctuation,
yet done it as a result of not creating any new energy at all, that the new universe still
contains zero energy.
It's just that now the universe is gargantuan rather than some small quantum fluctuation.
All you need is for that fluctuation to grow according to the inflation theory, and that
growth conserves energy.
It's zero or essentially zero, just like the energy of the apple was zero.
So you get effectively a universe from nothing.
The ultimate free lunch, if this idea is correct.
My co-author for my textbook, Jay Pasakoff and I wrote an article in the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific's popular magazine, Mercury, and it summarized the state of knowledge
which we didn't contribute to.
We're not the people who do this work, but we summarized some of these insights from
modern physics, and we called the article universe from nothing, because it might have
been essentially the ultimate free lunch.
Even before inflation theory came around in the early 1980s, there was some speculation
that the whole universe might have been a quantum fluctuation.
In particular, looking at Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, if you make an amount of energy
delta E that's zero, you can make it for a very long time delta T, maybe even infinity,
and the product of those two will still be less than Planck's constant.
So if the universe truly has zero total energy or nearly zero, it may itself have been a
quantum fluctuation out of nothing, and it's still around because the uncertainty principle
allows it to be that way.
It's sort of like the universe, the whole universe is like a virtual particle.
And Ed Tryon who came up with this idea in 1973 said, in answer to the question of why
it happened, I offer the modest proposal that our universe is simply one of those things
which happen from time to time.
Isn't that great?
So the universe just sort of came into existence.
Well, okay, look, this is kind of speculative, definitely.
The inflation part I think is well-grounded.
Something like inflation is widely thought to have occurred.
Maybe we don't know the details of the mechanism yet.
We don't know how much the universe expanded.
We don't know exactly what energies and fields were involved.
Those details remain to be figured out.
But something like inflation seems to have occurred early in the history of the universe
because it explains so many of the things that we otherwise didn't explain in the standard
Big Bang theory, and it has made some specific predictions which appear to have been confirmed
through observations.
So inflation looks like it's on pretty solid ground.
The quantum fluctuation, maybe, maybe not.
Sounds good, but I'm not sure how we'll ever test that.
Well, how about alternatives to inflation?
Inflation sounds good, but it's always good to keep an open mind.
At the end of the 19th century, a number of famous physicists said that, oh, well, we
know everything.
There's nothing else to be learned, and everything else is just a detail, engineering in a sense.
Then along came quantum mechanics and general relativity and special relativity, and it just
changed the world, right?
So we shouldn't just think that we know it all, and maybe inflation is wrong.
One interesting possibility was proposed by Paul Steinhart of Princeton University, who
said that, well, inflation didn't really occur.
Rather, the universe goes through cycles.
It's a cyclic universe, and the idea is based on certain extensions of modern-day string
theory known as brain theory.
Not B-A-I-N, like my brain or your brain, but brain, B-R-A-N-E, like membranes.
And the idea is that our three-dimensional universe, that is, the three spatial dimensions,
plus time, of course, are floating around.
They're like a membrane within a larger fourth spatial dimension, so there's at least one
additional big dimension, and our three spatial dimensions are a membrane floating around
in it.
See, in string theory, most of the dimensions are small, and maybe some of them are maybe
a millimeter in size, and people are trying to find those deviations in the strength of
gravity on the size scale of one millimeter these days.
But in new modern extensions of these theories, some of the dimensions might be absolutely
enormous, so big that, in a sense, our universe is embedded within them.
So suppose you have a whole bunch of membranes floating around in this fourth dimension,
and here's our membrane, and there's a bunch of others as well.
These membranes can approach one another, and when they collide, you can get a hot, big-bang-like
situation.
At least, that's what Paul Steinhardt thinks.
The two membranes collide, a large amount of energy is generated by the collision, and
that heats the universe, and in that hot universe, you can get primordial nucleosynthesis and
all those sorts of good things.
But you avoid the singularity, you avoid the point-like or the quantum mechanical particle
from which everything appeared, all right?
So he says, well, it's not that there was a little tiny thing, and then inflation made
it gargantuan.
He's saying there were these brains, and there may be more than one of them, floating
around in some bigger hyperspace to begin with.
Of course, that's the problem.
Where'd they come from?
That's the problem I have with this theory.
But anyway, maybe inflation set up the membranes, I don't know, I'm not a theorist, okay?
These are all very speculative ideas here, okay?
There's no clear support for the cyclic universe.
But if these membranes hit, creating a big-bang-like structure, a hot, dense universe, then it
could happen again.
Maybe there are other membranes here that could hit as well.
And in the future, then, our universe might grow still more as it collides with additional
membranes causing renewed activity, additional big-bangs, if you will.
Now, you might say, oh, this sounds weird.
Are there any testable predictions?
Indeed there are.
It turns out that in inflation theory, there should be gravitational waves set up early
in the universe as this universe inflates.
But in the membrane theory, there are essentially no gravitational waves.
These membranes collide and they don't generate gravitational waves, at least not much in
the collision.
So a test will be to see if we can see the influence of gravitational waves on the structure
of the cosmic microwave background radiation.
The measurements so far are not yet good enough to tell.
But someday, we hope to see whether there are imprints of gravitational waves on the
cosmic microwave background radiation.
So maybe there will be a way to test this cyclic model for the universe.
It's also called echpirotic, born in fire, because when the membranes hit each other,
they generate a lot of heat, kind of like the big-bang.
So it's sometimes called the echpirotic universe.
Another alternative is that maybe the speed of light varies, and perhaps it was faster
in the past.
If that's the case, then light signals could have traveled a greater distance than in the
standard model, and maybe different parts of the universe could have come into causal
contact that is, you know, they could have communicated with one another and come to
the same temperature without having had to have been in a very small volume which inflated.
So maybe the speed of light used to be really fast, and that was the way in which different
parts of the universe communicated, and there are ways of getting rid of the flatness problem
as well this way.
The trouble with the variable speed of light hypothesis is that, first, there's really
not much evidence for it, and second, it's not clear how it explains some of the early,
some of the other great successes of inflation theory, like it's not clear how it explains
all of the size scales for the observed structure of the universe.
The evidence that the speed of light is changing is slim.
You can look at combinations of constants, like the fine structure constant.
The fine structure constant is alpha, it's the square of the electric charge divided
by Planck's constant divided by 2 pi, that's what the bar means, h bar, and also divided
by the speed of light.
Now this fine structure constant is a measure of the strength of electromagnetic interactions,
and if it changes with time, then the spacing of electronic energy levels in a given atom
should also change with time, and so the wavelength of absorption and emission lines produced
by electronic transitions going from one level to another should also change with time.
You can look at two absorption lines in a laboratory gas where the separation of the
absorption lines is some amount, delta lambda.
We've drawn it here specifically for the sodium atom, and if the fine structure constant
changed with time, then in a distant object the spacing between these two absorption lines
will be slightly different because the fine structure constant changes and that changes
the spacings of the energy levels and hence the transitions among those energy levels.
Well some astronomers claim to have found a change in the fine structure constant.
Out to Redshift 1 or something like that, they find that it changed by one one hundred
thousandth.
It doesn't sound like much, but it's way more than any of the theories predict, that's
one problem, and it's way less than you would need to explain, for example, the current acceleration
of the universe.
To explain the current acceleration of the universe, you'd need a change in the fine
structure constant of maybe 10% out to Redshift 1, and that's not what they're observing,
and moreover other observers don't see any evidence for a change in the fine structure
constant.
Another alternative is that maybe general relativity is incorrect.
Perhaps it's just wrong.
And one idea is that the rotation curves of galaxies are not an indication of the presence
of dark matter, but are rather an indication that general relativity is wrong in regions
with very low gravitational fields.
It is very far out in the outskirts of rotating galaxies.
The main idea of this type that's been floating around for a number of years was developed
by Mordechai Milgrom.
It's called Mond or Modified Newtonian Dynamics, and it can be used to explain the observed
rotation curves of galaxies in a way that doesn't require dark matter.
Unfortunately, when you try to apply Mond to, for example, clusters of galaxies like
this one, which are filled with hot X-ray emitting gas, the predicted distribution of
that hot X-ray emitting gas in the Mond theory does not match what we actually observe, whereas
theories that incorporate dark matter and normal general relativity get a much, much
better agreement.
So I don't think that Mond is the correct theory.
It could be that general relativity is wrong, and indeed some of the string theories that
suggest that gravitons can leak out into some other dimension, you know, out of our
brain and into the bulk, the hyperspace in which our brain is embedded, those are all
in a sense modifications to general relativity, and those might be true, although we have
no clear evidence that they are true.
But some of the specific other Mond-like theories that try to explain, for example, the rotation
curves of galaxies, I don't think that they are likely to be right because they don't
explain enough of the other observed aspects of the universe.
To summarize this, let me say again that inflation is on reasonably solid ground, but the specific
mechanisms of inflation, what exactly happened we're not sure of, and we get into wild speculation
when we ask the question, what happened before inflation?
What happened at t equals zero, and even more interestingly, what was the universe or the
space in which it's embedded like before time equals zero?
