To many cosmologists, the theory of the inflation of the early universe is highly seductive.
While retaining most of the good features of the standard Big Bang cosmology, it alters
our perception of the first blink of an eye of the universe's existence. Instead of just
extrapolating the equations of the Big Bang back to t equals zero, you find that maybe
the universe went through a very brief period of accelerated exponential expansion which
turned it from something way smaller than a proton to a grand universe almost arbitrarily
large. That idea gets rid of some of the apparently ad hoc assumptions of the standard
Big Bang and provides agreement with observations along many fronts in the universe, so it's
really an amazing idea.
Now though we don't know what preceded inflation, there are a number of speculative, though
physically reasonable, possibilities. The one I already mentioned, a quantum fluctuation
out of literally nothing, nothing at all. It just, boom, it just came about. The universe
just appeared. That's a physically reasonable idea, but it raises some interesting questions.
I mean, if there was nothing, not even the laws of physics prior to the quantum fluctuation,
how did it know that it could occur? What dictated its occurrence if there were no laws
before the quantum fluctuation occurred? What allowed it to happen? Well, maybe the
laws of physics and the quantum fluctuation occurred simultaneously. They were created
at the same time, and as soon as the laws of physics became possible, the quantum fluctuation
occurred because it was not only possible, but perhaps even necessary for quantum fluctuations
to occur given our understanding of the laws of physics. I mean, the quantum fluctuations
are an inherent property of the universe because of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. So
as soon as that principle came into existence for whatever reason, the quantum fluctuation
had to occur. That's one idea. Or maybe the fluctuation occurred in some pre-existing,
higher dimensional space which already had laws of physics, and within that higher dimensional
space there were these quantum fluctuations all the time, particles and antiparticles
appearing and disappearing, and in at least one case, the fluctuation lasted long enough
for inflation to take over and create this gargantuan, wondrous universe. It branched
off into new dimensions, the dimensions of our universe, the dimensions to which we have
physical access. That's another possibility then. Now, both of these are very speculative,
and we don't know how to experimentally test among them to see which one is correct. So
in a sense, though they're based on reasonable physics, we don't know how to test them even
in principle, and so by their very nature, these possibilities then remove themselves
from the realm of science because science has some very strict rules. A hypothesis that
isn't testable isn't strictly speaking science, although to some degree it is if it came from
a logical scientific line of reasoning. In any case, this quantum fluctuation hypothesis
suggests that there may be multiple universes, perhaps even infinitely many. After all, if
it was the ultimate free lunch and it happened once, why not multiple times? Why not infinitely
many times? Quantum physics actually suggests that that's not such an unreasonable idea.
A multitude of physically disconnected universes could exist, and we've never seen any of them,
of course. We don't have any physical access to those other dimensions, so we don't know for
sure that they exist, but they may well exist if quantum fluctuations occur spontaneously in
some pre-existing space or whenever laws of physics arise that allow their creation. So it
would be like bubble universes in a multiverse, a whole bunch of separate physically disconnected
volumes of space in some grander hyperspace. Now, don't confuse this with the phrase you
sometimes hear in the news where you'll hear that an astronomer found a galaxy in the distant
universe or some new star cluster in the nearby universe. They don't mean different universes,
they mean distant parts of our universe, the one to which we have physical access, or nearby parts
of our universe. I get this question a lot among the public, hey, you know, did you hear about
the universe that they discovered, that other universe, the distant universe? I go, no, no, no,
no. That's a quasar or a galaxy that they found in a distant part of our universe, okay? But these
bubble universes would be distinct. They're theoretical at this stage. We don't know that
they exist, but they might exist. And I've drawn them with different colors to indicate that the
values of the physical constants might differ among these universes, even if the fundamental
laws of physics are the same. Now, the fundamental laws might even be different. Maybe there's more
than one way to write down a self-consistent set of mathematical equations that can describe
a physically realistic universe. We actually don't know the answer to that question. But let's
suppose there's only one unique way to write down the laws. The constants, like the speed of light,
or the fine structure constant, or Newton's constant of gravity, might differ among these
universes, okay? And that might be because if the values of the fundamental constants depend on
details in the way in which symmetry broke among the unified forces. Remember, I said that the
forces were at one time unified, and then symmetry broke, and, you know, different forces emerged,
different manifestations of some unified underlying force emerged. Okay, that may be,
there may be only one way that can happen, but the physical constants associated with that
breaking of symmetry might differ from one universe to another. And a great example
is given by snowflakes. Snow, snowflakes always have a general hexagonal symmetry. Here they are.
And that's because the water molecules, the structure of water molecules only allows them to
come together with this hexagonal symmetry. It's a fundamental property of water, that when it
freezes, it must have this hexagonal symmetry. But every snowflake differs from every other
because of the detailed molecular motions of the water at the time that it was beginning to
freeze. Depending on exactly how those molecules were moving, you'll get different shapes for the
snowflakes. Even though fundamentally they all have the same symmetry, hexagonal symmetry,
and they're all dictated by the same fundamental formation mechanism. The details differ, but
the underlying mechanism is always the same. So in a similar way then, these different universes,
though they all form in the same fundamental way, they may have different values for the
physical constants due to local details, uninteresting details in a sense of the formation process.
Here's another way of getting multiple universes, perhaps with differing physical constants.
You could have a large inflating space, and then in different locations of that space,
symmetry breaking starts occurring. But independently, like here's a unit, here's a unit,
here's a unit, and in all these spaces, symmetry breaking is occurring. And so you get all these
physically disconnected regions of broken symmetry separated by regions where the forces are still
unified and the universe is just still keeping these things separate. They're causally disconnected
from one another at this point because they are independent regions of broken symmetry in some
underlying expanding universe. So in a sense, you can think of them as different universes,
and again, they may have different values for the physical constants, like the snowflake example,
or for example, trees falling in a forest. You've got a big forest, and here's a patch of
trees that falls one direction. You know, one tree might start falling and it knocks the others
over because they're weak. They have some sort of a beetle infestation or something. And in another
region of forest, the trees will fall in a different direction, that kind of thing. But it's the same
physical process. Or water freezing in a glass. If you look at it, the axis of symmetry of the
little hexagonal crystals that form might point in one direction, in one place of the freezing
glass of water, and in another direction, in another place in the freezing glass of water.
That kind of thing, okay? Now, another way of getting more universes than one is to have what's
called eternal inflation. A single inflating domain as a result of quantum fluctuations
produces a bunch of baby domains within it, which themselves start inflating. So the picture might
be something like this. You have some big domain that's inflating within it. Quantum fluctuations
produced two inflating domains, and within each of those, quantum fluctuations occur once again
that produce new regions of inflation and so on. And again, the laws, or at least the physical
constants, could differ. So here you have this one smooth inflating domain, and then quantum
fluctuations start occurring within it, and you branch off into a whole bunch of independent
little inflating domains, like a bunch of baby universes coming from a single ancestor. So here,
down here, maybe is the grandmother universe, which has several sons and daughters, which themselves,
then, are parents to new baby universes, and they go branching off forever. Eternal,
chaotic inflation, where you have all these little bubbles, each of which is an independent universe,
arising from a quantum fluctuation from its parents. What a weird idea, huh? It's an interesting
idea, actually, I think. Andre Linde came up with it, and it's interesting to me because you get a
wide variety of universes which have many values for the physical constants. Maybe they span the
whole range of allowable values, and then we live in one of the universes that's conducive to our
existence. I'll have more to say about this later. The kind of universe we would like is,
for example, looking at this diagram of energy versus symmetry breaking parameter,
we would like one which lasts a long time. So instead of having a ball roll down the hill quickly,
and in which case you would have symmetry breaking occurring rather quickly, and the volume wouldn't
grow to a very large volume, you'd instead want some sort of a curve where the ball is rolling
down the hill slowly, and that gives a lot of time for this one little unit, this one inflating
universe to grow to a vast size, as must be the case to accommodate our observable universe.
Our observable universe is very uniform, so whatever inflated had to have had time to go
through many doublings and inflate to a very large volume, and you get that if you have a curve
of symmetry breaking versus energy that's flat or gently sloping downhill for a while, to give that
region of broken symmetry a chance to grow into a vast volume, as opposed to this case here where
as soon as the symmetry starts breaking, it rolls down to the bottom of the hill and you end up
then with very little energy pushing on the universe after a short time, and so it doesn't
grow to a very large volume. That's the kind of universe we'd like is the one that has a chance
to grow to a large volume. Now, I want to mention more explicitly that the inflation of the early
universe may be related to the dark energy accelerating the universe right now, and one way in which
there could be this relationship is that if this bottom here does not go all the way down to zero,
then even when the ball lands down here in this local minimum, there's still some latent heat
or some energy of the false vacuum or some dark energy, whatever you want to call it,
tending to stretch space more and more quickly, and so maybe our universe is at the bottom of one
of these little valleys right now, which isn't a state of perfectly zero energy, and maybe there's
another state over here of perfectly zero energy to which we will transition sometime in the future,
perhaps due to quantum tunneling through this little hill here. Anyway, that's the idea.
Yet another way of getting multiple universes is through black holes, some physicists think.
Black holes may connect our universe with another universe like a little baby universe
sprouting out from the other side here, and indeed, we've already seen this hypothetical
connection when we considered the possibility of wormholes between universes. But in this picture,
you might even be able to produce a black hole in your basement. Alan Gooth likes to say this,
you know, squeeze material down tightly enough to make its density so high that it'll contract to
form a black hole, and you might create another universe sprouting off into some other dimensions.
Hopefully it won't sprout off into our own dimensions because it would, you know,
it would expand and crush us, or at least expand us out to very large distances away from one another.
So in any case, there's this black hole idea, and one possibility is that the emerging universe
is completely different from the parent universe. But another idea advanced by Lee Smolin in his
book, Life of the Cosmos, is that the baby universes sprouting from these black holes
have largely the same properties or characteristics as the parent universe, and so they pretty much
look like the parent universe, but with some mutations. So universes might be able to gradually
change characteristics instead of having the universes that are born from another parent
universe be completely different all in one bang. So these are all very speculative,
interesting ideas. The bottom line is there may be many physical ways in which to get a
multiverse, a multitude of universes. And so the old joke that I used to hear when I was young,
define universe and give three examples, isn't really a joke anymore, because back when I was a
kid, it was a joke because the universe was everything. Well now there may be many of them,
and I guess we have a new term for that, the multiverse, but still we can now give perhaps
three or more, maybe even infinitely many examples of other universes, though we can't
physically point to them and we can't prove their existence. We don't know whether they
really exist, they're hypothesized to exist. I don't know that we'll ever know. You might design
experiments that suggest the presence of other dimensions or of dark matter outside the three
dimensions to which we have physical access. Maybe that's what pulls outward on our universe and
causes the apparent acceleration. Maybe other universes are pulling outward on our universe,
causing acceleration. So suppose this one's our universe and the other universes are out here,
and they're somehow pulling out on our universe, causing the apparent acceleration.
How would you distinguish that possibility from simply dark matter or some other property of
hyperspace pulling out on our universe? That's the problem, it's hard to see how to actually test
these various hypotheses in a unique way. How do you know that our acceleration isn't due to
gravity leaking out of our universe gradually and causing it to weaken? There are many possible
explanations and the problem theorists have had is that they don't know of a way of uniquely testing
the hypotheses. It'd be nice if we could travel through a wormhole and actually go to a different
universe and say, hey, I got a new one, here's a different one, hopefully with similar physical
properties, otherwise you would disintegrate. But anyway, you go there, you look around,
then you come back and tell your peers. That would be cool, but as I discussed before,
we don't actually think that travel through a wormhole is possible. So these conclusions,
though, achieved by the process of science, by their very nature, remove themselves at
least temporarily from the realm of science and maybe forever. But I'm hoping that someday we
will have ways of testing for other universes. There are many things that physicists and
astronomers are doing now, which 20 years ago would have been thought outside the realm of
science because no one could think of a physically conceivable way of testing the hypotheses,
yet now, decades later, we do have ways of testing the hypotheses. So maybe there will
be a way of directly testing for the presence of other universes in the future. I hope so.
Now, there's an independent argument for the multiverse. It's based on one form of what's
called anthropic reasoning, reasoning that says basically that our existence can be used
to make certain deductions about the properties of the universe. Unless the universe were so and so,
we wouldn't be here to be discussing it, right? So that's an interesting idea. It's sort of
centered on us, and so a lot of physicists don't like it, but it has some utility and it has some
aspects of it that I think are quite attractive. Let me go through this line of reasoning,
which will independently suggest the presence of a multitude of universes spanning a range of
physical properties. If you look at our universe, it seems to be incredibly finely tuned for the
emergence of complexity. By that I mean carbon nuclei and oxygen atoms and things like that,
culminating with life. And indeed, the pinnacle of that would be intelligent life able to ask
questions about the universe, devise ways of testing those questions, of answering those
questions. In other words, the pinnacle of life as far as we can tell on this earth is human
intelligence. So the universe seems finely tuned for the emergence of this complexity. If you
play with the equations of physics and you change not the laws, but the values of the seemingly
arbitrary physical constants, you change them just a little bit. And in most cases, not all,
but in most cases you end up with much more boring and even stillborn, I call them, universes.
Nothing really interesting ever develops in them. For example, if the strong nuclear force
were 20% weaker relative to the electromagnetic force, then only hydrogen would be stable. So
there'd be no nuclear energy to power stars, no heavy elements for life, none of that interesting
stuff. Or if the strong nuclear force were 2% stronger than the electromagnetic force,
then only helium would be formed during the hot big bang, no hydrogen, you know, none of that.
So there'd be no long lived stars, there'd be no hydrogen burning stars, there'd be no water,
there'd be no hydrocarbons. Without hydrogen, you have a pretty boring universe, at least at the
level of life where you need long chains of carbon attached to hydrogen and other things.
Now suppose the weak nuclear force were appreciably stronger. Then it turns out all hydrogen would
have fused into iron during the big bang. So again, there'd be no hydrogen around, no fusion of
hydrogen and stars, no carbon, no oxygen, none of the things we know are necessary for life
of our type. Or if the weak nuclear force were weaker, then only helium would be formed during
the big bang, no hydrogen, you know, no hydrogen is again bad news. Now what do I mean by weaker?
How much weaker? Well there it gets into details, you know, the calculations can get kind of hairy,
but the point is you don't have to be much stronger or much weaker to muck up the observed
properties of the universe. Here's another example, the masses of the particles making up atomic
nuclei. If the masses of the proton and neutron were more nearly equal, then it turns out only
helium would be formed during the big bang, just helium, okay? Or only neutrons, depending on the
details, okay, depending on just how equal the masses of the proton and neutron are. But in any
case, no hydrogen, no water, no hydrocarbons, no long chains of carbon with hydrogens attached,
okay, that's the stuff that we think is necessary for life. Or suppose the mass of the neutron were
somewhat higher relative to the mass of the proton, then neutrons wouldn't exist, they would be so
disfavored in the formation process of elementary particles and combinations of elementary particles
that there'd be essentially no neutrons, there'd be only hydrogen and hence no heavier elements,
which require neutrons for their existence. Well, these sorts of arguments and many,
many others, okay, there's many arguments like this having to do with small changes in the
fundamental constants leading to boring universes or at least very different universes that don't
allow the emergence of such complexity. Many such arguments and you look at them and you ask
yourself, what do they imply? What can we learn? What can we conclude from all this? What are the
possible conclusions? Well, one that's reasonable, but it's outside the realm of science because we
can't test it, is that there's a single universe and it's special and it was created by a divine
creator with us in mind, a special creation of a universe tailor made for our existence.
This is essentially one form of intelligent design, it's an argument for God and there's no way one
can scientifically disprove such an argument, but there's no way one can prove it either.
So it's an interesting argument, but it's outside the realm of science, I can't get anywhere using
the rules of science to explore this argument of intelligent design. So it doesn't really belong
in a science classroom and so at this point I will move on. I'm not saying it's wrong or right,
it's just not part of the realm of science. So now let's consider the possible implications
with or without God. One implication is that the universe is special and it happens to be
just right, just right for our existence by accident. There's just one universe and that's
the way it is. It's possible, but if you'll pardon the joke, I think that the odds against this are
so low as to be astronomical. Very low odds that this is actually the case, but I can't
disprove it, it might be the case. The third possibility is that there are multiple universes
spanning a wide range of physical properties and we necessarily live in one of the good ones,
one of the ones that had conditions suitable for the emergence of life and complexity
advanced brains such as ours. So it looks like our universe is special, finely tuned,
and it is to some degree, but this is not unexpected if there is a multitude of universes
that is a multiverse spanning a wide range of physical properties, spanning perhaps
all of the allowed range of physical properties. In that case at least one such universe or a few
would have been suitable for the emergence of complexity and intelligence and we obviously
live in one of those good ones. This is sort of analogous to a poker game. All hands of poker
are equally unlikely, but according to the laws of poker some hands are better than others,
they're winning hands or more likely to be winning hands. There are fewer of those than all the
random hands that aren't winning hands according to the laws of poker or the rules of poker.
Okay, we capitalize on the winning hands. Now if you got a straight flush the first time you
were playing poker, this is the first game you've ever played and you get a straight flush, I you
know and other players would probably suspect that you have some sort of a deal with the dealer,
right? It's unlikely that you'd get a straight flush the first time you play, but it's not
impossible, it could happen. On the other hand if you played poker millions or billions of times
and never got a straight flush that would be kind of weird, right? I mean you're really unlucky,
okay? You're going to get one occasionally if you play enough times. So ours is not necessarily
the only universe, there's a multitude of them. Ours just happens to be one of the good ones,
not necessarily the most interesting one, but certainly more rare than the common uninteresting,
boring universes in this vast archipelago. We're one island in this huge chain of universes
and it happens to be a good island. Now this is kind of like a grand extension of the Copernican
principle. We're not the center of the universe, our sun isn't either, our galaxy isn't either,
our cluster of galaxies isn't. The supercluster is just one of many. What if our universe is one
of many? It's a grand extension of the Copernican principle. It doesn't mean that it's correct,
but at least it's not unprecedented. Now let me note very carefully that many physicists and
astronomers despise this kind of anthropic reasoning, okay? They really hate it. They say
it's not real science, it emphasizes our perspective which might be quite limited. Maybe our imaginations
don't imagine other forms of life based only on neutrons or only on iron or something like that,
right? They really don't like this and they also say that by resorting to anthropic arguments,
we're giving up. We're no longer seeking an explanation for why the fundamental constants
are the way they are. Well, I'm not saying we're giving up. Let's keep searching. All I'm saying
is that it's possible that there is no final answer other than there could have been a wide range
for the values of the physical constants and our universe is the way it is because the other ones
weren't conducive to our existence. That's the idea. I'm not saying give up, okay? And I'm not the
only one who embraces ideas like this. There are many eminent scientists who do. I think there are
more who don't, but there are many who do. And I recommend some books in particular by Martin Reis,
such as Before the Beginning, Our Universe and Others. And also he wrote a book called Our Cosmic
Habitat and he discusses these kinds of ideas and he's perhaps the most eminent British astronomer
right now. Now Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake naked in Rome partly for his belief
in other worlds having alien creatures. Fortunately, these days and at least in our country,
we can express our opinions without fearing similar punishment and we can debate with our peers
in the spirit of academic freedom and intellectual investigation of all possibilities.
The utility of anthropic reasoning can be illustrated by considering an ancient Greek
philosopher contemplating the origin of Earth's properties. It's radius, it's mass, it's distance
from the sun. In Aristotelian cosmology, the Earth was unique, a constant of the universe. It just
was this way. It had these properties and that's the only way it could have been because
it was created that way. But the Greek philosopher thinking about the properties of the universe
in a more abstract way might wonder, well, instead of just creating it that way, what fundamental
physics governed the properties of the Earth? Just like string theorists right now wonder
what fundamental physics determines the mass of the proton or the vibration mode of a neutrino
or something like that. The Greek philosopher could instead have reasoned that these properties
of the Earth, the mass, radius, distance from the sun, things like that, are not uniquely specified
but can take on a range of values depending on local details, where the clump of material
happened to be from which the Earth formed. And that philosopher could reason that these properties
must be within a certain window for us to exist. We can't exist on the planet Mercury. We can't
exist on Neptune. They're bad for our existence for a number of reasons. One's too hot, one's too
cold. We live in the place that's just right because that's one of the few places we could have lived.
And the philosopher would then say, maybe then there's an ensemble of these things, objects,
let's call them planets like the Earth, covering a wide range of properties and ours happens to be
in the good window and so here we are contemplating the universe. That philosopher could conclude
that other planets exist without ever having seen one. Now this is not a rigorous proof,
it's not completely rigorous reasoning, but it's a plausibility argument. The Greek philosopher
could plausibly argue that there are these other universes, these other planets out there,
and ours is simply one of the good ones. Another idea was that Fred Hoyle said,
given the abundance of carbon and oxygen in the universe, the properties of the carbon nucleus
must be a certain way, okay? He made some predictions, some very specific quantitative
predictions. Willie Fowler went often measured the properties of the carbon nucleus and found that
Hoyle was spot on. So within a percent or two, Hoyle had predicted the properties of the carbon
nucleus simply based on the observed abundances of carbon and oxygen. He said the carbon nucleus
must be such and such, otherwise we wouldn't exist. That was an example of anthropic reasoning.
So it has some utility. Can we, you know, know for sure that other universes exist?
No, we can't, at least not right now. And you could ask the question, why should any
universes exist? Well, we don't know and we almost certainly will never know. We'll never know why
the laws of physics had to have been there in the first place. Science alone probably cannot
provide all the answers. All science can do is allow an exploration of the universe based on
its observed properties and experiments and hypotheses to get an ever better working model
of how this universe ticks, not why it exists.
