We come now to the final step of our extensive journey through the universe, and I want to
provide a grand overview and some philosophical comments.
At first, I'd like to thank my loving family, including my daughter Zoe, my son Simon, baby
Capri, and especially my wife Noelle.
They have provided endless patience and support while I've worked very long hours on this
course.
I'd also like to express my gratitude to my parents, who helped nurture my curiosity
about the universe in so many ways, from putting up with my smelly chemistry experiments in
our basement to giving me a small telescope when I was 14, to encouraging me at all stages
of my education and career.
My extended family members have also been there when I needed them, and Frank Serduke,
who drew many of the diagrams I've used, has been invaluable.
Over the years, I've learned so much from my colleagues and students, exploring the
universe through exciting research projects and explaining the wonders of the cosmos in
the classroom have made my career exceed my highest expectations.
I'd also like to thank the teaching company for inviting me back for this second edition
of my course, providing a fantastic opportunity to continue sharing astronomy with a broad
audience.
The staff have worked tirelessly to achieve very high levels of excellence, and I really
hope you enjoyed the course.
So all of you above, and others too numerous to list, thank you so much.
So now let's take a grand view of the cosmos.
The universe is truly vast, and this may make you feel small and insignificant.
After all, images like that of the Hubble Ultra Deep Field, a small but typical part
of the sky, convince us that there are about 100 billion galaxies out to something like
14 billion light years in all directions, and that's just in the part of the universe
that we can see.
We now think the universe extends far, far beyond just those parts that we can see.
The parts we can see might be like a proton in the universe.
It might be so big.
Filled with galaxies all over the sky, and our Milky Way, our Milky Way galaxy, is just
like one of these specks.
Let's choose this one right here.
Looking at it up close, we see that it's a spiral galaxy, about 100,000 light years
across containing hundreds of billions of stars, and there are so many galaxies like
this spread throughout the universe, each containing billions, tens of billions, hundreds
of billions of stars.
Our Milky Way is one typical galaxy.
We see many stars within our galaxy when we look out at the Milky Way on a dark, moonless
night.
Look at all those stars, just myriads of them, innumerable worlds out there, perhaps.
Let's choose this one right here, this star.
It might be like our own sun, a typical star, over a million kilometers across.
That sounds big, a million kilometers, but compared to the vastness of space that we've
already explored, it's tiny.
This typical star is a tiny part of the Milky Way, which itself is a small part of our Milky
Way galaxy, which itself is a speck in the vast universe of galaxies.
So this sun, a million kilometers across, is just a speck in our galaxy and a speck
in the universe.
It's surrounded by a system of planets extending over billions of kilometers.
Typically the planets are separated each from one another by tens or even hundreds of millions
of kilometers, a vast solar system to be sure on a human scale, but tiny compared to the
entire galaxy.
And our planet, Earth, is just one of these planets and a rather small one at that.
As Carl Sagan said, it is just a pale blue dot when seen from a distance, even from the
distance of the moon.
And here we are in this room.
We occupy just a tiny fraction of Earth's surface, a seemingly insignificant speck of
dust in the universe.
Well, from a scientific perspective, there seems to be no clear reason for our existence.
Here we are, specks of dust in this vast cosmos.
What does the cosmos care about us?
Why should we care about us?
Oh, wait a minute, wait a minute.
I don't want to make you all depressed and suicidal, okay?
Of course, of course, each of you is very important to yourself, to your family, to your friends.
Don't go doing something drastic to yourself, okay?
I'm just saying that scientifically it at first appears as though we're just a speck
of dust of no cosmic importance.
But really, you know, who cares what's going on thousands of light years away?
That's not going to make a difference in your job or life.
What you care about is your immediate surroundings, your loved ones, your friends, your quality
of life, things like that.
So obviously, regardless of what goes on in the rest of the universe, each of you is
very important.
But I don't even think of you as cosmically insignificant, despite what I just said, the
speck in a speck in a speck, you know.
You are cosmically significant.
Each of us, in fact, is very special and very important.
Just consider the big picture, how the universe really is.
Consider what could have been.
The universe formed 14 billion years ago in a blinding flash, a big bang, we call it,
and it began to expand.
It could have expanded too quickly or too slowly, and density variations might not have
had a chance to form and grow.
These density variations that we map through the microwave background.
But these variations did form, and they did grow through gravitational collapse.
Large structures forming from smaller ones, all through the action of gravity, the sculptor
of the universe, they did form.
But the universe could have expanded too quickly, spreading out in density, becoming so low
in density that they might not have formed.
Or maybe the densities initially were so large that only supermassive black holes formed.
But that's not what happened.
Density variations that gave rise to galaxies full of stars, and to clusters of such galaxies
formed.
And it need not have been that way in some other universe, in many other universes perhaps.
It wasn't that way.
And the laws of physics are such that heavy elements were cooked up within stars and subsequently
expelled into the cosmos by gargantuan explosions, supernovae.
Explosions that not only expelled into the cosmos heavy elements cooked up during the
normal evolution of a star, but also expelling into space elements that could only have been
produced by a gargantuan nuclear reactor like this, an exploding star.
We are made of star stuff.
But alter the physical constants just a little, and you find out that in many cases, depending
on which ones you alter, stars don't explode, they don't eject material into the cosmos.
But in our universe, they did.
And these chemically enriched gases from supernovae spread out in our galaxy, gradually
mixing with other clouds of gas and dust.
And those other clouds, the nebulae, eventually started to gravitationally collapse.
They became massive enough that all the action, all the gravitational forces between the particles
made them collapse into ever denser structures, forming dark dense clouds whose central regions
subsequently fragmented into numerous stellar embryos, and finally into clusters of stars.
There in the center of the Orion Nebula, you see newly formed stars, and stars in fact
that are still forming from these chemically enriched gases, gases that had been enriched
by previous generations of stellar birth and death.
Now many of these newly formed stars were surrounded by discs of gas and dust from which
planets could coalesce.
In some cases, the discs were thick enough and surrounded by cocoons, shielding them
from ultraviolet radiation that might have otherwise destroyed them.
And because of previous chemical enrichment through supernovae, there were sufficient
quantities of heavy elements from which rocky, terrestrial planets could form, planets sufficiently
close to the central star that they were bathed with light and heat, providing conditions
conducive to the development of complexity.
One of these planets, in the case of the solar system, was the Earth, at just the right distance
from a long-lived, stable star, to allow the formation of ponds and oceans of water.
Had our solar system not been swept clean by a giant planet like Jupiter, the remaining
debris might have continued to crash into the Earth for billions of years, probably
extinguishing any life that may have formed.
But we did have Jupiter, and Jupiter cleared out our part of the solar system, making Earth
a habitable place.
On the other hand, had the giant planets been placed in highly eccentric orbits, as often
appears to be the case in other planetary systems, Earth would soon have been ejected
from the solar system, robbing Earth of light and heat.
Over time, natural processes increased the concentration of organic matter in ancient
ponds on Earth, and somehow, somewhere, self-replicating organisms formed in the primeval broth, and
they began to evolve.
These eventually evolved into humans, with highly advanced brains, great dexterity, insatiable
curiosity, and unlimited creativity.
Creatures that could gaze upon the heavens and wonder what our purpose is, how we came
to be, where it's all going, and what is it that makes the universe tick?
We have this curiosity, we have the mechanical ability, the dexterity to build machines with
which to test our hypotheses, we can explore the universe.
Now as with other life forms, we are enormously complex structures, even the simplest cell
is far more complex than any inanimate objects like rocks, stars, globular clusters, and
galaxies.
Even the simplest cell is so complex.
Biologists have the hard part.
For astronomers, it's easy to understand the physical inanimate mechanisms which govern
the formation of a neutron star, or the collapse of a star into a black hole, or the disruption
of a galaxy, or the merging of two galaxies together.
Those are easy things, okay?
They just take lots of computer time and a lot of fumbling around with equations.
But the cell, boy, that's hard to understand.
Yet what sets humans apart is this ability to explore the inner workings of nature, to
ask questions about the universe, and ultimately to understand it.
We have the brain power to do this.
It is almost as though the universe has developed a way to know itself through us.
Had it not done this, it would have been filled with all of these inanimate objects that
may be form a beautiful tapestry in the cosmos, but that do not lead in any way to an understanding
of the cosmos by any of its contents.
So we are the observers of the universe, the explorers of the universe, the brains and
conscience of the universe.
And it needn't have been like this.
Alter the laws of physics ever so slightly, and our universe might have been stillborn,
devoid of such complexity.
But you know, we were dealt a darn good poker hand.
Maybe not the best one possible, but a really darn good one.
Maybe it took many tries, perhaps infinitely many, for the multiverse to achieve a suitable
universe, one in which the physical laws were conducive to the formation of highly complex
brains and an innate curiosity about the cosmos.
And maybe, even within our own galaxy, it is very rare that creatures achieve such a
level of intelligence, curiosity, and mechanical ability.
Now you might say, surely intelligence is common in our galaxy, given that the laws
of physics are the same throughout, and given the billions upon billions of stars in our
galaxy.
People say, look at all those stars, surely there's lots of intelligent life out there.
Well you know, if the probability for intelligence forming is one over trillions, or quadrillions,
then even with billions of stars, you know, you multiply billions of stars by the reciprocal
of an even bigger number, and you could come up with numbers less than unity.
It's not at all clear that there's lots and lots of intelligence in our galaxy.
And moreover, even if simple life had appeared, we think that it took a long time for such
complexity to develop on Earth, for us to develop.
Look at the four and a half billion year history of the Earth, only in the last few million
years have there been hominid-like creatures, and only in the last couple of hundred thousand
years have there been homo sapiens.
Remember that Earth had to have many special conditions for us to exist, I've already noted
some of them before.
But there are others as well, such as the presence of a large moon to stabilize Earth's axis
of rotation, or having an unusually high proportion of heavy elements.
You know, our sun and the solar system have more heavy elements than is typically the case
in our galaxy.
Most other stars are less abundant in the heavy elements, and wouldn't have formed rocky,
Earth-like planets in the first place.
Rico Fermi, the famous physicist, raised an interesting question.
If they're common, if intelligence is all over the place out there in our galaxy, where
are they?
If there are many highly advanced civilizations, and they might have formed billions of years
ago, why haven't they visited us yet?
Wouldn't they have had enough time to develop machines that could go through the vast distances
of space, populating nice habitable planets?
Shouldn't at least one advanced civilization have developed the tools to colonize the entire
galaxy?
We see no evidence of them.
Does that mean they're not there, or maybe just that they're rare?
This is not a compelling airtight argument by any means, but it does cast some doubt
on the idea that highly advanced civilizations with great intelligence and mechanical ability
are very common.
I and a number of my colleagues think that they're pretty rare.
We may not be unique, but we're pretty rare.
So in fact, I hope I've shown you that we are very, very special.
Here we are, eager and able to contemplate and understand the universe, and it easily
might not have been that way, either because no universe had the right properties, or because
the development of life and intelligence and mechanical ability and curiosity was such
a fluke that it almost never happens.
That's another possibility.
We just don't know.
What we do know is that we have a pretty good understanding of a lot of the universe.
We don't know all the details, but gosh, you look at what we know.
You look at what we've covered in this course, and it's just incredible.
I've introduced you to some of the frontiers.
Who knows where they will take us?
I'd love to learn what will happen in the future.
I'd love to live long enough to find out what humans discover about nature, and achieve
in 100, 1,000, 10,000 years.
To me, that's the worst aspect of dying.
I'll never know what humans achieve and learn far in the future.
I hate that.
I really hate that, but I accept it.
But I would love to know what the universe is like, and I think humans in the future
will have a much better understanding than we even have right now, and great for them.
I hope they have a great time finding out.
I'd love to know, too.
The late celebrated physicist Richard Feynman of Caltech wrote a poem expressing this great
joy of thinking about nature.
He was standing by the ocean, watching the waves pounding the seashore, and he thought
about how they consist of just trillions of individual atoms all just kind of grooving
around doing their own thing, minding their own business, and yet forming this surf, you
know, this great ocean.
And this great ocean was sitting there for almost eternity, you know, billions of years,
just with all the trillions of atoms interacting.
Why were they doing this?
You know, if there was no one around to look at it or to understand it or to think about
it, you know, what purpose does it even serve?
You know, it's sort of a dead planet, you know?
But somehow, somehow out of all this life emerged, complexity emerged, self-replicating
and evolving molecules emerged.
And they grew.
They grew in their complexity and their overall structure and size.
And you got DNA and proteins and all these structures that eventually formed us, us somehow
out of this pond, out of this zillion set of atoms minding their own business, you know?
They produced us, atoms with consciousness in a sense.
So here we are standing, watching all this happen.
And he says, he ends it by saying that we are matter with consciousness and curiosity,
able to wonder about our own ability to wonder and able to explore nature.
Each of us, in a sense, is both a universe of atoms and an atom in the universe, but
a very special atom in this universe.
So people often ask, you know, what is the purpose of the universe, you know, why does
it even exist?
Well, you know, science can't answer that.
Okay, that's for theologians and philosophers and metaphysicists, you know?
We can only figure out how the universe works, not why it's here and what its purpose is.
Each of you has your own reason for thinking that the universe exists.
I can't tell you that, you know?
I don't know what the purpose of the universe is.
Maybe the purpose is very simple.
Maybe the purpose is to produce organisms that simply enjoy being part of the universe
for a fleeting moment.
Or maybe the purpose is to produce sentient beings who can figure out and appreciate the
physical beauty of the universe and the extraordinary way in which relatively simple physical laws
give rise to essentially infinite variety.
Maybe, maybe that's part of the purpose of the universe.
Indeed, as Einstein once said, the most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it's comprehensible.
Each of us is an integral part of the universe, a part that can strive to understand it.
And if some of us did not pursue the challenge of deciphering the cosmos, we would be selling
ourselves short as human beings.
We would be wasting something that sets us apart from all other living creatures.
I really firmly believe that.
I feel very fortunate to be in a situation where I'm not hungry every day and I'm not
worrying about where I'm going to sleep tomorrow night.
I can pursue the wonders of nature simply for the joy of understanding or trying to contribute
in little ways to our understanding of how it all works.
I mean, that's part of the essence of the human brain and of human life.
And regardless of whether any of you or most of you choose a career where you explore the
workings of nature, I'm not trying to make scientists out of all of you.
Don't go and change your jobs.
But each of you can appreciate the workings of nature.
I'm not trying to make scientists out of all of you.
Don't go and change your jobs.
But each of you can appreciate what it is we're learning and can appreciate the magnificence
of the universe and the fact that we are coming to an understanding of it through these sorts
of studies.
And I hope you will support such studies.
In any case, each of you clearly is special to the vast universe, not just to your friends
and family.
And this is it.
I hope you found this to be a fantastic voyage through the cosmos, broadening your horizons.
You've gained at least a rudimentary understanding of astronomy and how we got here, our fundamental
origins.
Now, this has been a survey course.
I've covered a lot of topics, and though there's been 96 lectures, oh gosh, I've only skimmed
the surface.
I've covered so many things so very briefly.
Now, Socrates said, education is the kindling of a flame, not the filling of a vessel.
And I hope in that spirit, I've kindled your Socratic flame and inspired you to study in
more detail those parts of the universe that most interest you.
In any case, you can now read and comprehend much better than before various astronomy news
articles that very, very often appear.
And astronomy is in the headlines so much these days.
So many exciting things have been happening, and will continue to be in the news again.
Solar eclipses every few years, black holes being discovered everywhere.
Quasars, dark matter, dark energy of some weird repulsive, some say repugnant nature, but
I think it's beautiful.
We just don't understand it, and it is repulsive.
The fate of the universe.
Keep your eyes and ears open for new developments.
Even by the time this course comes out, things will have changed.
That's great.
Science is a dynamic process.
It's supposed to change.
Now, to help you follow some of the progress in science, here are a few useful websites.
I have one, astroalex.com, which has links to many other sites.
There's also astrosociety.org, the website of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific.
Despite the name of the Pacific, anyone in the U.S. or anyone worldwide can join, and
by joining, you will be supporting the public dissemination of knowledge in astronomy.
They're a great group consisting of scientists, educators, the lay public, you know, amateur
astronomers, fantastic group to join.
You can also look at hubblesight.org for Hubble Space Telescope news, and they have links to
other good websites.
And a really nice website that I like a lot to start my day is the Astronomy Picture of
the Day website, where each day there's a new picture having some sort of celestial connection,
and they have comments on it, which is cool, and links to other sites.
And if you have questions about astronomy, a great place to address them is at the Astronomy
Cafe, where there's an astronomer, Stan Oldenwald, who will answer your questions about astronomy.
And he already has a couple of thousand answers posted to standard questions.
And then there's space.com with lots of current information on the cosmos.
Now, I also hope that this course has given you some appreciation of the methods by which
astronomers and physicists learn about the universe, and also some sense of the thrill
of scientific discovery.
I told you about how I discovered Saturn through my small telescope at the age of 14,
and it didn't matter that millions of people had seen it before.
I discovered it.
No one told me to look at that star-like object shining at the sky.
I discovered Saturn that night.
And imagine the thrill of discovery when you truly find something that no one has ever
realized or found before.
It's just an addictive feeling.
That's why we do science.
Some discoveries have practical spin-offs, such as Newton's developments of gravitation
and calculus, or the realization that the long-term survival of humans depends on our
ability to deal with the meteoroid or comet collision problem.
One of these things is going to hit us one of these days.
We'd better realize that and deal with it.
Scan the skies, try to find it before it hits, and send something out there to deflect it.
If we find it long before it's going to hit, we can actually do something about it in principle
and save ourselves from extinction.
So astronomers may save the world.
Now, other discoveries simply advance our knowledge of the cosmos, allowing us to better
understand the intricate workings of nature and to better appreciate our place within the cosmos.
And finally, I hope this course has heightened your sense of awe and appreciation and wonder
about the universe.
Perhaps the next time you go out to the countryside, when you look up at the dark sky,
you will ponder the magnificence of the universe and its contents,
and the amazing fact that through careful experiments, observations, and thought,
humans are coming to a good understanding of what makes it all tick,
what makes the universe work, what dictates the contents and their complex interactions,
how did it all come together, where is it all going?
We humans are coming to a good understanding of this through this process of science,
arguably the most successful process ever, you know, where we explore nature, formulate hypotheses,
test them, validate them, and then even use our knowledge to improve the quality of life,
to improve our own existence here in the vastness of the universe.
We couldn't do it without science. We couldn't do it without medicine, which is based on science.
We couldn't do it without technology.
Let me close by saying that I think astronomy is good for the soul, whatever that may be.
And according to the writings of Plato, so did Socrates.
Referring to astronomy, Socrates said,
In every man there is an eye of the soul which is purified and re-illuminated by such studies,
and is more precious by far than 10,000 bodily eyes, for it alone sees truth.
May you keep enjoying the wonders of the heavens. Thank you.
