These lectures are part of the Great Courses series they are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day you can finish even the longest course in just
weeks.
How's our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Science and Religion.
The lecturer is Dr. Lawrence M. Principe.
Dr. Principe is a professor of the history of science and technology and of chemistry
at Johns Hopkins University.
He graduated magna cum laude from the University of Delaware where he received his B.S. in
chemistry and B.A. in liberal studies.
He earned his Ph.D. in organic chemistry at Indiana University, Bloomington, and then
his Ph.D. in the history of science at Johns Hopkins University where he began teaching
in 1989.
Johns Hopkins has repeatedly recognized Professor Principe's teaching achievements.
He has won their Distinguished Faculty Award, the Excellence in Teaching Award, and the
George Owen Teaching Award.
In 1999, Professor Principe was chosen as the Maryland Professor of the Year by the Carnegie
Foundation.
In 1998, he was the recipient of the Templeton Foundation's Award for Courses Dealing with
Science and Religion, and in 2004, he was the first recipient of the prestigious Francis
Bacon Award for History and Philosophy of Science from the California Institute of Technology
and the Francis Bacon Foundation.
Dr. Principe is the author of The Aspiring Adept, Robert Boyle and His Alchemical Quest,
and the co-author of Alchemy Tried in the Fire, winner of the 2005 Pfizer Prize.
He has also published numerous papers on the history of science.
Professor Principe prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
sketches, and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Science and Religion
Together, they comprise two of the most important and wide-ranging influences on human civilization.
When we survey the broad sweep of history, the impact of these two features of human
civilization are everywhere apparent.
A glance at the Daily Newspaper will convince you, that is, if you need convincing, that
the two, both of them, continue to be important influences on our daily world, both for good
and for ill.
Their impact is everywhere.
We can't escape either one.
Even the most avowedly non-religious person can't allude the daily influence of religion
in their lives, in terms as obvious as current events, vocabulary, or the very ways we conceptualize
the world.
Likewise, even the scientifically untrained or uninterested can scarcely draw a breath
without coming in contact with science or with one of its technological products.
So even those who think that they are little concerned with either science or religion
or both are really just deluding themselves like ostriches with their heads stuck in the
sand.
Well given the importance of these two subjects, it's not surprising that down through the
ages they've had considerable chance to interact.
So we're faced naturally with a simple question.
What is the nature of that interaction?
How have science and religion that have independently so powerfully influenced human civilization
impacted each other?
Well this course intends to examine just that question.
Over the next 12 lectures, we're going to explore several historical episodes that provide
insights upon the varied interactions between science and religion.
Of course, 12 lectures is very few.
We can do little more than hit some of the high points of the science-religion interaction,
but we're going to endeavor to fill out a broad view of the science-religion landscape
and call into question some very common assumptions about it and, I hope along the way, correct
some prevalent historical errors about the topic.
Well, to get started, Aristotle advises us that we should begin any serious investigation
by defining our terms.
In my experience, I've found it's always a good idea to listen to what Aristotle has
to say, so let's heed his advice.
We'll first define the scope of this course and then see what we can do with those very
slippery words, science and religion.
Well there are many religions in the world, of course, and one could ask interesting questions
about the relationship of any one of them with science.
But this course is going to focus on the science-religion interactions specifically in the Latin
West.
Now what do I mean by the Latin West?
What I mean are the lands that were once the Latin-speaking parts of the Roman Empire and
its successors, in other words, predominantly Western Europe, Mediterranean.
In the sense I'm using the term, I'm also including one important offspring of European
culture that is North America.
Well we can't cover everything in 12 lectures, but there are two more important justifications
for this choice.
The first is that modern science is predominantly a product of the Latin West.
Therefore if we want to draw meaningful connections between historical events and modern day concerns,
it seems most reasonable that we should choose to look at the culture that's most directly
the progenitor of our own.
Second, most of the listeners to this course, regardless of their religious affiliation
or lack thereof, or of their historic ethnic origins, will be North Americans.
And thus, by that very fact, immersed in a public and intellectual culture which is
Western European in origin and character.
So therefore this Western European focus seems to make sense in terms of relevance.
Now this cultural focus immediately has one good advantage.
It helps us define the religion upon which we will focus, namely Christianity, the dominant
religion of European and New World culture.
So having said this, we can now more rigorously define the scope of this course.
It is the study of the interactions of Christianity with science in the Western tradition.
Now of course, there are many extremely interesting and enlightening episodes in religion science
interactions in Islam and in Judaism, but unfortunately we can't cover them in this
course.
There exists, I should point out, sufficient diversity within the Christian tradition anyway,
particularly after the 16th century Reformation and after the 19th century explosion of North
American splinter sects.
So we're going to have our hands quite full just dealing with diversity within Christianity
anyway.
Well after examining definitions and some historical models for the science-religion
interaction, we're then going to follow a mostly chronological sequence to examine
some illustrative episodes.
Some of these are going to be familiar to everybody, like the Galileo affair or the
continuing fallout over issues of evolution.
But there are others that will be less well known, for example the issues regarding miracles
and spirit interactions in the world, biblical interpretations and medieval naturalism.
One thing there's already plenty of out there in discussions of science and religion is
self-serving rhetoric, as well as polemics and gross oversimplifications.
Part of our job is to get beyond all of those, to achieve a well-grounded and most of all
properly contextualized view of what really happened and why.
So we want to untangle the real issues in play and as we see some of these issues are
intricately philosophical and intellectual.
Some of them are really going to bend your mind to get your brains around them.
At other times these issues will be political or social and sometimes just personal.
What's certain is that the real stories are almost invariably much more interesting than
the rhetorical, polemical versions, even if the real stories are less useful in the end
for bashing people over the head.
Finally, my last comment about the course, this is a course predominantly about scientific
and theological knowledge.
Therefore, I'm not going to treat issues relating to ethics.
That would certainly be a course on its own.
Now let's get to the difficult task, defining what we mean by science and religion.
Here frankly, we're stuck between a rock and a hard place.
On the one hand, we need some precision in our terms so that we're sure that our discussions
don't slip out from beneath us, owing to subtle shifts in our definitions or unclear
terminology.
Indeed, many of the misunderstandings between science religion and their interactions, both
historically and at the present day, stem from the sloppiness with which terms are bandied
about.
And they're used more as rallying posts than as explanatory terminology.
We want explanatory terminology.
But on the other hand, we also have to realize that any of the definitions that we give have
a historically contingent component.
Now that's a fancy way of saying that nobody, except maybe for some philosophers and lexicologists,
actually start by making definitions and then classify things in the world according to
the definitions they've just made.
Rather, the real things exist first and then the definitions are wrapped around them with
more or less neatness.
For an example, let's take the astronomer Johannes Kepler.
What he was doing at the turn of the 17th century was certainly scientific to him, but
it might not fit our modern definitions of science.
Because those modern definitions were hammered out and rigorized in the 19th century for
very specific purposes.
So my point is that if we start out setting down definitions that are too rigid, too absolute,
too modern, we automatically limit ourselves to speaking only about modern times.
But this is a history course.
We can't limit ourselves just to modern times.
So if we start with definitions distinguishing science cleanly from religion, which might
probably seem reasonable enough to most people today, we start out simply enough on the wrong
foot.
Let me give you an example.
A moment ago I mentioned Johannes Kepler, one of the most important astronomers and mathematicians
of the early 17th century.
He is cited in every elementary physics text as the discoverer of important laws of planetary
motion.
For example, that the planets orbit the sun in elliptical orbits with the sun at one
focus of the ellipse.
We can clearly recognize what we call science in Kepler's work.
But Kepler was also explicit in saying that his motivation for uncovering the laws of
nature was to give glory to their creator.
At one point he writes, and I quote, God is praised through my work in astronomy.
Thus, was Kepler's motivation scientific or religious?
Was he more involved in science or religion?
Well, the answer to those questions is simply that they're poorly phrased questions.
They're poorly phrased because they illegitimately transfer our own definitions and boundaries
from the 20th and 19th century back to Kepler's 17th.
For Kepler, a clear distinction between science and religion, which seems so obvious to us
today, so unquestionable, simply didn't exist as such.
And Kepler is not some oddball exception.
The same could be said of Isaac Newton, for example, or any of their contemporaries or
predecessors.
If you're interested in more examples of this sort, I'll take this opportunity to
direct you to my longer course on the history of science to 1700, which documents the close
relationship, in fact, the inseparability of scientific and religious issues throughout
the period that it covers.
In this course, we're going to look at illustrative episodes in more detail and tease out the
meanings to them.
But let me get back to definitions.
I'm a stress that part of our task here is to understand what was actually meant by
science or religion in the past.
And we can only do that by looking at things as they really existed.
We're going to set ourselves up to fail if we create categories first and carry them
back with us to the past.
That would be baggage that we carry with us.
So we find ourselves having to navigate between two extremes, no definition at all and too
much definition.
I suggest that the compromise solution is to start with the broadest definitions that
are familiar with us that we can come to now and then remember to leave ourselves open
to amend, expand, alter, mutate those definitions as we go.
So let's start now with science.
Well in common parlance, science actually has two distinct meanings.
First, it's a body of knowledge claims.
Now what do I mean by knowledge claims?
I just mean a body of statements that are held or claimed to be true or probably true.
Besides a body of knowledge claims, however, science is also a practice.
The first definition is older because science, our English word science comes from the Latin
sciencia, which just means knowledge.
Since the 19th century, however, science has meant a specific kind of knowledge, namely
natural knowledge, that is knowledge about the natural world, and we can rattle off a
list of the various sciences with which we're familiar, botany, biology, astronomy, chemistry
and so forth.
But besides this body of knowledge claims, science is also a practice and by that I mean
a set of methods for gaining, assessing and augmenting the sum total of knowledge claims
that science holds.
For example, say we're listening to the evening news one night and we hear some kind
of study that's just being reported, there's something wrong with us with it to our minds
and we say, oh well, that's not scientific.
What do we mean by that?
We mean that some standard agreed upon rules of method, whether observation, testing, control,
experiment, logical analysis, whatever it might be, has not been followed.
So science has these two distinct meanings, body of knowledge claims and a practice for
acquiring them.
Now, religion.
Here, clearly, we're in somewhat deeper waters, but the restriction of this course to Christianity
means that we can avoid one really horrible question, that is the philosophical and legal
question of what constitutes a religion.
Instead, we can just say, well, Christianity is a religion and move on.
There are, however, three terms that describe different aspects of Christian religion.
And these three terms I want to introduce because they are more precise than those sort
of catch-all term religion.
They're going to make our discussions a little bit more precise.
Actually, I hope a lot more precise.
The three that I have in mind are first, religious practice, two, theology, and three, faith.
Let's look at each one and give a definition of each in turn.
First, religious practice.
That can be defined as the observances and actions that flow from a religious commitment.
For example, attending church, giving alms, praying, fasting at particular periods, moral
self-discipline, and so forth.
You can add to the list.
Theology is the intellectual, methodical study of God, the spiritual world, God's attributes,
actions, and relationship to creation.
Like science, theology is composed of two parts.
A set of knowledge claims, for example, Christ has a dual nature, and a practice for generating
these knowledge claims.
The third term, faith, is a method of arriving at knowledge claims.
The method is by simple belief, by assumption, or suspended disbelief.
Now that we've defined these three, how are the three actually related?
You can work out a good deal of this on your own, I think.
Think about it for a while.
Think about people you know, think about yourself, think about examples, and try to tease out
the three different facets of religion in those people or those examples.
Let me give you a couple of examples that came to my mind.
One, we could have two individuals, both of whom display a high level of religious practice.
One could have a highly developed theological sense and rely very little on faith.
The other one, however, could have a very large investment in faith and very little theology.
It's possible even to simultaneously be an atheist and a theologian.
All that would mean is that you use the methods of theology to generate a number of statements,
but without actually investing those statements with personal belief, so that's possible
as well.
I should also say that faith need not mark out people that we would term religious.
The example is that to be an atheist requires a great leap of faith, that is, to assent to
the unprovable statement, the unprovable premise, that no God exists.
So in fact, a theist and an atheist are both people of faith, they're both believers.
It just happens that one belief is negative and the other one is affirmative.
Well there are probably as many permutations and combinations of these three within a religious
person as there are people.
I'll let you think about that a little further on your own.
Well, after having said this, it seems to me that when we're talking about science
and religion, what we're really talking about most of the time is science and theology.
There's little point, for example, in talking about say, science and religious belief or
religious practice, because there's not enough similarity between the two to make any kind
of comparisons meaningful.
But science and theology share a lot in common.
Both are bodies of knowledge claims and practices.
And the practices are not entirely similar, but they do have things that can be compared.
They form a pair that's very well suited for comparison.
Let's go a little deeper here.
The content of both science and religion is made up of statements and claims about the
way things are.
Examination of their practices is really very revealing.
We've already encountered faith as a method of generating statements or claims.
But let's name another method, namely reason.
How do faith and reason relate to one another?
That's a very important question, and really it lies at the core of a great deal of what
we usually refer to as the science-religion interaction.
Often it's really a faith-reason kind of interaction instead.
How do faith and reason relate to one another?
That's been a fundamental question for millennia.
Lecture three, I'm going to devote almost entirely to that question.
But for now, we need to tease out just some starting point for our discussions, so a short
answer will be enough.
Faith and reason are both methods for generating a knowledge claim.
Faith functions by means of belief, a premise is stated and believed true, generally on
the basis of some sort of authority.
In short, it's assumed true.
Christianity maintains a body of such statements that are handed down within its tradition.
Now different Christians may argue about exactly what those faith statements are, but there's
a considerable amount of agreement.
For example, the collection of faith statements that's crystallized as the Nicene Creed at
the beginning of the fourth century.
It includes, for example, the faith statement, I believe in one God.
Creed, by the way, derives from the Latin word credo, I believe, a word that is repeated
at the beginning of every section of the Nicene Creed.
The point is that the exercise of faith provides a body of knowledge claims.
Other knowledge claims being a set of statements that are claimed to be true, or probably true.
The exercise of reason, on the other hand, takes us from premises to conclusions by the
means of argument and logic.
As a method, it's obviously more complicated and open to greater analysis than is faith,
but it leads to a similar product, a collection of knowledge claims.
Now to the key point.
In discussing science and religion, it's sometimes claimed that science operates by
means of reason and religion by faith, and that this difference of method is the basis
of their distinction.
But think about it for a little while, you'll see that this is a false idea.
Traditional Christian theology does not operate by faith alone.
At every moment it relies upon logical argument, deduction, and reason.
The works of medieval theologians, for example, are masterpieces of logical analysis and rational
argument.
I like to point out that the principle, the logical principle known as Occam's razor,
which is often used and sometimes abused in modern scientific discussions, is actually
named after William of Occam, a 14th century Franciscan theologian.
Now it may be that the medieval theologians' rational arguments began from or are bounded
by certain statements held by faith, but in fact, again, if you think about it, scientific
arguments are really not that different.
Science as we know it incorporates a substantial number of faith statements simply in order
to operate.
While the specifics of scientific study and reasoning generally stem from empirical evidence,
which is one of the defining characteristics of science, there are also many implicit assumptions.
For example, most natural scientists make the leap of faith, a leap that's been assailed
recently by some modern critics, that they are studying something that's real, that
the natural world, the physical world actually exists, that it has an independent existence
outside of ourselves.
A related assumption is that the world is uniform in the sense that its behavior is
regular and law-like.
Likewise, assumptions have to be made about sense perception.
We have to assume that our senses are giving us in some way, whether we're looking directly
at a natural object or reading an instrument or a scale or looking through a telescope,
we have to assume that our senses are giving us some kind of authentic, reliable information,
and we have to rely on our subsequent ability to register and interpret those sensations
correctly.
These are all statements that cannot be proven true, but of course, without such assumptions,
science would be impossible.
It would be futile, for example, to bother trying to determine natural laws if we believe
that they changed every few minutes.
But recognizing such implicit assumptions, which are ultimately expressions of faith,
shouldn't lead us to diminish the status or the ability of science to tell us about
our world one-wit.
Instead, it shows that the basis of our knowledge claims about the world are invariably grounded
upon certain assumptions that are outside the realm of reason.
This does not imply that they are unreasonable notice.
Only, and this is the important point, it shows us that the exercise of human reason
has its limits.
We have to accommodate ourselves to positing some ground-level assumptions with which we
are comfortable, that rest ultimately upon beliefs, assumptions, leaps of faith.
Once we do that, then we can progress.
The point here is by no means to undermine science, either as a body of knowledge claims
or as a practice, but rather to show the inadequacy of making too facile a separation between science
and theology based on their deployment of faith versus reason.
Both of them employ both.
Good theology, good science, are methodologically quite similar, even if the things that they're
making claims about are often, but not always, quite different.
Now, let's move from philosophy to history and look at historical claims about the interactions
of science and religion.
Well, many models for the interaction between science and religion have been proposed over
time.
Probably the most common of all these is the conflict or warfare model.
The model states, as you can tell from the title, that science and religion or scientists
and religionists form two separate and warring camps.
Well, this model is so prevalent and provides such an interesting example of how commonly
held beliefs come to be developed and maintained that I've decided to devote an entire lecture
to it.
That will be our next lecture, lecture number two.
For right now, I'll just mention its existence and move on.
Another model is what's called the separate realms model.
This states that science and religion operate in fundamentally different realms of knowledge
and activity.
In one version, not all versions, but in one version, science deals with the physical world
while religion deals with morals and ethics.
Another version of this was proposed by the paleontologist and popular writer Stephen
Jay Gould and called by him NOMA for Non-Overlapping Magisteria, that is to say that science and
religion have their own independent, autonomous, separate spheres of authority.
A consequence of this model is that any time a conflict appears between science and religion,
it must be the result of a border transgression.
Well, there's something in this formulation of the separate realms model that appeals
to our innate sense of fairness and professionalism.
Still, there are serious critiques of it to be made.
First, it's clearly a post-conflict model.
It assumes that in its absence, things are going to run to conflict.
So it's an attempt to play the referee and find agreeable borders.
It's in a sense saying, alright children, play nice and stay within the yards I've
marked out for you.
As a result, it really doesn't have very much value to the historian, because the boundaries
that it sets forth are not trans-historical.
They're the result of history.
Thus, it can't help us understand the historical record.
It would be anachronistic to apply it to situations where the boundaries were different.
Remember, for example, the Kepler instance I mentioned, and it runs the risk of making
us arrogant because we're tempted, maybe even encouraged, to use it as a ruler by
which to measure up historical incidents.
When they don't measure up, we tut tut and wag our finger at some presumed border transgression
without acknowledging that the borders have actually shifted considerably.
Well, the Latin word for ruler, or carpenter's square, norma, gives us a word to describe
this kind of model.
It is a normative model.
It tells us how things ought to be, that is, it sets down a pattern or a norm.
But of course, a norm that has been arrived at by a particular person at a particular
time and place.
Historians eschew the normative.
Our job is to be descriptive, interpretive, and explanatory.
The normative, well, the normative, we leave to philosophers, moralists, umpires, and other
know-it-alls.
As we progress through this course, we should instead pay attention to the ever-shifting
and ever-fuzzy borders of science and religion, and we'll see, again, that in the past they
don't lie where we expect them to.
Some of the most interesting and most productive interactions occurred from what we might call
crossovers, border transgressions, the borrowing of terms, methods, and ideas from one realm
into another.
Indeed, historians of science recently have taken to talking of appropriations and translations
between science and religion to describe the regular exchange and re-adaptation of materials
between science and theology, typical of periods before the 19th century.
But there's another critique of the separate realms model to be made.
Simply, Christianity DOES make claims about the natural world, for example, that the world
is not eternal.
It's a dogma of Christianity.
Such claims do overlap with the claims of natural science.
Likewise, some scientific work either directly or indirectly makes claims that overlap with
theology.
The assertion made by some writers that religion deals only with morals or ethics or should
virtually identifies these authors as modern, English, liberal Protestants.
That is to say, products of a particular historical development.
Traditional Christianity contains knowledge claims about the way things are in the natural
world.
Historians of science nowadays generally adopt some version of what's called the complexity
thesis.
It's not as neat or as simple as the conflict or separate realms model, but it has the
advantage of being historically more accurate.
Namely, there's no one simple description to the science-religion issue.
There have certainly been episodes that can be described as conflicts.
But having said that, as historians we need to go further to analyze and specify what's
really going on, to learn what it can tell us about the thoughts and ideas that informed
each episode.
Likewise, there have been points of harmony or collaboration, and these too need to be
examined for what they tell us and provide a contrast to the common assumptions of conflict.
On a larger scale, this is going to teach us something about the familiar, the here
and now.
That the here and now is neither inevitable or the only way that things can be.
This in fact, it seems to me, is one of the fundamental reasons for studying history.
It's not to be normative, that is, for us to go around telling our predecessors what
they should have been.
Instead, it's rather to give them the chance to explain to us what we might have been and
yet could be.
