Lecture 2 The Warfare Thesis
In the last lecture, we looked at some models for the interaction between science and religion.
I concluded at that point with the suggestion that the interaction has been so complicated
over time that we can't use any one blanket description, instead I proposed the complexity
thesis.
But at that time, I also mentioned the conflict thesis as one of the most prevalent of the
blanket descriptions for religion and science interactions.
In this lecture, we're going to look more closely at that conflict model.
It's a good idea, I think, in general, to look at where our assumptions and preconceptions
come from.
One of the things I find very interesting about the conflict model is that it's been
reinforced to equal degrees by people on both sides of the science-religion controversy.
The strangely persistent issue of creationism and evolution that we hear something about
almost every day now in the newspapers renews the perception of conflict.
And scientists as well often make statements that are fairly aggressively anti-religious.
So the conflict model has these people constantly reinforcing it as well.
But one of the best things about history, to my mind, is that it gives us a sense of
perspective, a perspective that often reveals how strange and atypical our times are in
relation to the past.
So given the widespread public acceptance of the conflict model, it comes as a surprise
to many people to learn that no historians will support it.
Let me be clear, the idea that scientific and religious camps have historically been
separate and antagonistic is rejected by all modern historians of science.
So let's explore its origins.
Why when and by whom was it proposed?
How was it defended and how was it disseminated so widely?
What's the evidence for it?
Is there a particular context and reason for its formulation?
And finally, how do we explain its long-term success?
Now in history, we have to realize that it often proves quite difficult to answer questions
of origins and causation with precision and certainty.
But this is not the case with the warfare model of science and religion.
Its origins are easy to pin down.
So I'm going to begin with some simple declarative statements.
1.
The conflict model is a fabrication of the late 19th century.
2.
Its origins lie with two men, John William Draper and Andrew Dixon White.
3.
These men had specific political and social purposes when arguing their case.
4.
Most importantly, the historical foundations for their work are almost totally unreliable.
Let's look more closely.
John William Draper was born in England in 1811, the son of an itinerant Methodist preacher.
He emigrated to the United States in 1832, received a medical degree from the University
of Pennsylvania in 1836.
In due course, he took up a position as a professor of chemistry, first at Hampton
Sydney College in Virginia and then at New York University.
He was eventually also named the first president of the American Chemical Society.
In the 1860s, he turned from his scientific work towards publishing on historical subjects,
including in 1863 a book that was entitled A History of the Intellectual Development
of Europe.
This publication manifested Draper's embrace of positivism, the positivism of Auguste Comte,
particularly his Law of the Three Stages of Human Development.
In brief, Comte had claimed that all human history progresses through three successive
stages, the first being the theological and the lowest, then the metaphysical, and finally
the highest stage, the positive stage, or the scientific stage.
Such a theory, as untenable as it's now seen to be, was sweet music, not to say sweet
flattery, to the ears of 19th century scientists.
This was the period they were trying to professionalize their fields.
This was the period in which the word scientist was coined for the first time.
The Industrial Revolution was in full swing, and its products of science, technology and
manufacture were daily being felt more and more on a constant basis by ordinary people.
Scientists themselves, at this time, were eager to create, define, and elevate their
social position, so the positivism of Comte that put scientific thought at the top of
the heap was a welcome boost for scientists.
Additionally, Draper loved the idea of immutable laws governing everything, not just science,
but culture and history as well.
Well, as a result of Draper's historical writing, the most successful science popularizer
in America, Edward L. Yeomans, asked Draper to contribute a volume to his International
Scientific Series.
This series eventually contained more than 40 volumes, and by the time he asked Draper,
it already contained books on several scientific topics which had been commissioned from leading
scientists.
Draper's contribution, which was published in 1874, was a history of the conflict between
religion and science.
Well, its success was phenomenal.
It outsold every other title in the series.
It went through over 50 printings, was translated into 10 languages, and even today 130 years
later remains readily available.
Draper's main sentiments are summed up in the first few pages where he writes, and I
quote,
The history of science is a narrative of the conflict of two contending powers, the expansive
force of human intellect, and the compression arising from traditionary faith.
Well, with these references to expansion and compression, it sounds rather like Draper
the chemist discussing gas laws, but in fact he uncomplicatedly identifies expansion as
science and compression as religion.
So how does he support his contention of conflict?
Well unfortunately, with some of the worst historical writing you are ever likely to
come across.
Historical facts are confected, causes and chronologies twisted to the author's purpose.
We find interpretations made merely by declaration, we find quotations violently taken out of context,
and instances, quite a few of them, where Draper claims a historical writer said something
that's in fact 180 degrees away from what he actually claimed.
Let me give you an example.
At one point, Draper ridicules St. Augustine for saying that the sky is stretched flat
over the earth like a skin.
Well if we go look up St. Augustine, in fact that line does occur there, but it's a quotation
that St. Augustine makes out of the Psalms.
Why does Augustine cite it?
Well he uses it as an example of how biblical interpreters must be careful not to accept
the surface text of scripture, since here, as St. Augustine notes, it obviously conflicts
with established astronomical knowledge.
Indeed, Draper declares that, quote, no one more than Augustine brought science and religion
into antagonism.
Well in a future lecture we'll see just how wrong that statement is.
Now much of Draper's book is so ridiculous, so melodramatic, so rabid, it's hard for a
knowledgeable person actually to read it without a rye smirk.
In fact, I find when I'm teaching science and religion to my students, I always want
to give them some kind of points of discussion in terms of photocopies out of Draper's book,
but I've never actually been able to find something I didn't think they'd laugh at.
And further, it's not just any religion that Draper assails, Draper's book is actually
one long vitriolic rant specifically against Catholicism.
Rather than the impartial account he promises readers in the introduction, Draper runs to
sarcasm, ridicule, and absurdities.
In fact, large sections of his text pass by without any discussion of science and religion
issues in order to assail what he calls the corruption of Christianity into Romanism.
And quite literally everything bad is laid at the feet of the Catholic Church, which
he claims to quote, have ever held a bitter mortal animosity towards all science.
In fact, Draper may be the only person in history ever to blame the Catholic Church
for the prevention of the expansion of human population.
How does he manage this?
Well first he asserts as a law, there's in one of those laws that Draper loves so much,
that the human population should double every 25 years.
And then he claims that in the 500 years from 1066 to the Reformation, the population of
England scarcely doubled.
Thus he concludes, Catholicism is to blame, partly on account of priestly celibacy, partly
on account of insinuated clerical debaucheries that prevented legitimate proper marriages.
You can tell he's a Victorian Englishman, right, because he thinks that you need a proper
marriage for children, but let that pass.
Partly on account of excessive death from famine, disease, and lack of due medical care,
all of which of course is the Pope's fault.
I'm not making this up.
By the way, perhaps he never did the math, but given his law of population and the starting
population of England of two million that he provides, if it weren't for the supposed
suppression of the population by the Vatican's policies, then the population of England in
1566 would have been about two trillion, or 350 times the current population of the planet.
Well what could provoke such claims?
Two things.
First, Draper flies off the handle at several mentions of the First Vatican Council, which
had been convened in 1870, just four years before his book came out.
One of the things about it that got his goat apparently was the council's criticism of
rationalism, namely the belief that all knowledge and truth is immediately accessible to and
subject to reason.
The council instead affirmed that human reason, while powerful, is nonetheless limited in
its extent, for there exist certain transcendent truths, for example the triune nature of God,
that could not be revealed by unaided reason.
So Draper reprints some of the things that annoy him the most about Vatican I's dogmatic
constitution at the back of his book, but the intensity of his response remains still
a little hard to account for after you've read this.
This is because Draper's tone is not entirely rational, but is partly emotional.
That is, it's grounded in the fervent Anglo-American anti-Catholicism and racism of the late 19th
century, particularly sparked by opposition to new Catholic immigrants to America.
Indeed, we can remark with just a smirk that he doesn't seem to have noticed that the
mid-19th century doubling of the American population at what he calls the prescribed
rate, and which he uses to prove the superiority of new Protestant America to Catholic old
Europe, was in fact due in significant part to Irish immigration.
Anyway, Draper calls Protestantism the twin sister of science.
Any conflicts came only from misunderstandings or from Protestants being, and this is his
term, incompletely emancipated from Catholic type thinking.
What I find particularly odd is his adulation of Islam, which he actually calls the Southern
Reformation.
Part of this comes from his unexplained contempt for the doctrine of the Trinity, for which
he invents an Egyptian origin.
But another part of it comes from his implicit belief that probably anything would be better
than Catholicism.
Now although Draper's book was popular, some people apparently found this topic a little
bit humorous as well, because in the 1870s after the book was published, a cartoon came
out in New York that showed Draper dressed in a turban and pointed shoes waving a scimitar
engraved with the name of his book in front of the pope who held a scroll saying infallibility.
Underneath is a poem that goes in part like this.
Now by the holy prophet's beard the panem Draper cries and flourishes his cemetery before
Saint Peter's eyes, to his eye who am infallible, as all the world doth know, by science bright
and Islam's might, to his eye that tell thee so.
Well, Draper's support of American anti-Catholicism and anti-immigrant sentiment is certainly
one of the reasons his book found such a wide readership, but it also found a public steeped
in the ideas of scientific progress, eager for the new science and ready to benefit
from its promises, promises which are made abundantly throughout Draper's book.
It was also a time of considerable discussion of science and religion anyway because it
falls in the aftermath of Darwinian evolution, but we'll postpone that particular discussion
to a later lecture.
Well, while Draper's work is easy to dismiss as cranky and ahistorical, a more sustained
and seemingly more historical presentation of the warfare thesis came out at about the
same time, from Andrew Dixon White, who was White.
He was born in America in 1832 and raised as an Episcopalian.
Unlike Draper, he was actually a historian, first at the University of Michigan, then
he became the first president of Cornell University, and then the president of the American Historical
Association.
He first treated the subject in 1869.
In 1876, he published a version entitled The Warfare of Science, and he went on the lecture
tour giving talks about this issue.
These short publications grew into a ponderous two-volume work entitled A History of the Warfare
of Science with Theology in Christendom, published in 1896.
While White's books are still melodramatic in tone to modern readers, modern tastes,
but they don't share Draper's rabbidity.
Perhaps for this reason, and for the reason that they weren't hawked by a big popularizer
like Yeomans, they didn't sell as well.
Nonetheless, as a result of the copious footnotes that they contained, they seemed to be more
reliable and so, in effect, had a greater impact, certainly on the historical community,
if not the popular community.
Why was White interested in the subject?
Well he was driven to it by criticism he received as president of Cornell University, one of
the first educational institutions in America that had been established without religious
affiliation and which embraced an entirely secular program of study.
Thus White's strategy was to reply to his critics by trying to use history to show,
as he says, that,
"'Interference with science in the supposed interest of religion has resulted in the direst
evils both to religion and science, and invariably so.'"
So the book is, in short, a projection of his experiences with Cornell onto history.
Let's take a few minutes to examine some of his arguments.
Unfortunately, when examined for historical accuracy, his arguments, even though footnoted,
are not much better than drapers.
What I hope to do here is not only to criticize White, I mean, criticizing White is unnecessary
at this point, but also to fill out a catalog of common historical errors that you might
want to keep in mind whenever you're reading any kind of book or treatment of history.
Well, let's start with a simple and a notorious example, the idea that before Columbus, people
thought that the world was flat.
Well, in fact, it is draper and White, specifically, both of them who bear most of the blame for
popularizing this baseless view, to the extent that nowadays, 80% of schoolteachers still
foist this upon poor innocent schoolchildren.
Fact is that, of course, the sphericity of the earth was well-established by the 5th
century BC, by the Greeks, and a good measure of its circumference made by the 3rd century
BC, and these facts were never forgotten in learned Western culture.
Ancient knowledge on this score was much more than what White calls vague germ ideas.
Well, how did White and draper get things so wrong?
Well, first what they did was to dig up virtually the only two flat earthers from late antiquity.
Factantius in the 3rd century and the extraordinarily obscure Cosmos Indico Pleustis, a merchant
of the 6th century.
Then they made these two unimportant characters fill in for the entirety of intellectuals
for a thousand years.
Are they really representative?
Not at all.
The text of Cosmos, in fact, was not even known in the Middle Ages, it was discovered
only in the 18th century and published then.
The historical fault here I want you to take home as a lesson is called collectivism, and
that is the unwarrantable extension of an individual's views to represent the views
of a larger group of which he is considered a part.
Thus White and draper too, whom White seems to have copied, picks Laxantius and Cosmos
as the paradigms and extends their view to represent all church writers, which involves
ignoring everybody else.
We could do the same thing today, of course.
If we wanted to say something about what Americans think, we'd go and pick a publication
out of the Flat Earth Society, located in California, and conclude from it that Americans
think the world is flat.
Well White then tells of a brave Columbus who fought mightily for the revolutionary notion
of the Earth's sphericity, and here he helps us out, damning himself, with a footnote that
reads, W. Irving, life of Columbus.
Yes, indeed, this is Washington Irving of Rip Van Winkle and headless horseman fame,
who wrote a fictionalized account of Columbus in 1838, yet White uses it as a historical
source.
This is an error of critical judgment.
It's the same as if we used the Da Vinci code as if it contained some historical realities.
In fact, while White, echoing Irving, tells of a daring Columbus before an ignorant, sneering
mob of clerics at the University of Salamanca, the real debate was far different.
The debate at Salamanca was about the size of the Earth, not its shape.
Columbus was rightly criticized for thinking the Earth vastly too small by about the width
of the Pacific Ocean, so about a third.
The fear was that Columbus could never hold enough provisions to sail as far as Asia,
not that he'd fall off the edge.
Well, White then goes on to ridicule the papal role in settling disputes between Spain and
Portugal over possessions in the New World.
He says, in 1493, Pope Alexander VI issues a bull laying down a line of demarcation
upon the Earth as a flat disk.
This was hailed as an exercise of divinely illuminated power within the Church.
White claims that the document then, quote, soon passed into the catalogue of ludicrous
errors, because, of course, one could get to the west side of the line by sailing east
the long way around.
However, let's go back and look at the original source.
The papal bull, Interce today, specifically says that the line goes, quote, from Arctic
Pole to Antarctic Pole, and of course you can't have poles unless you have a globe.
So here is White as an example of a failure to check sources.
Well, another common fallacy that White broadcasts, and which is still popular today, very common,
I have to fight against this in students all the time, was that the Church forbade human
dissection.
Now, it's true that there was a strong taboo against cutting open the human body among
the ancient Romans, and this is why the second century physician Galen dissected instead monkeys
and dogs and then transferred his anatomical discoveries by analogy to human beings.
And this distaste endured for some time, but never was human dissection forbidden by Christian
authorities.
In fact, well before the end of the Middle Ages, attendance at a specific number of human
dissections was a required part of medical education.
Well, to carry his point, White writes the following, quote, St. Augustine, oh poor Augustine,
he gets such a bad rap from these folk.
St. Augustine, in his great treatise on the city of God, which remains today one of the
treasures of the Church, speaks with bitterness of, quote, medical men who are called anatomists,
who with a cruel zeal for science have dissected the bodies of the dead and sometimes of sick
persons who have died under their knives and innumely pride into the secrets of the human
body to learn the nature of disease and its exact seat and how it might be cured.
For White, this is a condemnation of anatomy.
But let's turn to the original text, St. Augustine Dechivita de Dei, Book 22, Chapter 24.
I'll even quote from the same translation that White did, except what I'm going to
do is I'm going to read a little bit before and a little bit after.
Bear with me, it's a slightly long quotation, but it's all important.
Augustine writes, No part of the body has been created for the sake of utility, which
does not also contribute something to its beauty.
And this would be all the more apparent if we knew more precisely how all its parts are
connected and adapted to one another, and were we not limited in our observations to
what lies on the surface.
For as to what is covered up and hidden from view, the intricate web of veins and nerves,
the vital parts of all that lies under the skin, no one can discover it.
For although, and here comes the part quoted by White, with a cruel zeal for science, some
medical men who are called anatomists have dissected the bodies of the dead and sometimes
even of sick persons who died under their knives and have inhumanly pried into the secrets
of the human body to learn the nature of disease and its exact seat and how it might be cured,
yet, notice White stops here, yet those relations of which I speak and which form the concord,
or as the Greeks call it, the harmony of the whole body outside and in, as as some musical
instrument, no one has yet been able to discover because no one has yet been audacious enough
to seek for them.
But if these were known, then even the inward parts of the human body, which seem to have
no beauty, would so delight us with their exquisite fitness as to afford a profounder
satisfaction to the mind than the obvious beauty that gratifies the eye.
So what Augustine is actually saying is that even the yucky guts of corpses are beautiful
in their form and function and proclaim the wisdom of God their Creator.
Only an abusively selective quotation could possibly turn this text into a prohibition
against dissection, so here we have another historical fault, selective quotation out
of context.
We have time for one more example.
White tells of the 13th century Franciscan Roger Bacon how he was imprisoned for science
studies.
Actually, though, Bacon's three major works were written at the request of Pope Clement
IV, and if Bacon was actually imprisoned, it's not entirely certain, the sources are
unclear, it was probably for writing books without the explicit permission of the Vicar
General.
In White's account, Bacon's experiments resulted in pandemonium.
Quote,
Everywhere were priests, fellows, and students rushing about, their garments streaming in
the wind, and everywhere resounded the cry down with the conjurer.
Now one might be rude enough to ask exactly what his source is for this, but the first
linkage of Bacon to sorcery actually comes in a 16th century play, 300 years after Bacon.
I'll remark at this point only that the condemnation of science as demonic, which is endlessly
repeated in bad Hollywood productions, is not a feature of the Middle Ages.
But we'll come back to talk about demons in our fourth lecture.
At any rate, White then shifts gears immediately and remarks, quote,
In 1868 and 1869, 60,000 children died in England and Wales of scarlet fever.
Had not Bacon been hindered, we should have had in our hands by this time the means to
save two-thirds of these victims, and the same is true of typhoid, typhus, and so forth.
Well, do I really have to explain what's wrong with that?
It's a bald emotional assertion based on nothing.
It's totally worthless.
The only thing I wonder about is, why do you suppose White only saved two-thirds of the
poor babes?
Well, maybe he thought that all of them was excessively optimistic and half not quite
enough, so he took something in the middle.
Well as you can see, refuting White is like shooting fish in a barrel.
With his combination of bad sources, argument by assertion, quoting out of context, collectivism,
and general reliance on exclamation rather than evidence and argument, White is not a
book to be taken seriously.
Its real value is as a relic of its particular time and place, and as a museum of how not
to write history.
I often wonder, you know, he should have known better.
Why did he write a book like this?
It's so bad.
And the best I can come up with is that perhaps he thought that his case was so important
he had to argue like a lawyer, and that is less concerned about truth than about winning
the case.
That's the only way I can explain it.
But there's a fundamental flaw that I haven't mentioned with the conflict thesis.
It's the fallacious assumption that scientists and theologians formed two separate camps
throughout history and that the theologians imposed their will on the scientists.
But before the 19th century, scientific inquiry, better called natural philosophical inquiry
at this time, was not carried out by a distinct professional class.
Throughout the Middle Ages, natural philosophy was generally done in the context of theological
speculation.
People from before the 19th century who we retrospectively call scientists themselves
believed that theology and religious texts like the Bible were relevant to their work.
They would have reacted with puzzlement to the modern suggestion that they should have
kept the two separate.
They wouldn't have known what we were talking about.
Thus religion was not an external imposition, but a key part of the mental landscape of
pre-modern natural philosophers.
There were simply not two camps.
But while we can look today with astonishment upon the shoddy character of Draper and White's
writings, their books have had enormous impact and we can't deny that.
Much of this is due to their great success in creating a myth for science as a religion.
Their myth of science as a religion is replete with battles and martyrdoms, saints and creeds.
And as we know or should know, myths are often much more powerful than historical realities.
This myth was embraced by those who adulated science as a concept and as a culture and
it functioned as a means for identifying an identity for science and scientists just
at the time that they were hammering out this identity.
I say, with a little professional shame, that there were even historians of science that
continued to support the views of Draper and White as late as the 1950s.
Additionally, some scientists, particularly those of the crusading atheist variety, referred
to them long after that.
One egregious example is the cosmologist Carl Sagan, ironically enough another representative
of White's Cornell University, who regurgitated sections of them seriously in his popular
science program Cosmos.
Well, we've now explored not only the inherent faults but also the contextual pressures and
purposes for which these views were written a hundred years ago.
It's now time to let them go.
The historian's task is to analyze specific episodes contextually in order to fill out
a comprehensive view of issues and interactions, without recourse to soundbite over simplifications.
So in our next lecture, we're going to get on with it and examine ideas about faith, reason,
and biblical interpretation as expounded by St. Augustine in the 5th century.
