Lecture 4 – God and Nature – Miracles and Demons
If we assume that a creator god exists, then we have to ask, how involved is he in the
running of his creation?
This is a crucial question for the relationship between science and theology.
It asks to what extent the world operates on its own according to inherent laws and
natures, and to what extent God involves himself in the process.
It's a basic question about causation, what causes the phenomena that we see.
Really, this is the essential question, the central question of scientific inquiry, the
discovery of causes.
But it's also a question for theologians.
Why?
Well, how God is involved in the running of creation influences the way we study the
natural world.
It's been suggested, for example, that the concept of a single, eternal, omnipotent god
provides a necessary, although not a sufficient, basis for science as we know it.
This is because God, such a god, can be taken to imply regularity, which is what scientific
study endeavors to uncover.
In contrast, think about a pantheon of quarreling lesser gods, always doing and undoing each
other's work.
Well, that would tend to undermine confidence in the regularity and predictability of natural
processes.
Well, within Christianity, there's a range of historical answers to the question of
God's activity.
At one end of the spectrum lies the position called supernaturalism.
This says that God directly affects everything in the world.
Simply put, all causation is supernatural.
It comes from a power outside of nature rather than powers within nature.
All events and phenomena are caused immediately by God.
Now, within this one position, there are several sub-positions.
One is what I'll call naive supernaturalism, where the answer to all questions of causation
is simply one word, God.
Often this sort of naive supernaturalism comes from ignorance or a lack of interest
in or even a contempt for natural investigations and explanations.
But there's also a much more sophisticated version of supernaturalism, which is called
occasionalism.
According to this system, the links that we witness between cause and effect, for example,
the water in a tea kettle put over the fire grows hot, because it's over the fire, are
merely consequences of our perceptions.
The fire has no inherent ability to heat water.
Instead, it's the result of God's direct intervention.
Indeed, the term occasionalism arises from a fundamental tenet to this position, namely
that one thing doesn't actually cause another, it only marks the occasion at which God acts.
Now, supernaturalism in general potentially diminishes one's interest in the natural
world.
If there's no causative power resident in nature, then why should we bother studying
it?
Supernaturalism can also undermine trust in scientific laws, because the laws themselves
have no real existence.
But this is not the only perspective on supernaturalism.
Thoughtful Christians, some of whom have been occasionalists, have almost never conceived
of God as capricious.
He acts in uniform and stable ways, according to a kind of a covenant that he established
with the world when he created it.
This covenant then fills in for the laws of nature.
Another way of saying this is that God constantly creates, by his direct action, a Cursus comunus
naturi, a common or usual course of nature.
On the other hand of the spectrum, from supernaturalism lies the position that God's direct activity
ceased after the creation.
This can be supported by an appeal to the verse in Genesis 1 on the seventh day he rested.
That is to say we're still dwelling now in that extended seventh day when God is at rest.
Under this conception, the effects and phenomena we witness are caused by inherent powers,
laws, or natures that God implanted in things originally.
This view is known as naturalism.
That is, causation is natural, it flows from natural things.
God delegated in a sense some of his power to the things he created, endowing them with
specific powers of causation.
So fire heats the water in the kettle because God created fire in such a way that he gave
to it the power of heating.
In this case the Cursus comunus naturi is the direct result of natural causes operating
regularly and independently.
Now a way to describe the difference between God's direct and his mediated activity was
enunciated by medieval theologians.
They defined two levels of causation, primary and secondary.
Now all Christians agree that God is the ultimate cause of all that is.
All created things came ultimately from his creative act and therefore they are secondary
to him.
Thus, if they have inherent powers of causation, those powers are secondary.
Supernaturalists now rely upon primary causation.
The direct cause of effects is the first cause, that is, God.
Naturalists on the other hand invoke secondary causation.
The direct causes of effects are secondary causes, the regular activity of natural created
things.
Well in a sense what we're arguing about here is how many intermediaries we're going
to have between God and the daily running of creation.
A supernaturalist would say none, a naturalist would say some, although exactly how many
depends upon your particular ideas about naturalism.
For a supernaturalist if God decides to go on a vacation or just to stop acting things
stop happening or even existence stops happening.
For a naturalist the powers implanted in natural things would still continue to cause
their usual effect.
Now a key point to notice here is that we as human beings cannot decide ultimately which
is the true description of objective reality.
There is no empirical test that's possible.
All we can observe are effects and a temporal relationship between cause and effect.
We can't actually demonstrate an operational connection between what we sense as a cause
and what we witness as an effect.
So between the extremes of naturalism and supernaturalism exists a continuum of intermediate
positions.
Theologians and natural philosophers alike have positioned themselves at various points
along this continuum.
And it bears saying at this point that Christians are not alone in these discussions.
A large group of Muslim theologians, most particularly the 11th century Al-Razali, espoused
a strongly occasionalist perspective.
That view was opposed from the other end of the spectrum in the 12th century by both his
co-religionist Ibn Rushd, known as Averroes, and by the Jewish philosopher Moses ben Maimon,
known as Maimonides.
In fact the arguments of Ibn Rushd and Maimonides were carefully studied by Christians in the
Latin Middle Ages and deeply influenced their thinking on these issues.
So if it needs to be said I'll just take the opportunity to point out that the works
of the theologians of the three western monotheistic religions were in fact mutually influential
and this is a point that's much too easily overlooked.
But let me get back to my point about the spectrum between naturalism and supernaturalism.
There are objections to both extremes.
Naive supernaturalism, of a sort that invokes God as immediate cause but without any kind
of commitment to uniformity of action, flies in the face of our daily experience.
Our experience of the orderly, law-like behavior of nature.
The occasionalist perspective that is a more sophisticated kind of supernaturalism preserves
our experience of the uniformity of nature but to some it seemed to degrade God into
a general factotum, constantly acting as the mechanic of the universe and bound to observe
certain laws of action.
Worse, it seems to implicate or can be interpreted as implicating God in evil acts.
For example, if we used fire not to make tea but for arson and murder, the immediate cause
of the evil result would be God, not the reprobate who applied the fire to that end.
At the other end, naturalism helps make sense of the world explaining law-like behaviors
but in its extreme form it can be seen as anti-providential determinism.
What do I mean by that?
By that I mean that if the laws and powers in nature are set by God and remain absolutely
unchanged and untouched then there seems to be no room left for God's providential care
or intervention in the world.
Indeed, in some cases it risks treading on God's omnipotence for having created and
established the world in a particular way, he cannot step in to alter or suspend it.
To some, this ran the risk of rendering God unnecessary after the initial creation.
Now how did these positions play out historically?
Well in traditional Christianity, occasionalism was always a minority position.
As for naive supernaturalism, that was rejected already in the patristic period.
The clear counter argument to naive supernaturalism is that yes, God can do anything like turn
a cucumber into an aardvark but we don't see all possible things happening in the world.
In fact, if you think about it, what we see happening in the world is a very, very small
number of all the events that would be possible in a world where anything could happen.
Naive supernaturalism's appeals to God's omnipotence were answered in a definitive way
in the 13th century by theologians such as Alexander of Hales, St. Albert the Great and
his student St. Thomas Aquinas.
Building on arguments from earlier theologians, they distinguished two different kinds of
divine power.
The first is merely God's omnipotence and this is called the potencia dei absoluta,
the absolute power of God.
The other is a subset of this.
These are the powers that God actually chooses to exercise given the creation the way he
made it.
This is called the potencia dei ordinata, God's ordained power.
So while in the potencia absoluta God could turn a cucumber into an aardvark, because
of the way he chose to create the world in the beginning, namely to make a world in which
cucumbers don't turn into aardvarks, that power is not part of his potencia ordinata.
In briefs said St. Thomas, it's ridiculous to say that God does something just because
he can.
So while God could be capricious and while God could intervene constantly to change
the laws of nature and while he could turn cucumbers into aardvarks, he chooses not to.
As mainstream Christian theology has historically held a position decidedly on the naturalism
side, but not radically so.
Medieval thinkers preferred to appeal to nature for explanations of natural things rather
than resorting to the first cause, God.
Created things do have powers of their own to cause effects, but God can intervene directly
in the world even though this is extremely rare.
Religious to God's direct action, for example, throwing up one's hands in the search for
a causal explanation and saying, well, God did it, he can do anything, was not seen as
a satisfactory answer.
This state of affairs, I should point out, runs contrary to a lot of popular opinion
that erroneously believes that the medieval had frequent recourse to supernatural explanations.
This might have been the case among the medieval peasants, but not among intellectuals theologians.
An example of medieval Christian preference for naturalistic causation appears in commentaries
on the creation.
This might strike you as a strange place to look for naturalism, but actually not.
It's a point of dogma that God created what is ex nihilo, that is, out of nothing.
That of course had to be his direct act, because prior to creation there was nothing but God
and therefore no possible secondary causation.
But many writers favored only an initial primary causation by God.
St. Augustine, for example, argued for an instant of creation, one infinitesimal moment
of direct divine causality, and in that instant God brought something into existence out of
nothing which contained within itself what he called semina in Latin, or seeds, of things
that were to be.
These seeds were the created and specified powers that God implanted in creation in the
initial creative act.
And just as a seed contains within itself the power of producing a mature plant given
time, so after God's initial instant of creation the seeds began to produce on their own new
forms according to their ordained powers.
Researchers such as the natural philosopher Theologians of the 11th and 12th century School
of Chartres dispensed with Augustine's Semina while retaining a mere instant of creation.
According to Terri of Chartres, God created in that primordial instant only a confused
primordial chaos composed of the four elements, fire, air, earth, and water in the medieval
conception.
But by their very act of creation these elements were endowed with particular properties,
for example fire being hot and earth being heavy, and these native properties then took
over the completion of the cosmos.
Differences in density caused the elements to separate out, and this separation then
caused a rotation of the cosmos which we still see in the heavenly bodies today.
This motion in turn produced heat, and that heat acting upon earth which had agglomerated
with water at the center of the universe from the settling out of the initially created
elements generated plants, animals, and finally man.
Terri's younger contemporary William of Conge goes a bit further saying that since
the same earth, water, and heat continue to exist today then there's no natural reason
why new human races are not produced naturally from their interaction.
He concludes that since we've never seen this happen then there must be some kind of
divine prohibition against it.
Now here's a very curious inversion of 21st century expectations.
We have a 12th century Christian writer at a cathedral school invoking God not to create
living beings, but rather to prevent it from happening naturally.
An important place for naturalism is in miracles.
Some medieval tried to explain even biblical miracles naturalistically, but we have to
be careful exactly how we say that because the topic is subtle and very important.
Take for example the parting of the Red Sea as described in Exodus.
Now scripture states that there was, quote, a strong east wind that swept the sea throughout
the night.
Thus this gave medieval commentators the opportunity to argue that it was the wind that divided
the sea, not the direct finger of God.
Get those images from Cecil B. DeMille out of your head, they'll just confuse you.
Thus the general commitment to naturalistic explanations meant that God could be one step
or more removed even from miracles.
God might have parted the sea directly, that is as an immediate cause, or instead God who
had initially created air and wind with specific properties such as the ability to push and
dry up water worked through secondary causes.
And this is crucial to Orthodox Christian theology which states that God works almost
invariably through secondary causes.
Now this choice of theological perspective has an important consequence on the way we
study the natural world.
It elevates the status of created things by giving them both inherent powers and instrumentality
in the hand of God.
It makes them, in short, worth studying.
Thus it guarantees an important place for naturalistic investigations of created things
in their properties and for the investigation of causes.
Let's take a little further illustration.
Let's say you happen to be standing on the eastern shore of the Red Sea.
Suddenly this tremendous wind whips up, off flies your hat and the wind continues blowing
throughout the night like you've never seen it before.
After a while you look up at the sea and you see this finger of dry land extending far
out into it.
Well what happened?
Surely you would point to the unusual wind as the immediate cause.
You rightly enough think it to be an amazing event but a fully natural one.
Eventually you look out and on the horizon you see a straggling group of people making
their way towards you.
When the man in front is with an ear shot you yell out, wow that's some wind eh?
And he shouts back, it's a miracle.
Well you're puzzled because you witnessed the wind.
You're satisfied that the effect was caused by it.
So how can you settle the dispute?
Was this a miracle or not?
This is the sticky issue of the discernment of miracles.
How to recognize miracles and how they fit into the course of nature.
This is an important issue for theology and natural philosophy.
Well first we need a definition of what actually constitutes a miracle.
That was worked out by theologians over time.
Moderns attuned to science as paradigmatic of knowledge forget or don't realize that
theology like science is not static.
It develops as theologians develop new ideas, arguments and perspectives.
Philosophy like science is about our desire to know, about our struggles to understand.
Well by the time of St. Thomas in the 13th century and owing in part to his thought,
miracles were defined as special events outside the Cursus Camunus Naturi.
These might be worked by God intervening directly, for example in the initial creation.
Or by his applying existing secondary causes in a special way.
Discerning a true miracle is tricky for two reasons.
First a given phenomenon might have more than one possible cause.
And it would be hard for us to determine what the cause is.
Second the result of a miracle might be a purely natural event and so it's difficult
to recognize that there's anything unusual about it.
Well let's return to the Red Sea.
To determine whether or not the event we witnessed is a true miracle we have to determine if
it falls outside the Cursus Camunus Naturi, the common course of nature.
The consequence for the science-religion issue is profound.
It means that we have to know as much as possible about the common course of nature.
Thus, the need to identify miracles leads directly into a need for scientific knowledge.
Things are never easy.
For our understanding of what constitutes the common course of nature is built up incrementally
from our collective experiences.
Therefore, when we come up against very rare phenomena for the first time, they can initially
appear to be miraculous.
Then we need to turn to the central issue of this lecture, namely causation.
An event that displays a naturally inexplicable disproportion between the power of the evident
cause and the effect is likely to be miraculous.
Thus it requires us to know about and to quantify the power of natural agents.
In this case, is the action, the power of wind, enough to produce a dry passage through
the Red Sea?
If the answer is no, then we might have a miracle via God's direct causation.
If the answer is yes, then we still might have a miracle, but via God's manipulation
of secondary causes, unless we can show that this kind of wind appears from time to time.
Now here, the fact that a rare wind appeared just as a throng of nervous Israelites stood
on the far shore increases the probability that it's miraculous.
But since we cannot know causes with absolute certainty, our final answer can only be in
probabilities.
Then St. Thomas concludes that absolute identification of something as a miracle is, in the final
analysis, ultimately an act of faith.
The key point is that scientific understanding by teaching us the limits of natural actions
is crucial to the discernment of miracles.
Thus here is one clear overlap between natural and theological inquiry and knowledge.
The need to discern miracles encourages the study of natural laws and agencies.
The knowledge of natural laws and agencies in return bears upon the discernment of miracles.
The case of miracles is one example of the co-development of science and theology.
Miracles became a particular problem theologically and scientifically in the 17th century, because
at that time, after the Reformation, some Protestants, particularly Anglicans, adopted
the doctrine of the cessation of miracles, namely that the age of miracles was over.
It ended with the death of the apostolic generation.
Now there's a practical motive here.
The idea could discredit Catholicism, which held that miracles continued to occur and
continued to testify to the particular truth of the Catholic faith.
However, as with many things, there were unintended consequences.
Without the evidential, that is the testimonial power of miracles, some Protestant thinkers
of the 17th century turned to the investigation instead of witch and demon activity in order
to gather evidence for the existence of a spirit realm.
Several well-known natural philosophers participated in this endeavor.
We'll talk more about that in our 7th lecture.
But for now, it's worth talking a little bit more about demons and miracles.
Catholic activity was of great interest to both theologians and natural philosophers
because it provided a counter-example or a counterpoint to questions about God's activity
in the world.
The Orthodox theological position states that demons do not have the power to produce
true miracles.
They can only trick us into thinking that they can.
This is because demons don't have supernatural power.
That is not something that God, who is the sole possessor of supernatural power, ever
gave to them.
Demons do, however, know natural laws perfectly.
They've been around a long time, they've been able to study them, they know them.
And being incorporeal, they can move with infinite speed.
Now think about it, an incorporeal being has no dimensions.
Or it's not restricted to three-dimensional space, as we know it, which is the domain
of corporeal substances, so they can move, if that's even the right word, between points
A and points B without ever being in between.
Thus demons can appear to work miracles, but all they can really do is go and get natural
agents.
They know where they are, and they know how to get them, and apply those agents to particular
subjects in an instant.
So we are returned to the critical issue of discernment, what looks like a miracle might
not be, and the dangerous part of it is, assenting to the wrong miracle might put you within
the power of demons.
Significantly, since demonic action is entirely natural, that is it relies on a knowledge of
natural causes and powers, a very learned human being could do nearly as well as a demon.
Except for the part of course of moving with infinite speed.
Hence knowledge of the natural world, what we call science, gives even human beings a
power to produce seeming miracles.
In short, we have a word for this, it's technology.
Which can produce marvels, but not true miracles.
In my last minutes, let me apply what we've learned in a new direction.
Some recent forms of Christianity exemplify the link I've been trying to talk about between
views of God's activity in the world, miracles, and trust in scientific inquiry.
I'm referring to certain non-mainstream sex that greatly enhance the frequency and
importance of miracles.
They have miracles, for example, broadcast nightly on television, and their members
are taught to expect a miracle in the way the rest of us expect the afternoon post.
In some, they adopt a position of naive supernaturalism, where God is constantly intervening in
a way that is also erratic.
Such a position, as we've seen, diminishes the role of natural causation and the scope
of scientific explanation.
Further, in what we can now recognize really as a related development, many of the same
groups attribute a far greater power to Satan and demonic forces than is acceptable in Orthodox
Christianity, to the point that their worldview borders on, if not falls into, Manichaean
dualism.
Turn on the television in some places and you're likely to hear very frequent references
to the power of Satan and the battle between good and evil forces, much as the Maniches
would have expounded it to a skeptical Saint Augustine.
Well, as a result of this weak discernment criteria for miracles and a dualist mentality,
their spiritual and corporeal worlds are disordered.
The spiritual world is disordered by a supposed struggle between God and forces aligned against
Him.
All you have to do is think, as Saint Augustine did, what it would actually mean to oppose
omnipotence.
Think about that for a moment.
Indeed, the situation is little different from what I mentioned at the start of this
lecture regarding a squabbling pantheon.
The natural world is similarly disordered because it's so full of divine interventions
that there's little sense in seeking out and trusting to a Course's communus naturi,
a common Course of nature.
The regularities that in fact constitute science.
Well, given the situation, it's not surprising that these same sects are frequently the very
ones that most consistently oppose or devalue scientific inquiry and the power of science
to give explanations.
As I said before, one's view of God's activity in the natural world orient one's view of
natural science.
Well now we have to move on.
The past two lectures dealt with broad themes in theology and their impact on studies of
the natural world.
In the next two lectures, we're going to shift gears to examine a particular event
in the science-religion interaction, indeed one of the best known episodes, the case of
Galileo.
You may discover that the best known things can also be the least understood.
