Lecture 5 – Church, Copernicus, and Galileo
Whenever the topic of science and religion comes up, the issue of Galileo in the Church
is never far behind.
This episode that scholars have taken to calling the Galileo affair has been subject to use
and abuse in historical writing as well as on the stage for many years.
In this, in the following lecture, we're going to try to recapture and recontextualize
some of the very interesting issues that are in play in the Galileo affair.
We're going to focus on the characters and the context and what the Galileo affair actually
did in the course of science and religion.
It's a complicated affair with lots of players and lots of twists of fortune, it's almost
like a soap opera, in fact an Italian soap opera.
Scholars who have devoted their life to studying the issue still continue to debate some of
the points that remain controversial.
First thing I'm going to do is divide our work for these two lectures into three parts.
First we need to get a handle on the scientific background to Galileo's affair.
We need to examine the first phase of the Galileo affair which took place from 1613
to 1616.
It's not always recognized that the Galileo affair actually had two separate periods of
time that were separated by fifteen years.
In the next lecture we're going to cover the second phase and that took place in 1632
and 1633.
Well, let's start with the background.
For this we have to return to the mid-16th century.
In 1543 Nicholas Copernicus published his De Revoluzioni Bus Orbium Celestium, that
is on the revolution of the heavenly orbs.
In this book Copernicus proposed two radical changes to man's conception of the cosmos.
The first of the claims was heliocentrism, namely that the sun is at the center of the
solar system or of the universe in Copernicus' mind.
The second one was geokineticism, meaning simply that the earth is in motion.
And the earth in fact has two motions, one its diurnal motion on its axis and second
its annual motion around the sun.
This was in contradiction to the Ptolemaic Aristotelian cosmos that was geocentric, earth
at the center, and geostatic, earth not moving.
Well Copernicus had been working on these ideas for about 30 years.
Already by 1514 he'd written a short summary of his ideas.
He didn't publish this, but it circulated in manuscript and established his reputation
as an astronomer.
To the extent that Pope Leo X and 1515 invited him to come to Rome to help work out the reform
of the calendar that was then a pressing problem.
Actually Copernicus declined to do this because he said that our measurements for the length
of the year were not accurate enough yet.
Copernicus might never have published his ideas if it hadn't been for the nagging of
several fellow churchmen to do so.
I say fellow churchmen since Copernicus himself was in holy orders.
He was a canon of the cathedral in Krakow.
A canon is a largely administrative office.
Well, Copernicus eventually published, but he passed the publication work off to others
to finish for him.
We'll talk more about that in a bit.
Once Copernicus's theories were published, people didn't suddenly say, oh wow, why didn't
we think about this before?
In fact Copernicus's theory found little acceptance.
Why?
Well several reasons.
First, the moving earth and central sun violated common sense experience.
We don't feel the earth moving under our feet and we have no way to detect it.
Second, Copernicus essentially threw out 2,000 years of coherent astronomical theory.
A move like this in any field would not be welcomed.
Third, it subverted fundamental principles of physics, such as the motion of heavy bodies
towards the earth.
Aristotle had put the earth at the center of the cosmos because it's the heaviest substance
and therefore anything that we drop that's heavy also falls towards the center.
So if you accept this crazy idea of Copernicus that the earth is somehow removed from the
center and suspended away from the center, why then do heavy bodies still fall towards
it?
Why don't they go falling towards the sun?
If the sun is at the center.
So even if you accepted this, there were still some problems with Copernicus, namely it predicted
stellar parallax, but no one could see this.
In fact, it took until the 19th century before it was actually detected.
On a totally different level, some readers of Scripture found Copernicus' system contradictory
to some clear passages in the Bible, such as the motion of the miracle in the Old Testament
where Joshua makes the sun stand still in order to lengthen the day.
Well, the objections against heliocentrism and geokineticism were so compelling that
for over 50 years after the publication of the Revolution, there were probably no more
than 10 or maybe a dozen people who actually accepted Copernicanism.
Many others, however, adopted Copernicanism as what we might call a convenient fiction.
In other words, it was useful to put the sun at the center for your calculations of where
planetary positions should be.
People didn't believe heliocentrism was literally true, and most in fact didn't care, because
the main point of astronomy at the time was not to say something about the objective reality
of the heavens, but rather to do calculations to say where the planets would be when so
that you could use them for astrological predictions.
In other words, the objective reality of celestial mechanics was just not important to them.
They wanted the right answer and easy calculations.
In his early days, Galileo was not a Copernican, but by the start of the 17th century he had
become convinced of Copernicus' hypothesis.
He began arguing for it, using in part some of the new telescopic findings that he had
made, and in part by trying to develop a new physics that would be coherent with Copernican
astronomy.
One of the earliest hints of concern arose over breakfast in December 1613.
Galileo wasn't present, but one of his students and his successor as professor of mathematics
at the University of Pisa, Father Benedetto Castelli, a Benedictine priest, was there.
The breakfast was held at one of the palaces of Galileo's employer, the Duke's de Medici
in Florence.
The Medici present there was the Dowager Duchess, Christina, mother of Cosimo II de Medici,
who was actually the ruling Grand Duke.
She asked Castelli if Galileo's heliocentric ideas didn't contradict the Bible, particularly
the Joshua story.
As we learned from a letter Castelli immediately wrote to Galileo, the Duchess did this as
much out of pure curiosity as out of any kind of concern.
Well, Castelli answered as best he could, and as he says to Galileo, the Duchess seems
to have been quite satisfied.
Galileo wrote Castelli a letter in response, one which he would greatly expand into a letter
addressed directly to the Grand Duchess, Christina.
In both letters, Galileo argued that Scripture had to be interpreted in the light of scientific
knowledge, and that its expressions were accommodated to the original audience.
What does that mean?
Well, it means that in fact, let's say the Joshua story was written from the point of
view of the ancient Hebrew people, who believed that the earth was stable and the sun was
in motion around it.
So the doctrine of accommodation says that the inspired writers thought it better not
to confuse their original audience by telling them things they really didn't need to know,
or that conflicted with common sense experience.
It would have detracted from the main message.
Remember what St. Thomas Aquinas says, that the Scripture speaks according to the opinion
of the people, that is its original audience.
Well, this should all sound very familiar from our lecture on St. Augustine.
Galileo quoted the clever motto of a colleague, Cardinal Baronio, who said the Bible was
to tell us how to go to heaven, not how the heavens go.
But additionally, and perhaps injudiciously as we shall see, Galileo went on to provide
his own reinterpretation of the Joshua passage.
He argued that the literal meaning could be saved owing to his recent discovery of the
sun's rotational motion.
Galileo theorized that since the sun rotated in the same direction that the planets revolved
around it, that solar rotation was actually the cause for planetary motion.
Therefore, he says, when Scripture states that Joshua stopped the sun, it doesn't refer
to the sun's apparent motion from east to west across the sky, but rather that rotation
which had been invisible until the time of Galileo.
When the rotation was miraculously stopped, the rest of the solar system shut down simultaneously,
including terrestrial rotation, thus making the sun appear to stand still and lengthening
the day.
Well about a year later, on the 4th Sunday of Advent in 1614, the Dominican friar, Tomaso
Caccini, preached a sermon at Santa Maria Novella in Florence.
The Old Testament reading for the day was the Joshua passage.
Caccini first expounded it in a moral and allegorical sense, but then went on to criticize Copernicus,
mathematicians, and Galileo and his followers in particular.
While some in attendance took umbrage at this and asked the usual homilist to preach a contrary
sermon the next Sunday, in fact Caccini's superior actually wrote a letter of apology
to Galileo, but our first question is, why was Caccini so upset?
Less than a month later, in February of 1615, another Florentine Dominican, Niccolò Lorini,
wrote a letter of complaint to the Inquisition.
He forwarded a copy of Galileo's letter to Castelli, saying that it contained suspect
ideas.
Now the Inquisition was a very orderly institution.
It was not an anything goes out of control institution.
In fact, reading Inquisition records, most people are struck by the attention to protocol,
to due process, and to clarity.
In their usual efficient way, the Inquisition examined the complaint.
Galileo's letter was found to have what were called bad expressions, that is, word
choices that might be benign, probably were, but sounded bad.
For example, at one point he says that Holy Scripture perverts certain things.
But the consultant found no serious objections.
Interestingly enough, two out of the three bad expressions occur only in the copy that
Lorini sent to the Inquisition, not in Galileo's original.
So this suggests that someone, maybe Lorini, was trying to make Galileo look bad.
Where did this copy of the letter come from, anyway?
Well the Inquisition summoned Caccini.
Caccini then claimed that Galileo and his followers hold seriously heretical views.
For example, that God weeps and laughs, and that the miracles of the saints are not true
miracles.
The Inquisition panel, which up to this point has seemed pretty bored by Caccini's mutterings,
suddenly perks up and takes notice.
They've heard something serious now.
On further questioning, Caccini admits that in fact he's only heard some rumors from,
guess who, Lorini.
So others are called in, and in the end they interview one Gianuzzo Atavanti, a minor cleric,
and they find out what really was going on.
A few months earlier Atavanti, who knew Galileo, but was no real close associate of his, was
in the Dominican convent in Florence studying theology.
He and his instructor were practicing a disputation.
Now scholastic disputations often work indirectly, like geometrical ones.
You state the proposition is true, that you're going to be refuting.
So they said something like, God laughs and cries, therefore, somebody like Atavanti
suggests, or as Atavanti suggests, must have been eavesdropping.
Well the inquisitors say, why would you think someone was eavesdropping?
Who?
Well, Atavanti replies, a few weeks previously he had been discussing the question of the
sun's motion, and some friars skulking about in the corridor burst in on them.
Aha, I hear what you're talking about.
Who is the skulking friars?
Tomaso Caccini.
He sputtered at them for a few minutes and vowed to preach a sermon against the sun's
motion, which as we've seen, he did.
Reading the minutes, you can almost see the inquisitorial panel rolling its eyes at this
discovery and they dismissed the case.
All except, unfortunately, one little piece.
They decide that they have no expertise to examine the status of heliocentrism.
So what do they do?
They do what any big administration does.
They outsource to consultants.
After four months of work, on the 24th of February in 1616, so this has been going on
for a year now, the consultants turn in the report.
It's damning.
They conclude that Copernicanism is, quote, foolish and absurd in philosophy and heretical
in theology.
But then something curious happened.
The inquisition ignored the report.
They could have declared Copernicanism heretical, but they didn't.
Instead, they did two milder things.
First, they turned to the office of the index, that is, the body that's charged with reviewing
books and censoring them where necessary.
The index then decreed that Copernicus's book was, quote, suspended until corrected.
Well, what does that mean?
It doesn't mean that Copernicus's text was prohibited or was to be destroyed.
It means only that certain corrections should be made to it.
It actually took four years before the corrections were published, indicating that this was not
something high on the priority list.
When they actually appeared, there were about 10 passages to be amended out of the entire
book.
All of them because they were offering interpretations of Scripture or asserting straightforwardly
that heliocentrism was absolutely true.
The second action was that Cardinal Roberto Bellarmino, one of the most powerful churchmen
of the day in Rome and an important theologian, was told to meet with Galileo and inform him
of the decree of the index, and also to give him a verbal warning to abandon his opinions
about Copernicanism being literally true.
Well, this meeting happened in February 1616.
Unfortunately, what exactly happened at that meeting would become a subject of controversy.
All we know is Bellarmino gave a warning, Galileo agreed.
Now let's examine these events.
What's clear, first of all, is that Caccini and Lorini, two minor friars in Florence,
had some kind of beef with Galileo.
Galileo was particularly acid-tongued and never suffered fools gladly, so perhaps there
was some kind of personal affront here.
Perhaps they were just overzealous, either legitimately so, or in the typical kind of
way that various low-order functionaries, whether in church, in business, or in academe,
looking for advancement, tend to be.
We don't know.
However it started, the whole affair took on a life of its own with the decree of the
index.
That's the crucial moment.
Clearly, there was dissension within the Inquisition, since they ignored the panel's recommendation
to condemn heliocentrism.
Bellarmino is really the most interesting character.
Let's look at him a little more.
The best source is a letter that Bellarmino wrote to a Neapolitan priest named Paolo Antonio
Foscarini in 1615, just while all this was going on.
In that year Foscarini published a book reinterpreting the Bible to be compatible with Copernicanism
and he sent a copy to Bellarmino.
Foscarini probably was aware of the goings on in Rome about heliocentrism and thought
he would weigh in on them.
Bellarmino's reply is very revealing.
Bellarmino praises Foscarini and Galileo by name for speaking, and I quote, suppositionally,
and not absolutely about their theories.
Four, and let me quote Bellarmino's letter.
There is no danger in saying that by assuming the earth moves and the sun stands still,
one saves all the appearances better than by postulating eccentrics and epicycles, as
in the old Ptolemaic system.
And that is sufficient for the mathematician.
However, it is different to want to affirm that in reality the sun is at the center of
the world and the earth revolves with great speed around it.
This is a very dangerous thing, likely not only to irritate all scholastic philosophers
and theologians, but also to harm the holy faith by rendering holy scripture false.
In other words, heliocentrism is fine as a hypothesis, but don't demand that it's
a true depiction of the cosmos.
Bellarmino further claims that if there were an undeniable demonstration of the earth's
motion, then scripture would have to be reinterpreted carefully in accord with this new finding.
All he says, he will not believe there is such a demonstration until it is shown to
me."
Galileo himself must have gotten a copy of Bellarmino's letter.
He'd gone to Rome at this time, and he knew Bellarmino personally, and he wrote a short
rebuttal to it.
The last piece we need to know is that when the index suspended Copernicus's book, it
condemned Foscarini's.
From now we see that biblical interpretation is a key issue here, but not in an entirely
straightforward way.
Let's start with Galileo's letters to Castelli and Christina.
Galileo's writings show an exemplary understanding of accepted principles of biblical exegesis.
Some parts seem to be taken verbatim out of St. Augustine.
He lists the unity of truth, the doctrine of accommodation, and uses a style of literal
interpretation that the African doctor would certainly have approved of.
Galileo's theological principles are sound and orthodox.
Furthermore, earlier writers had already discussed the possibility of the earth's motion and
had reinterpreted the Joshua passage without incident.
Already 250 years earlier, two masters at Paris, Jean Bordin and Nicolas Rehm, had separately
proposed arguments for a moving earth.
Both eventually settled against it, but the point is that there was no great tumult after
they made these proposals.
What they did, in fact, is that they decided that you really can't tell the distinction
between a moving earth and a moving sun because they're in relative motion and we're part
of the system and there's no test you can do, so they fell back on common sense experience
that the earth seems stable.
My point is that given Galileo's good grasp of exegesis and the previous lack of problems
with similar discussions, it would seem that there's something special about Galileo
and his time.
We don't have to look far to find it.
The Protestant Reformation
The Reformation, less than a hundred years old in Galileo's day and still spreading,
had thrown the Catholic Church into confusion.
One result was the Council of Trent, a church council that met for 18 years, from first
1545 to 1563.
The point of the council was to clarify Catholic doctrine in practice and to address certain
abuses that had been criticized by Protestants.
Now, a main cause for continuing schisms, which is a thing that the Council of Trent
was very concerned about, was the daily emergence of novel and often unlearned interpretations
of Scripture that had the effect of undermining long-established theological positions, even
Luther eventually was appalled by this trend.
Protestant thinkers emphasized the notion of personal interpretation of Scripture, so
the Council of Trent, where Bell Armino, by the way, was a key figure, forbade the reinterpretation
of Scripture in ways, quote, contrary to the consensus of the church fathers, that is,
the patristic writers.
In other words, if you're giving an interpretation, it should conform to the traditional readings
expressed by early writers.
So when Galileo and Foscarini wrote, it was in an atmosphere that was hypercharged with
concern, we can say even paranoid, about non-standard biblical interpretations.
Clearly, both Galileo and Foscarini violated the ruling of the Council of Trent.
Obviously, no patristic writer would have ever thought of getting heliocentrism out
of the Joshua passage.
But remember, Copernicus himself reinterpreted Scripture without immediate repercussions,
but that was 1543, before the Council of Trent.
Galileo probably added some fuel to the fire, though.
For in his letter to Christina, he violates intellectual turf a little.
He claims that his biblical interpretations are not just alternative, but they're better
than the theologian's interpretations.
Moreover, he tells theologians to stay out of natural philosophy, a sort of, well, you
can't do my job, but I can do your job better.
We all know people like this, and they're never very popular.
Now notice that Bellarmino did not rule out the possibility that scriptural interpretation
would have to be amended in the light of new demonstrated truths.
In this, he, like Galileo, was adhering to the principles enunciated by St. Augustine.
But Bellarmino required a sound demonstration of the earth's motion, and once that was
found then the proper authorities, not some mathematician from Florence, would go about
carefully to expound a new and improved interpretation.
So you can see here that the issue of biblical interpretation is linked to how much proof
there really is for a moving earth, the validity of Galileo's proofs.
Bellarmino and Galileo agreed on fundamental Augustinian principles.
Their difference was the level of proof needed before reinterpretation kicked in, and who
exactly would be doing the reinterpretation.
Galileo claimed he had a proof.
Bellarmino denied this.
In this case, Bellarmino was right.
Galileo advanced two telescopic proofs.
He discovered first that the planet Venus showed phases like the moon.
This would be impossible unless Venus orbited the sun and passed at some point between us,
the earth, and the sun.
Ptolemy system, this is impossible.
But it does disprove Ptolemy's system.
It doesn't prove Copernicus's.
In fact, Galileo's observations are perfectly well explained by other geocentric models
like that of Tico Brahe, or the fifth century system of Marcianus Capella, where Mercury
and Venus go around the sun, but then that combination goes around the earth.
Galileo also pointed to his discovery of the satellites of Jupiter.
They proved that orbital motion could take place around some center of motion that wasn't
at the center, that wasn't the earth, that wasn't the sun.
That's great, but it doesn't prove that the earth goes around the sun.
But Galileo's favorite proof was that the tides are caused by the motion of the earth.
It's completely wrong.
So while Galileo was ultimately correct about heliocentrism, he was wrong to think that
he had proof.
Pretty naturally enough, look at things from Galileo's perspective.
Look at them for a moment from Bellarminos.
Imagine the utter confusion that would result if the scriptures had to be reinterpreted
for every possible unproven scientific system.
Bellarmino was holding out for a sound proof, and Galileo just didn't have it.
The interesting point is that Galileo and Bellarmino were in substantial agreement about
harmonizing biblical interpretations with scientific knowledge.
Where they differed was on who would do the reinterpretation and when.
Bellarmino was cautious, more cautious than Galileo's enthusiasm would allow.
But there may have been other factors as well.
Galileo might have been caught in a power struggle between rival intellectual elites
within the church.
Since the late Middle Ages, it was the Dominicans that had been on the top of the intellectual
heap.
In Galileo's day, they were rapidly being replaced by the Jesuits.
In fact, some Jesuit schools, which were popping up all over Europe by the late 16th century,
were even starting to teach about Copernicanism.
Now remember, Galileo's accusers, Lorini and Caccini, were Dominicans.
And the majority of the consultants that returned the bad verdict on Copernicanism were Dominicans
as well.
Galileo, although he had run-ins with the Jesuits, like he did with essentially everybody,
was for the most part on good terms with them.
The Jesuits had welcomed him to their institution in Rome, the Collegio Romano, and when they
were requested to do so, they verified his telescopic observations, although they denied
his interpretations.
Even if this explanation turns out to be not so important, it points out an important caveat.
We are not free to indulge in collectivism, that is, extending the actions of specific
churchmen into a generalized statement about Galileo versus the church, much less about
science versus religion.
There were clergy, theologians, and officials on both sides of the issue.
We now have to consider the events that followed Bellarmino's meeting with Galileo.
Less than a week after the decree of the index, Galileo went to see the Pope.
Unfortunately, there's obviously no transcript of their private meeting, but we do have Galileo's
account of it.
Galileo was warmly received and he and the Pope talked for about 45 minutes.
The Pope acknowledged that Galileo had certain enemies, but stated that both he and the Cardinals
thought very well of him and that they would not give ear to certain unnamed slanderers,
so Galileo could, in the Pope's words, feel safe as long as I live.
This would prove not quite long enough.
Then Galileo heard that rumors about his having been condemned were circulating.
Well, to defend his reputation, he went to visit Bellarmino again and asked for a certificate
setting out exactly what had happened.
Bellarmino agreed and gave Galileo a certificate stating clearly that Galileo had not abjured
anything, nor had he been condemned, nor had he been punished in any way, but had only
been informed of the decree of the index about Copernicus' book needing correction and informed
that he should not hold or defend Copernicanism.
This certificate would prove crucial later on.
So at the end of the first act of the Galileo affair, March 1616, Galileo headed home to
Florence, having been asked privately not to defend the Copernican hypothesis is literally
true.
The only public sign of the events was that the index had suspended Copernicus' book
until corrected.
In the next lecture, we'll see what happened when Galileo received what he thought was
great good news in 1623.
Thank you.
Applause
.
