Lecture 6, Galileo's Trial
In the last lecture, we left Galileo on his way home to Florence in spring 1616.
For the next seven years, Galileo busied himself with matters other than Copernicanism.
But in August 1623, shortly after the death of Pope Paul V, Galileo received what he
thought was wonderful news.
His old friend and admirer, Mafio Barbarini, had been elected pope, taking the name Urban
the Eighth.
Galileo was then finishing a book entitled Il Sagetore, or The Assayer, which dealt
with a broad range of issues.
Galileo took the opportunity to dedicate his new book to the Pope, who was delighted
with it.
But the Inquisition soon received a complaint about it.
The Inquisition investigated, they weren't convinced by the complaint at all, and dismissed
it as groundless, and Galileo probably never knew about it.
In early 1624, Galileo traveled to Rome to visit Pope Urban the Eighth.
He was warmly received by his old friend in not one, but six separate audiences over several
days.
Of course, since these were private conversations, we don't have minutes to them, unfortunately.
But it's clear that they discussed the old issue of the earth's motion.
Urban the Eighth now had been one of Galileo's advocates back in 1616, and was later heard
to say that the decree of the index, a suspending Copernicus's book, should have been prevented.
During their discussions, the Pope apparently gave Galileo the go-ahead to write about
the Copernican hypothesis, provided that he did so in a hypothetical manner, and included
one particular argument.
This was Urban the Eighth's contention that since God is omnipotent, the determination
of ultimate causes can never be absolutely certain, that is, a given phenomenon could
be generated by more than a single cause, and still appear identical to our eyes.
You should recognize this as something we've talked about previously, namely God's activity
in the world, and the discernment of miracles.
How can we really, reliably get at the true causes of things?
Urban's argument is that given divine omnipotence, God could have created the world in any number
of different ways, in ways where the causes are different, even though the effects we
witness are the same.
Thus while Galileo was certain, and completely wrong, that the tides were caused by the motion
of the earth, in a sense the way water sloshes around in a container that's in motion, the
pope was more skeptical, or at least more cautious, and argued that the tides might
have another cause, in fact that might even be a cause that we would never think of.
Well as soon as Galileo got back to Florence, he's set to work.
First he wrote a reply to Francesco Ingoli's critique of the Copernican system.
Now Ingoli was a minor cleric, who had written against the earth's motion in 1616 when the
Inquisition's consultants were weighing the issue.
Remember the panel declared that Copernicanism was heretical, but the Inquisition took no
action in this.
Now if you have a chance to read Galileo's reply to Ingoli, you will see that some warning
signs are already apparent.
While Ingoli's arguments are in fact quite feeble, even silly, Galileo's reply lashes
out at several points with bitter sarcasm and indeed a bit of arrogance.
Galileo was a brilliant writer, absolutely a wonderful writer of Italian prose, but when
that talent was combined with his inability to suffer lesser wits, and his delight in
arguing even to the point of being contrarian at some times, it produced a personality that
created more enemies than he really needed.
Eventually the same trait would alienate an old and now very powerful friend.
So Galileo then began writing a dialogue, he entitled it simply On the Tides, because
it showcased his argument that the tides prove the motion of the earth.
By 1630 the manuscript is ready.
The events surrounding its publication however are just as torturous as the rest of the Galileo
affair.
Galileo wanted to print it at Rome under the auspices of the Linchean Academy, the first
international scientific society, which was headed by his friend Prince Federico Cezi.
So Galileo packed up his manuscript and headed to Rome in May 1630.
He submitted it to review to the Vatican secretary and chief censor for publications in Rome,
Niccolò Ricardi.
After a few weeks he received approval to go ahead with the printing after he had made
some finishing touches and had made a final check with Ricardi.
So Galileo left Rome with the impression that the publication of his book was going forward.
But problems immediately intervened.
Before printing could start Cezi died.
Without a patron the Linchean Academy collapsed.
Then plague broke out in central Italy interrupting all travel and commerce between Florence and
Rome.
Galileo could neither travel to Rome nor send his manuscript in for the final check because
it would have been quarantined at the border.
By March 1631 Galileo lost patience and moved to have the book published in Florence instead.
But this caused new problems.
The book had been cleared for publication in Rome after a final check by the Roman censor.
But the Roman censor's authority didn't extend to Florence.
So much of the summer of 1631 involved negotiations to transfer the permission to publish from
Rome to Florence.
Ricardi in due course affected the transfer and sent along a list of alterations that
Galileo was to address.
It's at this time that the title of the book was changed from On the Tides to A Dialogue
on the Two Chief World Systems, a suggestion which supposedly came from the Pope himself.
Now ironically enough this change had the unintended effect of making Galileo's book
much more influential than it otherwise might have been.
It moved Galileo's error about the tides out of the limelight and replaced it with
a broader comparison of the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, which of course is what
Galileo got right.
Anybody who's gone through the process of publishing a book or paper will find very
little in this process that's terribly unusual.
Of course today one would not be expected to make changes to a scientific manuscript
based on potential theological problems or consequences.
But that's not really the point I'm trying to make.
I point out only that modern sensibilities, when they hear the word censor, recoil.
We think immediately of the old Soviet Union or modern day China or some other repressive
totalitarian regime, but in fact a manuscript today still has to pass muster with reviewers.
They're not called censors anymore, but their role is really not terribly different.
Every academic has had a paper refused for publication or a manuscript held up for years
awaiting publication.
Publishers routinely require that titles be changed or that specific passages be altered
or amended before publication.
It would be easy to retort that nowadays this is peer review, it's not the interference
by some meddling churchmen, but that in part is a modernism that sees churchmen residing
in a class that's separate from scientists or natural philosophers.
In fact Riccardi sent Galileo's manuscript to a professor of mathematics, who was also
a churchman.
Galileo's book was finally published in Florence in February of 1632.
The book received immediate praise, but rumors about it started to arise just as immediately.
And here begins the second phase of the Galileo affair.
Remember that the pope was an old friend of Galileo's, so one might expect that the rumors
and complaints that arise could have been fairly easily stopped by the pope himself.
My guess is that Galileo counted on this.
That's not what happened however.
In fact the opposite happened.
Urban the 8th exploded in anger at Galileo.
Why?
Well there were a number of factors.
First of all I think we have to explain the pope's repeated declarations to the Tuscan
ambassador that quote, I have been deceived.
What did he mean by this?
Well there were probably two injudicious moves on Galileo's part.
The first one deals with his discharge of the pope's request to include the argument
about the limits of human knowledge in the dialogue.
Galileo did include it, but how he did so was certainly enough to infuriate Urban the
8th.
Galileo wrote the book as a dialogue between three characters.
The first by the name of Salviati speaks for the Copernican system and is really Galileo's
mouthpiece.
His opponent speaks for Aristotelian physics and Ptolemaic cosmology and is named Simplicio.
The third sagredo is the impartial intermediary who asks questions.
Now the name Simplicio could refer to the Aristotelian commentator Simplicius, but any
Italian reader would immediately see the pun on the words simple and simpleton, and indeed
poor Simplicio is cast as a gibbering idiot time and time again throughout the dialogue.
So where do you think Galileo puts the pope's argument?
On the very last page of the book and in the mouth of Simplicio.
Now even if Galileo didn't want to put it in the mouth of his own spokesman Salviati,
he could have given the line to Sagredo, Pariccio's Simplicio.
Simplicio's closing utterance is this.
God in his infinite power and wisdom could have conferred upon the element of water the
back and forth motion that we see in it by some other means than by making its container
move.
Urban's words?
From the mouth of the fool.
And they are greeted with a response that could easily be read as sarcastic.
What a marvelous and truly angelic doctrine.
If that's a sincere compliment, it's the only one that Simplicio ever gets in the
dialogue.
And secondly, somebody looked into the old Inquisition files back from 1616 and found
that Galileo had agreed not to defend the Copernican system.
Galileo had neglected to mention this to the pope who knew nothing about it.
The panel that examined the case of Galileo concluded that Galileo, quote, may have been
deceitfully silent about this injunction.
So I think it's fairly easy to understand why Urban VIII felt that he had been betrayed
by his friend.
Urban had supported and protected Galileo.
He had even written a poem in his honor.
He had given him the go-ahead to write the dialogue and here was his reward.
Embarrassment and insult.
Well Urban might have eventually forgiven Galileo, but there were aggravating circumstances.
In short, this problem was the last thing that Urban VIII needed in 1632.
The pope was having a very bad year.
He was under heavy criticism for his response to the Thirty Years' War and there was a movement
of foot to depose him.
The Thirty Years' War was a disastrous conflict in Germany over territory and dynastic claims
wrapped up in the mantle of Catholic Protestant conflict.
On one side were the Catholic powers of the Holy Roman Emperor and the King of Spain,
both of them part of the Hopsburg dynasty.
On the other were a group of Protestant German states and Sweden, who by the way were being
bankrolled by the most Catholic King of France, who had every reason to want to see the Hopsburg
powers worn down.
Well in 1632 the war was going very badly for Emperor and Spain.
While the pope was sending his nephew to France to try to hammer out a peace treaty, the Emperor
and Spain demanded that the pope intervene on their side with money and forces, or at
the very least declare the conflict a holy war.
Urban refused.
The result was that the Spanish party rallied against Urban with threats of impeachment,
accusations of weakness as a leader, and even rumors that he was in fact in league with
the Protestants.
Put yourself in Urban's red shoes for a moment.
You are under attack.
Your reputation, honor and position in jeopardy, and now along comes your friend with what
has every appearance of deception and embarrasses you at a delicate, intense moment when your
attention has to be elsewhere.
Thus Urban the Eighth rather than sweeping in to help Galileo let matters take their
course and seemed intent on making an example of him.
Well Galileo was summoned for questioning.
He first pleaded his age.
He was 68 and the difficulty of travel, but these were rejected and he had to go to Rome
in January of 1633.
Now from time to time fictionalized accounts of Galileo in chains in an inquisitorial dungeon
have emerged.
In fact Galileo was very well treated.
He might have had some enemies, he might have alienated the Pope, but he still had lots
of admirers and friends in church circles.
He was neither arrested nor imprisoned at this point.
He stayed in the palace of the Tuscan ambassador.
In April 1633 he was summoned for questioning.
At this point the inquisitor showed him a document from 1616 where he agreed to discuss
not to discuss Copernicanism in any way whatsoever.
In other words Galileo had been given a special injunction not to do exactly what he did.
Galileo was surprised.
He claimed only that he had been given a warning by Bellarmino and presented the inquisitors
with Bellarmino certificate.
In turn the inquisitors were surprised because they had never known anything about this certificate
either.
This language is milder than the document that was found in the inquisition files.
Indeed there's something fishy about that document that was found in the inquisition
files because it should have borne Galileo's and Bellarmino's signatures, but it's unsigned.
Scholars still debate the origin of this document.
Was it a sloppy record from 1616?
Was it the fabrication of some overzealous functionary?
Was there just a misunderstanding on one side or the other of what Galileo and Bellarmino
had agreed to?
Probably we'll never know the answer, and neither could the inquisition because the
only person who could have resolved it, Bellarmino himself, was dead.
At this point the case turned to a very specific legal matter.
It was not about heliocentrism, rather the question that the inquisitors had was simple.
When writing the dialogue, did Galileo violate his 1616 agreement with Bellarmino?
He was asked, Galileo was asked specifically, why he didn't get written permission to write
the book in the first place?
Why he didn't mention Bellarmino's warning to the Pope?
Well, Galileo's response seems rather unsatisfactory.
He claimed that he never imagined his book was actually defending heliocentrism, so he
thought that Bellarmino's warning was not relevant.
Galileo stated moreover that he didn't really think heliocentrism was true anyway, he was
just playing around trying to make a weak argument look strong.
Maybe he says, I overdid it.
This seems a big stretch, but the inquisitors seemed to accept it.
What the inquisitors did next will be absolutely familiar to anyone who's seen a few episodes
of Law and Order.
They propose a plea bargain to avoid going to trial.
The deal was this, Galileo would admit to having inadvertently broken his agreement.
Galileo took a few days to come up with an honorable way of saying this, and finally
he claimed that he was actually surprised when he re-read his own book because, my goodness,
it did sound like he was defending geochinetic theory even though that was far from his mind.
He had just written a little too vividly, and he regretted it.
That should have been the end of it.
Ordinarily, the Pope would have rubber-stamped the inquisitions' actions, but in this case
the Pope refused to accept the settlement.
Instead, he demanded Galileo had to be formally arrested, formally interrogated, and sentenced,
and he had to make a public abjuration, and his book had to be banned.
The far gentler measures that the Inquisition had worked out, which would have sent Galileo
home with essentially a slap on the wrist and his honor intact, were thrown out.
So in grim order, Galileo was arrested and formally interrogated on the 21st of June
in 1633.
He stuck to his story about never really holding Copernican ideas, but was convicted of vehement
suspicion of heresy, the middle level of three levels of sentences the Inquisition could
issue.
The following day, he was read the sentence and recited a formal abjuration.
He did not, as some romantic writers have suggested, mutter a por si muove, and yet it
moves under his breath.
Cute story, not true.
In all regards, Galileo, rather uncharacteristically, acted with humility and submission.
But there's one more oddity.
Galileo's sentence should have been signed by all ten of the Inquisitors.
But three of them didn't sign.
One was the head of the Spanish party, then trying to oust the Pope, further indicating
that there was some kind of link between these two issues.
It also bears witness to the close relationship between the Duke of Tuscany, Galileo's employer,
and the Spanish.
The Spanish Tuscan link provides another possible reason why Urban VIII might have wanted to
embarrass the Tuscan Duke by embarrassing his court philosopher and banning the dialogue
that bore the Duke's name in large letters on the title page.
But another cardinal who didn't sign is more interesting.
It was Francesco Barbarini, the Pope's nephew, and the most powerful man in Rome after the
Pope.
Perhaps we can read into this a very Roman way of indicating quietly that the trial
was really for show.
That Urban really didn't endorse it.
Galileo returned to the Tuscan Embassy, then to the home of the Archbishop of Siena, one
of his friends and supporters, and then retired to his villa at Archetry outside of Florence,
where he remained under house arrest for the rest of his life.
Well as we've seen, there were several external factors that impacted on the Galileo affair.
But there's a further intellectual issue we have to address.
It opens a window onto some assumptions of modern science that were just being developed
in the 17th century.
What I refer to is the split between a realist and an instrumentalist view of science.
What do those terms mean?
Realism holds that scientific theories are true depictions of the world.
Scientific ideas really do describe the world as it objectively is.
Instrumentalism on the other hand holds that scientific theories are simply useful tools
for saving the phenomena.
What is saving the phenomena actually mean?
Well it means that if we see some set of phenomena, say the various motions of the heavenly bodies
of the planets, the sun and moon, then the goal of science is simply to propose a coherent
model for explaining and predicting these phenomena.
Whether or not the theory is literally true of objective reality behind the observable
phenomena is irrelevant.
We get a better handle on the Galileo affair when we recognize that superimposed on it
was a contemporaneous shift within astronomy from instrumentalism to realism.
Most modern scientists are realists.
They expect the scientific theories they elaborate to be accurate, true depictions of the way
the world really is.
They are joined in this conviction by Nicholas Copernicus, Johannes Kepler and Galileo Galilei.
Indeed Kepler and Galileo were emphatic about their desire to give fully real, that is true,
descriptions of the hidden mechanisms behind the visible movements of the planets.
This sounds absolutely normal to us today, but for their immediate audience it was really
quite unusual.
Most practicing astronomers of their day were instrumentalists, as had been the case since
the ancient Greeks.
Their interest was getting planetary positions right, being able to calculate what planet
would be where, when, in past, present or future.
Why would they really care about what was really going on mechanically in the heavens
if it didn't make a visible difference to the phenomena?
In short, why bend yourself out of shape over arguing Copernican versus Ptolemaic system
if it didn't give you a different answer?
We saw how some astronomers adopted a Copernican system to make calculations easier without
thinking that Copernicus's system was any more true than Ptolemy's.
In terms of the characters around Galileo, Bellarmino, Urban VIII and many of the Jesuit
astronomers of the Collegio Romano held the then majority instrumentalist opinion.
So these characters kept telling Galileo just to discuss Copernicanism hypothetically.
In saying this, they probably had in mind the theological term ex supposizione, by supposition,
meaning that you take a position suppositionally for the sake of the argument and see where
it leads.
I emphasize this point for two reasons.
First to say something about the changing nature of science.
Don't imagine that it's static or predetermined, even something as fundamental as the status
of theories has to be worked out historically.
Galileo was in the vanguard of scientific realists.
But secondly, when we hear Bellarmino and Urban telling Galileo just to speak hypothetically,
our modern years tend to think this a little bit strange, or even that maybe it's some
subtle way of shutting him up.
But I would wager that Bellarmino and Urban were actually a bit confused by Galileo's
fixation on claiming the literal truth for his notions.
Copernicus' own book shows the same tensions.
Copernicus was a realist, but the Lutheran minister, Andreas Oceander, to whom the book
had been entrusted to see it through the press, added an unsigned preface, without Copernicus'
knowledge, committing Copernicus to instrumentalism.
Oceander wrote in this unsigned preface that he had published with De Revoluzionebus that
quote, the job of the astronomer is simply to think up whatever causes and hypotheses
he pleases, so that the movements of the planets can be calculated from the principles of geometry.
For he cannot, by any line of reasoning, reach the true causes of these movements.
Let no one expect anything certain from astronomy.
The realist position characteristic of modern science is ultimately a choice based on an
optimistic faith statement, namely that the human intellect can ascertain true causes,
and we can work backwards from observables to true causes and recognize them as such.
Since a question of values and aims, we have decided that science is supposed to get at
true causes, and not rest content with just workable accounts useful for prediction and
explanation, but which do not make claims to objective truth.
Science would not be as we know it today without these characteristics, but these are ultimately
choices we make about how science is going to be.
In practice, most scientists at least don't generally follow the realist road all the way
to the end.
I'll give you an example.
When I teach chemistry to my students, I use principles borrowed from physics to explain
things at a fundamental level.
Do I care whether these conceptions, these theories of physics are true or not?
I couldn't care less.
They satisfy me, they satisfy my students, by at least seeming to explain the things
that we see in chemistry, and they explain things well enough to get us going towards
what we really care about, chemistry.
So I might be a realist about chemistry, but an instrumentalist when I borrow explanations
from physics.
Engineers often don't care about true causes, so long as the theories they are using work
to a successful, practical result, like using Ptolemaic astronomy to get correct planetary
positions.
Philosophically speaking, we cannot really ever tell that we have uncovered true causes
or even that we are able to uncover them.
In this sense, Urban the Eighth and Bellarmineau were right.
But modern science does one of two things, either it gladly makes the leap of faith to
assert that human beings can ascertain true causes, or it simply assumes that we can, in
order to get the rest of science off the ground and functioning.
Having made that assumption, modern science has been pretty darn successful, hasn't it?
Of course it has.
On the other hand, the argument from success is not an argument for objective truth of
the starting assumption, only a verification that the assumption is working, that it's
a good one.
In conclusion, a little epilogue.
In 1979, only about a year into his pontificate, John Paul II made a widely publicized address
to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences.
He convened a commission to reopen Galileo's case.
Having said that Galileo was made to suffer unnecessarily by one of his predecessors,
he invited scientists, historians, and theologians to participate in this commission.
The commission's final report takes notes of errors that were committed on both sides.
Undoubtedly, chief among these on the church's side were the index decree of 1616 and Urban's
desire to make an example of Galileo in 1633.
On Galileo's side, his rather less-than-fourth-right dealings with Urban the Eighth and his error
about the tides.
More to the point, the report also contained a reaffirmation of Augustinian principles
of exegesis, as they were upheld in fact by Galileo.
And it also referred to the ultimate compatibility of faith and reason, a topic we've already
seen that was reiterated in the 1998 encyclical we mentioned previously.
So in sum, the Galileo affair includes a wide variety of issues that still command the
attention of historians.
In the past two lectures, I've tried to present a number of these issues, and I hope you can
see how much we really lose if we allow ourselves to reduce this to a simple conflict of science
and religion.
In our next lecture, we're going to look at some conceptions of God and nature as they
emerged in the seventeenth century.
