Lecture 7 – God the Watchmaker
The 17th century was an exciting time for both the history of science and the history
of religion.
It was a time for the history of science when many long-held scientific theories and concepts
were significantly amended or replaced, hence the period is called by many the Scientific
Revolution.
We already saw in the last lecture one major change to the world picture that occurred
in the 17th century, namely the replacement of the traditional Aristotelian Ptolemaic
cosmos with the newer Copernican Keplerian cosmos.
But another important development, and one that's perhaps more profound and more far-reaching,
was a new view of the way the world functioned.
I'm referring to the emergence of a philosophy of nature called the mechanical philosophy.
We saw earlier how man's concept of God affects his concept of nature, while in turn
man's concept of nature affects his conception of God.
The development of the mechanical philosophy brought with it changes to man's thinking
about God's activity in the world and God's relationship to mankind.
In this lecture we're going to look at how the 17th century mechanical philosophy and
17th century Christian theology interacted.
The mechanical philosophy envisions the universe as an immense and immensely complicated clockwork
or machine.
17th century writers liked in particular the comparison to a clockwork.
Hidden behind all the dials and hands of astronomical clocks of the period, which displayed everything
from lunar and solar cycles to elaborate automata with dancing figures and crowing cocks, and
other all sorts of ingenious devices lay unseen gears and wheels and pulleys that were what
was responsible the direct causes for the movements that delighted the viewers.
So 17th century thinkers drew a comparison between the world and what was for them a
technological wonder of the age, the astronomical clock, just as, say, the computer is in ours.
In living organisms, the levers and pulleys were to be revealed by anatomy and the new
microscope.
Individual organs became mechanical devices, the heart, a pump, the kidneys, filters, and
indeed the whole body a mass of plumbing and rigging.
Some thinkers went so far as to claim that animals were little more than automata.
But the mechanical philosophy also worked on a much more fundamental level.
In every substance lying between the surface that we can see was a simpler kind of clockwork,
that is, swarms of minute particles, called atoms by some, corpuscles by others.
These minute parts were in constant motion and endowed with particular shapes, and it
was their motions and their collisions and shapes which were responsible for the qualities
and the changes that we perceive in material substances.
Basically, it's a billiard ball type universe in a strict mechanical philosophy.
But before I go any further, I should just point out, if you haven't noticed it, that
we're back with the big issue of hidden causation.
Well as with many scientific developments, the mechanical philosophy turned out to be
a mixed bag for theology.
Let's look at some examples.
One major proponent and developer of the mechanical philosophy was Pierre Gassendi, a priest from
the south of France, mostly active in the 1630s to the 1650s.
Gassendi had a very difficult job ahead of him.
He was trying to use an atomic and mechanical system to replace Aristotelian conceptions
of nature that had been dominant since the 13th century and had been worked into Christian
theology.
The system he was trying to replace them with, this atomic system, had been rejected already
in antiquity and was tainted with atheism, so he had a tough job.
But he made several changes to the ancient system of atomism.
The ancient Greek Epicurus and his Roman popularizer Lucretius asserted that the atoms were infinite
in number, eternal and self-moving.
Gassendi, on the other hand, said that the atoms were finite in number, they were created
by God and, moreover, God had endowed them with their motion, thus introducing activity
and change into the world.
Gassendi additionally did a very important thing, that is, asserting the existence of
the human soul as an immaterial substance, that is, something not composed of atoms, and
he affirmed a belief in human free will, in accordance with Christian theology, of course.
Thus, Gassendi Christianized ancient atomism and incorporated it into a mechanical view
of nature.
Well, while Gassendi worried about Christianizing atomic mechanism, at about the same time
another Frenchman actually adopted the mechanical philosophy precisely because of the benefits
he thought it held out for Christian theology.
The minimum priest, Marine Mercen, was the Internet of his age.
He created a network of correspondence all across Europe facilitating the exchange of
ideas and letters between all sorts of different people.
This kind of position, later called an intelligentser, became crucial in the 17th century for the
exchange of ideas and international networks.
Mercen now seems to have advocated a mechanical system in order to help with the discernment
of miracles.
How?
Well, if the world functions by the motions and collisions of minute particles, then the
emergence of phenomena in nature must be perfectly regular.
In other words, you have, in the mechanical philosophy, a comprehensive explanation for
all phenomena.
So determining that coarseless Camunus Naturi, that common course of nature, will be much
easier, more exact.
And once you've done that, miracles will stick out like a sore thumb.
They'll be easy to identify.
Now the concept of a world that is a machine or a clockwork implied the existence of a
divine craftsman or a divine clockmaker.
Machines after all don't put themselves together.
In this way, the mechanical philosophy could be viewed as supporting religion.
We'll have a lot more to say about this position and its developments down to the present day
in our next lecture.
For now, I'll only point out that already in the 17th century, some thinkers were quick
to realize that the kind of God this argument suggested was not necessarily Orthodox.
For example, it could suggest an absentee God, in other words, a God that built the
clock, set it in motion, and then took a vacation.
He went away.
How would this conception fit with the Catholic doctrine of the continuation of miracles,
or with the more generally Christian notion of a providential and personal God?
But this was only one problem with the mechanical philosophy.
The mechanical philosophy also ran to the risk of promoting materialism.
That is, the belief that matter is all there is.
No spiritual, no immaterial entities like the soul or God.
If matter in motion was so powerful as an explanatory tool, can't it just explain everything?
Well, it's not hard to see that materialism eviscerates theistic belief because it renders
non-existent the central objects of religion, God and the human soul.
Well, materialism, bad enough on its own, further invoked the danger of determinism,
that is the belief that all future events are unavoidably determined by current conditions.
As it has sometimes been expressed, at least before the advent of modern physics, if we
knew the position and the motion of every atom in the universe, then we could predict
all future positions and thus all future events.
So in a materialistic world without entities that are both external to matter and able
to interact with it, then all the motions of particles on their own determine everything.
All future events, in other words, no free will.
Cassendi was very aware of these possible outcomes, hence he was careful to posit the
immaterial soul for man.
But a contrary voice was the mathematician and political theorist Thomas Hobbes.
He embraced a mechanical philosophy in his own way, and took it so far as to propose
a corporeal God and, like Epicurus, a corporeal human soul.
His contemporaries read this as equivalent to atheism.
Whether or not Hobbes was truly an atheist in our sense of the term remains a subject
of debate, but 17th century readers read him as one.
His views threw the danger of the overextension of mechanism into high relief.
Well, let me pause now to make an important observation.
In the modern world, we are likely to know a significant number of people who are atheists.
Either avowedly so, or practically so.
Thus it's easy for us to forget how extraordinarily outlandish such a position would have seemed
in the 17th century.
Sure, some people went about their lives ignoring the existence of God, but that's easy to
dismiss as just ignorance or immorality.
What actual, considered philosophical atheism was essentially unheard of.
Nonetheless, the 17th century, particularly in England, marked a time when people began
worrying seriously about the rise of atheism.
By the late 17th century, atheists were thought to be hiding behind every bush, like terrorists
today.
But in fact, it proved essentially impossible to point to a specific person and say, there
is an atheist.
Not that that did anything to allay the concern, the worry was that they were out there somewhere.
Let me stress.
Not only was this concern a new one in the 17th century, but also that it has continued
to characterize religious, particularly Protestant, apologetics ever since.
Don't underestimate this change.
People, religious writers, spent their time arguing for subtle understandings of the Trinity,
or of free will, or of divine providence, or of the Eucharist.
In the 17th century, began a shift in religious writings towards apologetics and frankly to
the trivial, to arguing simply for the existence of some kind of deity.
The emergence of this concern over atheism therefore had a profound impact on both science
and theology.
Now to return to the mechanical philosophy.
Numerous responses to the mechanical philosophy were proposed in order to address its potential
over extension to materialism, atheism, and other theologically unacceptable positions.
One response came from a group of thinkers called the Cambridge Platonists.
They were a group of professors at Cambridge University in the second half of the 17th century
who took particular inspiration from Platonic and Neoplatonic ideas.
One of them, by the name of Henry Moore, argued that brute matter in motion were simply insufficient
to produce the world we see and the natural phenomena we see.
So he added to matter in motion an inherent guiding principle.
This guiding principle was a non-sentient but immaterial entity he called the spirit
of nature or the plastic principle.
This principle could explain the remarkable organization of matter.
The way, for example, that a seed could draw in water and nutrients and generate there
from perfectly intricately formed leaves and flowers.
It guided the shaping of complex organisms, hence the name plastic principle.
That doesn't mean it's cheap and made in China.
What it means is that it comes from the Greek word plastikos, meaning a person who molds
images from clay.
Now thinkers, some thinkers didn't think much of this idea.
One contemporary who rejected it was Robert Boyle.
Boyle objected that the plastic principle was an unnecessary intermediary between God
and creation.
God was smart enough, he said, to have created a world to run on its own perfectly well without
having this host of maintenance workers running around keeping it going.
But at the same time Boyle explicitly wished Henry Moore the best of luck in trying to
prove the existence of some kind of immaterial entity.
Spirit of nature just wasn't the right one.
We'll see in a minute that Boyle himself was on the hunt for spiritual entities as
well.
Well, Robert Boyle will be familiar to any of you on account of the gas law that's
claimed after him, Boyle's law, namely that the pressure and volume of a gas are inversely
proportional, but Boyle did much, much more.
In fact, so involved was Boyle specifically in natural philosophy and religion and their
interactions that we should spend some time specifically with him.
Well, Boyle's an old friend of mine, so let me make some introductions.
Boyle was born into the richest family in Britain in 1627.
After a brief and not terribly successful attempt to write moral and devotional treatises,
he turned his attention to natural philosophy, especially chemistry.
Having a steady income from inheritance and remaining unmarried, Boyle spent his life
experimenting and writing.
His over 50 books contain important scientific essays, subtle philosophical analyses, and
theological treatises.
Now Boyle was a deeply religious man, Anglican in profession, though fairly ecumenical in
his thought.
He viewed the role of the natural philosopher, what we would call today a scientist, as a
priest of nature.
That's his term.
What does he mean by that?
Well, he saw the study of the natural world as an inherently religious activity.
The role of the natural philosopher was to study the world and to gather up from the
world ways in which to praise the Creator.
Like the priest sacrificing in the temple, the scientist in the world is the conduit
for the silent hymns and prayers of the natural world to God.
The idea that the study of the natural world was religious and devotional was not an uncommon
perspective in the 17th century.
This linked, of course, to the doctrine of the two books, the book of scripture, the
book of nature that we discussed before.
Reading the book of nature that is studying the natural world was learning about God,
very simply.
Indeed, Boyle suggested, in fact, that scientific activity, natural philosophical activity,
was a particularly appropriate thing to do on Sundays.
Why?
Because it was a kind of worship.
In fact, one of Boyle's earliest essays was entitled The Book of Nature, and it dealt
exactly with the issue of how natural studies strengthened an inspired religious devotion.
At the other end of his life, Boyle's last book was entitled The Christian Virtuoso,
and here the word virtuoso means about the same as natural philosopher.
It was written to explain Boyle's own life, and as well as an invitation to join him in
his project.
It dismisses the idea, which apparently must have begun to arise at this period, that scientific
study might somehow be deleterious to religious life and belief.
Boyle will have none of it.
He makes the opposite case.
Scientific study and understanding leads us to a profounder and more just appreciation
of Christianity and a greater devotion to God.
Now, remember that in the late 17th century there was a certain atheism panic.
Boyle was one of the worried parties.
This search was particularly crucial in England, the search for a solution to the atheism panic,
that is, thanks to the new Anglican doctrine of the cessation of miracles, as I mentioned
earlier.
Without the possibility of miraculous events that could signal the special activity of
God in the world, Anglicans had to look for other events that could signal the existence
and activity of supernatural beings.
Thus there were many projects at this time to uncover evidences of spiritual activity
in the world, particularly of spiritual entities like demons, angels, ghosts, and so forth.
Boyle himself was involved in several of these projects.
Boyle's name, in fact, appeared for the first time in print in connection with his sponsorship
of a translation of a French book entitled The Devil of Macron.
This book provides the account of a poltergeist that haunted a minister in France.
Boyle also helped out a contemporary of his by the name of Joseph Glanville, who was collecting
witchcraft testimony.
Now, Boyle himself was interested in witches not because they're evil, but because they're
if they could be verified, could demonstrate spiritual forces.
Boyle recognized perfectly well that the vast majority of such accounts were bogus, but
he also realized that he needed to find only one or a few credible accounts to argue his
case that there was spirit activity in the world.
Boyle also collected what he called strange reports, uncanny possibly supernatural occurrences
that could argue for spiritual activity.
He actually planned to publish this collection later in life, but apparently thought better
of it, and so it exists only in manuscript.
Boyle also spoke to some who attempted to practice the dark arts.
In one book, he tells of inquisitive men, as he calls them, who have so desired to prove
the existence of spiritual substances that they have tried, and I quote,
Forbidden ways of attaining satisfaction, and many have chosen rather to venture the
putting themselves within the power of demons, than remain ignorant whether or not there
are any such beings.
As I have learned, he says, by the private acknowledgments made to me of such unhappy,
though not unsuccessful, attempts by diverse learned men who themselves made these attempts
in various places.
Boyle thought about invoking spirits himself, but its possible immorality stopped him from
doing so.
But there's another interesting case here.
Boyle was keenly interested in preparing the philosopher's stone.
What is the philosopher's stone?
Well the philosopher's stone is a material substance to be prepared in the laboratory.
It was the goal of Alchemists who claimed that it had the power to transform base metals
like lead into gold.
For now, I'm not going to talk very much about alchemy, I'll just say that it was a
serious and a legitimate endeavor in the 17th century, undergirded by what seemed at the
time quite solid and testable theories.
At any rate, Boyle came to believe that the philosopher's stone could do more than just
make gold.
What he came to was a very unusual belief, and we don't know exactly where this idea
came from, but he claimed that the philosopher's stone might well be able to attract angels
and facilitate communication with them.
For the already rich Boyle, this possibility gave much more incentive to maker and or obtain
the stone than just to use it to make gold.
Indeed, he writes in an unpublished manuscript how this would prove a powerful weapon against
those atheists out there, for they could be shown the existence of angels.
Now all of this might sound a bit odd to you, but it would be a huge mistake to dismiss
it as weirdness or crankiness, regardless of your personal opinion about demons and angels.
I'm presenting all this material to you to show you how wide a domain early modern natural
philosophers felt was theirs to investigate.
Studies of spiritual phenomena were carried out by some of the most prominent natural
philosophers of the day, people whose works we still rely upon for fundamental parts of
modern science.
To them, such studies could be as much of their investigations as chemistry or physics.
Now contrast this with the situation that the modern scientist has.
In a grant proposal today to investigate angelic apparitions, how, why, and when did this shrinkage
of domain occur?
Well, let's keep this development in mind as the course progresses.
Now I have another point to make.
An important characteristic of the science-religion landscape of the 17th century was the sure
conviction that scientific discoveries would prove the best support for religious belief.
One instance of this conviction comes from one of Boyle's last acts.
In his will, he endowed a series of lectures against atheism.
The first Boyle lecturer was Richard Bentley, a classical scholar, critic, philologist,
and theologian.
In eight lectures he delivered in 1692 and 1693, he used recent scientific discoveries
to argue against atheism and in favor of a beneficent creator.
Interestingly, much of Bentley's material came from none other than Sir Isaac Newton
himself.
Indeed, the correspondence between Bentley and Newton still exists.
Newton proposed several arguments for the existence of God from his own scientific investigations,
in fact Bentley's lectures served in turn to help popularize some of Newton's ideas.
Again, we see here a cooperation between science and theology.
Now Newton himself was deeply religious, as was the case we must remember for essentially
all the scientific greats of the early modern period.
Galileo and Descartes were good practicing Catholics.
Gassendi and Melsenne were priests.
Boyle was called a lay priest by his confessor.
Boyle was so religious it said that he never spoke the word God without pausing before
saying it.
Newton was just as religious as they, except that he was a heretic.
He denied, for example, the doctrine of the Trinity, and he spent time trying to identify
and correct what he called corruptions of scripture.
He likewise was interested in prophecy and eschatology, that is, the study of the end
of the world.
By the way, Newton suggested that the world will come to an end in 2060.
His Principia Mathematica of 1687 stands as one of the foundational texts of physics.
In it, he proves the laws of falling bodies and of planetary motions and derives them
all from his overarching theory of universal gravitational attraction.
But in the same text, he also freely discusses the attributes and activities of God.
Again, we return to the changing domain considered appropriate for scientific discussion.
It was not unusual for physics texts of the time to deal with topics we would today consider
religious and therefore inappropriate for inclusion.
Newton talked about God in the Principia.
Gassendi discussed the soul and the general resurrection in his treatment of physics.
Descartes used the immutability of God as the guarantee for his ideas about the conservation
of motion.
By comparing this 17th century situation with the modern day, we once again have clear evidence
for the fluid and culturally contingent boundaries between science and religion, or science
and theology, over time.
Like many English contemporaries, Newton wanted to find evidence of divine activity in the
world.
Even though he was a heretic, he was very far from being an atheist.
There is some evidence that he may have believed that the force of gravity he discovered and
described was just such divine activity.
If this were true, then it would solve a real dilemma for non-Catholic Christians.
How do we get proof that God continues to care for his creation without miracles?
The force of gravity is inexplicable in a billiard ball universe.
Thus, it seems to lie outside the mechanical properties of matter.
Newton strove to find a natural cause without ever being satisfied.
Second of all, gravity is constant.
It can drop a ball at any time, and it always seems to work.
As such, it is a continual witness to the action of God.
But better, being constant, it is also a fundamental part of what?
The Camunus Corsus Naturi, the common course of nature.
Indeed, only the suspension of the law of gravity would be miraculous.
Thus God can have visible activity in the world, causing gravity, without a miracle,
simply by being the direct cause of a law of nature.
Now you should realize also that such a view would of course move our conception of the
world a little way towards supernaturalism.
Well before I end this lecture, let's get back to our boil lecturer, Dr. Bentley.
Drawing upon Newton, Bentley used the structure of the solar system as evidence of God and
his design, and its stability as evidence of his providence and continued activity.
For example, he says, all the planets revolve and rotate in the same direction.
How could this be an effect of mere chance?
The solar system remains stable.
The sun has not burned out, nor have the planetary orbits deteriorated.
This latter point was a real issue, for by this point in time, planetary observations
were keen enough to discover that the motions of Jupiter and Saturn were not stable.
One was slowing down, the other was speeding up.
The system could not have survived intact all these years without some adjustment by
divine intervention.
But such arguments for the existence of God are inherently problematic.
Why?
Because they're an appeal to ignorance.
Specifically, are ignorance of hidden causation?
Oh look, there's that problem again.
What such arguments create is a God of the gaps.
What does that mean?
The phrase God of the gaps refers to an image of the deity that is inadvertently created
by arguments that invoke his direct intervention to explain otherwise inexplicable phenomena
or situations.
In other words, to close the gaps in otherwise naturalistic explanations.
The problem is that such gaps tend to be manifestations of the incompleteness of our knowledge at
any given time.
Thus, they tend to close up with the advance of scientific knowledge, thus putting religion
in the embarrassing position of constant retreat.
The problem, for example, of the seemingly unstable motion of Jupiter and Saturn was
solved in the late 18th century, using Newtonian physics, not the hand of God.
So if we invest in a God of the gaps, that God risks being progressively squeezed out
of the picture.
The problem with the God of the gaps is a background to the belief expressed by white
draper and others that religion always retreats before science.
But such a retreat is a historically contingent event.
It depends upon a prior choice to create and then to rely upon God of the gaps arguments.
We cannot deny that some gaps might not be able to be closed.
One that comes to mind is that moment of creation when there's something out of nothing.
This seems to be something that science, at least as we know it, can't address.
But historically speaking, such examples are very few indeed in comparison to the many that
have been proposed and filled since the 17th century.
But now we're getting a little ahead of ourselves.
The use of the knowledge of the natural world to support religious belief developed extensively
in the 18th and 19th century.
The field became known as natural theology.
Natural theology and its attendant argument from design is what we'll talk about in the
next lecture.
