Lecture 8 Natural Theology and Arguments from Design
Can the study of the natural world demonstrate the existence of God?
In the last lecture, we looked at how a firm conviction that the study of the natural world
was a devotional activity developed into a practice of using scientific knowledge for
religious apologetics.
In this lecture, we're going to look more closely at the product, natural theology
and its major tool, the argument from design.
Natural theology is defined as the drawing of inferences and proofs regarding God from
the natural world.
We can see how old the general concept is by noting that natural theology results in
essence from readings of the book of nature.
But while limited theological readings of the book of nature have been around since antiquity,
a well-defined natural theology arose only at the end of the 17th century.
Natural theology once developed showed great resiliency and flexibility down through the
19th century, and it was particularly prominent in the English-speaking world.
That's a feature that will require some explanation.
But first, let's survey some writers in the natural theology tradition.
The foundational text in the genre is a work by John Ray.
Now Ray was born in 1627, the same year as Boyle.
He studied at Cambridge and became especially interested in plants.
He proposed some early classification systems for them, and parts of his system are still
in use.
In 1667, he was made a fellow of the Royal Society of London, the oldest scientific society
in continuous operation, and he published prodigiously.
Ray was also ordained an Anglican priest in 1660.
As such, he's another example in the long line of people in holy orders who were also
involved in the study of the natural world.
I keep bringing this point up again and again because I want to make absolutely sure that
I'm breaking down the rather automatic, modern, wrong response of putting religious thinkers
and scientists into different categories.
Well in 1691, Ray published a book entitled The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works
of Creation.
It proved very popular.
It was reprinted frequently for over 50 years.
Ray's work, like that of Boyle Newton and other 17th century natural philosophers, was
based on the conviction that, and I quote,
There is for a free man no occupation more worthy and delightful than to contemplate
the beautyous works of nature and honor the infinite wisdom and goodness of God.
Ray's book presents material gained from all kinds of recent studies in the fields
of botany, anatomy, astronomy, physiology and so forth, all of them proclaiming the wisdom
and goodness of God.
In other words, the investigation of the natural world enhances reverence for its creator.
Next came the Boyle Lectures.
We mentioned Richard Bentley's 1692-93 sermons last time, but there were many others.
For example, a particularly popular series were the 1711 and 1712 lectures given by William
Durham.
These were collected, revised, printed and reprinted down to the 1760s.
Durham called his subject physical theology, that is, theology from the natural world.
In 1802, however, there appeared what's probably the most widely read example of the genre,
William Paley's natural theology.
Paley was himself an Anglican vicar and a writer of textbooks largely on moral philosophy.
There wasn't much original material in Paley's volume, but it did summarize much of what
had gone on in the natural theology tradition of the 18th century.
The book was regularly read in university curricula, and it greatly impressed, among
many others, a young Charles Darwin.
Finally, perhaps the most extensive work on natural theology appeared in the 1830s.
These were the Bridgewater Treatises, an eight-volume set funded by a request from the eighth Earl
of Bridgewater.
He left 8,000 pounds to commission and print works, quote, on the power, wisdom and goodness
of God as manifested in the creation.
Authors were chosen by a committee composed of the President of the Royal Society, the
Bishop of London and the Archbishop of Canterbury.
The series contained works on astronomy, anatomy, chemistry, geology and other fields.
The hundreds of works on natural theology that appeared over the course of nearly two
centuries were written by a wide variety of authors.
So were they predominantly natural philosophers or clergymen?
Well, often both.
John Ray, as an example, his activities were evenly divided between natural philosophy
and divinity, and he held credentials in both.
Other authors were active predominantly only one of the fields.
Durham and Paley were clergymen without personal activity in natural philosophy.
They borrowed from the works of others for their natural theological writings.
On the other side was, for an example, Bernard Neuventyte.
He was a Dutch mathematician and a doctor of medicine, and in the 17 teens he wrote
one of the few notable non-British works on natural theology, but in fact the book went
through many more printings in England than it did anywhere else.
What was the main thrust of all this authorial activity?
While some argued that the attributes of God could be drawn from the natural world,
most natural theology was content to prove merely God's existence.
This goal was already clear in John Ray.
He writes, I quote,
There is no greater, at least no more palpable and convincing argument of the existence of
a deity than the admirable art and wisdom that discovers itself in the make and constitution,
the order and disposition, the ends and uses of all the parts and members of the stately
fabric of heaven and earth.
For if, in the works of art, as for example a curious edifice or machine, council design
and direction to an end appearing in the whole frame and in all the several pieces of it
do necessarily infer the being and operation of some intelligent architect or engineer.
You'll see there was a shortage of periods in the late 17th century, they didn't like
to use them up unnecessarily.
There's a fine example here of how most natural theology rests upon one principle, the argument
from design.
The argument from design holds that the smooth functioning and intricate contrivance of natural
objects implies a designer.
That is, it provides proof for the existence of God.
One was the natural theologian's prime target and signs of design, their chief weapon.
The classic example is the story of the watch.
It was told by Paley in 1802 even though he collected it out of Neuventite and Neuventite
himself drew upon ideas connected with the mechanical philosophy.
The story goes like this, imagine one day you're out walking in an isolated place and
you see a watch lying on the ground.
You pick it up and you look at it, you open the back.
You notice how beautifully the gears are cut and how perfectly they fit together.
You see that the best possible materials are used to make the component parts and you wonder
where did the watch come from?
From the watch, therefore, you naturally infer a watchmaker.
Even if there's nobody in sight and you can find no direct sign of the watchmaker, you
don't know he must be out there somewhere simply because you have the watch he made
in your hand.
The argument then moves from artificial to natural objects.
Consider the eye.
See how beautifully it's put together, how ingenious the adaptation of parts, therefore
looking at the eye you are sure of the existence of a designer of the eye, which we conclude
to be God.
Well what did people in the 18th century actually make of the argument from design?
The argument from design was subject to criticism already by the middle of the 18th century
and not just or even predominantly as it turns out from those inclined towards atheism.
The argument on examination turns out to be weak, ambiguous, and from the position of
Orthodox Christianity potentially dangerous.
Social thinkers, David Hume among them, pointed out that the arguments from design might not
take you where you want to go.
A watch might imply a master watchmaker, but it could just as easily imply a company
of watchmakers, in other words, polytheism.
Or it could point to an apprentice watchmaker, something akin to Plato's demiurge.
And even if we get to monotheism, the God of natural theology is far from the Christian
God without moral force, unique eternity, or personal concern about the creation.
In fact, Daists, in other words, those who believe in a God but one who is impersonal
and detached, latched onto natural theology every bit as much as Anglican vickers.
Daists used it to show that Christian revelation was unnecessary.
The principles of religion could be gathered entirely from nature by reason.
So faith, revelation, and church are all unnecessary.
When pressed to forcefully, the argument from design actually encourages non-Christian views
of God.
It does so by overemphasizing arguments drawn from reason for his mere existence at the
expense of faith in revelations of his attributes.
You see the difference.
From a Christian perspective, merely demonstrating the existence of God is really a pretty cheap
commodity.
So there's a designer God, big deal.
He could be the God of the Neoplatonists who isn't even aware that he created the universe
and who doesn't can't even care about you and your problems.
This is totally antithetical to Christian theology that the best metaphor for God is
Father.
Besides the end point of the argument, there are problems with the mechanism.
The argument is held together by analogy.
An analogical reasoning is only as valid as the analogical basis is sound.
What does that mean?
Well, let's consider the propositions.
A watch implies an intelligent watchmaker.
OK, no problem.
We've seen watches being made.
The proposition is then used analogically to say that the eye implies an intelligent
eye maker.
But this assumes that natural things, eyes, are produced like artificial things, watches.
The analogy is a legacy of the mechanical philosophy, but it's questionable.
Natural things arise spontaneously as units, from seeds, eggs and such like, and they reproduce
others like themselves.
Natural things, on the other hand, are composites assembled piece by piece.
And I, at home, have a drawer full of watches, but I've never opened the drawer to find
they'd given birth to new ones.
A second assumption is that God, the maker of natural things, works like a human being,
the maker of artificial things.
Well, besides being inherently unlikely, this is dangerous as an anthropomorphism.
It brings God down to a human level.
It threatens to make his activity banal, mechanical to be precise, and rob him of transcendence.
Worse still is that design is often in the eye of the beholder.
We cannot tell whether what we perceive as design is real or our construct.
We cannot put a designed universe next to an undesigned one and compare the difference.
There is no valid control, no valid yardstick by which to measure degrees of design.
Another way of saying this is to point out that the argument from design depends first
upon an argument for design.
That is, we must first demonstrate clearly that there is transcendent design, and that
will be impossible unless we can compare how things turn out with design to how they turn
out without design.
So arguments for design in the world rely ultimately upon appeals to ignorance.
We say cannot imagine how an intricate system could come to be without an intelligent designer.
All such arguments lead as we've seen to a God of the gaps.
We don't currently have a way to explain what we see, and so we resort to God as an
explanation.
The arguments from and for design are not really rational arguments.
What do they appeal to?
They appeal to our emotions, our feelings of awe and wonder, rather than to our reason.
The world is an extraordinary place.
It is full of marvels, but you can't turn admiration into an argument.
Therefore while design arguments are great for exhortation in a devotional context, they
are unsatisfactory in a probatory one.
This point now highlights a crucial historical development, a shift in what natural theology
was actually asked to do.
Initially, natural theology was about heightening devotion in believers.
It was thus intensely personal.
But this function was progressively displaced in favor of a public use as an apologetic
to convince non-believers.
That's where the weakness lies.
While reading the book of nature can fulfill the first goal, it's not able to accomplish
the second.
It's easier to augment a fire than to start one.
A believer studying the marvelous intricacies of the natural world can see the hand of God
and have his devotion increased.
But a non-believer, while subject to the very same feelings of awe and wonder, is not going
to translate that emotional response into praise of a creator.
Instead, he could just as easily marvel at the efficiency and power of the operation
of natural causes.
In short, a sense of wonder is going to enhance your respect for whatever cause you already
have in mind, not change its identity.
We shouldn't overlook the hand of history.
Both theologies' development stems largely from circumstances particular to 18th century
England.
First, the reliance on such arguments makes sense only in a context where there's already
paranoia about atheism.
Second, there was, specifically in England, pressure to turn to reason for religious apologetic,
because of the political situation.
The English Civil War of the mid-17th century left a legacy of religious dissension and
sectarianism, especially by low church enthusiasts as they're called, namely people who relied
on personal experiences of faith or revelation, and who opposed the Church of England.
One solution was to turn to reason-based arguments instead of faith or Bible-based ones, with
the assumption that reason is something everybody can agree on.
The members of the Royal Society believed that experimental natural philosophy was also
something that people of differing religious commitments could agree on.
Thus, with the social and political need to restore order and unity in Britain, the alliance
of natural philosophy and religious apologetic was a natural solution.
Thirdly, there's something very English about the image of a proper, well-ordered world
governed by a beneficent sovereign.
Indeed, the similarity between the natural theologian's view of the world and the projected
image of the English state and crown has been remarked upon by many historians.
There's also a social specificity.
You are far more likely to come up with or buy into the idea that the world is perfectly
designed by a benevolent deity if you are a country vicar sipping sherry looking out
into your garden.
More so than if you are a peasant in a hovel trying to scrape a few beans out of a lousy
plot of land and half of your children die before the age of ten.
In the same way, England's green and pleasant land suggests an agreeable natural theology
better than would a harsher environment like Central Africa.
Now let's bring the discussion up to the present.
A development related to natural theology has recently appeared in the United States.
It's called intelligent design, or since everything scientific has to have an acronym
ID.
Let's have a look at it.
There are two general principles to intelligent design.
The first is that intelligent causes have a crucial role in the origin and design of
the universe and of life in its diversity.
The second is that design is empirically detectable in nature.
While some ID advocates deny that their intelligent cause is God.
But this is a lost cause.
ID must terminate in a divinity of some sort.
Let me explain.
For example, some ID proponents would allow that hyperintelligent space aliens could be
the designer.
But this is no ultimate answer because then one would have to ask who designed the hyperintelligent
space aliens.
The only escape from an infinite regress, as Aristotle and St. Thomas would explain
patiently, is an undesigned designer, prior to all design things and therefore the first
designer or first cause.
And once you have an intelligent first cause, you have a divinity by definition.
Not the Christian God to be sure, but God nonetheless.
Some critics would find the recognition that ID, regardless of its disclaimers, must be
theistic as damning criticism.
I don't think this is the case at all.
It needn't be.
A theistic commitment didn't undermine the important scientific work and contributions
of Kepler, Galileo, Boyle, Newton, and you can name any number of them.
But some critics have identified ID as a thinly veiled, perhaps disingenuous move by evangelical,
fundamentalist Christians to insert what they can of their particular belief systems
into scientific and educational establishments.
Well this accusation gains some support from the fact that ID proponents have often adopted
legal or political strategies, or appealed to the court of public opinion to compel a
scent to their claims.
If ID is a scientific theory, as its proponents claim, then it has to be assessed by scientists,
by the slow, very difficult route of accumulating argument, evidence, result, and supporters.
I know of lots of examples in the history of science, where claims initially and long
rejected by the majority of natural philosophers were eventually shown to be true.
They became the accepted view.
But I'm unaware of a precedent or a philosophical justification for having a scientific point
determined by a law court or public opinion.
The scientific lies beyond the competency of both.
So therefore legal maneuvering looks like an end run around scientific discourse.
And since actions tend to speak louder than words, it does tend to undercut ID's claims
to be scientific.
Further, it's been pointed out that vocal supporters of ID have clear, generally highly
conservative, sociopolitical agenda.
Again, some critics consider this damning evidence.
But as a historian of science, I'm afraid again I have to disagree.
The existence of such agendas is not necessarily damning.
Some scientific positions of the past have also embraced political and social agendas,
or even emerged out of them.
Origins and agendas are crucial parts of the context, but they're not sufficient ground
for dismissing claims.
So what's the promise of intelligent design?
Well, many people adopt intelligent design in a way that connects it to the natural
theology tradition, namely as religious apologetic.
They believe there's design in nature, and this argues for a designer.
But this version of ID is susceptible to all the problems, weaknesses, and dangers that
natural theology was.
We explored these previously.
I'm not going to recap all the arguments now, just rewind the lecture and listen to
them again.
They all apply.
Some other ID supporters, however, strive to distance their system from natural theology.
Quote, instead of arguing for the existence of a designer, writes one major exponent
of ID, intelligent design asks how positing an intelligent cause to explain such objects
offers fresh scientific insights.
The point is to see what a designer helps explain.
The point is not to establish the existence of the designer.
Well, this turns the natural theology argument around.
Instead of showing design in the world and arguing thence to a creator, ID in this formulation
assumes the designer as an explanatory tool.
Now, since I showed above that the ultimate designer must be divine, this version of ID
begins with the adoption, provisional or otherwise, of a theistic perspective.
As far as I'm concerned, that's fine as it's no more inherently likely or unlikely
as a starting point than an atheistic one.
But here's the rub.
Our author says the point is to see what a designer helps explain.
Okay, that sounds pretty reasonable at first glance.
To a designer, a provisional cause for a phenomenon and see where it takes you.
The first response is great, okay guys, carry on, let's see the results.
But on second consideration, I'm still happy to say carry on, but on consideration I find
it hard to imagine what explanatory improvements could possibly be forthcoming.
For the same advocate asserts that, and I quote, intelligent design begins with features
of the world that are inherently inexplicable in terms of natural causes, not merely features
of the world that for now lack a natural cause explanation, but rather for which natural
causes are in principle incapable of providing an explanation.
Now this sounds to me like an attempt to wedge open a gap in which to house a god of the
gaps.
How on earth do we distinguish between temporary inexplicability and permanent inexplicability
without having first in hand a total and complete understanding of all natural causation?
And why would we trouble ourselves to uncover more about natural causation if we begin with
the assumption that whatever we find will be inadequate even before we know what it
is?
Well just for the sake of argument, let's imagine that one has identified something
in the world that is, quote, inherently inexplicable in terms of natural causes.
Well if you were trying to prove the existence of God, you're done!
You found something demonstrably not naturally caused, then it must be supernaturally caused,
therefore God exists, congratulations, go home.
But remember, this author claims that the point is to see what a designer helps explain.
When we claim that something is inherently inexplicable in terms of natural causes, we
are asserting that ordinary secondary causation is inadequate and therefore that primary causation,
the action of a designer, must be invoked.
The primary causation is by its very nature incomprehensible, like in my former example
suddenly turning a cucumber into an aardvark.
So the recourse to primary causation explains nothing in the usual sense of the word explain.
Do you see where we've ended up?
Can we rule out the usual functioning of natural causes where left with only two options?
One, direct primary causation, the first cause acts without mediation, for example the creation
out of nothing.
Or two, the first cause acts through secondary causes in such a way that their usual action
is altered, for example when an effect is disproportionate to the cause.
What do we call such events?
Miracles.
But once we identify a miracle, all we can do is label it as such, not explain how it
took place.
If we could explain it, it wouldn't be a miracle.
Therefore the promise that the designer might literally explain something is vain.
This is how, in fact, the medieval theologians gravitated towards a position of naturalism.
Primary causation is literally incomprehensible.
Try to imagine to actually understand how God created something out of nothing.
You can't do it.
So primary causation doesn't help you if you want explanation or understanding.
Whether we study secondary causation or we have nothing left to study, we can comprehend
only secondary causation, therefore only secondary causation provides true explanation unless
we want to change the meaning of the word explanation.
Recourse to primary causation is an abandonment of the search for explanation and understanding.
A designer might very well be behind the secondary causes, behind them directing them.
But we can never know for sure.
And in a practical sense, it doesn't make any difference for our explanations because
all we can actually ever observe is the secondary causation.
Thus, methodologically favoring naturalism is a way to preserve what is the most fundamental
human aspiration, the search for understanding.
And this applies with equal force to both science and theology.
Now interestingly enough, naturalism is a favored whipping boy for ID supporters, but
they conflate two flavors of naturalism.
Naturalism as a methodological principle says only that we should appeal only to natural
causes for our explanations.
Philosophical naturalism, on the other hand, says that the natural is all there is.
Philosophical naturalism entails atheism.
Methodological naturalism does not.
Confusing the two leads to a depiction of the scientific establishment as inherently
atheistic and atheism as a non-scientifically assumed position.
While this last part the ID supporters have right, atheism could never be a scientifically
held position, but it misses the point.
The notion that favoring naturalism for explanations entails atheism is just false.
Explanations based on naturalism have been favored since antiquity by natural philosophers
and orthodox theologians alike.
Naturalism obviously was not an unavoidable part of the package then, and it isn't now.
The depiction of the scientific community as atheistic is part of a straw man argument.
Recent surveys show that more than 40% of active American scientists believe in a personal
God, and a larger percentage, in fact a majority, in some kind of transcendent being.
In fact a transcendent being closer to the Judeo-Islamo-Christian God than ID's vague
intelligent causes.
Yet the vast majority of these scientists rely implicitly or explicitly on methodological
naturalism in their daily work without being atheists.
The point is, as I've said above, if you want explanations you have to appeal to secondary
causation.
The appeal to primary causation simply ends the inquiry by providing an answer without
an explanation.
Well, we will revisit intelligent design briefly in lecture 11.
In the next lecture we're going to ask questions about the age and origin of the earth and
the universe.
