Lecture 9 Geology, Cosmology, and Biblical Chronology
Questions about the age and origin of the earth and the universe have played an important
role in both scientific and theological discussions.
In this lecture we're going to look at some historical developments in both areas.
This lecture will showcase two important things.
First, examples of how scientific advances are, or are not, accommodated by adjustments
in religious thought.
And second, how different groups can take the same scientific finding and draw diametrically
opposed theological lessons from it.
Well in the patristic period and the Middle Ages there was little reason to think that
the earth was any more than a few thousand years old.
Now this may sound peculiar to us because we're used to thinking of an earth that's
billions of years old.
But there was no reason for the Medieval's, for example, to think of a concept of deep
time as it's sometimes called.
There was no physical evidence that would suggest this to them.
In terms of human history, the available records did not stretch very far back.
They of course had the writings of Greek antiquity like Plato and Aristotle, but this pushed
back human history only a few centuries before the birth of Christ.
The oldest texts that the Middle Ages possessed were the early books of the Old Testament.
And so these were virtually the only source for a chronology of what they would at least
have considered deep time.
So toting up all the begats in the ages of the Old Testament patriarchs gave a figure
for the appearance of Adam the first man of about 4,000 years before the birth of Christ.
As for the age of the earth, even though as I've said before there was little support
for the notion that creation took place over six literal days, there was even less reason
to stretch the period out into an enormous age.
Even a homocentric cosmology that is a view of the earth and universe created for mankind,
what would be the point of having an earth or universe hanging around for eons or even
millennia without human beings?
So with no compelling sources available, there was no reason to pass beyond the ready to
hand figures available in the Old Testament.
But I should emphasize here that these figures for the date of the earth, the age of the
earth, were not held so to speak religiously, that I mean as an article of faith or doctrine,
there was just nothing around to contradict them.
Now some of you will have heard of the famous date of October the 23rd, 4004 BC, a date
given for creation.
Well this figure resulted from the 17th century calculations of James Usher, the Archbishop
of Armaa in Ireland.
The date has sometimes been held up to ridicule, but Usher's date, even though it is of unusual
precision, was only one of many figures of about this value, give or take a few millennia,
which were proposed in the early modern period.
The reason we know Usher's date in particular is that that's the one that was chosen to
be put into the margin of some early editions of the King James Bible.
Until nowadays, fossils and sedimentary strata provide key dating evidence for geologists,
and it was in the 17th century that new attention was fixed on these features.
But their meaning was ambiguous.
Were fossils really the remains of living creatures, or were they just oddly shaped
rocks, that is, sports or games of nature as they were sometimes called?
One important person in this area was Niels Stensen, a dain born in 1638, and better known
by his Latinized name Nicholas Steno.
His first studies were actually in anatomy.
He discovered a salivary duct that to this day bears his name, Stensen's duct.
But during his time in Italy, under the patronage of the Medici, Steno collected fossils and
studied rock formations.
I should also say that about the same time Steno converted to Catholicism.
He became a priest and then a bishop, and is now in fact a Beatus, so one step from
recognized sainthood.
Steno in his geological work argued four important points.
First that fossils are in fact the remains of living creatures.
Second, that the layers we see in rocks, what we call strata, using the Latin word for roads,
are sedimentary deposits.
The fossil shells found encased in these deposits were laid down with mud that later hardened
into rock.
Third, since the strata are sediments, they must have been laid down horizontally.
Therefore, in any case where we see them at an angle, they must have been shifted at some
time subsequent to their formation.
Fourth, and finally, it then follows that the lower strata must be older than the higher
strata.
Now Steno couldn't determine the actual age in numbers of the strata or the fossils,
but what he did do was to show that there was some development of the earth.
The fossils moved from the ocean now to high land.
Rocks formed from mud and strata were disturbed.
In other words, Steno was the first to view the surface of the earth as a historical record,
a geological history, another chapter in the book of nature to be read.
A little while after Steno, at the end of the 17th century, there were attempts to interleave
biblical and geological histories into theories of the earth.
One attempt was Thomas Burnett's 1680s sacred theory of the earth.
He posited six geological ages that were punctuated by cataclysmic biblical events.
For example, the world as originally formed was perfectly smooth on its surface like an
egg shell, but at some point this shell cracked and collapsed, releasing subterranean waters
which were recorded in Scripture as Noah's flood and leaving what Burnett calls a wreck
of a world.
Well here in calling it a wreck of a world what he's showing is typical 17th century
distaste for what were considered horrible, ugly piles of waste.
We call them the Alps and other mountains.
In 1694, the astronomer Edmund Halley, or Halley of Halley's Comet fame, gave a paper
to the Royal Society in which he critiqued what he called the many insufficiencies of
Burnett's theory.
He said they are a jarring as much with the physical principles of nature as with Holy
Scripture.
Halley suggested that collision with a comet might have knocked the earth's axis out
of the vertical, making therefore the sea slosh out of its bed, causing geological
devastation and the event recorded as Noah's flood.
Just a year later, John Woodward's essay towards a natural history of the earth argued
that Steno strata were in fact the result of the flood.
This explained the specificity of fossils to particular strata, that is, the fossils
settled out in order of density.
These developments display two features of interest.
First, the flood of Noah became a geological, not just a biblical event.
Second, note how new scientific findings are guiding biblical interpretation.
There's little in the Genesis account of Noah to suggest geological effects of the
scale envisioned by Burnett, Woodward, or their many followers.
As the discovery of physical records of geological upheavals, Genesis as the oldest written record
might, they thought, give a parallel verbal account.
Each might fill gaps in the other.
What these early writers were trying to do is to piece together an earth history from
all available sources, and all of them, whether physical or scriptural, were meager, incomplete,
and open to multiple interpretation.
While natural theologians in England were contentedly harmonizing the Bible with new
natural philosophical ideas, across the channel in France, the same ideas were being used
simply to discard biblical narratives.
Thus it was in France that the earth's history was extended back in time to include the origins
of the earth itself.
In the mid-18th century, Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte Buffon, hypothesized that a large comet
struck the edge of the sun, knocked out from it a great plume of matter far into space.
This matter then, under the action of gravity, coalesced into the planets, creating the solar
system.
In 1796, Pierre Simon Laplace proposed an alternative hypothesis that the sun and planets
formed simultaneously out of the condensation of a rotating nebular cloud.
Well nowadays both systems of satellite formation have been shown to be correct in different
ways, Laplace's nebular hypothesis for the formation of the solar system, and something
akin to Buffon's impact for the earth-moon system.
Now how Buffon and Laplace got to this point is of great interest.
Remember that Newton was impressed that all planets and satellites orbit and rotate in
the same direction, and nearly in the same plane.
This for him was evidence of design.
It seemed wildly improbable that this could come about by chance.
But about 50 years later, Buffon actually did the calculation.
He found that the chances were 1 in about 7.7 million.
But rather than suggesting the hand of God to Buffon, it suggested that a single event
had produced all the planetary motion simultaneously.
He thus proposed that a comet striking a rotating sun would do just this, and Laplace
had the same issues in mind.
Listen carefully and you'll hear a gap for the God of the gaps slamming shut.
This showcases a problem with the argument from design and some arguments from probability
that still appear today.
The choice between design and wildly improbable chance is generally a false dichotomy because
it leaves out an essential feature, a mechanism of formation.
Probability calculations have to take into account the mechanism of getting from the
initial state to the final state.
So for planets and satellites to come together randomly and each acquire a given motion in
a given plane and in the same direction is 7.7 million to one against.
But once we add Laplace's mechanism of formation, it drops to one to one, and it becomes improbable
that the solar system could be otherwise.
Now the effect was to increase the age of the earth tremendously, specifically to create
a long pre-human period.
Now curiously, the new theories were used simultaneously both for and against the reliability
of biblical narratives, thus the impact of the new science on theology was determined
largely by external factors.
Here's what I mean.
Many French thinkers of the Enlightenment were already committed to deism over Christianity,
so they used the new natural evidence to ridicule the Old Testament as the superstitions of
a primitive people.
Voltaire, for example, ever ready to oppose established religion, even denied the specific
placement of fossils in particular strata largely because this observation had been
used to undergird the reality of Noah's flood.
In the 1790s, the Scottish deist James Hutton embraced an eternalist perspective, clearly
contrary to Christian doctrine, saying that the earth shows neither vestige of a beginning
nor prospect of an end.
On the other side of the fence, Christian apologists, or just those supporting the existing socio-religious
political order, harmonized new developments with Scripture, and their interpretations
were ever less and less naively literal.
Laplace's nebula, for instance, was easily seen by some as the world without form and
void of Genesis 1, verse 2.
While Laplace shocked Napoleon by claiming he did not need God as a hypothesis in the
formation of the solar system, while Laplace did this, three of the Bridgewater treatises
worked the nebular hypothesis into natural theology.
The same theory rejected as atheistic by some, for others, confirmed a biblical narrative,
so the same theories of evidence and evidence could be applied in diametrically opposing
ways, co-opted to fit with an individual's foregoing commitments.
While the same dichotomous impact greeted a contemporaneous development in biblical exegesis,
what I'm referring to is higher criticism.
Higher criticism is the analysis of the Bible not from a theological perspective but from
a historical, textual, and philological perspective.
It thus involves issues of dating, style, and authorship.
A J. G. Eichhorn's Die Urgesichte, an ancient history of 1779, is generally seen as the
beginning of higher criticism.
It uncovered, among other things, the multiple authorship of the Old Testament.
Rather than being the start-to-finish composition of Moses, there are actually four authoritative
memorial groups within the first five books of the Old Testament, distinguished by style
and vocabulary.
This explains, for example, the discrepant accounts of creation in Genesis 1 and 2.
Daists and others inclined to oppose Christianity on personal or political grounds claim that
higher criticism just showed the Old Testament was worthless.
But many German theologians and intellectual Christians embraced higher criticism, perceiving
that by emphasizing the Bible's meager value for literal chronology, it liberated its spiritual
content, its spiritual message.
So at the end of the 18th century, you find a complicated mess of conflicting interpretations,
motivations, and agendas surrounding the question of the age of the earth.
Those who just wanted to study earth history were, in a sense, caught in the middle.
Every discovery they made could be turned by those with larger agendas into an argument
for or against Christianity.
The response was to band together and to professionalize.
The year 1807 saw the foundation of the Geological Society of London.
The professionalization of science is possibly the most significant scientific development
of the entire 19th century.
These emerging professionals saw themselves as philosophical, as they called it, geologists.
Their group was defined by a focused attention to geology per se, not its religious ramifications.
But of course, whenever you define one group, you define two, those inside and those outside.
On the outside lived what were called the mosaical geologists.
They endeavored to conform scientific findings to literal readings of Genesis, and their
motivation came from two sources.
First, a need to oppose the rhetoric of eternalists like Hutton, and two, the moral horror at
the disaster of the recent French Revolution, which many in England saw as the direct result
of anti-Christian and anti-establishment tendencies exemplified by the French dais.
Now also, the professionalization of geology provoked a reactionary dynamic.
A field once open to all was now closing up behind intellectual, social, and educational barriers.
Significantly, the same group of the mosaical geologists were being shut out of biblical exegesis by a higher criticism.
So in the Middle Ages, for example, theologians were one of the most highly professionalized groups.
Their borders were clear.
But with the rise of Protestantism, there was the notion that anybody could interpret scripture.
Around 1800, with the advent of higher criticism, which required high-level skills like a mastery of ancient languages,
the reading of scripture was again professionalizing.
Thus those with less education, less professional training, found themselves becoming excluded.
Now, if you find yourself becoming alienated, excluded from increasingly complex, esoteric,
and professionalized scientific and theological communities, one response is retrenchment.
Thus, mosaical geologists returned to late 17th century styles of Earth histories, as if the 18th century hadn't happened.
Likewise, they preferred naively literal readings of Genesis as if higher criticism hadn't happened.
Bear in mind this retrenchment in the face of being left behind by advances one can't follow.
We'll come back to it.
But don't go away with the thought that the philosophical geologists were all secularists and the mosaicists clergymen.
Not at all, in fact, there were clergy on both sides of the divide, devout Christians on both sides of the divide.
This fact disallows a simple science versus religion reading of the two groups.
The division was really a social one.
And it was enforced by how the groups treated geological knowledge publicly.
This is an important point.
Mosaicists directed it to apologetic purposes akin to natural theology.
The philosophical geologists frowned at this use.
Even if some of their number agreed in principle with harmonizing Genesis with geology,
the maintenance of their professional boundaries required that this not be done publicly.
A strict adherence to naturalism thus became a hallmark to differentiate philosophical geologists from mosaicists,
as it would become in due course for all the sciences.
Remember, this stance for the philosophical geologists is not about private belief,
but about what's appropriate for professional discussion and publication.
So even though it can look like a science-religion split, that's not what it is.
It's a social split into an elite group with training and a popular group.
It's easy, I think, to feel sympathy for the mosaicists.
We can all feel a little bit of what they felt whenever we open up a journal devoted to a topic we're sincerely interested in,
and discover that we need an advanced degree just to get past the first few lines.
The long-earth history revealed by geologists was fairly easily accommodated in the end
by better educated, less literalist biblical exegetes.
For example, some developed the day-age theory.
That assigned a vast geological epoch to each of the six days in Genesis,
but there was another extension of the timeline coming in regard to the age of the universe,
before the creation or the appearance of a primordial earth, depending on how you look at it.
Some of the earliest and most significant impacts of reason on faith involved speculation about creation,
particularly the Creazio ex nihilo, the creation out of nothing.
For God's eternity to be unique, He must have created everything out of nothing.
Really nothing, no time, no space.
In regard to time, St. Augustine responded to those who asked why God created the world when He did and not before or after
by pointing out that time itself is a creation.
It can be detected only by change, and change requires created things.
Such reasoning was also part of His rejection of 24-hour periods of creation,
since in the first days there was nothing in existence to mark time.
Others, like the 13th century theologian and bishop Robert Grostet,
reasoned that extension, the three dimensions, was also a creation.
Creation, if truly ex nihilo, did not fill up some pre-existing emptiness.
So Grostet concluded that time, space, matter and light had to have been created in the initial moment of the fiat lux, let there be light.
Following reason and the known principles of light, the known properties of light,
Grostet reasoned that the natural radial propagation of light thus formed a spherical cosmos
by its natural motion outward from an initial infinitesimal point of God's creative activity, generating dimensions as it went.
The unacceptable position was that of an eternal universe, a universe without beginning.
Aristotle held this view, and his doctrine was rejected as untenable at the University of Paris by the famous condemnation of 1277,
a decree issued by this bishop of Paris.
Well, despite various thoughts about creation, including exactly what day in Genesis 1 might mean,
the age of the universe still remained small.
In accordance with homicentric assumptions, why should there be an earth without man or a universe without an earth?
Now let's move to the 20th century.
In the 20th century there was a 40-year debate between two rival cosmologies that posited very different,
in fact infinitely different, ages for the universe.
These two cosmologies came to be known as the Steady State Model and the Big Bang Model.
Both had theological ramifications.
Let's compare what happened with them.
First, the Big Bang Model.
The name Big Bang, I have to say, first of all, is a term of ridicule that was coined by the model's most boisterous opponent.
It was initially called the Primordial Adam Model in 1927 by Georges Le Maître, a Belgian priest.
Now Le Maître himself would consider his profession as a priest irrelevant to his scientific work,
but it bears mentioning here for anyone tempted to forget that people in professed religious orders
continued to do advanced scientific work down to the present day.
After Le Maître's ordination in 1923, he studied mathematics and physics at Cambridge,
Harvard, and then received a PhD from MIT before he returned to Belgium to become a professor at the University of Leuven.
Le Maître proposed his theory to explain a problem in Einsteinian relativity that predicted the universe should be either expanding or contracting.
Einstein himself had added a fudge factor to his calculations to keep things stable.
Scientists of the time simply expected the universe to be stable, to be eternal, to be unchanging.
Le Maître instead proposed that the universe was not actually stable, that it was in fact expanding,
and therefore that it had a beginning in what he called a single quantum.
The explosion of this quantum generated time, space, and the universe.
Now initially the idea was rejected. Some, including Einstein, felt that it sounded a little too much like Christian dogma.
Here's an interesting twist on the science-religion interaction.
Discomfort with the scientific theory now in the 20th century because it sounds too much like Orthodox Christianity.
In fact, it does uphold the Christian dogma of a cosmos, beginning with a Creazio ex nihilo, or at least beginning with the ex nihilo part,
or at least the beginning part at the lowest possible level.
Einstein himself, however, was won over after further conversations with Le Maître and called the idea, I quote,
the most beautiful and satisfactory explanation of creation to which I have ever listened.
In 1951, Pope Pius XII spoke in glowing terms of the Big Bang cosmology.
The endorsement actually chagrined Le Maître.
He had received a lot of criticism that his theory was religiously motivated, especially being a priest.
And so he'd been struggling for 20 years to keep the science separate from any kind of theological ramifications.
So he wasn't actually thrilled that the Pope decided to endorse his theory.
Now, you may know that Copernicus received the first copy of his Dei Revoluzioni bus just shortly before he died.
Just before Le Maître died in 1966, he received news of the detection of what is called the cosmic background radiation,
the echoes of the primordial explosion that were predicted in his theory.
Well, this discovery won over the remaining critics, except for one, its loudest, Fred Hoyle, the one who coined the derisive term Big Bang.
Hoyle supported a steady state model, an eternal universe.
Its expansion, which by now had been observed by Edwin Hubble and others, was explained by the sudden but continual appearance of individual hydrogen atoms,
a few here, a few there.
Hoyle himself was vociferously anti-religious and especially anti-clerical.
Particularly, I might add, anti-Catholic.
He in fact advocated solving the troubles in Northern Ireland by imprisoning all priests for life.
He rarely missed a chance to assail traditional belief and to ridicule the seeming affinity of the Big Bang with it.
Yet ironically, while he linked his own steady state model to an atheistic campaign, others were able to interpret it theologically.
Although it violated the letter of the Eternity Criterion, the steady appearance of hydrogen atoms from empty space was read by some as a continuing creiozio ex nihilo,
evidence of God's continuing activity in the physical world.
Well look at that, it's exactly the sort of thing that 17th century natural philosophers like Boyle and Newton had been looking for.
Thus we see again the potential flexibility of scientific ideas to theological interpretation.
Well, Le Maître's Big Bang is now the accepted cosmological model and it would be difficult not to see here a place where a theological doctrine,
in fact the only strict dogma relating to physical creation in Orthodox Christianity, was upheld against a once prevailing scientific view.
Don't take me wrong, I'm not indulging in apologetics here.
I'm only pointing out one counter example to claims that when theological and scientific perspectives are at odds, theology is always the loser.
Of course, here theologies when, if we can even call it that, was achieved through scientific studies carried out by priests, believers, agnostics and atheists.
Once again, nicely complicating the picture.
What we've seen in this lecture are steady increases to the age of the earth and the age and size of the universe.
This progressively undercut medieval homo-centric perceptions.
Man's dominion was made ever smaller in time and space and his cosmological centrality was lost.
Now, even though these scientific discoveries did not oppose any Orthodox dogmas, contrary to popular opinion,
they did have a direct impact on standard assumptions and thereby on theological discussions.
Many religious people have taken man's new position as a lesson in humility and celebrate a divine creativity of much greater extent than ever before imagined.
And that's the central issue of this lecture, that scientific findings and theories have proven remarkably malleable to theologians, open to multiple interpretations.
The diversity of theological responses to scientific ideas shows the falseness of the claim that theology has historically simply opposed scientific development.
In every instance, some theologians or religious individuals have been naysayers,
but at least as many have embraced new ideas to see what new things they might imply about the world, God and God's relation to it.
In our next lecture, we're going to take up a development whose way was cleared by the new age of the earth,
perhaps the most celebrated of all the science-religion issues, Darwinian evolution.
Thank you.
