Lecture 11 Fundamentalism and Creationism
One reason the issues of science and religion command such attention at present is their
timeliness.
Stories appear fairly regularly in the popular press dealing with the interactions between
science and religion at the present day in America.
Most stories deal with the continuing responses to evolution from American fundamentalists,
so this lecture will be about the origins and features of these current events.
What we're going to do is survey the genesis of fundamentalism in the early 20th century
and examine the famous Scopes Monkey Trial.
We'll then follow some more recent illegal battles and analyze creation science.
Now I need to start this lecture by stressing that there is more religiously motivated opposition
to evolution in the United States today than there was at the start of the 20th century.
By 1900, evolution as a concept, if not natural selection as a mechanism, had gained wide
acceptance in both scientific and theological circles.
A large and steadily increasing proportion of American clergy, from Episcopalians to
Evangelicals, had accommodated some form of the ancient earth and biological evolution
into their theologies.
Viewed from 1900, the trend was clear, namely that naively literal readings of genesis such
as a literal six-day creation and a special creation for each individual species were
quickly becoming things of the past.
Yet, something happened.
By 1920, naive literalism and the opposition to biological evolution had roared back to
life in America with a prominence and a belligerence never before seen.
The cause was the rise of fundamentalism and it changed everything within a generation.
How did this happen and why?
Well, let's begin with the origins of fundamentalism.
Fundamentalism as a movement began in the early 20th century as an essentially American
product.
The name fundamentalism derives from a set of 12 tracks called The Fundamentals, published
from 1910 to 1915 under the editorship of A.C. Dixon, a Baptist leader.
These paperback volumes were mass produced and widely distributed.
They shared an emphasis on conservative doctrine and an opposition to modernism.
Modernism is a movement towards new theological perspectives in Protestantism, particularly
manifested in Episcopalian and in Northern Methodist churches.
Higher criticism, a key feature of modernism, came in for particular attack.
Thus fundamentalism from its origins is inherently a reactionary movement.
The edges of fundamentalism are quite hazy, simply because one could be a fundamentalist
and belong to a number of different denominations.
It was Southern Baptists and Presbyterians, and especially lesser local Bible sects that
responded most avidly to the call of the Fundamentals.
We can divide fundamentalist beliefs into two groups, the theological and the sociopolitical,
and the two are inextricably linked.
First, the theological.
I think there are three interlocking features that are most important.
Naive literalism, biblical inerrancy, and 19th century millenarianism.
Let's take the last one first because it explains and undergirds the other two.
19th century America was awash with prophets of doom.
Itinerant preachers and self-styled prophets clamored incessantly about an impending apocalypse.
It's a chapter in American history that we almost always forget about.
It's not generally covered in the political history of the US, but it was a very important
movement in the 19th century.
Groups of believers banded together to await the end, and precise predictions of its date
were very common.
One example were the Millerites, followers of William Miller, a Baptist farmer from upstate
New York.
They expected the end in 1843, and that was later revised to the 22nd of October, 1844.
The roots of this movement lay in the invention of dispensational millennialism.
Dispensational millennialism was a then novel notion that there were seven ages to human
history marked by different ways, dispensations, that God tried to deal with humanity.
Currently we live in the 6th age, the age of grace, but soon supposedly that will end,
and the last age will begin, a final period full of tribulation called the millennium,
hence millenarianism or millennialism.
The need was to determine exactly when the millennium would begin.
So millennialists of the 19th century began frantic calculations based on numbers and
prophecies in the Bible.
The continuing effect of this 19th century largely American development are enormous.
It's the local source for apocalyptic utterances in everything from headlines in the weekly
world news to bad Hollywood films about the Antichrist.
From this source arose also the strange notion of the rapture, which has become popular, that
the supposed faithful would suddenly disappear at the start of the millennium, a belief totally
unheard of before the 19th century.
Likewise here begins the origin of continuing fundamentalist emphasis on the New Testament
book of revelations, a document not even universally accepted as canonical until the 16th century.
Now given the centrality of calculating dates from specific biblical passages, you can see
that naive literalism and biblical inerrancy come as a natural consequence.
If you interpret the Bible metaphorically, what does that do to the dates that you're
basing your calculations on?
You don't have hard and fast numbers anymore.
So the millenarian movements and innovations of 19th century America are the crucial background
to fundamentalist notions of theology.
But fundamentalism as it emerged in the early 20th century was at least as much a social
as a religious movement, and once again a reactionary one.
The key stimulus was here, social anxiety.
Anxiety particularly over social exclusion, mostly through the loss of a supposed old
order, and that's rhetoric that is still with us.
In the early 20th century the anxiety was fear over the loss of a religiously oriented
locally independent Anglo-Saxon Protestant America.
In other words, outsiders, however you define that, were gaining positions of social culture
and political stature.
The perceived foes were actually diverse, but in general were simply modernity and change
of all sorts, in particular the rise of urban and learned culture and industrialization.
Remember, this is the time in America where a fundamental shift is going on from an agrarian
economy, an agrarian society, a rural society, to an urbanized industrialized one.
That was a very traumatic change.
Anxiety over immigration was also key.
Moreover, there was a sense of exclusion arising from more advanced methods of biblical exegesis,
which the less educated couldn't follow, led to confusion.
This constellation of sociopolitical anxieties of the early 20th century is the background
not only to fundamentalism, but also to the second Ku Klux Klan, which was organized in
1915, just as the fundamentals were being published.
Now, I'm not saying that the two were composed of the same people, but only that the two
movements spring from similar historical and social circumstances, a sense of social displacement,
people who suddenly realized that after all, they didn't have a privileged place in an
increasingly pluralistic America.
Well, as an inherently reactionary movement, fundamentalism thus developed around a core
of negativity, an identity defined by opposition to things perceived as other.
This led increasingly towards belligerency.
As one of the foremost historians of fundamentalism in America writes, a fundamentalist is an
evangelical who's angry about something.
What fundamentalists have been angry about has changed frequently over time.
In the fundamentals, it was largely higher criticism, while evolution, in fact, was treated
quite benignly.
The explosion of belligerency against evolution in particular dates from World War One.
World War One was a shock that we have difficulty today imagining.
As the first really technological war, it exposed barbarism in ways no one had imagined.
World War One suggests that something had gone fundamentally wrong with Western culture.
The confidence in progress and the promises of enlightenment that formed optimistic Victorian
social and political rhetoric were blown to smithereens.
Technology the pride of Victorian civilization was now used to make instruments of death.
What went wrong?
Now for some, it was a decline in traditionalist thinking, and it was not lost on some that
Germany had been home to higher criticism and materialism.
Others argued that the Germans had actually used social Darwinism, the survival of the
fittest in society, to justify aggression, while biological Darwinism, with its doctrine
of common ancestry, reduced human beings to the status of animals.
Here's another key point, though.
The rise of public secondary school education.
The period 1900 to 1920 witnessed an unprecedented growth in high schools.
In 1890, there were about 200,000 high school students in America.
By 1920, the number had surged to two million, a tenfold increase, and that would double
again in the following decade.
Thus, America's rural populations, which we have to remember at this time, were incredibly
isolated and had been since the founding of the frontiers.
They were suddenly exposed to modern thought and science for virtually the first time.
Another example could be read as another example of outsiders, in this case the textbooks of
predominantly Northeast intelligentsia, invading rural America.
What's the easiest countermeasure?
Ban the teaching of evolution in the schools.
As beginning in 1921 in Kentucky, laws were introduced in various state legislatures to
do just that.
Such a law, the Butler Act, was passed in Tennessee in 1925 and gave rise to the Scopes
Monkey Trial.
Well this trial has been dramatized on the stage and in film as the drama Inherit the
Wind and has entered the American consciousness.
In fact what we have to realize is that the whole trial was a setup.
Once the Butler Act was passed, the American Civil Liberties Union looked for a test case
to challenge the law and several Tennessee communities actually vied for the case.
But it was awarded eventually to Dayton, Tennessee, a town on the eastern edge of the state.
The town leaders of Dayton asked a local teacher, the 24 year old John T. Scopes, if he'd be
willing to stand as a defendant.
He was a perfect defendant, he was young and easy going and in fact he had only stood in
as a substitute teacher for biology classes, it wasn't even his subject.
And in those classes he might or might not have ever mentioned evolution.
He was no crusader for free speech and science and neither were the town leaders.
Their hope was to bring some free publicity to an economically struggling town.
Well the grand designs of the locals overwhelmed the modest test case that the ACLU had wanted.
When the trial convened in July 1925 it was at least as much circus as it was trial.
In fact the whole court proceedings had to be moved out of the courthouse because owing
to the weight of all the spectators the floor of the courtroom showed signs of collapse.
So they set up outside on the lawn.
The problem was that big guns, completely unwanted by the ACLU, showed up for the legal
team.
On the prosecution came William Jennings Bryan, former presidential candidate, famed orator
and now the fundamentalist's main rallier and loudest spokesman.
One other thing about him, many of you may know that the Wizard of Oz is in part a political
allegory.
William Jennings Bryan is the cowardly lion.
Bryan bears much of the credit or blame, depending on how you look at it, for turning
the fundamentalist movement towards evolution.
For his defense, John Scopes chose America's most famous, some would say infamous, trial
lawyer Clarence Darrow.
Well, Bryan had begun crusading against evolution in 1922.
He was convinced that evolution did lie at the heart of the deterioration of morality
and civilization.
He saw World War I in just these terms.
As a perennial stumper and presidential candidate, he had embraced a simplistic populist creed.
The people, he said, should have what they want.
Now he extended this populism, his adulation of the average man, he himself was called the
great commoner, into an aggressively anti-intellectual attack on science.
He referred in outraged tones to what he called an oligarchy of scientists, telling Americans,
regular Americans, what to believe.
He seemed literally to believe that scientific questions could be settled by a majority vote,
even if the majority didn't understand the questions.
Bryan's militancy and belligerency on this issue features that in fact frightened and
shocked even his own wife, played well with rank and file fundamentalists who eventually
emulated the style.
Now no one will ever accuse Bryan of being an intellectual, nor will he ever escape
the accusations of demagoguery that typified his public career.
However, it would be wrong to think that his late in life crusade against evolution was
nothing but bluster and foolishness.
Instead, at the core, it reflected his traditional crusadings for workers' rights and human
dignity, both of which he felt were imperiled by evolution.
So really, we can find fault with the way he went about it, but in fact his heart was
probably in one sense in the right place.
The Scopes trial didn't last long, one week in July 1925.
Darrow and Bryan tried to turn it into a debate over fundamentalism and evolution, and nearly
succeeded, but the judge tried with greater success to restrict the case to whether or
not Scopes broke the Butler Act.
Accordingly, there was no scientific or theological testimony allowed.
The battle between fundamentalism and modernity took place predominantly in the opposing statements
of Darrow and Bryan, and in a dramatic turn when Darrow put Bryan on the witness stand.
The prosecution tried to prevent him from getting on the stand, but Bryan could never
turn down a public forum.
As H. L. Menken, who covered the trial for the Baltimore Sun, wrote,
It is a tragedy indeed to begin life as a hero and end it as a buffoon.
And Bryan ended just that way.
Darrow's questioning revealed that even Bryan himself could not adhere to naive literalism,
and probably for the first time in his life, Bryan was forced to make his boisterous public
statements seem self-consistent.
He jabbered and blustered and tried to crack jokes, but cross-examination proved a very
different environment from his usual bully pulpit, and one to which he was singularly
ill-suited.
Where was John Scopes?
He never took the stand.
But in the end, he was convicted and fined $100.
And that was all the ACLU really wanted at the beginning of an appeals process.
But their hopes were dashed, because Scopes' conviction was overturned at the first appeal
on a technicality, as it turned out Tennessee law forbade a judge to impose a fine of more
than $50.
And here in this case, the fine was $100.
So after all this sound and fury, what did it accomplish?
Not much directly.
The Butler Act still stood.
Now given the wide press in print, in newsreel, and for the first time the new technology
of radio, Brian's rantings only forced the sides further apart, and his death a week
later left the fundamentalists without a political leader.
These factors together with a new threat, that is to defeat the presidential bid of
Al Smith in 1928, God forbid, a New Yorker and a Catholic, made evolution slip from center
position on their agenda.
But after 1925, evolution also receded from biology textbooks owing to publishers concerns
over the sales in southern states.
So the attempt to ban the teaching of evolution was not over, only held at bay by more pressing
issues.
A new spur came in the 1960s in the same form as it did in the teens, improved secondary
school education.
The trigger was Sputnik.
Which in 1957, the initial lead of the Soviet Union in the emergent space race forced the
American government to take a hard look at American education.
One result was a study of American high school curricula.
What the studies found was appalling, massively outdated textbooks and much of the country
with substandard instruction.
This was no way to compete with the Ruskies.
The biology group, or BSCS for biological sciences curriculum study, produced massively
improved biology texts for high schools in 1963.
Mid-century American biology texts were little more than zoological and botanical compendia
after the fashion of 19th century books.
But the new books used evolution as an organizing, explanatory principle, as professional biologists
and college level texts had been doing for decades.
These new books were widely adopted.
But in a few years, the improved curriculum set off new attempts to ban evolution.
Four states, Arkansas, Tennessee, Louisiana and Mississippi, still had the 1920s era laws
on the books.
A challenge was made in Arkansas in 1965 by the Arkansas Educational Association, charging
the law to be unconstitutional on the grounds of infringement of free speech by school teachers.
Well it took them just two hours to convince a judge to strike down the law.
But it also took the Arkansas Supreme Court just two sentences to reinstate it.
It then went to the federal Supreme Court and in 1968 the Justices ruled the anti-evolution
law unconstitutional because, quote, it selects from a body of knowledge a particular segment
which it proscribed for the sole reason that it is deemed to conflict with a particular
religious doctrine.
So finally, 1968, the 1925 Butler Act is struck down with other similar statutes.
Well, with the banning of evolution precluded, anti-evolutionists turn to a new strategy,
the equal time strategy, that is, if you're going to teach evolution then you have to
give equal time to, well, what?
Something had to be found as an alternative and this is the origin of creation science.
Now the roots of creation science lie earlier than 1968, but it was the Supreme Court decision
of that year that consolidated it into a legally promotable evolution alternative.
What is it?
Where did it come from?
Before we answer that question we need to take a close look at the labels creationism
and creationist.
Now labels like product names are important and often for some of the same reasons.
Anti-evolution sounds negative, it's that annoying anti at the beginning.
So anti-evolutionists took to the more upbeat name creationists.
But the two words are not interchangeable.
If they were, one would have to be either a creationist or an evolutionist.
But this is a false dichotomy, most Christians are in fact both.
Be on the lookout for these false dichotomies and anti-evolutionist rhetoric, they are very
common.
Well creationism encompasses a wide range of viewpoints, let's analyze it.
The first division within creationists is between general and special creationists.
Special creationists affirm only in a nonspecific way that God is the ultimate creator, they
make no claims about what it is exactly he did or does.
Special creationists on the other hand assign him one or more specific special roles in creation.
Now special creationists are themselves divided into two parts, progressive and strict.
Progressive creationists interpret the six days of Genesis allegorically while strict
ones do it literally.
Still not the end of the taxonomy.
Progressive creationists, that is the allegorical interpreters, are further divided into.
The first view God's actions as single or very few, for example initiating life or infusing
the human soul.
After an initial creative act ex nihilo, that's enough to make you a creationist right there.
Several forces within creation accomplished everything, say for one or two special interventions.
This for example is a position of the Catholic Church.
The other group of progressive creationists require a large, perhaps an infinite number
of separate creative acts for each species or genus.
The former group is closer to naturalism, the latter closer to supernaturalism.
But wait, there's more.
The strict creationists, that is the biblical literalists, are also divided into.
One group adheres to the gap theory, that is they envision a long epoch between the initial
creation and the six days.
The other are the young earth creationists, who along with rejecting evolution entirely
reject geological time and consider the earth less than 10,000 years old.
So in speaking of creationists, we have to identify which flavor we're really talking
about.
So with that taxonomy in place, let's get back to creation science.
Creation science represents strict creationist, biblical literalist views, and generally of
the young earth variety.
Now while it originated in the 1960s, its roots are older and based in what's called
flood geology.
So we've seen flood geology before, the notion that Noah's flood was a global geological
event explaining fossils, mountains, canyons, strata.
We saw its emergence in the 17th century, the late 17th century, its revival by mosaic
geologists in the early 19th century, but by 1900 it was essentially dead.
But you know, some bad ideas are like Dracula, just when you think they're dead and buried
and all of a sudden you feel their breath on your neck again.
Flood geology, Manichaeanism that we've talked about, are two examples.
Flood geology rose from its coffin in 1923, not merely coincidentally at the height of
the fundamentalist anti-evolution furor.
The one who pulled the stake out this time was George McCready Price in his book entitled
The New Geology.
Now Price was a Seventh Day Adventist and so his source is clear.
Do you remember the Millerites, the pre-millennialists who awaited apocalypse in 1844?
What did they do in 1845?
Well some of them redid the calculations and others became the Seventh Day Adventists following
the teenage prophetess named Ellen White.
Now White, as a result of a vision, asserted that Noah's Flood was the central event in
geology.
Now of course she didn't actually need an interview with the Almighty to come to this
conclusion, just picking up any of the various popular mosaic geology texts would have done
just as well.
Price obviously drew upon White as a source.
But his 1923 claims didn't have much immediate impact.
The impact came only at the start of the second anti-evolution furor when the views were revived.
In 1961 there appeared The Genesis Flood, a book by Henry M. Morris and John C. Whitcomb.
This book and these authors gave rise to creation science and to the founding of the Creation
Science Society in 1963.
Well legal arguments for equal time for creation science had some initial success, notably
in Arkansas and Louisiana.
Such arguments, like those for teaching intelligent design, at first glance appeal to American
ideals of fairness.
Such measures were however turned back in 1987 when the Supreme Court recognized creation
science as a religious doctrine and not science.
In fact it's a very specific doctrine not to be confused with orthodox Christian doctrine.
It's a minority view that of young earth creationists, one of the groups down in the
corner of our taxonomy of creationists.
In fact in the legal case in 1981 virtually every mainstream Christian denomination, Catholic
and Protestant lined up to support striking down the equal time law.
In response to this external pressure anti-evolution continued to evolve.
The next variations masked any identifiably religious content in order to pass constitutional
muster.
Remember this is not an intellectual movement, it's a legal and a political one now.
The goal remains steady but various pathways are closed off by the courts and new ones
have to be found.
It doesn't necessarily require new ideas, just new strategies.
The mutated offspring was neo-creationism.
This next generation appeared first in the form of abrupt appearance theory, simply that
new life forms abruptly appeared.
Basically creation without mentioning God.
Well, this weak variation was not fitted to long term survival and became extinct very
soon.
A more successful adaptation is intelligent design which we examined in an earlier lecture
and it continues to proliferate and develop at present.
So as we can see from this lecture the anti-evolution stance developed in the United States in fundamentalist
circles since the 1920s has focused primarily on keeping evolution out of secondary school
teaching or to distract from evolution by presenting some alternative more alignable
with strict biblical literate perspectives.
There's a continued success here in a way since, as occurred in the late 1920s, textbook
publishers have tended to decrease the coverage of evolution in order to avoid upsetting their
profits.
Which is what their business is all about.
Likewise public school boards, principals and some teachers find that the path of least
resistance is simply to avoid or give short shrift to evolution.
One result is that in the US the greatest coverage of evolution in high school biology
now takes place in Catholic schools and in other private schools that weren't set up
by fundamentalists themselves.
Well, I couldn't end this lecture without pointing out how this evolution controversy
of 20th century America, more than the 19th century English issue, instantiates in many
ways the conflict thesis for science-religion interactions, although we should be clear
not to neglect the political and social dimensions which are just as important.
So in our next and final lecture we'll consider how these current developments distort our
historical perspective.
We'll also try to draw together some issues we've treated in this course and suggest
a way to reposition and reduce this conflict.
