Lecture 12 – Past, Present, and Future
Now we've arrived at our twelfth and final lecture.
We've covered a great deal of material in terms of both time period and subject matter,
and now's the time for us to review a little bit of this and see where we've come to.
One thing that should be clear at this point is how complex, how diverse the interactions
between science and theology have been over time.
We cannot apply simple blanket descriptions to them, and I hope I've convinced you that
we shouldn't want to either.
We would then lose the engaging complexity, the intricacies of the issues, and the profound
ideas that we've encountered.
Well certainly the old warfare thesis can no longer stand.
It's starting assumption that there existed in the past two well-defined and warring camps,
one under the standard of science, the other under the standard of theology or religion,
is simply mistaken.
We've seen many thinkers whose work freely traversed what today we would consider as
the boundaries or the borders between science and theology.
Have there been conflicts between a given scientific statement and a given theological
one?
Of course there have, but there have also been conflicts between two theological positions
or between two scientific positions.
Conflict can be an opportunity for discussion, exploration, and discovery, or an opportunity
for becoming shrill and self-righteous and sulking off to our respective corners.
It's a free choice, but it's also clear which is the intelligent and the productive choice.
What we've seen in the foregoing lectures is often, though not exclusively, the movement
and development of ideas and concepts and methods back and forth between natural and
theological inquiry.
This really shouldn't surprise us, because science and theology after all share a great
deal in common.
They are both human strivings for knowledge, operating by the cooperative exercise of faith
and reason.
They are both activities of human beings and both expressions of human desires.
Most of all are fundamental human desire to know.
Theological and scientific inquiry in the West grew up together, often interacting,
often sharing methods and goals, sometimes encouraging, and sometimes chiding one another.
On the one side, theology developed some of the methods and approaches that modern science
takes for granted, and often by the way I should say, imagine sometimes to be its own
creation.
The disputational nature of scholastic theology developed basic rules and methods of logical
argumentation, and probably more importantly instilled, irremovably, in Western culture
a culture of disputation.
Try to imagine good science without dispute.
It's hard to imagine as good theology without dispute.
One specific appropriation from theology to modern science that we've mentioned is the
preference for naturalism in giving explanations.
This is a key methodological principle for modern science, but its foundations lie with
the profound thoughts of medieval theologians who realized that only natural causation,
that is secondary causation, is really comprehensible to the human mind, therefore only secondary
causation has any explanatory power.
One thing we haven't mentioned explicitly in this course is the vast institutional patronage
that natural philosophical inquiry obtained from ecclesiastical sources, from cathedral
schools to the first universities to great churches doubling as observatories, and the
innumerable scholars whose work in natural philosophy was facilitated by the support
of their being in holy orders.
In our lectures, we've mentioned just a few of them, including St. Albert the Great,
Roger Bacon, Copernicus, Cassendi, Mersenne, Castelli, Ray, and Le Maître.
There are of course many others.
For its part, scientific study has made its own contributions to theology.
Perhaps one of the most notable ways is in terms of new perspectives on the world, in
other words, a truer sense of man's place in time, space, and nature.
Without a doubt, some of these new revelations were received with discomfort or resistance,
but real theology, no less than science, is about the search for truth.
It is not, as some people now erroneously enough wave it off, just about opinion.
Theology has come away from the encounter with new views of man's place in relation
to the creator of time, space, and nature.
I remind you also of St. Augustine's comments on the need for up-to-date, demonstrated
natural knowledge among theologians and exegetes.
And as we've seen throughout the course, Christian theology has proven itself remarkably
flexible in its ability to adopt, adapt, and explore new scientific findings, to see,
in essence, what they mean.
Even though the warfare model is wrong-headed as a historical description, some current
events do seem to lend to it an air of credibility.
The violent fulminations, declamations, and legal wranglings that have taken place between
anti-evolutionist fundamentalists and the scientific establishment or the educational
establishment since the 1920s seems to instantiate a model of warring adversaries.
And since this issue is closest to us in time and space, it naturally looms the largest,
and so it tempts us to read the conflict back in time.
And here is where historical perspective is so necessary.
What does it do?
It gives us a high vantage point from which to survey the scene.
By taking us above the current fray, it helps us distinguish between local and general phenomena,
and helps to see larger trends and directions.
Even better, it gives us a host of reckoning points by which to measure our own times.
What does the perspective of history have to say about the current tussle?
Well, the historical issue of professionalization explains a striking feature of the anti-evolution
conflict.
It imposes standards of education and training on those entering a field.
Their reward is recognized authority.
In the Middle Ages, in early modern period, a person interested in the study of the natural
world simply acted on his interests, provided he had the leisure to do so.
For example, in the 17th century, how did Stano start looking at rocks and fossils?
Well, he just started picking them up, collecting them, and studying them.
Robert Boyle had no formal education after age 12.
Study of the natural world, natural philosophy, was in this sense an amateur activity.
Since that time, however, professionalization has raised the bar for entry.
It's heightened the social recognition and thus the authority that scientists enjoy.
Theology was highly professionalized in the Middle Ages.
A doctorate in theology required at least 10 years of advanced study, much more than
was needed for, say, lawyers and physicians.
The criteria for entrance to the guild of theology were stringent and well-defined.
Those without the degree could neither teach nor practice theology.
Study for those admitted was thus assured.
But following the Reformation and the rise of personal interpretations, the restriction
of theologizing to a professional class began to erode.
With the proliferation of countless minor religious sects in frontier America, it became impossible
to monitor.
Today, while there are still many professional theologians with extensive training, there
are also many others, more, who write or speak on theological topics with little or
no real training.
Moreover, because high-end theology, by high-end theology I mean philosophically and intellectually
sophisticated, because high-end theology is every bit as complicated as any other high-level
intellectual field, it is almost entirely the low-end material of which there is more
out there that finds popular exposure and currency.
In other words, it fills entirely the theological niche in popular conceptions.
This trend, along with other considerations, has resulted in a loss of authority, not just
for theologians, but for theology itself.
Indeed, today even many well-read people are unaware of the continuing tradition of sophisticated
professional theology.
Thus science and theology have followed opposite trajectories, science becoming all the time
more and more professional, more and more advanced in the public eye, theology less and less.
The point I want to make is that the trend for theology manifests itself in the inherent
caliber of the theological issues involved in the current anti-evolution debate.
From earlier episodes we sampled challenging issues about the limits and powers of human
knowledge, the difficulty of identifying causation reliably, and the means by which God can act
in the world.
All of these are naughty subjects of long-term discussion and interest to generations of
theologians.
Generations of theologians apply their reasoning to these problems.
And though I mentioned at one point this was the case not just in Christianity, but as
well in Islam and Judaism, often in similar terms.
But the current conflict stemming from fundamentalism concerns no intellectual issue more complicated
than whether Genesis 1 is to be read literally or not.
Basically speaking it is very hard not to find this astonishingly trivial and uninteresting
in comparison to earlier issues.
Given the publicity surrounding these current events it's easy to see why so many people
today are surprised to learn of the existence and continuing development and practice of
sophisticated, high-end theology.
And if fundamentalist statements on evolution remain all the theology that the general public
is exposed to, then the status of and respect for theology will continue to decline.
Well the perspective of history not only points this out, but offers a solution.
There's an old hymn that was, at least at one time, popular in fundamentalist circles.
And if you've ever seen the movie Inherit the Wind based on the Scopes Trial you'll
remember the scenes of crowds singing it in the streets.
Give me that old time religion.
I think I'm justified in taking old time religion to mean historical religion.
So what does historical religion have to say about the current issue of evolution and biblical
literalism?
Well basically it tells us it's a non-issue.
There are the instances of naive literalism being used as a bludgeon for natural philosophical
scientific ideas.
Galileo certainly had some problems on a related score in the nervous aftermath of the Council
of Trent.
But even then, for every Dominican who saw a problem with heliocentrism in Joshua's
story, there was a cardinal who claimed that the Bible was to tell us how to go to heaven
not how the heavens go.
The Middle Ages accepted St. Augustine's recommendations on biblical interpretation.
St. Augustine's fifteen years of careful thought and rational analysis to create a
literal commentary on Genesis 1 concluded with the idea of an instantaneous moment of
creation that produced a universe that developed over time into the form we see.
And no medieval theologian would have raised an eyebrow at the idea that living beings
could arise spontaneously, naturally, out of non-living matter.
That's old time religion.
But if something a little less old is desired, and the subtext here might be a little less
Catholic perhaps, then current biblical inerrantness in errantists can reach back to their own immediate
history.
There is an important history there too.
Consult, for example, with the late nineteenth century's strongest champion of biblical
inerrancy, Benjamin Breckenridge Warfield, a conservative theologian at Princeton Theological
Seminary.
Against higher criticism, Warfield defended the position that the whole Bible is a divine
revelation free from error.
His doctrine of biblical inerrancy is the basis for current-day strict creationism
and a mainstay of fundamentalist belief, yet the historical fact is that Warfield was not
only open to the theory of evolution, on occasion he openly advocated it.
There's some more old time religion.
The recognition of these historically held positions demands an answer to one particular
question.
If so many devout and highly learned Christians over time rejected naive biblical literalism
and had no problem even with the idea of the spontaneous origin of life, and even the prime
architect of modern biblical inerrancy was willing to accept evolution, what's the problem
now?
Some would suggest that the problem is to be sought as much in a concern for political
and social control as with any theological position.
But for many people, and I think especially young people, much of the problem may simply
be an unfamiliarity with good sources.
They are bombarded with so much bad, no pseudo theology, that they have never witnessed the
real thing.
In that case, the solution is easy, the study of history.
One hopeful sign I have seen of late are a few publications by evangelicals that present
historical materials, and use them to educate, for example, young earth creationists that
the literal six days of creation is not the old time traditional view and why.
Now some might respond that the writings and interpretations of earlier theologians are
not relevant to them today, but that seems to me rather like a physicist saying that
the laws discovered by Newton Laplace and Maxwell are no longer relevant to him.
And of course, being realistic, I acknowledge that there will be some who refuse to engage
in any discussion whatsoever.
They will say, well, it just is that way, or I believe what I believe.
Fideism again.
In which case, I find that I can save my limited strength for people who want to discuss things
rather than flying to an anti-intellectual state that precludes it.
Not all will be saved.
But the perspective of history provides a further observation, namely, rather than merely exemplifying
the warfare thesis, both parties involved in the current controversy seem to have actually
adopted it as a model for behavior.
The fiery rhetoric of William Jennings Bryan that ignited opposition to Darwinism was a
formative pattern for fundamentalists.
And perhaps at a deeper level, it seems that the warfare model appeals to fundamentalists'
inherently manachian mindset, good and evil, light and dark, us and them.
But if some, and I emphasize the word some.
If some fundamentalists are guilty of fanning the flames of war, then so are some scientists,
and to an equal extent.
There are those in the scientific community who make a point of evangelizing for materialism
and atheism.
We heard a few lectures ago heckles dogmatic and pompous creed about the cell annulling
the deity.
I mentioned also previously that some fundamentalist depiction of the scientific establishment
as aggressively and inherently atheistic is an example of the error of collectivism.
But, but, in reading the heckles, the hoyles, the sagans, the darkens, the drapers and their
tribe, one can see easily the foundations of this depiction and why it causes justifiable
anxiety.
There are today notable and high profile scientists who use op-ed pieces, popular books and programs
and other public pulpits to proclaim the gospels of materialism, atheism and scientism.
When such positions are argued for rationally and with philosophical sophistication, it
will certainly lead to interesting and productive discussion, but too often the claims are philosophically
naive and clothed in arrogant sarcasm and dismissive disdain.
That's no way to carry out a discussion.
Similarly, much media reporting on scientific developments either uncritically recapitulates
unreasonable scientific boasts or, by simplifying the issues, fall inadvertently into philosophically
naive claims that impinge on other fields, including theology, or that raise legitimate
concerns among those seriously concerned with the issues.
If, as I mentioned before, some fundamentalists misunderstand the difference between methodological
naturalism and philosophical naturalism, it's in part because some vocal scientists do so
as well.
Or maybe the scientists have forgotten the difference.
And here again, history comes to the rescue.
History is often about reminding us of things that we've forgotten.
Part of the process of scientific professionalization was the creation of boundaries of what was
and was not the domain of scientists.
We saw, for example, with the early geologists who just wanted to mind their rocks without
being drawn into larger agendas.
As natural philosophy was being pared down and divvied up into the various sciences,
pronouncements on ultimate origins, purposes, and meanings were excluded from new scientific
discourse, the days in which a Newton could talk about the being an attribute of God in
a physics text were over.
The commitment to naturalistic explanations became explicit.
The rules of appropriate scientific conduct, as we can call them, had both philosophical
and pragmatic origins.
On the one hand, certain topics were seen as simply lying outside the boundaries that
were being drawn for science.
On the other, the avoidance of such topics was a way to avoid being drawn into discussions
and debates outside the new boundaries of science.
I think the crucial point here is that these points were instituted as rules of the game,
not creeds.
Some scientists seem to have forgotten the difference.
Participating in scientific discourse means you are not allowed to use, for example, supernatural
intervention as causation, or to stand in for explanation.
Then a miracle occurs is not scientific.
It's not an allowed move on the chessboard of science, if you will.
In such cases, the only allowed move is to suspend judgment and say that science offers
no explanation, but science does not tell you, in fact, cannot tell you that no supernatural
activity exists or that God might not be operating behind secondary causation.
A scientist is perfectly free, of course, to adopt an atheistic or materialist stance,
but not to say that this position is a necessary consequence of science.
There is a fundamental difference between allowed professional behavior and personal
belief.
And if some scientists, rightly enough, object to the intrusion of the uncredentialed into
their field of play, then as a matter of professional courtesy, if nothing else, they have to mine
their own manners when they try to play on the equally professionalized field of high-end
theology.
In the specific case of evolution, an argument made by some scientists is that the random
nature of mutation and the contingent nature of natural selection rules out any possibility
of divine guidance.
This position is addressed in one of those high-end theological documents the general
public rarely gets to see.
I couldn't resist one last chance of sharing one of these sort of documents with you.
It's a document from the International Theological Commission entitled Communion and Stewardship
and was published in 2002 and approved by the man now called Benedict XVI.
As part of a lengthy argument about the Christian's duty towards environmentalism, it outlines
human beings' place in the created world.
It reaffirms, for example, John Paul's 1996 comments about evolution and then goes on
to explain that neo-Darwinians who rule out any divine role in evolution display, quote,
a misunderstanding of the nature of divine causality.
Well, are you ready for one last go at divine causality?
Here it is.
And I quote.
It's a little bit lengthy, but I'll try to parse it for you.
Many neo-Darwinian scientists have concluded that if evolution is a radically contingent
materialistic process driven by natural selection and random genetic variation, then there can
be no place in it for divine providential causality.
But true contingency in the created order is not incompatible with a purposeful divine
providence.
Thus, even the outcome of a truly contingent natural process can nonetheless fall within
God's providential plan for creation.
Any evolutionary mechanism that is contingent can only be contingent because God made it
so.
An unguided evolutionary process, one that falls outside the bounds of divine providence,
simply cannot exist because, quoting St. Thomas, the causality of God who is the first agent
extends to all being.
It necessarily follows that all things, inasmuch as they participate in existence, must likewise
be subject to divine providence.
Well there you have it.
High end theology.
In other words, God made all the secondary causes, therefore any effects they produce,
even if contingent or random, are ultimately linked to God's creative act.
Thus the document concludes that, and I quote again, neo-Darwinians who would induce random
genetic variation and natural selection as evidence that the process of evolution is
absolutely unguided, are straying beyond what can be demonstrated by science.
In other words, there's a limit to human knowledge.
We really can't determine where chains of causation come to an end.
I come to the ironic conclusion then that strong anti-evolutionists and strong partisans
of scientism have a great deal in common.
They are both fundamentalists.
The battle is going on between two groups of extremists, two minorities within their
respective groups.
They have every right in the world to engage in this battle if they like.
But there is a consequence of the way in which it is being carried out.
There is simply a lot of fallout, a lot of civilian injuries if you will, for the majority
over whose head they are firing their missiles.
What I mean is that extremist positions have the effect of alienating moderates and deepening
divisions.
Loud declarations from either end tend to overwhelm more moderate voices either by greater
volume or, more likely, by greater coverage in the media.
Extremist views tend to be simpler, less nuanced and thus easier to communicate in a 15 second
soundbite or a newspaper column.
Try to imagine, for example, USA Today trying to report on this commission document I just
quoted from.
This leaves the general public with the impression of a radical, irreconcilable division between
science generally and religion generally, a conclusion that the historical record and
current reality oppose.
In fact, such a division seems to be in fact what extremists want, a life or death struggle
for preeminence.
Sort of Darwinian, isn't it?
On the one side, we find one ID supporter claiming that legal challenges to teaching
evolution are about, and I quote, who's going to sit at the head of the table?
On the other, the baseless and empirically false assertion that it's impossible to be
both a scientist and a theist.
For those in the middle, the best recourse is again, guess what, history, to the historical
perspective.
This course has illustrated a wide diversity of interactions and pointed out areas of commonality
between scientific and theological methods and aims.
Most clearly of all, I hope, is that it has shown how things have not always been as they
are now, nor need they be.
It emphasizes how current struggles are or are not local and limited, and how they hide
from our view the intricacy of the real intellectual issues.
Now of course, fundamentalists are welcome to vent their position.
But it should also be perfectly clear that fundamentalists do not have the right to speak
for Christianity as a whole.
They are not representative from the perspective of the here and now they are a minority, and
from the perspective of the whole history of Christianity considerably less than that.
More importantly, they have little claim to authority when compared to historical theological
positions or present-day high-end theology.
They like to use the unmodified name of Christian in referring to themselves, but this is in
fact, if we analyze it, a usurping presumption.
In exactly the same way, the vociferous advocates of a materialistic scientism do not have the
right to speak for science, scientists, and the scientific establishment.
What seems to be in the shortest supply on both sides is a sense of humility before the
complexity of the world and the difficult issues surrounding man's place in it.
Conflicts?
No.
Disagreements?
Will invariably arise between people working in different fields or in the same field?
These are the results of the tentative, often provisional, nature of our understanding,
an effect of fallible human beings groping towards knowledge.
Where we've come now to the end of our course, we've surveyed some of the high points of
the interactions of science and religion, and ignored an embarrassingly large amount.
Obviously, there are many more episodes to study.
Many more lessons to be learned, however, we have been able in our time together to
identify some key issues and themes, to explore some of the interesting events, and to meet
some of the interesting people.
My hope is that this will provide a starting point for you in your own further exploration
and consideration of what will remain a developing subject.
For now, I trust that this will be enough.
Itte, Misa Est.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com, or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12.
Thank you very much.
