Welcome back to carnadities.org. Today we're going to be continuing with our
series on Bayesian epistemology. In this video we're going to be looking at
Bayesian confirmation theory and the paradox of dogmatism. Now when I
originally planned this series of videos I wanted this to just be one video but
when I really dug into the content this is really the meat of what Bayesian
epistemology is. And if it was to be one video it would be far too long. So I'm
going to split it up actually into a week-long series with a new video every
day so that we can really dig into each of these concepts without any of the
individual videos getting too long or in depth. Before we get started into this I
would strongly strongly encourage you to look at my previous videos in this
series unlike most of the videos here on this channel. These videos are very in
depth. They're more technical and more math heavy than a lot of the stuff we've
done here. So if you don't have a good background already in Bayesian epistemology
or Bayes's theorem you should really check out those videos. But if you've
watched those videos and you're comfortable moving on let's go. So we're
going to be talking about Bayes's confirmation theory in light of something
called the paradox of dogmatism. If you didn't watch my series on the month of
paradox here it is. If I know some statement P to be true then I know that
any evidence against P is misleading. I should disregard evidence that I know is
misleading. If P is known then all evidence against P can be disregarded.
Therefore once I know P I cannot ever change my mind. Like I said if you want
more information on this paradox you can check out my video in the month of
paradox series. For now I just want you to think a little bit about this paradox
and think how this paradox would apply to Bayesian theory as we're learning about
it and how Bayes's theory might be able to get out of it. Okay so the first video
we're going to be doing that's the next video in this series is going to be on
the simple principle of conditionalization. This is just the basic
kind of foundational bedrock principle that's going to bring Bayes's theorem
into the realm of epistemology and it's going to be supported by the Dutch
book arguments we looked at last time. Next we're going to take a look at
confirmation and disconfirmation. This is what we mean when we say Bayesian
confirmation theory. Basically it's saying how evidence can actually confirm
or disconfirm hypotheses. How a specific hypothesis could in fact be in some way
supported or confirmed or unsupported or disconfirmed by a piece of evidence
that doesn't necessarily render it completely true or completely false. Then
we're going to talk about entailment. We're going to talk about how
conditionals and implications work in Bayesian epistemology and then we're
going to move on to Bayesian dogmatism which is basically talking about the
dogmatism paradox and how that applies to Bayes's theorems and some interesting
things that will have fallen out from our talk about entailment. Basically it's
going to get down to the irrationality of certainty in Bayesian world. Finally we
will give an outlining of the new paradox of dogmatism, what I'm calling it,
and basically how Bayesian epistemology can avoid it. This is going to be a new
formulation of the dogmatism paradox that we saw at the beginning of this video
and we're going to see if there's a way that Bayesian epistemology can kind of
get out of that paradox. Those are the videos we're going to be looking at this
week. Watch this video and more here at Carnades.org. As always check out the
Stanford Encyclopedia philosophy for more information or if you need just
another story telling you the same thing. A lot of the information here I take is
off of the SEP so there's a lot of the same things we're saying but sometimes a
different medium can really help. Stay skeptical everybody.
