These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you can learn
if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company
and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Memory and the Human Lifespan.
The lecture is Steve Jordan's, professor of psychology at the University of Toronto, Scarborough.
He received his undergraduate degree from the University of New Brunswick
and his master's and doctorate degrees from the University of Waterloo.
He joined the faculty of the University of Toronto in 1995
and serves as associate chair of psychology and program supervisor for the undergraduate program.
Professor Jordan's research includes developing and implementing technologies for learning.
His recent work involves the use of mobile applications as cognitive prosthetics
to assist the learning disabled and patients with Alzheimer's disease.
Presentations of his research at conferences consistently earn him best in session honors
and he frequently gives keynote addresses at teaching conferences.
In 2010, he was a speaker at the Canadian Psychological Association Convention.
Professor Jordan's conducts research on memory, consciousness and attention
and has many publications on these topics in top-rated psychology journals.
His research has been consistently supported by grants from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council of Canada.
In recognition of his work on memory,
Professor Jordan's won a Premier's Research Excellence Award for the 2001 to 2006 period.
For his lecturing and innovation, he has received the Scarborough College Student Union's
Best Professor Award for 2002 to 2003 and again for 2010 to 2011.
Four nominations for Television Ontario's Best Lecturer Competition, twice making the top ten list.
A Leadership in Faculty Teaching Award in 2006 and 2007
and a National Technology Innovation Award in 2009 for the creation of Peer Scholar,
an internet-based tool that supports the development of critical thinking
and communication skills in the classroom.
In 2010, Professor Jordan's received a President's Teaching Award,
the highest award for teaching at the University of Toronto.
This award entitles him to membership in the University's Teaching Academy,
a select group of faculty who promote teaching initiatives at the University of Toronto.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes lecture guides, a glossary and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review these materials before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, Memory is a Party
Human memory is absolutely amazing.
It keeps us connected to our past while also preparing us for our future.
It allows us to learn from our experiences and to share our experiences with others.
And it literally defines who we are.
Think back to your childhood for a moment.
What's your earliest memory of cookies baking?
What do you remember about your childhood bedroom?
Was there an object, maybe a toy, that you remember being especially fascinated by?
Do you remember a childhood playmate?
Or what about fear?
Many childhood memories are related to fear.
You may not recall such things right away, but think about them.
It's just astonishing what we can recall.
Even with a little effort, we can remember events that happened literally decades ago.
But memory can also fail us.
In fact, sometimes it can both succeed and fail at the very same time.
Have you ever been in a situation where someone is recounting a memory to you,
a memory that they've already told you about before, perhaps even many times?
Well, when they do that, they are both remembering the experience they're relating,
but also forgetting that they told you about it previously.
How can the same system be simultaneously so amazing and yet so prone to error?
Hi, my name is Steve Jordans.
I'm a professor of psychology at the University of Toronto, Scarborough.
I think memory is absolutely fascinating.
I've been teaching about memory for over 10 years at the university.
I give talks in the community, and I also conduct research with my students
to understand memory better.
I'm really thrilled to have this opportunity to share what I learned with you,
and I'm going to try my very best to infect you with my fascination.
And while I'm here as the expert on memory,
I also want to confess right now that throughout my life, I've been a generally forgetful guy.
When I was a teenager, maybe looking frantically for my car keys or something else I'd misplaced,
my mother would tell me, one day you will be a professor.
I know this because you're so absent-minded.
The absent-minded professor, sometimes stereotypes do come true.
But of course, this is what we all do.
We all forget our keys, our cell phones, our anniversaries,
the names of people we just met, and on and on.
We are prone to the silliest seeming memory errors,
and I personally still feel really silly and embarrassed about it.
But that's memory for you.
It's a truly complex and fascinating beast.
So my goal in this lecture is to convince you
that the simplistic way that we often talk about memory is just that.
Very simplistic.
In fact, too simplistic.
I personally feel that most humans have very little sense
of just how interesting and amazing they themselves are.
We take our abilities for granted,
and we don't often think about them in much detail.
So back to our question then.
How can memory be simultaneously so impressive and yet also so prone to error?
Well, in a very real sense, we'll be answering that question throughout the course.
We'll be building up a picture of how memory supports the conception of who we are,
how memory declines or changes with age,
and what sorts of things you might do to reduce this decline
and even to improve your memory.
But the first step to a more accurate understanding of memory is to realize the following.
There really is no single thing called memory.
Yes, it's true.
In colloquial speech, we often use the term memory as though it were a singular noun.
That is if it represented one thing.
So your memory is like a bed, a single thing that exists in a single place
and performs essentially a single function.
We say things like, my memory is getting bad,
almost as though we were saying, my bed is becoming uncomfortable.
However, memory just isn't one thing, and it isn't really a thing at all.
Instead, remembering is a set of cognitive processes that occur within the biological matter of our brains.
We'll cover brains in much more detail later in the course,
but let's get an overview of how the brain handles remembering.
The brain has two hemispheres that are connected by a tangle of nerve fibers called the corpus callosum.
These connecting fibers were the structure that was absent in birth in Kim Peek,
the real person who is the basis for the movie character Rain Man.
The absence of connecting fibers across the hemispheres may have fostered his extraordinary memory,
and yet they also contribute to his difficulties on general IQ tests.
These rare individuals with unusual brain features have historically been absolutely central
to advances in what we know about how brains work in everyone.
Now, each hemisphere of our brain has cortical regions, which are the sort of higher, more outward regions,
and subcortical regions, which are lower, more inward regions.
The cortex itself is traditionally thought of as the seat of higher brain functions,
while the subcortex handles lower brain functions.
The cortex consists of four lobes, three of which analyze signals coming in from the world,
seeing, hearing, and touch, whereas the fourth, the frontal lobe, handles how we direct our attention,
what we choose to remember, and how we control our actions.
If you wanted just one lobe to get you started, you might first think about the temporal lobes.
You can get a sense of this region by putting your hands over your ears on both sides of your head
while pointing your middle fingers towards the back of your head until they almost touch.
The temporal lobes are important for auditory memory,
so they're critical for your ability to understand and remember what I'm saying to you right now.
Okay, the inner region of those same temporal lobes, which is known as the medial region,
are especially important for containing a small structure absolutely critical for creating any explicit memories at all.
That structure is called the hippocampus.
In fact, the hippocampus is one of the few brain locations that is constantly creating new neurons.
That old myth you might have heard that adults never create new brain cells?
Well, that's refuted by the hippocampus.
The big picture is that stored memories involve lots of distributed representations spread across higher brain regions of the cortex.
They work together with the lower brain regions such as the hippocampus.
So for example, the cerebellum, which is a very large region at the back of the head,
is responsible for helping us to remember to make our motor movements smooth and graceful.
It was a defect in the cerebellum that contributed to the difficulties that Rain Man had in moving his body smoothly.
Now the point is, what we might call our memorial abilities actually reflect the orchestrated interaction of a number of different brain systems.
These complex brain processes allow for amazing feats, but they also allow for problems.
So by exploring these processes in detail, and by considering how they interact,
we can gain a much stronger appreciation for your memory when it works,
and you can also have a deeper understanding of why and how memory sometimes fails,
and how you can help your memory.
Understanding how it all comes together also sheds new light on what goes into making possible who you are.
Okay, well, let's make all this a little bit more concrete with a few fun examples that will introduce you to your memory systems one by one.
In fact, to make this a little bit more fun, why don't we imagine we're at a party,
one in which the other guests are your memory systems.
I will be your host, and I will introduce you to these systems and give you a very general sense of what they do, their profession if you like.
Sometimes I will introduce them with a question, and that's to let you experience more personally what it is they're actually doing.
So in fact, here's our first guest now.
This is someone named Episodic Memory.
Episodic Memory is a great guest to introduce via a question.
So let me ask you this question, but as I do, pay attention to what happens in your mind, because that'll be important.
Okay, you ready? Here it goes.
Think about the last dinner that you remember. What was the meal?
So notice what happened.
It's almost as though you have a little movie playing in your mind, one that includes the place of your dinner,
the people you shared it with, perhaps the time of day, or maybe even snippets of the conversation.
It's like that episode of your life was replayed.
That's episodic memory.
Oh, by the way, I need to warn you that some of these characters go by two names.
That can make it a little bit of a challenge to keep things straight, but I'll try to be sensitive to that,
and I'll generally stick with one name, but I might also mention the other occasionally as well.
So this episodic memory character also sometimes goes by the name autobiographical memory.
Notice that both of these names relate to different aspects of the subjective experience that you just had.
You played an episode in your mind, but it was an episode from your life, one in which you were the star.
Thus, it was an episode about you, making it both episodic and autobiographical.
Okay, so let's move on to the next guest then.
Once again, I'll introduce this guest with a question.
Don't forget to introspect. Pay attention to what's happening in your mind.
Here's the question. What is five times four?
Okay, what happened this time?
You got the answer, but this time it felt just like the answer just appeared, right? Unaccompanied by any other experience.
What if I ask you what the baseball team from Boston is named?
Again, just the answer, right?
In 1972, a psychologist from the University of Toronto named Endel Tulving pointed out that this kind of memory feels different from our memory of episodes.
And he dubbed it semantic memory, and he characterized it as your memory of the facts that you've learned about the world.
These facts were learned in the past, and they can subsequently be retrieved.
Clearly, this character belongs at this memory party, but this memory process does not involve the replaying of an event in which the information was learned.
It doesn't feel like an episode from our life. It just feels like facts, and when we want them, they're retrieved and they're available.
But if you're thinking ahead and organizing what we've been discussing, and by the way, that's a really good thing to do.
If you learn the material well, you might be saying something like this.
Hey, wait a minute. The things that are in my semantic memory were learned via specific episodes.
For example, if you'd asked me about the name of the Boston team just days after I learned it, I likely would have replayed that learning episode.
It would have been an episodic memory.
Well, if you thought this, you'd be right on.
Episodic memories are when information is remembered within some specific context.
Repeated exposure to information across a variety of contexts essentially decontextualizes it.
So yes, episodic and semantic memories do indeed dance together, sometimes in pretty complex ways.
Hey, memory isn't one of those parties where the characters just stand around against the wall.
No, they interact and these interactions are critical to a full story of our more general memory abilities.
So we'll talk about these interactions in some detail as we progress through the lectures.
But let's now move along and meet the next guest.
Now, I can't really introduce you to this guest with a question per se, but I just ask you to consider the following.
Think of some occasion when you've maybe watched an athlete or a dancer effortlessly performing some really complex motor movements.
We all know roughly speaking how they came to be able to do that.
The smooth and accurate performance that you see now has resulted from previous experience, specifically from effective and repeated practice.
At early stages, this practice might have been informed by the learning of various verbalized routines,
but the smoothness that you see now only comes from repetition.
Now, if we think about this a little bit, typically the performer is no longer intentionally trying to use their memory in any way.
They're just performing.
But those previous experiences are indeed influencing their current behavior.
The processes of memory are what bridge the gap between that previous practice and the current fluidity of movement.
This type of memory, the memory that underlies the development and the performance of these sorts of motor skills, is called procedural memory,
or sometimes muscle memory.
The muscle memory pseudonym reflects the fact that what one is learning in these situations is how to orchestrate muscles in appropriate sequences.
That is a procedure to perform some larger behavior.
And procedural memory is not just for athletes and dancers.
Most of us speak our native languages as fluidly as an athlete performs their sport.
Part of this involves learning words, and for that we need some assistance from semantic memory.
But in addition, we also had to learn how to coordinate those muscles in our throat to produce the sounds of the words in an appropriate manner.
In fact, when you hear baby's babbling, that represents their very first attempts to use those vocal muscles to produce speech-like sounds.
And this babbling slowly, over time, becomes much more defined and articulate.
And that happens as the muscles in the throat learn to coordinate themselves in an efficient and precise manner.
Once again, this sort of development and orchestration of these interactions between muscles is procedural memory.
To again appreciate the extent to which these memory systems like to interact, let's consider how these memory systems might come into play when someone decides to learn a new language.
In fact, imagine that you have decided you're going to learn how to speak French.
So you take a class. After attending your first class, you go home to work on the things you've learned.
Now, at this point, you're likely relying very heavily on episodic memory.
You're replaying the class itself in your mind, and you're working on those exercises that the teacher introduced to you.
Over time, you will come to hear certain French words repeatedly.
Sometimes from the teacher, maybe sometimes from the books or the other study materials, and perhaps even from exposing yourself to French-speaking people.
As you learn these words across a variety of contexts, then they enter the domain of semantic memory.
Now, this is all very similar to the transition from episodic to semantic memory that I described earlier, one of their favorite dances, if you will.
But, knowing the words and knowing how to string them together to form sentences, that's not enough to make you fluent in French.
To be truly fluent, you need to say the words right.
And what I mean by that is you need to learn the accent.
Because for every language, the manner in which the vocal muscles coordinate to produce the accent of that language is a little different.
If you keep using your English throat muscle procedures while speaking French, you will have a horrible English accent.
Parlez-vous le français? That's not good French.
But, if you keep exposing yourself to real French speakers and keep mimicking the sounds as they make them, eventually your throat muscles will learn to coordinate in a French way.
And this is procedural memory.
And marrying that with your semantic knowledge, knowledge that was initially derived from episodic memories, is what ultimately makes you proficient in French.
So these dances that the memory systems do, they're not limited to just two participants at a time.
Hey, I told you these guys were interesting characters, right?
Well, while episodic and semantic memory likely seemed like things that you thought of as memory, procedural memory might have seemed a little different to you.
When you're performing some procedure you practice, again, it often doesn't feel like you're trying to remember anything.
It feels like you're just performing.
Well, with this in mind, this is a good time to clarify what we mean when we say the word memory.
What are we including as phenomena that reflect the workings of memory?
Alright, well, so if memory is a party, imagine we have a bouncer at the door of our party, and we have to give our bouncer some rule, something that clarifies who's allowed in and who's not.
What's that rule?
Well, early psychologists struggled with this a little, but today we can use the following definition.
Memory is acting any time some past experience has an effect on the way you think or behave now or in the future.
It's a pretty broad definition, and it really implies that any time a past experience can be shown to affect you now in any way, then some sort of memory system must be preserving that experience over time.
By this definition, it really doesn't matter whether one is trying to retrieve the information from the past.
As long as the past affects the present, that's all that matters.
So memory systems then are their vehicles for transporting the effects of experience over time, and if we want to understand memory more fully, we have to consider the full spectrum of the ways that can happen.
By now you can see that memory is indeed more like a party.
So far you have met episodic, semantic, and procedural memory systems, and you have a sense of some of the ways they might interact.
Is there even more to this party?
Well, okay, the memory systems that you've met so far, they all belong to a general class of memory systems that are called long-term memories.
Long-term memory refers to really any situation in which the initial experience occurred maybe days, weeks, months, or even years earlier.
So the experience causes some sort of long-term change that can affect us literally for the rest of our lives.
So for example, when you learn French, you have that for life.
The learning we performed left an enduring trace, and it supports behavior even without us feeling that we're really remembering anything at all.
We're just speaking.
But within this party of the brain, there are also memory systems that we use to hold on to experiences for much shorter time periods.
Usually just long enough to accomplish some task.
These include some very low-level systems, like this character over here.
It's named sensory memory.
Sensory memories are fading copies of some stimulus, some stimulus that's impinged on our senses.
So for example, perhaps the slowly lingering trace of a touch, of a sight, or a sound.
There are at least two of these systems, and probably three.
But let me introduce you to the auditory version of sensory memory, echoic memory.
Have you ever had someone ask you a question while you were thinking about something else?
As you were clearing your mind, you might have said, what?
But then, as they began repeating the question, you say, oh yeah, sorry, never mind, I heard you.
But you didn't hear them.
Instead, you somehow stored the question while you were busy, and then you replayed it in your mind.
It was the replay that you heard, not the initial question.
The initial question was held on to by our friend, echoic memory.
And echoic memory can hold on to auditory information for about three to five seconds.
That's enough time to allow us to deal with distractions, to switch our attention away from whatever we're currently involved in,
and literally hear that event, even though it happened in the past.
The next time you ask someone a question and they say, what?
Just wait a few seconds.
Let a echoic memory do its thing before repeating your question.
There may be no need.
Okay, so now we come to the most interesting character at the party.
This next memory system sometimes goes by the name short-term memory, although I prefer its other name, working memory.
So imagine the following situation.
You're out for the evening, and you meet somebody that you think could really help you in some way.
Maybe they could advance your career, or for whatever reason, there's somebody that you would like to keep in contact with.
You have no paper or pen and no electronic device with you.
They come up to you and they chat with you for a while.
It's your lucky day.
But after some point in the discussion, they say to you, hey, I have to go now.
Call me sometime and we'll continue our conversation.
My number is 492-2085.
And then they just walk away.
What do you do?
As soon as you can, and without looking stupid about it, you likely start looking around for a pen and paper or some other way to record the number.
And meanwhile, in your head, you repeat 492-2085, 492-2085 while you're looking around.
Now, notice what that voice in your head is doing.
It's trying to hold on to that number.
It's trying to hold on over time as you search for paper.
This is a form of memory.
It's a very active form of memory.
But it takes mental work to use this form of memory, which is why I often like the name Working Memory.
Note also that while this working memory system can hold on to information for a while,
it does not effectively hold on to information over longer periods.
We know this from experience.
That's why we're so frantically looking for paper to create a more permanent record.
Now, while working memory can be used to hold on to information for a short period of time,
it's actually a much more general purpose system that plays a very central role in our ability to combine information from the other memory systems.
We often do this with the goal of solving some novel task.
So for example, how high do you think you could reach if you were sitting on a camel?
In this case, you can't just rely on semantic memory to give you the answer,
because you've likely never learned an answer to this question.
Instead, you have to figure it out.
And figuring it out is what working memory does best.
Here are some of the thoughts that might go through your mind when you're trying to answer that question.
You might think back to some time in your life when you saw a camel.
Maybe you were in a zoo or maybe you were on vacation in the Middle East.
And you pay attention then to how high the back of the camel was.
So you replay that memory, maybe see yourself there and you might say, hmm, I think the camel was about six feet tall.
All right, cool.
Now you start pulling information from semantic memory.
You probably know how tall you are.
I'm six foot three, for example.
But of course, that includes my legs.
But from buying jeans or other pants, we know that means semantic memory tells us that in my case,
my inseam is 36 inches.
So I can calculate how high my head could be from my butt by subtracting my inseam from my total height.
Six foot three minus three feet, three foot three inches.
But now we have to take into account a little bit more.
We have the camel at six feet tall.
We know my head is three foot three above that.
But I asked how high we could reach while sitting on a camel.
So we have to take into account the reach as well.
And so if I say, oh, I don't know, maybe that's about a foot and a half over my head.
If I had to guess, I'd say I could reach about 11 feet tall.
If I had to be specific, I'd say more like 10 foot nine inches.
So information from both episodic and semantic memory was useful.
But we also did new things with that information.
We combined and transformed what we knew to come to a solution to a brand new problem.
And this is what working memory does.
The thoughts you experienced were literally working memory doing its thing.
I told you it's a hard working system.
Most certainly is.
Now we do this kind of problem solving all the time.
But have you ever been so tired or perhaps so sick that you felt you just couldn't?
It feels like thoughts won't work.
Well, lack of sleep or other forms of mental interference
tend to reduce how many things we can keep within our working memory.
How many things it can literally hold on to.
And if we can't hold on to many things, we simply can't think about them deeply at all.
We feel zoned out.
OK.
So I've been having a little fun now depicting our memory systems as characters at a party.
One thing you'll learn in this course is that imagery is one of the things that can help you remember.
And these characters and their interactions,
well, they're going to be central in the dramatic interplay
that underlies many of our truly amazing cognitive abilities.
So we're going to revisit and we're going to flesh out these characters more
as we move onwards in their story of memory.
We will also visit the brain structures that underlie these memory systems.
The homes where these characters live, if you will.
And we'll get a sense of what life would be like when those systems are damaged.
Of course, none of us is getting younger and the brain does deteriorate as we age.
So given this, I will also highlight the fact that while some forms of memory do become less effective as we age, others do not.
And even those that do degrade do so in the context of what could be best thought of as cognitive transformation.
And this transformation includes both positive cognitive effects as well as the negative ones.
As I'll also show you, you can keep your memory strong while also enjoying those positive cognitive effects of aging.
We're also going to visit, by the way, some more extreme forms of memory impairment,
like those associated with amnesias and Alzheimer's disease.
And I will highlight how technology may eventually be used to provide so-called cognitive prosthetics
to step in when the brain fails.
Having introduced you to your memory systems, I would like to make a general comment about the study of memory.
As in many fields, researchers tend to create a lot of specialized vocabulary,
with new terms being regarded, well, almost like a toothbrush.
Everybody needs one, but nobody wants to use anybody else's.
So popular books on memory, well, they tend to be like researchers.
They, too, tend to fixate on just one or two aspects of the subject, and they ignore the rest.
In this course, by contrast, we're going to try to bring together the main insights of various research traditions,
literally from across the field.
Our goal is to build an increasingly rich vocabulary for understanding memory in all its complexity,
from mnemonics to the first experiments to cognitive psychology to cognitive neuroscience, neuropsychology, and beyond.
Now, building that foundation will at times take us through some relatively academic terrain,
where the connections to everyday life might not be always so readily apparent.
But I will try to highlight those where I can.
My larger hope is that the journey as a whole will give you a far deeper understanding of memory
than you would get from any of the parts considered in isolation from one another.
Understanding how our memory systems interact, sometimes together, sometimes at cross purposes,
will be with us throughout this course.
In the next lecture, we'll work on improving our ability to remember using techniques that have been around since ancient times,
and techniques that really do work.
Do you wish you could improve your memory?
Well, follow me, we'll retrace the steps of the ancients, and encounter the ancient art of memory.
