Lecture 2. The Ancient Art of Memory
Any time I give a lecture on memory, one of the first questions I get always goes something
like this. Sometimes I have a lot of trouble remembering things that I really want to remember.
Things like, well, grocery lists or names of people that I've just recently met. Is
there anything I can do to improve my memory? Well, it turns out this question is far from
a new one. We know this because one of the very first strategies used to improve memory,
the strategy that I'm going to highlight in this lecture, dates back to the classical
periods of Rome and Greece. So to anticipate, yes, it is possible to improve your memory,
and in this lecture, I will show you some of the tricks and techniques that you can use
to do just that. But hang on, if you've been paying attention so far, you may be saying
to yourself, but wait a minute, there is no single thing called memory. Rather, you said
there were multiple memory systems. Which one are we talking about improving? I'm glad
you asked, because this is an important point, and it's one that many books on memory improvement
just don't address. So usually when people talk about improving their memory, they are
talking about improving their memory for things like grocery lists, or to-do lists. Maybe
people's birthdays, or especially their memory for the names of people that they've met,
but really don't know very well. Now, it turns out we all have a lot of trouble remembering
names, and it's a problem that seems to get even worse as we age. Well, by the end of
this lecture, you'll understand why that is, and maybe you won't feel quite so bad for
yourself having so much trouble with names. But let's go back to that question. Which
memory system are we talking about? Because if we think about this a little bit, it may
help us to kind of congeal the information that I talked about in lecture one. So for
starters, we're clearly talking about long-term memory. When we make a grocery list or a to-do
list, it's something we do now, but it's something that we hope we'll be able to retrieve later.
So given what we learned last lecture, that narrows it down to either episodic memory,
semantic memory, or procedural memory. Well, obviously, this isn't about any sort of motor
behavior like dancing or playing sports, so that rules out procedural. With respect to
a person's name or birth date, well, if we know that person well, say like a spouse or
a child, then these things are semantic memories. We just know their names and birthdays. Sure,
yeah, we sometimes forget, especially those of us who are men, and especially when the
date in question is an anniversary. But we all have the hardest time remembering newer
information, new names, new dates, this week's grocery list. Those things are episodic memories.
And so mostly we will be focusing on improving episodic memory in this lecture. Now that said,
we will come back to the other memory systems in subsequent lectures, so there I say I won't
forget about them, but I just want to begin by focusing on our ability to remember new
bits of essentially random information. So that will be the context for now. Imagine
you've been exposed to some new information and you want to remember it later. What do
you do? So why don't we start with a demonstration and then use that demonstration to highlight
some of the relevant principles and techniques that I want to show you. So let's say you
offer me the following challenge. You will give me a list of 14 unrelated words, and
my task is not only to remember those words, but also to remember them in the order that
you give them to me. And I have to do this both over a short time period and also over
a longer time period. So we'll test me just after I learned the list, but we'll also
test me again at the end of this lecture. I can virtually guarantee you that I will
be able to pull this off. And during the middle part of the lecture, I will show you how it
works so that you can do it too. Now, you and I currently exist in a different time
place, and that will make it hard for us to interact directly. So to do the demonstration,
I've come up with another way. I'm going to start this demonstration with 14 words that
reflect events or locations associated with my weekday routine. They really represent my
morning ritual, and it's a ritual that's pretty consistent. Basically, I wake up in
bed. That's a good thing. I go downstairs for breakfast, and I walk my two dogs, Lola
and Layla. I then iron my clothes. I have a shower. I get dressed, put on my shoes,
and hop in my car. I go past a school, then a little later, a church, and then a relatively
famous local landmark, Ted's Diner. Then I pull into the university, I grab a coffee,
and I go to class. So I can think of these words, and let me just kind of remind you
of what those words are again. Bed, breakfast, walk, iron, shower, dressed, shoes, car,
school, church, diner, university, coffee, class. These words represent that ritual I
just told you about, and these words are really going to be critical because they are what
I'm going to use to link other information, new information, to.
All right, so what about that new information? Well, people here in the studio have come
up with random words. These are the words for me to remember, and they've been placed
in this, I guess what could be best described, as an urn. I have not seen any of the words.
I'll mix them up, and I will draw them out one at a time, and these will be the words
that I will remember. Now, what you'll see is that I'm going to connect each of these
words with one of those 14 words in my morning routine, and in so doing I will be using a
mnemonic strategy called the method of loci, and I'll explain that a little bit more in
a moment. Once I have the words connected, once I've done the association, then I will
be able to recall them accurately and in order without studying them any further. What's
more, I will come back to them at the end of this class, just around 25 minutes from
now, and we'll still be able to recall them in order. Okay, so here goes. Let me kind
of tell a story now. We're going to take my morning ritual, and we're going to embellish
it thanks to the words in this urn. So, start off. I wake up in bed. Let me pull out a word.
The word is sand. Okay, I didn't sleep very well. Obviously, I didn't sleep very well
because somebody kicked sand into my bed, made it very uncomfortable. That's okay.
I wake up, I go down for breakfast. Ocean. Beautiful. For some reason, there's an ocean
outside the breakfast window. It wasn't there the night before. For some reason, I don't
know where the ocean came from, but now I can eat my breakfast overlooking the ocean.
What a fantastic image. Great. After breakfast, I go for a walk with the Wonder Dogs, and
I have the word elbow. Walking with the Wonder Dogs, elbow. Well, let's just say the Wonder
Dogs are a little feisty today, and they're pulling me left and right, and this way and
that, everywhere we go, by the time I get home, my elbows, both of them really soar
from all this. All right, great. I'm home now, ironing my clothes. The next step, burglar.
As I'm ironing my clothes, somebody has the nerve to start breaking into my window. While
I'm right there, ironing my clothes. Luckily, Lola and Layla, the Wonder Dogs, kick the
burglar's butt. Cool. Now, shower. I go into the shower. Problem. Glue. It's not water
coming into the shower today. It's glue. What a pain in the butt that is. Say no more. Get
out of the shower. Somehow, I get the glue off me. Time to get dressed and shovel. Okay.
Well, let's do a little bit of Groucho Marks or something as I'm about to get dressed,
and there's the clothes on the floor I step, and there's a shovel that jumps up and bangs
and hits me in the face. Why not? That works. But I get dressed anyway. Go to put my shoes
on. Bacteria. Oh, don't we all hate this? My shoes smell horrible. Clearly, it's bacteria.
What can you do? I'm a guy. Happens. Hop in the car. Okay. As I hop in the car, parade.
Yeah, well, I open the garage door. I'm about to back out, but there's this parade on my
street, and you know how parades are like? They don't allow you to just kind of jump
in, so I have to sit there and I have to wait for the whole parade to go by. Fine. Do that.
Hop in my car. On the way, I drive past the school, local school, windmill. Well, it's
a school that's really an energy conservation, so they've stuck a bunch of windmills on
the roof. That's different, but cool. Makes a lot of sense in this day and age, right?
Go past the church, next destination, and it's soccer. There's a bunch of priests and
rabbis out there playing soccer. I guess it's a church, so it's a bunch of priests playing
soccer against the nuns, priests versus the nuns. I'm curious to see who will win. But
I drive on anyway. Past the diner. At the diner, lemon. Okay. Well, the diners for whatever
reason has decided to promote lemons, so all the specials today have lemons in them somewhat.
Doesn't sound very appetizing, but why not? Get to the university. Trantula. Ah, don't
you hate that? There's a trantula infestation at the university. No big deal, but when I
drive my car over it, well, you don't want to. You get the idea. You get the image. Somehow
I park. I manage to get by all the trantulas, go for my coffee. And here's the word chess.
So they won't give me my coffee until I beat them at chess first. Well, that's easy enough,
right? So I do that. Okay. And finally, I'm at my class in the morning. And laser. Okay.
I get to class and you know what happens. There's students with lasers and they're putting
it on my forehead and stuff while I'm trying to teach. And that's very annoying, but that's
how it is. Okay. So 14 words. You saw how much I thought about them. I've formed all
these associations. I'll look at the words no more. They shall stay in this little urn
over here. And to demonstrate that I have indeed lured the words, let me recite them
back to you, quickly mentioning each step of my routine to show you how I use them to
remember the words. All right. Ready? Here goes. I start in bed. Sand. There was sand
in bed. Made the bed really uncomfortable. Go down for breakfast. There's an ocean. Ocean
view that wasn't there before. Fantastic. Going to walk with my dogs, pulling me every
way. Elbow. Pulling my elbows out, right? Cool. Come back to iron. Burglar. Burglar was
breaking in as I was ironing. Lola and Leila kicked their butt off they go. After I iron,
I have a shower, glue coming out of the shower. Okay. I then get dressed, step on the shovel,
hits me in the face. Drag. Okay. Go down to get my shoes on. Bacterium. My shoes are
smelly. They have that bacteria smell. Drag. Hop in the car. Open the garage door. There's
a parade outside. Okay. I can't go anywhere because of the parade, but eventually the
parade passes. Start driving. I go by a school. The school had windmills on the roof. Energy
conservation. Excellent. Windmills. Drive a little further. Get to the church. Nuns
versus the priests playing soccer. All right. So soccer was the church. Little further yet,
past Ted's diner where lemons are the special of the day. Lemons at Ted's diner. Pull into
the university. Trantula infestation. Hate when that happens. I survive. Cool. Go for
my coffee. Have to play them a game of chess. So I beat them at chess. Get my coffee. Finally
go to my class. And at class, those pesky students with their laser pointers are having
a field day. Okay. I think I got them all. I hope so. Are you impressed? Well, don't
be impressed yet. I mean, it's one thing to remember a list of items right after learning
them. It's something else to remember them quite a while later after our mind is kind
of thinking about other issues. So let's see if what I did left a durable enough trace
for me to remember it at the end of this lecture. But for now, let me move on to an explanation
of why this strategy works and what it tells us about memory. It turns out that this desire
to improve our memory is not new at all. The method that I just demonstrated is something
called the method of loci where loci is just a Latin plural of the word locus, meaning place.
So this procedure literally dates back to the glory days of Rome. And at that time there
were orators who would travel the land stopping at various cities at banquets and their responsibility
at these banquets was to literally tell the leaders and the other important people of
the city the news of the realm, what was going on in other places. Now, their credibility
to do so depended on others believing that their memory of those events was accurate.
So to prove their memory strength, they would very quickly learn the names of the people
at the banquet. They would learn this just before the banquet started and then they would
literally introduce these people just before beginning to relay the news. So they would
go table by table and introduce everyone that was there. This feat of memory would impress
those there. And so then when the orator went on to tell the news, they would be much more
trusted by the people who were hearing it. Now, how did they do it? Well, these orators
tend to follow familiar routes when they traveled through the land. So they would go from city
to city location to location. And when they were trying to learn these new names, they
would take these new names and these people and they would kind of imagine them in these
different locations. So using imagery or whatever else they could to strengthen that association,
they would literally place these people along their normally traveled route. Then when it
came time to retrieve those names, they would mentally travel that route again. And along
the way, they would essentially collect the people and say their names as they did. If
those associations they formed were strong enough, then retrieving the locations would
provide a queue that would allow them to retrieve the name. So those locations played a critical
role in terms of organizing this new information. By the way, this is pretty much what Simonides,
the poet, did in Greece in 5th century BC. Simonides was the sole survivor of a roof
collapse that killed all of the other guests at a large banquet he was attending. He was
able to actually reproduce the guest list by imagining each table and remembering who
he had observed sitting there. So he didn't really do the same kind of encoding I did,
but because the people were already organized in tables and because he knew them, he was
able to associate people with tables and then literally go table by table. So it's the same
general process. In his case, the environment was providing the organization and his knowledge
was allowing him to form those associations. But when the environment doesn't provide the
organization, we can still do it ourselves. And that's exactly what I did with you in
that demonstration I just performed. This is all really important because often when
people say they can't remember something, they're implying that the problem they're
having is with respect to retrieving the information out of memory, literally the retrieval stage.
They know they originally heard the information, for example, maybe some person's name that
they met, or maybe they know that they thought about the chores they wanted to do, but when
they needed to remember them, they couldn't. And they assume the problem is with respect
to retrieval. Now, technically it's true. I mean, retrieval
can fail, but the real lesson we learn from mnemonic strategies is that it's often not
enough to just listen to something or to think about something. We really need to think about
it deeply. Our ability to remember depends heavily on the way that we think about the
information when we first encounter it. That is when we encode it. If we encode the information
well, we will have a much better chance of retrieving it later.
Remember when we spoke of working memory? And I told you that it's a memory system that
we use often to combine information from different sources to solve some new goal we have, some
new task. I also told you it's very strongly linked to consciousness and our sort of mental
thoughts. Well, anytime that we encounter some information
that we want to remember subsequently, we have a new goal. That is a goal. And therefore,
it's working memory that we can best use to reach that goal. And it's working memory
that we're using in the demonstration that I just gave to you. It's literally taking
information, combining it, and helping us to remember it better for later.
If you think about that information properly at the time of encoding, that is, if you engage
in the right techniques using your working memory, then you can in fact indeed remember
the information better. So again, these techniques have to do with
encoding. It has to do with how you put the information into memory. And if you put it
in the right way, it's easier to get it back out again later.
So to make this kind of make sense, imagine the following. Imagine we have two boxes.
One is pretty large, the other is much smaller. And imagine we have some recipes that we might
want to use later. And we've written them down on small recipe cards. And we've made
two copies of each recipe. One copy we just throw into the large box.
The other copy we file into the smaller box, perhaps sorting it as we do. Maybe according,
for example, to the alphabet. So maybe apple pie is first, zucchini casserole is last.
Now tonight, we decide that we'd like to make the Portobello pasta recipe. And we know
that we'd written it down. We also know we put it in both boxes.
We tossed a copy into the big box, and we filed, in the appropriate spot, a copy in
the small box. Now what happens if we want to find this?
Well, it'll be much easier to find this recipe in the smaller box. That is both the time
to find it and the likelihood of us actually finding it before we give up will be much
higher if we look in the smaller, sorted box. In fact, if we had a whole bunch of recipes
in that big box, we might find it almost impossible to ever find the recipe we want.
We would know it's there, but we just couldn't bring it back. And this is a lot like when
we know that we've listened to a name or thought of some chore we want to do, but we just can't
remember it later. Alright, so putting things in the right way helps
you get them out. Now it takes more time and effort, of course, to put things in to the
recipe box and to memory in that organized way. But there's good dividends to be paid
for that. And so really the point of this is that it's not about the size of your memory.
These techniques are not about making your memory bigger. It's about storing information
in your memory in a more efficient way that helps you get it out.
So the first kind of variable that will help us do that is organization. If we organize
information at the time of encoding, then we can learn to use that organization to enhance
our memory. So what sort of things can we do during encoding that will do that? Well,
let's return to that sorted recipe box. In that case, what we used to provide the organization
was the alphabet. It gave structure to the information. And we could use that structure
to later retrieve the information we wanted. We know that Portabella pasta, Portabella,
begins with a P. So we can search that small recipe box, find the P area, and even if we
only sorted by the first letter, we would already be in the right area of memory. If
we alphabetized a lot more detail right through the letter, we could hone right in on exactly
where that recipe is. It would be very efficient to be able to find it when it was put in in
a highly organized way. So now let's think about that method of loci. We had new information
to put into memory. For example, those words that were given to me to remember, but I didn't
just throw them into memory. Instead, I took the time to attach each new piece of information
to a structure, a structure that I already had in my memory. Not the alphabet, but my
morning routine. By associating each piece of new information with something I can already
retrieve easily from memory, I am essentially using my routine to get me to that right area
of memory, just like the alphabet lets us get to the right part of the recipe card file.
So right now is a great time for you to pause this lecture and come up with your own list
like the one I used. Come up with your own morning routine or whatever it is. Make it
long enough so that you can store lots of items if you need to. You can always just
use part of that list. I prefer the list tied to my daily routine because I live a pretty
consistent sort of life on weekdays, so that listing is quite ingrained in my mind. But
maybe there's something else for you. Choose anything. Anything in which certain steps
occur in a very specific order. As long as you know these steps and you know the order
in which they occur, that's fantastic. So right now pause me for a moment and go write
a list like that. Okay, so let's talk about what your list of queues can do for you. By
having these well structured memory queues, you can organize the information better in
memory and we can use this organization at retrieval to get us in the right general area
of memory. Now, how do we get the information we want? Well, this is where the associations
come in. As forming good associations is the second critical variable we can use to enhance
our memory. You likely notice that when I was associating the new information with my
queues, I often made use of bizarre images. That is, I turned the words into images and
joined the two bits of information in ways that were either slightly humorous or downright
odd, like glue coming out of a shower, for instance. I did this because of research showing
that we can remember bizarre things better than we can remember common things. So by
forming strong associations between a set of organized queues, in my case my morning ritual,
and some new information, I not only can get to roughly the right place in memory, but
I can also use the associations to get the specific information I want. Now that you
have your list of queues, let's practice using them. Either by writing your queues down or
by working through them in your head, use them to memorize the following list of words.
Newsletter, harpoon, window, chapstick, calamari, Elvis, packaderm, tuba, doughnut, pupae. Basically
do what I did. Generate bizarre images that link the words to your queues. You can pause
me again right now while you do that if you'd like. So how did you do? You can learn even
from trying this just once, but you can start to get it really good at it with a few tries.
By the way, there's another aspect of bizarre images that is very important, and that is
the very fact that I turned each word into a picture in the first place. In so doing
I was creating a copy of the item, and I was storing the copy and the original in different
parts of my brain. The word is a linguistic stimulus. It goes in the linguistic part of
the brain. The picture is stored in the picture area. So I literally have two copies, almost
like two recipes in one box, which will make it even easier to find. Psychologists call
this the dual coding hypothesis, and based on it, they generally encourage people to,
whenever possible, form multiple copies of a stimulus. So the dual coding is yet another
variable that can help us to enhance our memory. Organization, association, and dual coding.
As another example of a different strategy that also utilizes these three factors, you
likely learn from your teacher this acronym, Roy G. Biv, an acronym which you can use to
remember the colors of the rainbow. Now notice Roy G. Biv was this imaginary character. Each
letter in the name is associated with the color of the rainbow, red, orange, yellow, green,
blue, indigo, violet. So the name provided the structure, the letters of the name provided
cues to the association, and the fact that we've taken now color information and stored
it as a name provides dual coding. All right. So now let's just return to those pesky names.
Think of those critical variables, and now think of yourself trying to remember names. Well,
if you're introduced to somebody named Bill, maybe you can form a bizarre image. Maybe you think of
Bill running out of a restaurant to avoid paying the bill. So now we've used association and dual
coding to remember that name, and that should help. But here's the real problem. That's fine
for Bill, but what about George, Alicia, Frederick, or Ajamal? Many names simply do not lend
themselves well to imagery, and that's a big reason why they're so hard to remember. Let's
consider Ajamal. That's a real challenge. Your best bet is to try multiple tricks. Some might be
just while playing around with words and well-known slogans. So we could think of something like,
ah, the great Ajamal, almost as great as the Taj Mahal, and ah, he went to the mall to play
dodgeball. You can also maybe even search your memory for maybe a similar name that you've
heard before, like Ajamal and Jamal, had a great fall, you know, anything you can use to help you
remember that name in those sorts of ways. Of course, the more that you know the person, or notice
about the person, the more that that can give you other possible associations. You could think,
oh, Ajamal, so tall, or Ajamal in the hall. This is precisely why we have the trouble remembering
names. They're so random that they're often very hard to organize, and therefore often hard to
form associations with, and harder to code in more than one way. Of course, you can and should
still try, but don't be surprised if names always remain a more difficult thing to remember. They
just are. By the way, this technique may seem like a lot of work, but if you do these things over
and over, then it will become very natural to put things in memory this way. So the effort involved
will decrease. For example, that demo that I did with you, I've done this many times in many
different talks, so that the words I use, that routine, it's essentially second nature to me,
and I can jump right into the process of forming associations. Yes, it still takes time and effort,
but the amount of effort reduces, and heck, forming associations, especially these bizarre images,
it's kind of fun. So all in all, not a negative experience. Of course, the most critical point is
that these things do work. They were traditionally called the art of memory, and they've been used,
well, for a couple of thousands of years in a lot of different names. So give them a try. Again,
main steps, organize, associate, dual code. You'll be taking part in a long tradition, and you'll
be improving your memory at the same time, your episodic memory, remember. So now, the moment
of truth. Let's see if I can still remember those items from earlier in the lecture. Okay,
bed, sand, breakfast, ocean, walk, elbows, iron, burglar, shower, glue, dressed, shovel, shoes,
bacteria, car, parade, school, windmills, church, soccer, teds, lemon, sorry, that was diner,
teds diner, lemon, university tarantulas, coffee, chess, class, lasers, think I got them all. How
about you? Try it yourself. It's one thing to watch somebody else do it, but when you try it
yourself, you'll actually find it's pretty easy. And it's kind of cool. So I'm thinking you can do
it, give it a go, and then try it in any different circumstance of your life. It's something you
can really use to enhance your memory. Enjoy.
