Lecture 4 Sensory Memory, Brief Traces of the Past
Welcome back. In the first lecture I introduced you to different forms of memory and I promised
that I would reintroduce you to each and give you many more details. We then took a trip
into mnemonics and wrote memorization and talked about the very beginnings of the science
of memory as a person by Herman Ebbinghaus. So now I want to get back to my promise and
I want to begin describing each of our memory systems in more detail. I want to give you
a better sense of the data that supports the existence of each and tell you more about
the context in which each system plays a role. We will also discuss the manner in which these
various systems interact. We are going to start by talking in this lecture about a kind
of memory called sensory memory. To introduce you to the relevance of sensory memory I would
like to tell you a little story about my dad. When we grew up we had one television. My
father was a very hard working man, he had his full time job and he always had hobbies
to ensure that he did not have idle hands. But when he relaxed the TV was his way of
doing so. He would watch TV shows intently and the rest of the world simply vanished.
If any of us spoke while he was watching it was just like we didn't exist. Whatever we
said just disappeared into the ether. If we wanted to communicate with dad we waited for
a commercial. Perhaps you know people like this, perhaps you are such a person. Well
my dad's behavior while watching TV is an extreme example of the limitations we have
with respect to processing information. The world we live in is extremely rich and complex
and at any given moment there are all sorts of things we could either look at or listen
to or feel, taste or smell. However humans are largely single minded animals and by that
I mean that we tend to find it very hard to consciously think about more than a single
thing at a time. Yes we can multitask so that is we can apparently do multiple things
at once but do we really or instead do we simply switch our attention very quickly between
the tasks. Well in fact most of the existing evidence favors that attentional switching
hypothesis. That is those who are good at multitasking are usually good at moving their
attention back and forth between a variety of tasks or sources of stimulation. At any
given moment though it seems that they like the rest of us can really only think deeply
about one thing at a time. Some people like my dad don't even try to multitask and instead
they just deeply engage in one mental activity while ignoring all others. This limitation
of focus on only one source of stimulation at a time could pose some major problems for
us. If we're thinking deeply about something say that we're looking at what if somebody
says something that's critical. We could miss it completely and sometimes in fact we do
miss things in that way. Again if anyone said anything to dad while he was watching TV he
would completely miss it. But this really only happens when we insist on locking into
one thing as my dad did. More commonly we switch our attention from whatever it is
that we're concentrating on and then we're able to kind of hear what was said to us.
But wait how can this be? How does this work? If after some of the words were already said
then how can we switch our attention and hear what was already said? Well we're able to
do this thanks to sensory memory, a very short term memory buffer that really holds
on to sensory stimuli for a brief period after they occur. This buffer gives us time to switch
our attention to some other stimulus and to still see or hear it even though that precise
stimulus is no longer present in the environment. So sensory memory is what compensates for our
inability to think about two things at once. Better still sensory memory maximizes the
likelihood of us catching stimuli that might be important to us even if we were distracted
when they appeared. In a way it's almost as if the information coming into our sensory
system was set up to kind of allow a time delay when we switch our attention. So for
example if one were to think about the information coming into our sensory systems as streams
of information then we're only able to attend to one stream at a time but we can switch
between streams and it's like their time delayed. Okay let me be clear about that we could only
attend to one thing at a time part. If somebody's talking to us of course we can see, hear
and maybe even smell them all at once all at the same time. All of this information is
being processed but our attention is primarily focused on one sense. In most cases that would
be on the words that are being said. In fact if we did begin to notice let's say that this
person didn't smell so good we might also have the sense that we're not listening well anymore
because we're being distracted. That is attention is being captured by the less than pleasant
smell. But if something catches our attention in a stream that we're not attending to we
are able to switch that to that stream in an almost time delayed manner. That is we
don't start where the stream is now but rather we start a little before where the stream
was when it caught our attention. Somehow that information that grabbed our attention
in the first place is retained well just long enough for us to switch, rewind and catch
what it was that caused us to switch in the first place. Now seriously that's pretty cool.
The basic principle of sensory memory is straightforward then. If each of our sensory
systems had a buffer system that allowed stimulation to be preserved for a while after it occurs
then if we're concentrating on some let's say visual stimulus when an important auditory
stimulus appeared a copy of that auditory stimulus is retained giving us enough time
to switch our attention and then listen to the copy. Switches of attention happen quickly
so the copy doesn't have to be saved for a very long time. Now this seems to be exactly
what the brain does especially when it comes to visual or auditory stimuli. It's probably
also true of other senses as well but really there's very little research that's been
done on them. So we're going to really focus on the visual and auditory streams of attention
right now and I'm going to tell you about some of the relevant research. We're going
to begin with the visual form of sensory memory. It's a kind of memory called iconic memory.
In 1740 a physicist and mathematician named Johann Segener fixed a burning coal to a wagon
wheel and spun the wheel. As the wheel spun Johann perceived a streak of light behind the
coal's position. When the wheel spun at about 10 revolutions per second he perceived a complete
circle of light as if the light that had left the coal 100 milliseconds previously was still
there when the coal made it back to the same position. Well we don't have a wagon wheel
but what we do have is a bicycle with a light attached to the back wheel. So I'm going to
get that wheel spinning and let's see the trail that we make and let's see if I can
actually get a complete circle of light. Okay so here we go. You can try this at home with
a string and a light. Anyway I think you'll agree that the light can only be in a very
single location at a single point in time so the trail of light that we see cannot really
be occurring in the real world. Instead that trail reflects our perception of the event
as coded by our brain. Somehow within that perception some component of memory is allowing
the light to live on in specific spatial positions even after the light itself has moved on.
That component is iconic memory. This might remind you of what is called persistence of
vision. When you watch a movie in a theater the actual movie is a series of distinct frames
projected at say 60 frames per second. But your iconic memory holds each frame long enough
after it's gone that you don't notice the gaps between the frames. What you see instead
is a continuous picture. When iconic memory was first studied in detail by George Sperling
in 1960 he used a device somewhat like a film projector something called a tachistoscope.
Sperling's experiments involved a contrast between two experimental conditions one of
which was called a full report condition and one of which is called a partial report condition.
While these conditions themselves are relatively straightforward the logic that links them
to the conclusions about iconic memory well that's a little bit more complex. So I want
to walk through these kind of slowly. In the full report condition nine letters would be
briefly presented and they would be presented as three rows of three letters. So a grid
of three by three. Participants in this condition would see these letters presented very briefly
just a brief flash of the letters and then they would be asked to just report what they
could what did you see. Typically they report about four or five letters on average and
this is a number that was consistent with experiments performed by James Cattell back
in the 1800s. However the interesting point is this many of the participants claimed that
they actually saw more at least initially. That is they felt like they had seen all nine
letters but as they began reporting the letters this visual image faded. Kind of the way a
dream fades when you wake up in the morning. So that by the time they had reported let's
say four or five letters the visual image was completely gone and they could report no more.
Now Sperling was intrigued by what this participant said and he wanted to see if he could actually
confirm that they had originally seen many more letters than they could report and to
test this he devised a partial report condition and it worked as follows. So once again a
three by three matrix of letters was flashed briefly but after it was removed a tone was
sounded and that tone was used to cue which row that the participants were asked to retrieve.
A high tone told them to retrieve the top row, a middle tone the middle row and a low
tone the lowest row. When he did this what he found is that most participants could report
at least two and quite often all three of the letters in the cued row. So here's the
logical part that can be a little tricky. If they could report two or three items from
any row without knowing which row would be cued and the fact that the letters were gone
when it was cued they could still report two or three that kind of suggests that they could
actually see well from six to nine letters initially that two to three times three because
theoretically they could do that from any of the rows that were cued. Thus it does indeed
seem as though the participants reports were correct. Initially they could see most of
the letters even after the letters were removed but this visual image faded quickly and was
gone by the time they had specified what some of those letters were. Now with Sperling's
technique he was also able to ascertain how long this visual trace of the stimulus lasted
and he did this by varying the time between when the letters disappeared and when the cue
was presented. After just one second performance in the partial report condition was no better
than that in the full report condition. That is people could report only about 1.5 items in
the cued row and again if we multiply that by three assuming they could have done that for any
row then we get a number of about 4.5 items overall and that's obviously right smack in the
middle of that four to five letters that participants can report in the full report
condition. So it seems as though the image is completely gone after just one second.
Of course even in the full report condition the participants can report four or five items and
once those items are selected well the participants can remember them then for quite a while
thereafter. So there's an implication here that there's really two memory systems at play. One is
that raw sensory image of all the presented items but as participants start to sample that and
report those items the items they report are seemingly being transferred to another system and
that system is most likely working memory. In fact it seems that the purpose of iconic memory is
literally to keep the raw image around long enough just in case some components of it are important
enough to deserve such a recording such a more enduring memory. It is almost like a sort of
holding cell in which a wide net is cast across all the items presented so that some of them
might then be further detained as others are allowed to leave. In real life then the purpose of
iconic memory is to help us to not miss important things when our attention is engaged on some
other sense or even on some internal thought. In fact as I was preparing this part of the lecture
I paused my writing at one point and I went for a hike with my wife and my two dogs. As we were
walking I was sort of deeply thinking about where this lecture might go and what I wanted to do.
Of course I was also watching where I was going but my mind was really on my thoughts not on the
visual scene in front of me. However at some point I noticed a quick movement grab my attention
and then I kind of rewatched my iconic memory and saw a blue jay fly across our path. My wife
then said hey did you see that blue jay and thanks to my iconic memory I was able to say yes I had
I hadn't missed it. So sensory memory and iconic memory in specific also plays a role in keeping
our sensory representations of the world intact and rich. For example when it comes to vision we
all feel like we're seeing sort of a complete representation of what it is in front of us.
However the truth is that our eyes actually dart all over the visual scene. Our eyes make little
jumps that are called saccades and each jump is about 200 milliseconds or a fifth of a second. Each
one of these jumps gives us basically a small snapshot of what's in the world in front of us
but somehow from all of these snapshots we're able to form an internal representation in which all
of these snapshots are essentially pieced together in a mosaic and it's that mosaic that underlies
the illusion we have of a complete representation. This is almost like some of David Hockney's
photo collages that you may have seen. So iconic memory allows this integration of parts to happen
more smoothly. Given that each snapshot now remains in a sense for a second or more
and then gradually fades as we continue to sample new areas we don't just have one snapshot active
at any given time. We actually have one sort of currently active and up to five or so that are
in various stages of degradation. So iconic memory ends up giving us much more visual input
and without it it's not clear that we would really have the illusion of seeing the entire
scene in front of us at any given time. So iconic memory then really serves two functions for visual
stimuli. When we're attending to vision it supports our perception of a rich and detailed
representation of our world. When we're not attending to vision and some important visual
event occurs it allows us enough time to switch our attention to that event and still see a copy
of it. Notice that in both cases it is really making our perceptual processing of the world
much more fluid and seamless. Now at least one of our other senses also has this sort of short
term storage and that senses audition or hearing and the form of sensory memory related to hearing
is something we call echoic memory. The copy is like an echo of what was said. Now we've all
experienced echoic memory frequently and it is likely more familiar to you than iconic memory is.
Here's the typical situation and it's one that I mentioned in the initial lecture.
So here we go. Imagine you were again reading a novel or maybe deep into a television show
or perhaps even deep into your own thoughts. A family member enters the room and says something
to you. You stop attending to the novel or the TV or your thoughts and you automatically say
what but then as they start to repeat what what they had said you often will say oh sorry
no I heard you that you don't have to repeat yourself but the fact is you didn't actually hear
them at least not when they originally spoke to you. Once you switched your attention though
you were able to replay the question which was still stored in your echoic memory thus you heard
the echo not the original communication. It's actually rather easy to experience a
echoic memory and to get a sense for how much information it can hold. Why don't we try it now?
I'll read you a list of numbers and at some point I will say stop. Just listen to the numbers.
Don't try to memorize them just listen to them. When I say stop tell me what the last few numbers
were. Okay ready here goes. Six seven six five nine four two three seven zero two stop.
Okay I tried to read those numbers at roughly a rate of one per second and most of you could
likely replace something like three seven zero two stop. Okay that's about the last four or five
seconds of the list. There have been a number of more formal experiments that have indeed confirmed
this notion that echoic memory seems to survive about four or five seconds. Now that's much longer
than iconic memory remember it was about a second and that's why we likely notice a echoic memory
more. Now this brings up the question why? Why is a echoic memory longer lasting than iconic
memory? Well we're not exactly sure of the answer to that but it's a good issue to consider and to
highlight one of the ways scientists will think about questions like this. Since the time of
Charles Darwin scientists have begun to think more in terms of the function of certain attributes
or processes. I'm sure you've heard about the finches that were so important to Darwin's original
thoughts on evolution. He noticed that two distinct species of finches lived on the same island
but on different parts of that island. The two kinds of finches looked different one had a short
strong beak the other had a long narrow beak. The finches with the short strong beaks lived in an
area that had lots of berries and nuts the sort of food that a strong beak would be really useful
for eating. The finches with the long narrow beaks lived in an area where there were many insects
that burrowed in dead trees. The long beaks would allow them to get at and eat these insects thus
the shape of the beak was not purely aesthetic but rather it had real functional significance.
Okay so with functions in mind then we can ask questions of the following sword.
Given the environment we live in the human environment why would our
koac memory last longer than our iconic memory? Well one possible answer would go something like this.
For humans speech is highly important. Our ability to communicate via speech allows us to
share information in rich and powerful ways. We're doing it right now. Given this importance
it is not at all surprising that we have large parts of our brain devoted just to the processing
of speech. In fact we have one area called Broca's area that we use for producing speech
and an entirely separate area called Vernike's area that we use for understanding it.
Now speech is serial one word following another slowly over time. What's more the end of sentences
often don't make a lot of sense unless you know the beginning. So if somebody is talking to us
and we must switch our attention to begin listening to them it would be very beneficial to have as
much of their previous speech and memory as is possible. Hence an echoic memory that can hold
a lot of information would be highly beneficial. In contrast visual images are just that visual
images. They do not tend to have that same sort of structured unfolding over time and usually we
just want to see something not an entire related process. So I mean yes we might all like to have
our own personal instant replay of an entire process once in a while but that's kind of something
that television has taught us to want and having that running all the time might actually be a
little overwhelming or at least very inefficient. Thus a short-lived visual memory may be perfectly
sufficient. Okay so what about our other senses? Do they also have sensory memories as well?
Well for taste and smell the answer is sort of a qualified yes. In a sense there is like
a sensory memory but it's one supported by the environment not supported by the brain.
What I mean by that is the following. Smell and taste are chemical senses
and they tend to automatically kind of fade in and fade out as a function of the concentration
of those chemicals. So for example imagine that you're driving down a road where a skunk had been
hit. As you approach that smell the concentration of that chemical gradually increases. So it builds
up and then as you drive away from it it gradually decreases kind of like a fading iconic memory.
So we don't really need the brain to do this. The concentration level of the chemicals kind of
does it naturally and so it's not at all clear that we would have the same sort of sensory memory
for smell and taste or that we would even need it but for something like vision it seems to perform
important functions things like letting us see a blue jay on a fall hike. All right what about touch
then? Well that would be called tactile or haptic memory and if we have short-term memories for other
senses we might have them for touch as well. Well remember when I told you that psychology was a very
young science? Well it turns out that very few studies have examined whether there really is
short-term memory for touch. Personally I think there is. I mean if I simply touch my cheeks and
then let go it feels to me as though the touch gradually fades as though the sensation of the
touch lives on for a while. One thing to know about touch is that it's a relatively slow system.
Another thing is that it is sequential like hearing and a third thing is that touch often
involves not only the skin but also our kinesthetic system so there's a lot going on with touch.
So far there's only been really some very preliminary research and this research is
done interestingly with both blind subjects and sighted subjects. For example it's possible to
create either familiar objects or unfamiliar patterns using what are called raised line drawings
and these are things that blind people can feel as well as sighted subjects. You can ask the
subjects to feel these drawings and then remember what they experienced. An entirely preliminary
view from this research is that a sensory system for touch may indeed exist however if so it appears
to be very brief possibly even briefer than iconic memory and also perhaps limited to just two or three items.
Okay so what do I hope you have learned about yourself from today's lecture? Well one important
point is the following the world literally bombards us with information and at any given time we can
only really attend to and think deeply about one source of information. This could be information
about the external world as it comes in from one of our senses or it could be information about the
internal world our thoughts. Perhaps we are lost in a memory or working out a plan for the future
or engaging in a pleasurable daydream or fantasy. Whatever our conscious mind may be engaged with
we seem to be constantly storing at least the visual and auditory information that is coming
into our senses. Not only are we storing it but at some level that information is being processed
for its potential importance. If it's deemed important then our attention may be pulled
from wherever it is to the iconic or the echoic trace and that allows us to see or hear that
information despite the fact that it's no longer there. Well unless of course you're my dad watching
his favorite TV program in that case other information can try pulling you all at once
but your mind is not paying attention and the sensory memories are lost. But if you do turn
some attention to the new information from sensory memory then that information can be saved
and it can be passed on to a far more powerful system and that's the subject of our next lecture
and that's the subject of our next lecture the system of working memory.
