Lecture 7 Episodic and Semantic Long-Term Memory
I was one of those kids who just kept changing what I wanted to be when I grew up.
Just after getting my driver's license, I was thinking, wow, you know, being a taxi
driver wouldn't be so bad.
You just get to drive your car around all day and when you have no fares, you can crank
up your music as loud as you want.
It's a dream for a 16-year-old, right?
Well, once I read more about the challenges of being a taxi driver, the image kind of
changed a little bit.
Now, of course, the goal of any good taxi driver is to get as many fares as possible
and then to efficiently ferry them around the city without getting lost.
So, in order to do this, first you have to be in the right places at the right times.
The places where people who want a cab tend to be.
It also requires great knowledge of the city and, you know, sort of how things work in
the city.
What's the best route to go down and which way should you be driving when you're going
down that route to most efficiently get from point A to point B?
They also learn the rhythm of the city pretty well.
So they know, for example, to be around office places at the end of the day or maybe to visit
restaurant districts around the time when people are done eating and to be around clubs
and bars at the time when they let out.
Taxi drivers also pay a lot of attention to specific events that might be going on in
the city.
So perhaps there's a concert or a home show or some other one-day event that's expected
to attract many people.
If they remember this event is going on, they may decide to also visit its location, especially
if the event ends at some specific time.
Remember when I first introduced the psychological definition of memory?
I said that any time past experiences affect your current behavior, then memory is at work.
Well, already you've learned that there are many ways in which the past can linger in
our minds, including very short duration sensory memories and the more effortful working memory
system that we use for all sorts of purposes.
In this lecture, we're going to turn our attention to long-term memory systems, the
systems that allow experiences to affect our behavior over much longer temporal windows.
In my little story about the life of taxi drivers, I included examples of three different
kinds of long-term memory.
I had introduced these previously, but we're going to discuss them more in this and in
subsequent lectures.
So for example, I mentioned that taxi drivers have to know the roads of their city.
So to take perhaps a really extreme example, aspiring taxi drivers in London are advised
to study for two to four years, learning hundreds of detailed routes, including virtually all
of the landmarks and points of interest, and they have to do this and then write a qualifying
exam.
It's an exam that's simply known as the knowledge.
Taxi drivers also just come to know certain parts of the city, and they tend to know good
places to pick up fares at certain times.
So all of this kind of knowledge, their knowledge of the city and the knowledge of where to
be is represented in their semantic memory, their general knowledge of the world learned
across a range of experiences.
I also mentioned that the taxi drivers will take into account specific one-time events.
Now, presumably they would have heard of these events via a radio advertisement or maybe
something they read in a newspaper.
And if they remember learning about that event at the right time, that is when that event
is about to let out, then they will go to that appropriate location.
Now this form of memory is an episodic memory.
It's related to some specific episode of their lives, the episode of hearing about that event
and hearing, for example, the date and when it might let out.
Of course, all the while they also have to drive, and that requires remembering the muscle
movements related to driving, and that's procedural memory.
So all three of those types of memory reflect the influence of events that occurred some
time ago, perhaps hours, days, months, or years.
And all three are considered different types of long-term memory.
Now, before we get to that, let's begin with two analogies that will really help us to
think about the relation between long-term memory and working memory.
The analogies won't be perfect, they seldom are, but some of these imperfections will
actually allow me to highlight some important aspects of long-term memory, so even the imperfections
will be useful.
All right, the first analogy is a library analogy.
Let's say you have some sort of project, and you need to do some research to accomplish
this project.
So you go to the library and you find a table where you're going to work.
You then begin to go to the stacks and search the stacks, find books related to your project,
and bring them back to your table.
Once you bring them back, you search through the books, find the stuff that's relevant,
and probably combine information from various books to ultimately produce your project.
Okay, in this example, the desk that you're working at is essentially your working memory.
It represents your working memory.
The stacks with all the library books represent your long-term memory.
So the working memory is a sort of dynamic place where a lot of things are coming together.
Information from long-term memory is brought there, it's accessed, it's analyzed, and it's
combined with other information to create some sort of new product.
If that new product is something that we might want later, then perhaps we work on it enough
such that it itself becomes a new book, and we essentially take that book and place it
in our long-term memory.
It's almost like we added a new book to the library.
So as that analogy suggests, working memory sometimes uses information from long-term
memory, but it can also put new information back into long-term memory, very interactive.
Now, for those of you who prefer computers to libraries, computers also provide an interesting
analogy.
So let's say that you want to write a letter using some program like Microsoft Word, for
example.
That program had been previously installed on your hard drive.
And really, your hard drive is essentially like another long-term memory system.
Once something is copied to it, it just stays there, and essentially it does nothing until
the program is activated, which we typically do by double-clicking on some icon.
Once we do that, the program is loaded into what's called RAM, Random Access Memory.
Now, RAM is like working memory.
It's the place where items from long-term memory, like programs or previous versions
of files that were on the hard drive, they're loaded into RAM so that the user can work
with them.
Once the user creates new content, maybe they update old content, or maybe they're
combining content with new ideas to produce something completely new.
Now like our working memory, only so much information can be active in RAM at any given
time.
And once again, if we create something that we might want later, we can then save it to
the hard drive, which is akin to placing the newly created information into long-term
memory.
Both of these analogies are good in the sense that they highlight the following points.
Working memory and long-term memory are very interactive, in the sense that information
from long-term memory may be copied into working memory, usually with the goal of solving some
current problem that we have or some task.
But the solution of that may then be copied back into long-term memory as a new bit of
information that might affect future performance.
At the same time, these two forms of memory are distinct.
Long-term memory is more about static storage, although as I say that, you'll see later in
the course that that's really kind of too strong of a claim, really.
But for now, let's think of it that way.
Long-term memory, static storage.
We put something there and it stays there until we need it.
Working memory, in contrast, is much more about accomplishing something, something we
need to get done.
I mentioned earlier that working memory is related to the notion of consciousness.
More strongly, one could argue that our conscious experience is really the experience of what
is happening in working memory.
And this will be especially important as we discuss the first kind of long-term memory
I want to focus on, episodic memory.
Now, of course, I introduced you to episodic memory in the first lecture, but let me reintroduce
you by asking another question similar to the one I asked you then, but a little different.
Here's the question.
When was the last time that you went shopping?
Okay, if you were able to remember, I expect, again, that you remembered much more than
just the answer to that question.
Instead, what likely happened is that you searched your memory to remember one or more
shopping trips.
And as you remembered each, they were replayed in your mind, kind of like short movies.
Again, movies in which you are typically the star, but the movies also probably included
all sorts of other details, like maybe the people who were there with you, or some details
of the place in which you were shopping and the people you interacted with there, perhaps
even images of what you purchased or other random events that occurred.
So the answer to the question came with all sorts of other contextual information.
Part of that information probably included when you went shopping.
And if multiple shopping episodes came to mind, you had to sort through that a little
bit.
You had to figure out, well, which of these experiences is the most recent?
And in order to do this, you also had to explicitly remember something about the event and when
it occurred specifically.
Okay, so the critical point here is that the subjective or conscious experience of episodic
memory is really critical.
In fact, it's called episodic memory precisely because it involves a replaying of some episode
from your life.
As I mentioned before, it's sometimes called autobiographical memory because it is about
your life.
Much as an autobiography is the story of your life, autobiographical memories are episodes
from your life, chapters in that story.
Now there's a slight caveat to all this, and that caveat is as follows.
You can also mentally replay episodes from your life in which you really are not the
star.
So perhaps you were at a fascinating player or a great concert once, and you can kind
of replay events from that player concert.
Now you're still in that memory, but you're playing more the role of a spectator in that
memory and not the role of a star.
So in a sense, it's still an autobiographical memory.
It's a memory of your life, but it's one in which you're not really the star.
In fact, that taxi driver example I gave you, the one about the taxi driver hearing about
some event, maybe from a newspaper or a radio ad, in that case, the taxi driver isn't really
the star.
They're more of a spectator.
It's still considered episodic because it's still an episode from the person's life.
If the taxi driver starts to kind of combine these sorts of information to form a new piece
of general information, like when and where to look for fairs, that will become part of
his semantic knowledge.
So episodes where we are not the star may be the most natural contributors to semantic
memory.
So the conscious experience is what makes an episodic memory an episodic memory.
And working memory is the place where conscious experiences happen.
The best way to understand this relationship is by way of a concept that I like to call
the reality simulator.
And it's a concept very similar to notions of virtual reality and especially similar
to the holodeck notion that was often described in the Star Trek series in which Patrick Stewart
starred as the captain.
The idea behind the holodeck was as follows.
The characters on the show were all on a spaceship in deep space for long periods of time.
And as you can imagine, this could give rise to inevitable cabin fever of the worst sort.
So the holodeck was a room that could be used to create settings in a virtual reality sort
of way.
And these settings would be complete with the context and characters acting in appropriate
ways.
So for example, if somebody felt the need to escape to a 1950s era jazz bar, the holodeck
could be used to create a virtual jazz bar within which that person could interact with
other patrons, maybe watch live music if they wanted, perhaps even play live music, maybe
even along with these other artificially generated characters.
So it was a virtual reality that could be used to provide a getaway.
Well, to some extent, working memory is our own personal mental holodeck.
It allows us to create virtual worlds within our minds.
So for example, when we read a novel, we literally see the people in places as we read about
them.
We envision the interactions that are described.
In fact, many of us are disappointed when we see the movie.
If there's a movie version of this novel, when we go and see that, somehow it just doesn't
seem as personal or as relevant.
The people in places that we created in our minds were somehow superior to those presented
in the movie.
Now, we use this reality simulator for all sorts of things other than memory.
So for example, imagine the following.
You are a mother.
It's midnight.
Your daughter's not home and your daughter has an 11 p.m. curfew.
What do you think is happening in your mind?
Well, chances are you're creating all sorts of terrible movies in your mind.
Movies that portray all the horrible things that could be happening to your daughter right
now, the various things that she might be experiencing.
This kind of mental experience is what we call worry.
Now note that in this situation, you yourself are not represented in the simulation at all.
This is a simulation about your daughter.
It's not something that you did or that you experienced.
Interestingly, it also has nothing to do with memory per se, although clearly your knowledge
of your daughter and her friends and the things they like to do could sort of form that simulation
that you create.
But the simulation itself is a simulation about your daughter and it's about things that
might be happening now.
It's not a simulation related to memory and definitely not to memory of your life.
Now I could tell you similar stories related to daydreaming or fantasies or maybe even
planning some event like a future trip.
All of these internal events involve you simulating some sort of event within your mind and watching
that event unfold.
And working memory is a system within which such events are experienced.
So really, working memory is about a whole lot more than memory, which is why I described
it as such a central cognitive process.
Okay, from this perspective then, episodic memory is simply another of the sorts of simulations
that working memory can provide.
We set our reality simulators, our internal holodex if you will, to simulate some context
we experienced in the past.
Yes, these contexts tend to be autobiographical with you playing the role of either the star
or occasionally the observer.
We then replay the events that we recall occurring within that context and in so doing, we re-experience
the event as a conscious memory.
Thus working memory is the system that gives episodic memory a conscious quality and that's
why we're still talking about working memory in this lecture about long term memory.
Now let's contrast all this with semantic memory.
Just to reintroduce you to semantic memory, let me ask you some questions that are of
the sort that you would use your semantic memory to answer.
Okay, so here goes.
This is like the quick round in a trivia game show on TV.
What comes after March?
What is eight times three?
What is the capital city of Germany?
Is Ontario east or west of British Columbia?
Do more or less than 10% of Canadians still live in igloos?
What is the name of the American national anthem?
Okay, how did you do?
Well, notice that these questions were generally much less personal.
I didn't ask you about some event in your life, but rather I asked you about some information
that you either do or do not know.
Again, these are the sort of questions that might be asked on trivia game shows and generally
when we see people do well on such shows, we'll maybe describe them as book smart or intelligent.
They have acquired a whole lot of information about the world.
When we attempt to retrieve information about the world, information we clearly learned
on some earlier occasion, the subjective experience tends to be very different.
Usually we feel like the information just arrives in our working memory without much
else.
What month comes after March?
Well April.
We remember it.
That's it.
What month comes to mind?
Perhaps we have a mnemonic that comes to mind.
For example, which months have 30 days?
Well, 30 days, half September, April, June, and November.
That perhaps might come to mind, but there's no movie in our mind.
It's just the answer retrieved from memory.
So really, the primary distinction between semantic memory and episodic memory is the
lack of an episode, an autobiographical episode to be exact, in the case of semantic memory.
A secondary distinction is that items in semantic memory are the most likely to benefit
from fun and simple mnemonic tricks.
Maybe you learn the number of humps on a Bactrian camel versus a dromedary by just thinking
of a capital B versus a capital D with both letters lying face up.
Clearly episodic and semantic memory are related.
Virtually, everything that is in our semantic memory got there through episodes of our lives
in which we had contact with the world knowledge.
In fact, together, episodic and semantic memory are often called declarative memory because
whether we retrieve an episode or a semantic memory, in both cases, the retrieval feels
intentional and the result is a product that can then be declared.
Thus the two kinds of memory have much in common.
They differ in terms of subjective experience.
Semantic memories come tied to a bunch of contextual details that make us feel like
we are reliving the experience whereas semantic memories do not.
So perhaps the question becomes the following.
When I ask you a question like 8 times 3 for example, why don't you have an episodic replaying
of the event when you first learned that?
I mean such an event occurred, at some point in time there was a teacher who initially taught
you that problem.
We know that occurred so I ask you to think back a little bit, try to bring it to mind.
Can you do it?
No, right?
It's really hard.
Why are you having so much trouble retrieving that particular episode?
Of course there were also other episodes.
Other teachers probably taught you that problem as well, perhaps in different contexts.
There are all sorts of math problems you likely encountered over your learning that required
you to multiply 8 by 3.
You may have also encountered that problem in the context of homework that you were doing
with your parents' help or maybe you even came into contact with the problem outside
of the educational sense in general.
Maybe you wanted to buy 3 t-shirts at one point and they cost $8 each and you had to
know if you had enough money and that required the same multiplication problem.
Why is it that you can't remember any of these episodes when I ask you that question?
Why do none of them come to mind?
Well, in a sense I've answered that question by asking it the way I did.
The claim is this, in order for some experience to become an episodic memory it needs to be
somewhat unique and it needs to be tied to some relatively rich and singular experience.
If we experience some piece of information over and over and we do so across a range
of different contexts then it becomes generalized knowledge, knowledge that is linked in so many
varying contexts that it loses a strong association to any specific one of them.
That is what semantic memory is and that is why it doesn't bring to mind specific contextual
information when you try to retrieve it.
It is linked to so many different contexts that no one of them is especially linked to
it.
So when I ask you what you had for dinner last night I am asking you about a unique event
linked to the food you remember and many of the details of the event are likely to come
to mind.
But if I ask you if you like potatoes that's a very different question.
No unique event is implied, you've eaten potatoes in many different episodes of your life and
chances are none of them will particularly come to mind.
Now, lest I send sound too black and white about this there are some cases where a given
memory experience includes aspects of both semantic and episodic memory.
You may still remember the moment when a teacher or someone else first helped you remember
some semantic information.
For example, a guy I know told me the following story, whenever he wants to remember some
of the geological periods that he learned in school, and of course we all want to remember
our geological periods now and then, right?
Anyway, whenever he has such a desire he remembers a female classmate from a long ago class
saying something that started with, please cover our salad dish with carrots, which obviously
corresponds to the Precambrian, the Cambrian, the Ordovician, the Celerian, Devonian and
Carboniferous periods respectively.
So he is able to access this bit of knowledge of the world and in a sense that is a semantic
memory, it is his knowledge of the world, but he accesses it via an episodic memory.
Most of our semantic memories do not come to us in this manner, but some might, especially
if the context in which we learned it was unique.
I certainly have never heard that acronym before, it sounds very vegetarian to me.
Okay, well this all ties into our previous discussion of rote memorization.
Yes, cases of rote memorization do often occur in some specific context, typically a classroom.
But again, they involve a simple repetition of some fact.
The fact is not tied into any sort of rich context, it is just presented as a fact, then
represented in that same dry manner over and over.
When we learn information in this manner, it can go directly into our semantic memory.
We learn the fact, but the context in which we learned it might not come to mind when
we retrieve it.
When most of us complain that our memories are poor, we are most often referring to our
declarative memories, semantic and episodic memory.
In previous lectures, I suggested that by practicing strong encoding strategies, especially
those that use organization, association and dual coding, you can improve your declarative
memory.
Of course, that all makes sense at an intuitive level, but let's take a moment to think about
how that might actually happen.
One notion that is a truly fascinating idea is an idea related to something called neuroplasticity.
The basic idea here is that our brains, even fully developed adult brains, still alter
their structure as a function of experience.
One mechanism for doing this was originally hypothesized in 1948 by Donald Hebb.
Hebb suggested that learning experiences could lead to enhanced connectivity between different
brain areas.
For example, let's return to our cabbies from London.
They have to first learn all the streets of London.
They then have to learn all the points of interest that lie on those streets.
One can imagine the streets as represented in certain brain regions and these points
of interest represented in other brain regions.
When one kind of has to put these two things together, one has to co-activate both of these
areas of the brain.
And perhaps, when these brain areas are co-active, connections are formed.
That was the notion that Hebb originally suggested, but he couldn't provide any evidence that
this was the case.
However, in 1973, not long ago, Tim Bliss and Terji Lomo described a phenomenon that
they observed in a rabbit hippocampus, a phenomenon that they termed long-term potentiation.
Specifically, here's what they did.
They would first stimulate two different locations in the hippocampus at the same time across
a number of trials.
Now, as they did this, occasionally they would stimulate just one and they would record
the amount of stimulation that passed to the other electrode.
So this was the bigger picture.
They would stimulate both, both, both, and then every now and then stimulate just one
and measure, and then both, both, both, and then just one and measure.
And so this would allow them to look at how the transfer of activation may have changed
as a function of co-activation over time.
And what they observed was that the transfer actually became stronger.
So the more often two brain regions were co-active, the stronger the link between them became,
either because of an increased number of connections between these regions or because an actual
strengthening of the connections.
So the process that they observed fit exactly with Hebb's proposal, and long-term potentiation
is now viewed as the primary neural basis of learning.
So when you are forming associations, you are literally strengthening the connections between
brain regions.
Of course, I just assumed that what is true of the rabbit brain is also true of the human
brain.
Is that assumption justified?
Well, thanks to some imaging techniques that I will describe shortly, researchers were
able to examine the hippocampi of a number of our London cab drivers.
Remember, those who want to be taxi drivers typically spend two or more years learning
all the routes and the locations on those routes that a customer may wish to go to.
They do this learning through books and also from getting out in the streets on these little
scooters, and that's to attach their kind of book knowledge to direct experience.
Well guess what?
Those who pass the London taxi driver test and have been driving for a while tend to
have larger than average hippocampi.
What's more, the longer a driver has been driving, the bigger their hippocampus is.
This implies something truly fascinating.
By working hard to encode information, you are actually strengthening and in more unusual
cases perhaps even enlarging that part of your brain that performs this function, making
it generally more effective.
In some ways then, your brain is not that different from the rest of your body.
If you want to be able to run faster, practice running, and the biological tissue that supports
that will be strengthened.
If you want to remember more, practice remembering, and the biological tissue underlying the
formation of declarative memory will be similarly strengthened.
So working memory is the gateway that allows the formation of declarative memories, both
episodic and semantic.
And now I suspect you have a pretty good sense of the sorts of things you can be doing to
essentially oil that gate, so it allows information to flow more readily.
But guess what?
While working memory is the primary gateway to long term memory, there is also a secret
passage.
That secret passage is called implicit learning, and that's what we'll talk about next.
