Lecture 8, The Secret Passage, Implicit Memory
Most of the students who attend my class seem to be listening carefully to what I'm saying.
They're taking notes, occasionally they're asking questions.
However, there's a completely different breed of students.
Yeah, they show up to class alright,
but once they're in class they kind of settle in and relax
and by all the available evidence they seem to be well either asleep
or relaxing really deeply anyway.
In this sort of situation you wonder sometimes why do they come to class at all?
It seems like they believe they might learn something simply by being in the context
in which information is swirling around.
Almost like by osmosis that information would enter their body
and they would learn what they want to learn without even trying.
Let's assume for now that they do actually think they might learn something
despite the fact that they have no intention of thinking deeply about anything I'm saying.
Could they be right? Can one learn without trying?
Well, the system related to this kind of unintentional learning is called implicit memory.
So far in this course I've been really focusing on intentional encoding strategies
where people are making a really conscious effort to study information
in a way that will be later remembered.
Numeric strategies and rote memorization are both clear examples of intentional learning strategies.
As we've discussed, the gateway for this sort of learning typically leads through working memory.
It involves either mass repetition or at least some efforts to organize the information
and associate with other information,
especially information that might provide strong retrieval cues.
By contrast, implicit learning refers to memories that are encoded
when people really are not trying to learn at all.
The notion being that just repeated experience within some context
can result in knowledge being acquired without any explicit attempt to learn that knowledge.
A number of experiments have now clearly demonstrated that implicit learning does indeed exist
and that it actually plays a major role in shaping appropriate human behavior.
Now, that doesn't mean that the student just relaxing in my class is onto something
and that's because the kinds of information that we can encode in such an unintentional manner
are very different from the kinds that can be learned using intentional strategies.
Intentional learning strategies are indeed the best
if one wants to really remember all sorts of specific content and information.
So what's left to learn?
What is there that isn't specific content?
Well, the things that we can learn unintentionally relate to the structure
that underlies the information that we encounter in our lives.
The structure that underlies information, what do I mean by that?
Well, let me first introduce you to the notion of regularities.
The world that we live in is indeed full of stimulation
and it's coming at us all the time, but this stimulation isn't random.
Instead, much of the information that we receive comes tied to some structure, some specific structure.
For example, when people speak to us, they don't just piece together words randomly.
Instead, the words and the way they put them together follow what we call grammar.
In English, for example, adjectives come before nouns, so we talk about things like the red house.
We don't hear people saying things like the house red,
although in other languages, of course, the grammars are different.
In French, it would be la maison rouge, but within any given language,
the rules of grammar, the rules that govern how we put words together are fixed
and that represents the structure of language.
Okay, so the rules of grammar represent the underlying structure
and that structure governs the role of each word in a sentence and how those words interact.
And we all learn this structure years before we ever set foot in the grammar class
and that's sort of the critical point here.
So sure, there are times when teachers did try to explicitly teach us the rules of grammar,
but the truth is most of us had already learned at least the basics of English grammar long before entering a class.
Perhaps we couldn't explain these rules, but we could use them.
We knew how to put together sentences in meaningful ways,
ways that the people around us could understand.
We certainly did not run around talking about the house red until we were corrected by a teacher.
Now, as we'll see that last point, the notion that we've learned the rules without really knowing the rules,
that's critical.
Unintentional learning typically results in an unconscious sort of knowledge.
It is that knowledge that we refer to as implicit memory and that's why we're using the term implicit.
We learn how to basically mimic the regularities of some flow of information,
but often we cannot specifically verbalize what those regularities even are.
We use them, we don't know them in a sense, at least not in an explicit sense.
So how did we first learn the rules of grammar then?
Well, there is some debate over whether grammar is partly innate or not,
but for purposes of understanding implicit memory, we can just ignore that debate for now.
Clearly, most of what we learned about the rules of grammar came from simply being exposed to it over and over and over.
From well before the time we can talk, we are already surrounded by this kind of exposure.
So for example, our parents talk to us, talk to their friends, talk to each other, and talk to our siblings.
TV shows talk to us, and the characters on TV talk to each other.
The radio talks to us, and virtually every situation we find ourselves in, speech is there.
Sometimes it's directed at us specifically, and sometimes it's just there as context.
Of course, we learn speech not just by hearing it, but also by talking ourselves and getting feedback,
and that does require tiny bursts of conscious effort.
And when we're children, we receive lots of subtle or less subtle corrections.
Things like, no Steve, it's not weird foot, it's weird feet, and the bird flew, it didn't fly.
You remember things like that.
If we said things properly, well then we were greeted by smiles and hugs, or maybe even just an appropriate response.
May I have a cookie? Yes, you may.
That's a really nice reward for putting together those words well.
So between this experience of hearing others using grammar, and the corrections we received ourselves as we began using it,
we just learned it.
We learned the regularities that were used by others without really putting any conscious effort into thinking about those regularities.
In fact, the most likely place where we do need that occasional burst of conscious effort was when there was a non-regularity.
Let's think about those examples I just mentioned again.
No Steve, it is not weird foot, it's weird feet.
Well, saying weird foot is actually the regularity of adding an S to make something a plural.
And similarly, the bird flew, it didn't fly, well ED is often how we do a past tense.
And so we were in fact using the regularity.
We only had to be corrected because in those cases the proper grammar is actually an exception to the regularity.
By the way, this is also why immersion is often viewed as critical to developing a fluency in some language other than your mother tongue.
Yes, you can pick up all the semantic knowledge relevant to that new language via intentional learning.
But if you really want to become fluent, you need to put yourself among native speakers.
And preferably ones that are incapable of speaking your mother tongue.
When you're immersed in their language in this manner, you will implicitly learn the sort of nuances of the language.
Things that you would never learn in a classroom.
These sorts of nuances would allow you to speak without an accent, as I mentioned in a previous lecture.
But you might also learn things like the manner in which the native speakers combine words, well with hand movements,
a combination that often changes across languages.
For example, I have a good friend who spent a lot of time in Brazil.
He in fact married a Brazilian woman and he learned to speak Portuguese.
When he communicates in English, he kind of speaks like this.
He comes across in a very sort of low key way, very understated sort of guy.
So that's the guy I came to know.
And it would then amaze me when his Portuguese friends, excuse me, his Brazilian friends, would come over and speak Portuguese to him.
It was as if his energy suddenly got boosted three times and his talking became very animated and very exaggerated.
He became passionate and his hands just came right to life.
He didn't learn that from a book.
He learned it by immersing himself in the culture and absorbing the structure.
Both the verbal and the nonverbal structure, which comes together to define the way Brazilians communicate.
How does one study the processes of memory and implicit memory specifically, scientifically?
Well, it might be nice to do studies where you just track learners of some new language from the very beginning to the point where they're fluent.
But that would take a really long time and it would be very hard to control all the possible influences that could really come in and affect the outcome of that study.
So a much simpler and more direct way is to use experiments that create so-called artificial grammars and use them to study learning in that way.
For example, suppose we create a code or an artificial language that uses single letters in place of words.
And then we make up rules for how those letters can go together.
Certain letters can go together, other letters cannot.
So for example, maybe we decide that a legal string of letters will only begin with the letters F or R.
If a string begins with F, then it must be followed by either say W, D or R.
But if it begins with R, then it must be followed by either F, D, T or L.
With enough rules about what's legal, the researchers can now create a set of strings that conform to these rules.
And they can also create a set of so-called illegal letter strings, letter strings that somehow violate those rules and have letters occurring in combinations that are inconsistent with the rules that we set up.
In a typical experiment then, participants would be exposed to some of the legal items.
So let's say we had 40 legal items. We maybe show participants 20 of these items over and over and over again.
So they've seen all these items and they've seen them repeatedly.
They're told just to look at these, look at the strings, don't try to memorize them, but think of them as all members of the same family.
Think of them as relatives and try to just kind of get the sense of how they're similar.
Then in a second phase, we present another 20 legal strings, so not the same ones, but ones that were created by the same rules.
So these new 20 legal strings presented along with 20 illegal strings.
We mix them all up, randomize them, present them one at a time to people and we say,
your task is just to say whether you think the one you're seeing is a relative to those ones you saw earlier.
You'll never see one exactly like what you saw, but you'll see ones that are relatives of them.
And it seems kind of odd, but people say, okay, they do that.
They go through each string and say, yes, I think that one's a relative. No, I don't think it is.
And they do that for the 40 strings.
Okay, the first critical finding is that participants can indeed identify the relatives at high levels of accuracy.
They're often in the 70 to 80% correct range.
So they apparently do become sensitive to the structure that is common to the legal strings,
and they can use that structure to identify other strings that seem to be created from the same structure.
What makes this form of learning and this form of memory interesting is that participants use the structure of the rules
without feeling like they've learned it at all.
They'll often say they feel like they're just guessing.
This latter finding is made especially clear via a follow-up study.
In that follow-up study, participants are explicitly told about the structure prior to the test.
That is, the rules that were used to generate the legal strings are explained to them,
and they are told that they can use this new information now to distinguish relatives from non-relatives.
They are then given the same test as before, but this time they do reliably worse.
It is as if the conscious knowledge of that underlying structure made it harder for them to just rely on their implicit memory.
So implicit memory then is the secret passage to long-term memory.
Working memory is the main gateway, and when information goes through that gateway,
then that specific information can be retrieved later, either with or without the contextual details that were associated with the encoding episode.
But when information enters long-term memory through this secret passage, through implicit learning,
then something about the structure underlying the information is learned, but there is no explicit mastery of the information itself.
This sort of implicit learning, in fact, is very common in our everyday lives.
Music is an area where implicit memory seems to play an enormous role, even in our ability to recognize musical genres as distinct.
Musical genres are often defined by the sets of rules that have been used to create those genres,
and even though we may not know those rules explicitly, we can still identify different genres from the structure of the music we hear.
So for example, you've probably heard guitar solos, and some that occur say in blues music, and some that occur in other music, let's say country.
You may have no idea that there really is a structure that underlies how those different genres of music are put together.
For example, blues music tends to use notes that come from something called a pentatonic minor scale, and that gives them sort of a sad bluesy feel.
Country solos tend to use notes that come from a major scale, often the pentatonic major, for example, and they tend to have a more bright or happy sound to them.
So what I want to do for you now is kind of give you the sense that you in fact know about these scales, even though you probably don't know explicitly.
So we're going to do that through a demonstration. I'm going to play for you two solos.
One that's going to have a bit of a country vibe, and one that's going to have a bit of a blues vibe.
And I'm betting you can kind of tell the difference. Okay, here's the first one.
Music
Okay, that's one. Think about whether you think that sounded country or bluesy. Now here's another one.
Music
Okay, you've never heard either of those solos before. I know that because I just made those up.
But did you sense the fact that the first one sounded a little more country, and the second one sounded a little bit more bluesy?
Even if you're not a fan of one or the other style of music, you've still been around it. You've still heard it being played, and that's probably enough for you to have that sense.
Now, while we're talking about music, let's stick with it for a bit, and let me make a specific claim about what is and what is not being stored in implicit memory when you have music.
If you had to define music, how would you define it, by the way?
Well, the oldest philosophical definition of music is actually very concise. Music is defined as organized sound.
Don't you love it when something as complex as music can be captured in a simple two-word definition like that? Organized sound.
Well, that's it. That's music. But really, this is exactly what music is. It's a combination of rhythms, melodies, and lyrics that often repeat in some structured way.
It's organized. You may think you haven't, you don't know some of these structures. You'd be amazed at how many of them you do.
Let me just give you another little taste. Here's a structure that's in all sorts of blues music, especially. In fact, it's called the 12-bar blues.
It goes a little bit like this.
Okay, that's the 12-bar blues. Again, you've probably heard that in a bunch of different songs without even really realizing it, but it's a structure that's very common, and that's the kind of thing that implicit learning can capture.
Okay, as suggested then, implicit memory and declarative memory can often work together as they do in music, declarative memory being responsible for the lyrics, implicit memory for the structure.
There are other powerful examples of this, by the way. One of them is medical diagnosis. So doctors, when they're in training, they certainly engage in very deep, effortful encoding to try to learn things, for example,
like these specific symptoms that are associated with various medical issues, and obviously that sort of deep learning aids their declarative memory.
But they also do internships, and the purpose of those internships is to allow them to see many specific and individual cases of these same issues.
It's a form of immersion, and that's the prime training ground for the formation of implicit memory.
So as a result, many doctors will admit that while they have trouble sometimes giving a really explicit justification for their diagnosis, the sort of justification that they could get from their declarative memory,
they nonetheless are confident basing some diagnosis on what they might call their experience as a doctor.
These experiences, seeing these various cases, have allowed them to recognize some medical issue without necessarily giving them conscious access to the basis of that recognition.
So don't get too upset when your doctors may have trouble explaining why they think some course of action is appropriate.
Alright, so the examples I gave you so far are strongly related to rather specific domains.
We had language, we had music, and then most recently, medicine.
But implicit memories are formed for a very wide range of stimuli that we experience.
In fact, they're central to our being able to effectively function in our worlds.
So let's get a little more general, and I want to introduce you to the notion of script theory.
Okay, so you've been to sit-down restaurants, for example, and you've probably been to fast food restaurants.
If you thought about the sequence of events that occur within each context, and think about them sort of like it's a scene and a play, it's quite easy to specify a schema or a script for what happens.
In a sit-down restaurant, for example, you walk in, you usually wait at some matri-d location, you follow the matri-d to your seats, waiter brings menus, later returns with your order, etc.
Eventually, the waiter brings your food, later comes by to ask, is everything okay? Sometimes two or three times.
And then when you finish, the staff clears your tables, the waiter brings a bill, you pay, and you leave.
Now, the script is of course very different for a fast-food restaurant.
At a fast-food restaurant, the very first thing you do is order and pay, and then you're given your food at some counter.
You then bring that food to a table where you can eat it as soon as you sit down, and you clear your refuse when you're all done.
The underlying structure or grammar of how these two types of restaurants work is usually called a schema or a script.
And it's part of our implicit memory.
So you can think of it really just like the rules of grammar in the sense that grammar describes the structure underlying how words unfold in sentences.
Well, these regularities at these different types of restaurants describe the general features of how events unfold.
So in that sense, it's a schema and about the role that you play within these events.
So in that sense, it's a script.
We learn these regularities, these scripts, and we learn them in the same way as we learn grammar, mostly just by being exposed to them repeatedly.
As it was with grammar, there were probably a few corrections along the way from our parents in appropriate behavior we displayed in one restaurant or another.
But you can use these implicit scripts that you've learned and function quite effectively.
And you don't always just have to learn them through direct experience either.
You've probably seen restaurants portrayed on TV or in movies, or you've heard others describe events that they themselves have experienced.
Regardless of the specifics of your learning experience, there's a structure underlying how things unfold, and you'll have a memory for that structure without ever intentionally encoding it.
Your implicit memory of that structure helps you interact in reasonable and expected ways when you enter either a sit-down or a fast-food restaurant.
Once the script is learned, it guides our behaviors in ways that fit with the regularities of the context, allows us to behave what we would call appropriately.
Now, of course, scripts aren't just about restaurants. We form scripts about the roles we play within classes, within movie theaters, within airports or taxis, hotel check-ins and check-outs, shopping.
Really, any context with some consistent underlying process, some regularity governing the way events unfold.
When one takes the time to notice, you will notice that these sorts of regularities are very common.
Of course, we don't typically notice the regularities. We just learn them, and that's really the point. That's what implicit memory is doing for us.
There are two other points about scripts that really add to our appreciation of implicit memory, and in fact, memory in general.
The first one is this. Once we have implicitly learned some script, that doesn't just tell us what we should be doing now.
It also gives us a pretty clear sense of how events are going to unfold in the near future, which is really interesting because we often think of memory in a very retrospective way.
Something we use to revisit the past, but implicit memory actually helps us to behave appropriately in the present, but also allows us to predict future events.
For example, let's say you invite a colleague to dinner, and your intent is to propose some new project or a business venture.
When do you actually bring up this proposition?
Well, you'd like to pick a time when you can talk a little without being disturbed, so you might wait until your order is taken and the waiter leaves,
because you know that at that point it will be a little bit of time before the food actually arrives.
Now, you may not even think about this explicitly. Your implicit memory may just guide you, and that may be the time you find it natural to bring up this proposition.
The second interesting point is that it can also help you to notice unexpected events, events that perhaps warrant deeper consideration given their unusual nature.
So, implicit memory is coding the normal kind of events, and sometimes things won't fit with that.
And so, when that happens, implicit memory can actually inform which events in your environment are worthy of your attention.
So, in this way, scripts can really have very direct implications for your life.
No matter what you do or how you live, others will eventually develop a mental script of you in specific, and of any category to which you belong in general.
For example, I'm a professor, and we all have developed a schema of what a professor does, what my role is.
However, by occasionally violating that professor's schema, perhaps by playing guitar, or by walking in desks, which is another thing I like to do when I'm trying to describe this to students,
I can violate this schema, and in so doing, I attract more attention.
So, what is your profession? Is there a sense in which it too has a script?
What about some other role you play in life? Father, mother, grandparent, neighbor?
Whatever your role, and we all play many, it makes sense to both fit the script, but also occasionally to violate it.
Fitting the script will make you seem competent, but occasionally violating it will attract attention and can make you even more effective, more interesting.
So, the lesson here is that implicit memory is coming to represent the normal, the expected.
And when things happen as expected, all hums along just fine.
Our implicit memory is in essence one step ahead of our experience and stays that way when everything fits.
But implicit memory is also our advanced warning system for unexpected events.
Now, none of what I've been telling you about implicit memory is meant to suggest that you couldn't also learn these same regularities in a much more explicit way.
The rules of grammar are taught in schools, the structure underlying music is taught in any good music theory class,
and if one knew, for example, that they were going to an airport alone, they could do some research and figure out the steps and processes they'll be going through when they do.
So, yes, the structure of information can be learned either explicitly through the main gateway of working memory or implicitly through the secret passage of unintentional learning, which is better.
Well, that depends on whether you ultimately will need declarative knowledge of that structure.
Are you going to teach grammar or maybe teach music theory?
Well, then you'd better be able to communicate the structure to your students, which means you have to understand it in a much more explicit way yourself.
But if you just want to behave in a way that's consistent and appropriate with the structure, then you can just rely on your implicit memory to help you do so.
So working memory can provide the detailed information, whereas implicit memory can provide the structure.
As I speak to you now, your working memory, for example, can be working on what I'm saying and the meaning.
Your implicit memory can worry about how I'm saying it.
In this sense, then, there may even be a germ of truth in the old cliché that says those who can't do teach.
That is, someone who is focused on explicit knowledge of something, they may not simultaneously be the same person who has the implicit knowledge of the same area of life.
Those two things can be dissociated.
Remember the absent-minded professor?
I teach memory, but that doesn't mean I'm a master of memory in everyday life.
Okay, so to wrap up this lecture then, let's return to the student who's sleeping or just relaxing in my class.
Is it worth his while to show up if all he is going to, if he isn't going to make any effort to learn at all?
Well, not really, but not because he isn't learning anything.
He may actually be learning about some things, some things about me and about the structure of my classes and university classes in general.
Perhaps I tend to begin and end classes in a certain manner, maybe the lights drop a little as I begin a lecture,
or maybe I introduce videos in certain points, maybe I speak more quickly near the end of a lecture trying to get in what I say before the class ends.
So he may ultimately gain a pretty good sense of what I might do when.
He may also be developing his scheme of professors in general, and if he gets a job working in a university administration,
his implicit memories of professors may help him deal with them.
Or if he tries a career as a stand-up comedian this time in many classes, they may have given him more raw material to work with.
But unfortunately, while he may be learning the structure of the lectures, he won't learn the content without doing effortful encoding.
And of course, what we test in university is knowledge of content.
You just can't learn content through the secret passage to memory, I'm afraid.
You must learn content through the main gateway of working memory, and that requires attention and cognitive effort.
I thank you for yours.
