Lecture 9 From Procedural Memory to Habit
Today we're going to present the final type of memory we're going to be talking about in this lecture series.
It's called procedural memory, and we'll move from there to be talking about habit, which is very directly related.
I want to start with a personal example.
By the time I was 16, I had saved up enough money to buy my very first car.
The ultimate status symbol, of course, for a 16-year-old boy, and in my case, it was a bright yellow 1973 VW Super Beetle.
Oh, and it had a standard transmission.
At that point in time, I couldn't drive a standard transmission, so I had to get my dad to come with me to pick it up.
He drove us home in the car, and once we got in the driveway, he looked at his watch and said,
Well, you have about two hours before you have to get to work, and I have a meeting I have to go to.
So you've watched me shifting gears and doing stuff. You now have two hours to figure it out. Have fun.
Yeah, my dad was a firm believer in the sinker-swim approach.
When you begin learning a new motor procedure like this, you have to rely heavily on your working memory to guide you through the necessary actions.
And while working memory is indeed very powerful, it's really not very graceful.
Anyone that learns to drive, when you're going through that process of learning to drive, you're doing something that we're going to call creating a procedural memory.
And the idea is pretty simple. Essentially, by going through some procedure over and over, the muscle movements that you need to perform that procedure become coordinated.
So what begins as a very sort of non-graceful attempt at getting something done slowly transforms into a graceful orchestra of motor movements.
In my case, my first week of driving would have been better described as a combination of jerks and stops, really.
They were punctuated occasionally by smooth motion, at least until it was time to shift a gear again.
As you may know from experience, if you release the clutch too quickly or give too much gas when the clutch is released,
you jerk forward until, of course, you depress the clutch and hit the brakes and fear at which time you stop quickly.
That was my first week of driving a standard, a lot of that.
However, with further practice, my ability to drive my car improved.
After months of driving, I was actually getting quite good at shifting gears, and in fact I could do so while simultaneously doing other things,
like maybe singing Bohemian Rhapsody in the way that was later ripped off in that Wayne's World movie.
I hardly even had to think about what I was doing anymore. My hands and feet just did their thing.
Anyway, years went by and one day I found myself trying to teach my daughter how to drive a standard.
Yeah, I love my dad's approach, but I can't quite bring myself to mimic it.
As we saw in the last lecture, even a little bit of explicit memory can sometimes go a long way.
So instead, I tried to explain clearly and then demonstrate the steps involved in the smooth driving of a standard transmission to my daughter.
However, to my surprise and to my embarrassment, I really couldn't do that without actually driving for a bit.
I had to drive and pay attention to what my hands and feet were doing, making a mental note of it, so that I could then relay all this to her.
My driving had become so automatic, so habitual, that it was happening completely without any sort of conscious intervention.
I could literally drive without thinking about it at all, and apparently I did so all the time.
You've likely encountered similar learning situations in your life.
Perhaps you've tried to learn a musical instrument, or sing, after all, your voice is a musical instrument,
or perhaps you've taken up a martial art, some sport, maybe you took dance lessons, or maybe some of you learned how to knit.
No matter what the skill, some teacher or book likely got you started by explaining the behaviors you need to perform,
trying hard to give you some sort of structure to the movements that you ultimately have to learn.
So unlike my dad, who asked me to figure out the structure for myself, usually a teacher will try to give you a head start by explaining some structure to you,
and then they'll ask you to practice within that structure.
You may understand the structure quite well, but when it comes to the muscle movements, well, understanding and performing, they're two different things.
Smooth performance only comes from practice.
We all know that practice matters, but let me try to clarify what I mean by structure with an example.
So when I was learning guitar, one of the first things my music teacher taught me was some scales.
Scales are notes that sound okay when they're played together, really no matter what order you play them in.
That's the structure, and you typically get that structure from a teacher.
For example, my teacher taught me the pentatonic minor scale, and that was a scale I used in the last lecture when demonstrating a blues solo.
But when he taught me that, he began in the following way, without a guitar.
He said, I'm going to tell you some numbers. I want you to learn the sequence of numbers by repeating them over and over again.
This may sound like explicit learning to you, and it certainly is. Here are the numbers. See if you can do it.
1-4, 1-3, 1-3, 1-3, 1-4, 1-4.
I used my working memory, 1-4, 1-3, 1-3, 1-3, 1-4, 1-4, and it didn't take me too long, and I had it.
That's the structure, and I could get the structure down pretty quickly.
He then said, well, now take your guitar.
Put your finger anywhere on the lowest string, so let's say I put it here.
And these are frets, by the way, so he said, let's think of that as number one.
And now, this would be number four.
And so now, go through that structure that I just told you, 1-4, 1-3, 1-3, 1-3, 1-4, 1-4.
But when you do it, every time you hit a one, move to a higher string.
Okay?
Of course, I was very clunky at first. I was more like...
You get the idea. Slow process.
But through a heck of a lot of repetition, over and over and over,
often until your fingers are really sore, this notion of playing to your fingers bleed is not just a term, it's a reality.
You can get to a point where you can get a lot faster.
Now, I'm not fast. I've devoted probably a hundred or more hours really working on how to do the things inside that structure.
You don't necessarily always play the notes in that order. You noodle around a little bit.
So I've spent a lot of hours practicing, and yet if I ever go out and see somebody playing guitar,
I get a very good sense of really how basic my abilities are.
It takes a lot of practice. That's the point.
If you were learning to sing, you might also have had to learn scales, and how to sing them in this case.
And you probably had to practice those scales as well, over and over.
Sound of music, anybody? I won't do that to you. I'll stick with my guitars.
If you took up a martial art, for example, you probably watched your instructor showing you certain movements,
or saw them in a book. In karate, for example, these are called kadas.
If you joined a sport, you probably had a coach show you some things individually,
and maybe even work with the team on sort of coordinated movements.
If you took up knitting or something else, clearly there was a book or a teacher that showed you the basics.
And these things are the structure. You learn the structure, and that's great.
You can learn the structure very quickly.
They give you a sense of the behavior that you're trying to learn, and that really helps you get started.
But, as I highlighted in the last lecture, you might already know that structure at a sort of implicit level.
So, for example, you might already, if you were taking dance lessons, for example,
if you saw somebody do the tango and somebody else do the foxtrot, you could probably tell which is which.
But it's different from kind of being able to tell and being able to recognize and being able to do.
By having a teacher give you the explicit structure, that lets you know what it is you're seeing.
But now, to get to a fluid performance, knowledge of that structure isn't enough.
Practice, practice, and practice is the only way to ever get fluid.
Actually, this is why so many of us often begin to learn something, but then we give it up.
We see some behavior we'd like to learn, we take a few classes, and we come really hopeful as the structure of the behavior is revealed.
It's like the curtain is being lifted to the magic, and we get really excited by that.
I can see how it's done now.
But then we suddenly realize that structure is all that a class or an instructor can provide.
And that structure alone will not make you fluid.
You need to practice, and you need to practice many, many more hours outside a class than you spend inside a class.
Once many of us realize that, we're simply not willing to devote the effort to practice, and we give up.
So the point of all this is that the structure is actually less important than the practice.
And the teacher cannot just impart knowledge on you through words and demonstrations.
The teacher's a guide, not a provider.
Apparently my dad knew that.
That's why he didn't even worry too much about providing the structure at all.
He figured instead that I would figure out the structure for myself as I practiced.
In fact, this approach is one that we now call constructivist learning.
There's a notion out there that students learn better, they learn the structure, and they understand the structure better
when they have to figure it out for themselves, rather than having it just told to them.
Some educators, and I'm among them, argue that allowing learners to figure out the structure of a subject for themselves
is a very powerful form of learning, and one that educational institutions should use a whole lot more.
So the argument here is made in terms of cognitive processes, rather than physical processes.
So if you're learning to dance some specific dance, it's clearly helpful to have someone literally walk you through the steps.
The same could be said of driving a car, or most tasks that involve pretty specific coordination of processes.
But the cognitive processes we try to teach at university are often much more open-ended,
in the sense that there's no single right way to perform them.
And we'd like students to see this variety.
So for example, in the book Zen in the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, the author, Robert Persig,
describes his frustration with having students memorize the structure first when learning rhetoric, the art of arguing.
Persig favored a process where students would begin by just producing an argument, any argument.
Then, students would be exposed to each other's arguments, and their primary task would be to assess the quality of each.
And in so doing, develop their own sense of what made a specific piece of rhetoric more powerful than another.
In addition, they might also see that there are in fact different ways to produce strong arguments, not just a single way.
And there's actually two points here.
First, while explicit instruction can be very helpful in situations where there's really only a single right way to combine some processes,
it can stifle creativity in situations where there are multiple ways to effectively combine processes.
Second, while it's sometimes easier to discuss procedural memory in terms of physical processes,
the very same principles also hold true for cognitive processes.
The ones that underlie really high-level cognitive skills, things like critical thinking, creativity, and effective composition.
And these are skills that we value very highly in our society.
In fact, research from my own lab supports both of these contentions.
Using an internet-based software package called Peer Scholar, our lab has shown that when students are given repeated practice evaluating the work of their peers,
that is working in the same sort of constructivist manner, they become better evaluators.
And not only does their ability to evaluate others improve, but so too does their ability to evaluate their own work.
Their ability to think critically and to apply this cognitive process to their own work gets better with practice in a manner that mimics the same procedure as a motor task,
that is procedural learning.
So yes, even cognitive processes can be organized in ways that make them more fluid and effective.
And constructivist-type learning experiences provide at least one way of supporting this development.
Okay, so now let's move a little further down the path of learning and assume that we've spent a lot of time practicing some procedural skill.
We often refer to a very well-formed procedural memory as a habit.
And the following example will probably resonate well with many of you.
If there was a period of time when you drove a standard transmission, do you remember what it was like when you found yourself driving a car with an automatic transmission?
You likely did things like the following. As you increased your speed, you reached around for the gear stick, the one you would use to shift gears,
and your left foot may have automatically moved towards the position where the clutch is on a standard car.
Your foot might have also moved to that imaginary clutch whenever you came to a stop.
If someone were to ask you, why is your foot moving? Why are you putting your hand that way?
You probably would have said something like, oh, that. That's just habit.
Usually I have to press a clutch, and my foot seems not to realize that I don't have to do that in this case.
So the critical point here, though, is that if we do practice some procedure enough, it reaches a point where we are no longer in control of it.
The environment simply triggers certain procedures, and it can do so even when they're not even appropriate for the context you're in.
So you begin learning some new procedure with a lot of conscious control and conscious guidance, that is working memory,
but eventually you lose control completely. It's a little like raising kids.
In fact, we sometimes use the term habit to refer specifically to this automatic manner in which procedural memories can come to control our behavior.
This control can actually be very strong at times, as was demonstrated experimentally by John Ridley Stroop in 1935.
So let's move away from driving, and let's talk about another procedure that we all have practiced,
and we've practiced it to the point where it has become automatic in virtually every one of us.
It's the procedure of reading text. You are now, in fact, so good at it that it probably doesn't even seem like a big deal to you,
sort of like the way that driving a standard didn't seem like a big deal to my dad.
But reading text is difficult. Just ask any child who's struggling with the learning process.
One has to learn how to first parse sentences into words, then to segment the words into phonemes,
put these phonemes together, and all the sound and eventually get to meanings.
Wow, that's a lot of work. But you and I, well, we've done this over and over and over,
and we're now reading experts, and we're like Michael Jordan's of reading.
In fact, we're so good at it, we can't even control it even when it messes with us.
And that's the real lesson of the Stroop task. Let me explain the Stroop task to you.
It's actually quite straightforward. Words are presented in different colors of ink.
So some words might be written in green ink, others in red, others in blue.
A participant in a Stroop experiment would be shown a list of such words,
and their task is actually pretty straightforward.
Simply name aloud the ink color of each word as quickly and accurately as possible.
So ignore the word itself, worry only about the color in which the word is written,
and read those ink colors quickly, going down the list of words as you go.
Sounds easy, right? Well, not necessarily.
It's not easy when the word is fighting you for control of your voice.
That is, in the critical condition of the Stroop task, the words you are reading themselves spell colors.
So they're words like R-E-D, red, B-L-U-E, blue, and green, etc.
But these words are always presented in an ink color that does not match what the words say.
So for example, the word red might be presented in green or blue, the word green and red or blue,
and the word blue in either red or green.
When participants try to read these words, they tend to have some trouble.
They find it difficult, and they're definitely much slower to read them than when the word is neutral,
some neutral word or maybe even a symbol, or especially if the word matches the ink color.
The mismatch of the word and what it suggests with the color is what produces the problems.
So for example, let's say you have the word red presented in green ink.
The right response is green.
Well, what you'll often see is that subjects will actually say red.
When they don't say red, they'll often do something even a little more entertaining.
They'll say R-Green.
Obviously, the word is battling for control of the voice, and it's doing so because of the habit that's coming from procedural learning.
Again, we've learned to read words, and we're so good at it, we do it automatically.
We're not under control.
Put a word in front of our eyes, we read it.
It just happens, and it happens even when it annoys us, when it gets in the way of what we're really trying to do.
If we're reading a list of incongruent strups stimuli then, the automatic word reading is actually interfering with our ability to name ink colors.
So it's suggesting this incorrect response, and this habit is so automatic we can't control it even when it messes with us.
By the way, marketing people are quite aware of the strupe effect, and they sometimes use it to sell things, even marketing.
A few years ago, for example, I was in a subway in Toronto, and I saw an otherwise plain white sign that just said something like the following in black ink.
Even if people don't want to read the text on a subway sign, they will.
Advertise your product here.
Okay, the first time I saw that sign, I thought it was kind of clever.
By about the third or fourth time, I was getting annoyed with myself for reading it, even when I already knew what it said.
By the eighth or ninth time, well, let's just say the marketing company had made its point to me in a clear way.
Reading and other procedures that we learned sufficiently can reach a point where they are completely beyond our ability to consciously control.
So procedural memory can produce habits, and so now I want to talk about habits more.
But before doing so, I think we need to be clear about the relation between procedural memory and implicit memory, the topic of the last lecture.
As you may have noticed yourself, we're beginning to form a clear distinction as I discuss these different memory systems.
Some memory systems seem to be used in a very deliberate way, and they seem to produce a clear, conscious answer to some query.
I previously described these systems as those supporting declarative memory, and they include both semantic and episodic memory and, of course, the system that works with them so much, working memory.
But when you drive a car or when you read a word, you don't feel like you're querying your memory, and thus you don't feel really like you're getting any sort of conscious response to a query.
Instead, you are just trying to do something, and to the extent you have relevant past experiences, those experiences impact the fluency with which you can do it.
So procedural memories and implicit memory together reflect what we call non-declared memory systems.
And by non-declared, I mean to suggest that there's little in the way of conscious mediation of these systems.
Implicit memory simply picks up on the regularities in the environment, and it uses those regularities to generate expectations and to guide behavior appropriately in accord with those expectations.
Procedural memory coordinates physical or cognitive processes in ways that allow them to organize into smooth procedures that can be executed without conscious intervention.
So both have their effects without it feeling to us like we're using our memory at all.
And it is because of this lack of conscious intent that we sometimes refer to the effects of these systems as habitual.
I've described in some detail how procedural memory can give rise to habits, but I didn't emphasize the point when I discussed implicit memory.
Recall that implicit memory encodes the regularities of an environment, and it captures that underlying structure of things.
That structure can be used to guide behavior in the present, and with that in mind, I'll now describe how this can provide a different sort of habit.
And I'll describe this in the context of one of psychology's most well-known figures, a Russian physiologist named Ivan Pavlov.
Now, you've likely heard of Pavlov before, so I'll make my rendition of his story brief and to the point.
Pavlov was initially studying the canine digestive system.
His primary interest was how strongly the digestive system would respond to different kinds of food once the food was placed in a dog's mouth.
His experiments used a tube that was surgically inserted sort of in the jaw here under the dog's mouth and went into the dog's mouth.
This tube collected saliva and measured its quantity.
The more saliva, the stronger the digestive response.
So by measuring saliva, you could get a sense of how strong the digestive system was kicking in.
However, Pavlov's experiments ran into a snag very early in the process.
All worked fine initially, so perhaps for the first day or two, the experiments seemed to be okay.
But once the dogs had repeatedly witnessed the steps that occurred prior to them getting the food,
for example, the opening of some container or the preparation of the food, that sort of thing,
something surprising began to happen.
The dogs began drooling, that is, saliva began to build up as soon as the food was prepared.
The digestive system had kicked in before any food was even in the dog's mouth.
But of course this shouldn't be surprising.
The dogs are merely showing evidence of implicit learning.
They've picked up on regularities in the environment.
Certain things consistently happen before they get food in their mouths.
They use this structure and they use it to guide their behavior by preparing for what is about to come.
So this is yet another example of memory preparing you for the future.
Just like you warm up your car in winter, they warm up their digestive systems so that it is already when the food arrives.
Now of course if any of you have pets, you know this sort of behavior well.
For example, we used to store our tea in the same cabinet as we stored our dog, Lola and Leila, those are our dogs,
we stored their treats in that same cabinet.
But we had to eventually move our tea.
Why?
Well, our dogs quickly learned that whenever we get a treat, we first open that cupboard.
And in no time, any time we would open that cupboard door, they would be right there,
looking at us with a cute and thankful look on their face.
Almost like they were saying, thanks in advance for that great treat you're about to give us.
So anyway, through a process that Pavlov called classical conditioning,
we ourselves are able to learn that certain stimuli predict certain other stimuli.
And in those situations, we begin reacting to the first stimulus almost as if it were the second stimulus.
And that gives us a head start on responding.
As long as the predictable link between the stimuli is maintained,
this can lead us to develop a habit of responding to the first stimulus in that way,
even when we don't want to.
So here's a concrete example.
Let's say you are the type of person who tends to go to bed at roughly the same time every night
and who wakes up to an alarm clock five days a week to go to work.
Perhaps your alarm goes off at 6 a.m.
Whether you realize it or not, there are consistencies in your sleeping environment
that predict when your alarm will go off.
Some of these consistencies might be external.
For example, if you have a heating or cooling system that's programmable,
it probably reliably turns on the furnace or air conditioning at a specific time each morning.
Other consistencies might be internal.
Perhaps you like to have a glass of water before going to sleep.
Well, that water works its way through your system,
and your bladder ends up full at some relatively consistent time,
which causes a reliably timed internal sensation.
Even your sleep cycles are regular following something called a circadian rhythm,
and thus your brain waves and the chemicals floating around in your body and in your brain
change in regular ways through the course of a night.
All of these stimuli kind of give the brain a sense of what time it is
and when the alarm is about to come on.
The result?
You eventually acquire the habit of waking up slightly before your alarm goes off.
On a work day, this is fine.
It means you tend to wake up feeling like you're ready to wake up.
Yeah, maybe you missed a few moments of potential sleep, but mostly that's no big worry.
But on weekends or days off, well, on those days you'd prefer to sleep in a little longer,
and that's when the habit is annoying,
because even on those days when you actually remember to turn off your alarm,
you may automatically wake up just before six, habitually.
Well, you may not have noticed,
but in telling you all about procedural memory and habits,
I've actually been setting up a field of battle.
You see, while habits do often help us to do things we want to do,
things like driving a standard or without paying much attention
or even arguing points in effective ways,
there are times when we no longer want them controlling our behavior.
However, once created, habits are very hard things to break,
and in considering such contexts,
we're learning what happens when declarative memory systems
and non-declarative memory systems do battle.
That's right, it's time to turn this little story of memory into an action movie,
to the battlefield, shall we?
