Lecture 10 When Memory Systems Battle, Habits vs. Goals
What have I done?
I've created a monster!
Ah, the famous words of Dr. Frankenstein when he realizes that the entity he so lovingly
brought to life has turned against him.
It's a theme that's essential to many a good horror movie, but it's also a theme that
plays out between our declarative and non declarative memory systems, over and over.
With the best intentions, we've cultivated some habit.
Or at least we've allowed it to develop.
But then the habit grows stronger, stronger than our ability to control.
And if we suddenly decide we don't like what it's doing, well, let's just say we understand
Dr. Frankenstein's perspective a little bit better.
In fact, once a year we have an interesting ritual that puts us even more directly in
Dr. Frankenstein's position.
Each New Year's Eve we make resolutions.
Mostly resolutions with respect to behavioral change.
So we've been behaving in some way, probably for a long time, so long that either implicit
memory or procedural memory are now controlling the behavior.
Some behavior has become a habit controlled by our non declarative memory systems, a habit
that we have allowed to persist until this fateful day.
But today we decide that habit is a nuisance, and we want to stop it from exerting its influence.
Well, to defeat this habit, we're going to have to remember our resolution, and that
will require episodic memory, and we'll also have to load that memory into our working
memory whenever we are within the context where the habit might take control.
So our declarative systems must take charge at the right time, or else the non declarative
system will take control of the behavior, as usually happens.
Friendly cooperation between the systems of memory now becomes a conflict, a battlefield,
to control that specific behavior.
More concretely, the next time we pass by that donut shop, and we feel that habitual
pull that brings us to the cashier, we need episodic memory, we need to remember our resolution,
and we need working memory, because working memory must wrestle control of the muscles
away from procedural memory in order for us to walk past the store, feeling proud of ourselves
for doing so.
When declarative systems win this battle, we praise our willpower for succeeding.
When non declarative systems win, we say willpower has failed.
But memory is actually a more fruitful way to think about this age old battle.
We've already visited one experimental version of such a battlefield.
Remember the strupe effect I mentioned in the last lecture?
The task was to name colors, but sometimes the colors that we used, we used to write
out words, words that in fact were mismatching colors.
So in fact, the word red, written in green ink.
The actual ink color and the habit of reading the words came into conflict, and naming the
ink colors was harder, it was slower, and more error prone.
This is a classic experimental situation in which a highly developed habit, reading,
can interfere with some goal, reading the ink color.
These sorts of battles between declarative and non declarative systems don't just occur
in the lab, they're actually very common aspect of our daily lives.
Have you ever intended to go somewhere that you've maybe only been once or twice, only
to suddenly find yourself driving towards work or some other common destination instead?
This usually happens when the two roots are similar, there's some level of overlap and
somewhere along the way our minds become distracted.
That is, our working memory turns to some other thoughts and habits take over.
These sort of situations are called capture errors.
They occur in context where well-practiced habits are supporting some behavior, but that
behavior goes against our current goals and the habits win.
In fact, the term capture error is meant to describe a situation in which behavior is
captured by habit when it should be controlled by the current goals we have instead.
In terms of the brain, what's happening is that the basal ganglia responsible for habits
require far less energy than the high-energy prefrontal cortex, and that's where goals
are created and managed.
Of course, one of the real challenges is that these same habits can often be quite helpful.
In the case of both the stoop experiments and the case of driving to work or the store,
the habit is generally a good thing.
It's not that we wish we suddenly didn't know how to read or that we want to take control
of every action that we make in our car.
Your prefrontal cortex is thrilled by the fact that some other memory system is taking
care of a lot of these mundane things.
It's okay, usually, to have these things handled by habit.
Let's stick with the example of driving to work for a moment to flesh out the orchestrated
manner in which these declarative and non-declarative systems normally interact.
The first important point is this.
When I discussed procedural memory in the context of driving before, I focused on memory
for how to operate the car.
However, if you repeatedly drive your car along a familiar route, even the higher level
aspects of driving will also become habitual.
So, for example, at certain points you merge into lanes or you take specific turns, you
speed up when you go onto a highway and you slow down when you're not.
Generally speaking, you navigate your way along some path in an appropriate manner.
All of these decisions that you make along the way are consistent, and they tend to be
associated with very specific environmental stimuli.
You turn left at this intersection and right at that one.
Given this level of consistency, your implicit system encodes the structure and your procedural
systems take control of your behavior accordingly.
Thus, your non-declarative memory systems begin to function almost as a sort of autopilot.
That's the way of describing how we feel like we can drive to work without thinking.
Then we can.
We only need to think when something arises that's out of the ordinary, something that
does not fit with the consistent events that occur and that our non-declarative memory systems
are based on.
So, for example, maybe construction prevents us from taking our ordinary route, or perhaps
some emergency happens that requires different patterns of braking or acceleration, or maybe
weather conditions require us to just kind of slow down and be more cautious than we
normally would.
Or heck, maybe some pedestrian runs out in front of our path.
In these situations, our declarative memory systems, working memory especially, must flip
off the autopilot and take control.
Okay.
So now, given this depiction of driving, consider what happens when one drives, well, when intoxicated
or the new variant, driving while talking on a cell phone.
You might have wondered, why does anybody ever drive while they're distracted or drunk?
Distractions or drunkenness certainly are bad for some reasons that you can now name pretty
explicitly.
They interfere with sensory memory, they interfere with working memory, and they even interfere
with muscle memory.
However, it's also true that when one is driving a familiar route and everything about the
driving is routine, non-declarative memory can get somebody where they're going.
And it can even give them the illusion that their driving is not being impacted at all.
Of course, the problems occur when those contexts, the ones where working memory would normally
be required and would step in when those things arise.
That's why we hear terms like alcohol was a contributing factor.
Things don't generally happen because of alcohol, they happen because something out
of the ordinary occurred and the drunk or the distracted person was simply unable to
react as quickly and accurately as they normally would have.
So the larger point then is this, non-declarative memory systems learn our regular tendencies
and slowly take control.
This control is very often helpful, but the behaviors supported by the non-declarative
memory system are not flexible.
So typically, non-declarative and declarative systems will interact in a way that allows
the non-declarative systems to exert control when everything is normal and the declarative
systems stepping in when things are unusual.
Okay, so now let's return to the notion of capture errors.
In the case of capture errors, it is not the case that the declarative memory systems are
impaired or less able to respond to new circumstances.
Rather, capture errors reflect situations in which declarative systems seem to be working
fine but still has difficulty taking control back from habits.
And capture errors, by the way, can have some very dire consequences.
For example, one study that has drawn attention in research is an issue related to air traffic
control.
And here is the scenario, and this scenario was first described in the 1990s.
Apparently it is common for many airports to have two inbound runways that usually are
both available to use.
So the air traffic controllers will typically queue inbound planes into two lanes, one corresponding
to each runway.
Occasionally, one of the runways, though, is shut down, perhaps for maintenance or for
some other reason.
In those conditions, the air traffic controller must control their usual habit, the habit
to create two lines of incoming arrivals, and instead, they must queue all inbound planes
into a single line.
The interesting thing is the following.
During busy times, busy periods, having only one runway for landings, they can create delays
to passengers, but the air traffic controllers apparently handle the crowded new pattern
with very few problems.
And that's because the radar shows a single line of planes to the air traffic controller,
being a very strong perceptual stimulus of the goal that is relevant to the current situation.
However, accidents have occurred when the air traffic is light, and here's why.
In that case, there are no lines of planes on the radar.
And if the air traffic controller does not think about the closed runway when an inbound
flight approaches, the controller might fall prey to habit and assign one of the inbound
planes to the runway that's supposed to be closed.
That's even directing a plane into a maintenance crew.
This example highlights really two relevant points.
First, it clearly shows that capture errors are not just annoyances, but rather they can
have very dire results when they occur in context where the errors are very costly,
as in the one I just described to you.
Second, it begins to give us a clearer sense of the factors relevant to our ability to
control habits.
Remember when I highlighted the fragility of working memory?
I said that it was theoretically possible to say, take three words and hold them in
working memory for a very long time.
Theoretically possible, but in practice, it's nearly impossible.
Stimulation, both external stimulation and internal stimulation, tends to grab our attention.
And when our attention is pulled to something, that something becomes represented in our working
memory.
We begin to think about it.
Whatever was in our working memory before is lost.
Falls off that conveyor belt I told you about.
So now, imagine yourself as an air traffic controller.
You've been told runway two is closed.
It's closed today for maintenance.
Don't use runway two.
Of course, when you're told that, you put it in your working memory.
And you likely try to keep remembering that fact throughout the day.
This may be rather easy to do when that information is continually relevant, as in the case when
there are many inbound planes.
What's more, when things are busy, the environment also provides you with a really nice visual
cue to help you remember, the single line of planes waiting to land.
But when things are not busy, your mind may wander.
What's worse, the radar does not provide a nice visual cue anymore.
Perhaps your mind is just clear or wandering until a plane shows up.
That is when you'd be most prone to a capture error.
You step out of your reverie a little bit, but perhaps not far.
After all, you've landed planes over and over.
The habit's in place.
You can land planes without even thinking.
And of course, that's true.
It's true as long as the conditions now match the conditions back when the habit was formed.
And they do not.
The importance of working memory with respect to the prevention of capture errors has been
demonstrated in the lab.
Capture errors can take over even when a habit is just our tendency to pay attention to something
new that happens.
Remember those rapid glances I told you about?
Secads?
They usually allow us to construct those sensory memories of a visual scene.
And in a sense, these secads can be thought of as a habit we have.
When something appears in our environment, we secad to it.
However, in the experiment I'm going to tell you about, we're going to ask people not to
do that.
It's a so-called anti-secad task.
It works as follows.
You are told to look at a small x located at the middle of a computer screen.
After some random time passes, a stimulus is flashed either to the right or to the left
of where you're looking.
You are told to move your eyes in the direction that is opposite to the side where the stimulus
appears.
So if it appears on your right, you should look left.
If it appears on your left, you should look right.
Of course, this is really an unnatural thing to do.
And that's precisely the point.
Our natural habit is to look at things that suddenly appear, not to look away from them.
However, as unnatural as it may be, people are able to do this task.
They can look to the opposite side.
Well, they can look to the opposite side as long as they're able to keep the instructions
in their working memory.
If instead you ask them to use their working memory for something else, while doing this
task, then capture errors occur.
For example, remember our friend the count backwards by threes task?
We used this before to occupy working memory when we were trying to remember a list of
words.
Well, you can use that in this context as well by giving the participants a number and
then insisting that they keep counting backwards when the stimulus is shown.
When you do this or something like that, their eyes will go towards the stimulus, not away
from it.
By the way, this discussion of capture errors is also relevant to our previous discussion
of the problems that humans encounter when they try to remember to do something in the
future, so-called prospective memory.
I gave the example of remembering to bring a book for a colleague to work.
Well, we all have our morning rituals, and those rituals are actually habits as well.
So remembering to find a book and bring it with us as we leave for work, that's not part
of our normal ritual.
So that will require us to take control of our normal habit at some point.
Now, the capture errors we've been discussing so far are only part of the challenge for
prospective memory.
Capture errors arise even when a current goal has been queued up, but we have even
more trouble avoiding capture errors when we must both remember to queue the goal at
the right time and use that goal to take control of behavior at the same time.
So it's small wonder we're so poor when it comes to our prospective memory abilities.
Well, capture errors can be as dramatic, embarrassing, or fateful, and the additional challenges
of prospective memory can make them even worse.
But all that still doesn't really capture why New Year's resolutions are even more
challenging to keep.
There we don't just want to take control of a habit, not just some temporary control,
but we actually want to eliminate that habit.
That is, we want to control that habit on a permanent basis.
We really want it completely gone.
So maybe we have the habit, for example, of online gambling.
Maybe it started out as fun, but now we find we're actually losing a fair amount of money,
much more than we're comfortable with.
So we make a resolution.
New Year's are otherwise.
We're going to quit.
Well, let's first appreciate the challenge.
The computers that we've used for our online gambling are computers that we likely use
for all sorts of other purposes as well.
We have developed the habit of sitting in front of that computer, opening a web browser,
and going to some online gambling site.
One important thing to note is that that original habit likely formed because there was something
about doing this that we found rewarding.
Each time we engaged in that habit, in the past, the reward of doing so strengthened
the habit.
Remember when we discussed neuroplasticity and learning?
Well, throughout the development of our habit, our brains are forming connections, connections
among the stimuli related to that habit.
And they're relating these stimuli to parts of our brains, those parts of the brains that
initiate action, for example.
So quite literally then, when we find ourselves sitting at the computer, our brains might
be influencing us to complete the habitual behavior, that is to open the browser and
to go to the gambling site.
So now, some more intelligent part of us, our working memory probably specifically,
figures out that this is really a problem.
And this revelation probably came when we realized that the habit was no longer under
our control.
It had become like reading, a behavior that just happens when the right stimulus is there.
In the case of a destructive behavior, that can be really quite scary, perhaps even scary
enough to make us want to stop altogether.
If we manage to encode that thought into long-term memory, at least, that may become
literally our resolution.
Now of course, the problem is that the stimuli related to the habits of our life are almost
by definition present in our life.
For example, it's hard to get through life these days without ever opening a browser
on a computer.
But if performing those actions, perhaps for some other good reason, they can trigger
the habit.
And suddenly we find ourselves gambling.
Worse yet, at some level, we probably feel rewarded for doing so, just as we originally
did.
And therefore, the habit will be further strengthened.
So let's consider this in light of what I discussed previously in the context of capture
errors.
In that case, I suggested that in order to avoid making a capture error, one had to have
their goal represented within their working memory.
If their mind was distracted or occupied by anything other than the goal, then the error
would occur.
When we extend this to habits that we wish to permanently change, we need this level of
focus to be present every time we have the potential of engaging in the unwanted behavior.
That's a very tall order.
If capture errors reflect problems we have overcoming a habit just once, or during just
some small temporal interval, these problems are magnified many times if we wish to control
this behavior permanently.
We are virtually doomed to fail at some point in time.
Now of course, when we do fail, the rewarding aspect that helped to form the habit originally
will still be present.
And each failure will strengthen the habit further.
And this is working directly against our goal to overcome that habit.
This is when the interactions of declarative and non-declarative memory systems are really
like that battlefield I described.
After a few failures, one might just give up.
They may feel that habit is completely beyond our control, and they may be right.
Trying to stop a habit that is already well formed may be extremely difficult, and doing
so may require extraordinary measures.
So for example, in the case of online gambling, the only solution might be to find ways to
block access to all gambling sites from any computer you use.
Besides taking these extraordinary steps to block stimuli for the old habit, another
approach that is sometimes available is to use one's working memory to support a new
habit, a new habit that competes with the current unwanted habit.
So let's return to the online gambling habit, and pretend that it's my habit.
Here's the process I might go through.
First I might ask myself, when do I tend to engage in this habit?
If it happens to be something I do at a consistent time, let's say it's something I do just
after supper every day, I might try to pick up a different habit that is inconsistent with
the gambling habit.
I might try to find something else that I also find rewarding.
So let's say I like to swim, and let's say I can find a swim club that meets every evening
from 7 to 9 p.m.
If I get into the habit of going to that swim club, I can't be gambling at the same time.
Of course, I must be very firm with myself and insist that I stick with the habit every
evening for some rather long period of time.
You may have heard the notion that it takes three weeks of doing something consistently
to form a habit.
Really there's no reason why all habits should take the same amount of time to form, and
so I'm a little dubious about that three weeks.
In fact, a 2009 study from University College London found that people volunteering to change
a specific habit in either their eating or their drinking or their activity ranged very
widely in terms of how long it took for the new habit to feel like a habit.
Their range was anything from as quickly as 18 days to 254 days, two thirds of a year.
That's when the habit started to feel automatic.
The average, by the way, was about 66 days, so hoping for a new habit to take root in
only three weeks may be a bit optimistic for all but the easiest new habits.
The practical conclusion from this is if you want a habit to feel like a habit, look ahead
to a period of at least two months of literally controlling that habit and insisting with
yourself that you engage in it.
So now, let's suppose we go swimming for 66 days.
If we're swimming, we can't be gambling, and hopefully by the time we arrive home, we're
tired enough to go straight to sleep without touching the computer.
At the brain level, we're forming new connections yet again, or really, we're shaping them.
We're taking the time-based cues from our environment that used to push us to the computer
and are instead associating them with a different activity.
The hope is that with enough consistency, we can make these new connections stronger
than the ones currently in place, and if we can keep up the consistency, the new connections
should eventually become stronger than the old ones.
Now, of course, if we fail along the way, we will be re-strengthening the old connections
instead, and if this failure convinces us that it's hopeless, well, then it will be hopeless.
However, one good piece of preliminary news from that 2009 study was that those participants
who missed their new habit for a single day still did okay.
So missing just one day, that didn't really affect their ability to form a new habit,
and that's good news.
You need to be habitual to create a new habit, but you don't have to be perfect.
By the way, the next time that you try to change a habit, there are some times that
are better to do that than others.
If you can never change a habit in the context of some more general change, that's a really
good time to pick.
You see, habits, as I described, become linked to stimuli, stimuli that are present in your
home, in your social situation, or in your work environment.
So if any of these are going to change anyway, perhaps you have a new job or you're moving,
that's a great time to change habits, since you will be escaping a lot of the stimuli
that trigger those habits, and it will be easier to link your new stimuli with new habits.
Still, creating a new habit and setting aside an old habit at the same time is really one
of the biggest memory challenges of all.
One recent survey suggests that 92% of New Year's resolutions are not kept, and now you
likely have a better sense of why.
Once non-declarative memory systems are controlling some behavior, it can be very hard to wrestle
them back.
When it comes to eliminating some habit, not only do you need declarative memory to step
in at the right time, but in order to actually change your existing habit, you need to unlearn
it, which means declarative memory must repeatedly and consistently step in.
A few failures along the way, and one might stop trying, giving control back to the non-declarative
memory systems.
Suppose you've been smoking 20 times a day in a very regular way.
Same time, same place every day.
If you can resist five of those times in places, then you are indeed eliminating that part
of the habit, at least in those five places.
I think that's one mindset to have when you're in that situation.
That's progress.
It doesn't always have to be all or nothing.
Another sort of piece of advice we can actually take from is from Dr. Frankenstein himself
and from that story.
Be careful of the beasts that you nurture, because they will only get stronger and stronger.
If you know that certain behaviors have caused misery for others, don't assume they won't
also do so for you.
Procedural memories become stronger the more they are practiced, and at some points they
become so strong they become habits.
This suggests a continuum from weaker memories to stronger memories all the way to habits,
but the stronger procedural memories get, the more difficult they are for declarative
systems to control.
It's best to never let a bad habit get started, but if you have, the best bad habit is a weak
bad habit.
We've talked about capturers, which represent our attempts to control behavior at a single
point in time, and we've talked about trying to eliminate habits altogether.
But much like Frankenstein's monster himself, this may give you the sense that habits are
bad things, but for every bad habit you have, you also have many good habits that allow
you to live life more fluently and more effectively.
Frankenstein's monster was actually a nice monster.
He was just misunderstood, the same is often true of habits.
