Lecture 11, Sleep and the Consolidation of Memories
There's a movie called Fifty First Dates.
The premise of the movie is the following.
Boy meets girl, has a great day, and a great evening with her, and a great first date.
But then they go to sleep,
and when the woman awakes, she has no memory of the previous day
and no memory of the man that she spent it with.
The notion that's implied is that without the right kind of sleep, certain memories might not form.
And because her sleep was impaired in this way, the events of the previous day were never stored in her memory.
So every day she awakes with no memory of the previous day.
Thus the man in the movie must court her anew each day and does so for fifty days.
Fifty First Dates.
While this makes for a really fun premise for a romantic comedy,
it is not the case that without the right kind of sleep, we could forget an entire day's events.
However, there is a germ of truth to the movie in the sense that sleep may indeed help to strengthen certain kinds of memories.
That is, while good encoding is very important for getting information into long-term memory,
some psychologists believe that sleep actually consolidates those memories.
So the suggestion is that during sleep we may somehow reinforce or reorganize our memory systems in some manner
a way that makes the memories of recent events stronger, and that process is termed consolidation.
Now, there's actually a good deal of debate within the scientific community about the importance of sleep with respect to memory.
In fact, there's debate about the relevance of sleep in general.
These debates are primarily due to the fact that it can be really difficult to scientifically assess the effects of sleep on cognition.
But that's part of what makes sleep so interesting and so mysterious.
So given this intrigue then, the current lecture will focus entirely on sleep and on its potential effects on memory.
That's right, in the first lecture I told you that memory was a party.
Well, we're going to make it a slumber party.
We'll discuss sleep in general for a bit, and then I will highlight why it is such a difficult topic to study in an empirical way.
We'll then discuss some of the suggestive research, research that purports to show the importance of sleep with respect to the consolidation of memory,
and more specifically the importance of different kinds of sleep to different kinds of memory.
So let's get started.
Perhaps the most basic debate with respect to sleep is whether it serves any sort of critical function at all.
We spend almost a third of our lives of sleep, typically lying somewhere in a relatively prone and defenseless manner.
Some say that based on this fact alone, it obviously must be critical.
Otherwise, why would we have evolved this way?
Why wouldn't we have evolved to sleep less, or maybe even not at all?
But others argue that sleep may not really be so important.
Humans rely primarily on vision as their primary sensory system, and we use that for hunting and for escaping predation.
But that system is no good at night.
When light levels are not sufficient to support vision, then really we cannot hunt, we cannot gather.
And this means that we cannot acquire sources of energy during that time.
If we remained awake and active, we would be consuming large amounts of energy.
So the idea is that perhaps sleep is simply a mode of energy conservation.
We find some safe place, and then we go to sleep in order to not burn energy.
And maybe that's all there is to it.
Well, one way to assess whether or not sleep plays some important role is to simply prevent it.
In one rather extreme experiment, a group of rats was prevented from sleeping by simply waking them up each time they fell asleep.
After 32 days of this, all of the rats were dead, despite having full access to food, water, and anything else needed to fulfill their normal biological needs.
The researchers still don't agree on the precise cause of death.
It may have been hypothermia because there was an observed decrease in core body temperature the longer the animal went without sleep.
Or it could have been due to a failure in their immune system that left them open to germs that normally would have been able to fight any significant health issue.
In fact, those animals that died did have a lot of sores on their body and lost hair, and so that fits with the immune system story.
At the very least, though, these experiments make one thing clear.
At a very gross level, at least, sleep is critical for survival.
But is sleep really relevant to memory?
To answer that question, we first need to consider sleep more specifically, because like memory itself, sleep is not a single thing.
Instead, there appear to be distinct stages of sleep, and different stages may be relevant to the consolidation of different kinds of memory.
We know about these stages thanks to studies that use something called an electroencephalograph, or an EEG system.
You've probably seen pictures of people in sleep studies where people have electrodes on their heads.
These electrodes measure the electrical activity in the brain.
If this electrical activity was converted into an auditory signal, it sounds like the static you would hear on a radio if it was tuned to a frequency that nobody's broadcasting on.
Sort of a white noise.
The specific quality of the electrical signal changes as we sleep.
Sometimes the wavelengths that are generated are closer together, sometimes they're further apart.
And this would correspond to the frequency of the white noise we would hear if we could actually hear those.
In addition, sometimes the amplitudes of the wave is small, sometimes it's quite large, and this would correspond to the loudness of the white noise.
Now, luckily, people are actually able to sleep with those electrodes stuck to their heads, so we can measure the electrical activity as they sleep.
And some of the very earliest studies of sleep simply examined these changes in electrical activity over the course of an evening.
The findings of these studies were truly fascinating.
Researchers were able to identify four distinct patterns of electrical activity, patterns that correspond to four different stages of sleep.
At a more general level, we can think of sleep as divided into two kinds, non-REM sleep and REM sleep.
The term REM corresponds to rapid eye movements.
Rapid eye movements occur when we dream, and only when we dream.
So when we say REM sleep, we're actually talking about sleep in which we're dreaming, and non-REM sleep is sleep in which we're not dreaming.
So more specifically then, the stages of sleep proceed as follows.
Stage one is a transition stage, from wakefulness to your first true sleep stage.
Stage one is characterized by drowsiness.
Stage two reflects the onset of sleep proper, and once you're within that, our brainwaves continue to slow down, but they increase in amplitude until we hit stage three.
And stage three is going to be one of the stars of today's lecture. It's called slow wave sleep, and it's the deepest sleep we achieve.
If someone wanted to awaken us when we're in stage three, they would find it very hard to do so.
And that's because our brains are receiving very little input from the external environment when we're in this kind of sleep.
If they did succeed in waking us up, we would feel extremely tired and sluggish, and it would take us a long time to feel awake.
When people sleepwalk, they typically do so while they're in slow wave sleep.
By the way, during slow wave sleep, our bodies also release growth hormones, and these growth hormones seem very important for repairing tissue and perhaps reinvigorating our immune system.
So one function of slow wave sleep may be some form of physical maintenance necessary to keep our bodies functioning well.
And this could be the reason why many rats die when they're deprived of this kind of sleep.
Okay, eventually we emerge out of slow wave sleep and into REM sleep.
And a few truly amazing things happen at this point.
For example, just prior to entering REM sleep, our glands stop releasing the neurochemicals called norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine.
And as a result, motor neurons can no longer send their signals.
This produces a literal paralysis called rem atonia.
This temporary paralysis is the only thing that keeps us from acting out our dreams.
For some people, this paralysis does not always occur, and their sleeping partners often complain about being hit or kicked as they slept.
That shows us how important this paralysis can be.
It's a very useful thing to have happen.
By the way, if you've ever dreamt about being tied up or held down, or you felt you just couldn't move very quickly in a dream, that is likely your paralysis somehow finding its way into your dream content.
At some level, your body notices that it cannot move, and that feeling enters into your dream in some other form.
Okay, so we move from stage one to REM sleep, then what?
Well, first of all, one whole cycle from stage one to the end of REM sleep takes anywhere from 75 to 105 minutes, and when we finish, we repeat the cycle again.
However, as we repeat it, we don't spend the same amount of time in the various stages.
Early in our night sleep, we spend quite a bit of time in that slow wave sleep, maybe as much as 70 to 90 minutes worth, and only very little time in REM sleep.
However, as the night progresses and these cycles repeat, we gradually reduce the amount of time we spend in slow wave sleep, and we increase the amount of time we spend in REM sleep.
And that's often why when we awaken in the morning, we have dreams in our mind, of course, only to feel them slip away.
When we dream, the electrical activity of our brain looks almost identical to how it looks when we're awake and alert.
In a sense, it looks like we are awake and alert, but just cut off from the external world.
We think, we solve problems, we do all sorts of real world things, but the content of our thoughts comes from our brain, not from the external world.
In fact, it's probably completely correct to think of this as working memory online and doing its thing as it always does, but the information it has to work with comes entirely from internal sources.
In fact, this may be why dreams tend to be so unstable in terms of their content.
One minute we're in one place, interacting with one person, and the next we're somewhere else with someone else.
The claim here is that because the real world is bound by the physical reality of it, it has a certain stability.
Stability in terms of time, a stability in terms of place.
And so when it is feeding into our thoughts, we gain that stability from it, and it keeps our thoughts stable.
But when the real world is not providing the input, then the source of the stability is lost.
Internal input need not be so stable.
Thoughts can jump around, and the dreams can jump around with them.
But do they jump around with some purpose?
Are we just experiencing some sort of random brain activity that we somehow weave into a semi-meaningful chain of events, a story that plays out in our mind?
That's really the critical question.
In fact, this is a good place to visit one notion sometimes put forward with respect to sleep and memory.
In all this Huxley's novel Brave in Your World, written in 1932, children were conditioned as they slept.
The question here is that perhaps we could actually learn new information while we're sleeping.
And in fact, many companies still market products that claim to do just that.
Now, is this sort of sleep learning possible?
Well, probably not.
The problem is, once we make the transition from wakefulness to stage two, our brains perceive very little of the information entering our senses.
So the window during which our brains are actually alert enough to hear, it's really very small.
So perhaps as we're drifting off, we might be capable of some sort of unintentional learning.
Something like what I talked about in the implicit memory lecture.
And if we expose ourselves to stimuli that contain some regular patterns then, for example, maybe a foreign language,
the learning episode would be brief.
We'd likely actually learn it much better if we expose ourselves to the same material while we're fully awake.
So it's a cool idea, but not one that really has any scientific backing.
However, there's a different notion about sleep and dreaming.
And that is that in some way it reflects a sort of replaying of critical events that have happened to us in the recent past.
And that this replaying actually makes our memory of those events more stable.
That is, sleep and dreams consolidate memories.
It's another fascinating idea if it's true, but how do we test it?
Well, as you'll see, testing theories related to sleep can be quite complex.
One very simple approach is the following.
We could first present participants with some task to learn.
If we're interested in memory, maybe we give them a list of words to try to remember.
Then we break our participants into two groups.
One group is allowed to sleep, the other must remain awake.
Eight hours or so later, we test their memory.
What do we find?
Well, invariably we will find that the group that slept will perform better than the group that did not.
And this seems to imply that sleep is indeed aiding memory in some manner.
But does it really demand that explanation?
Well, remember when I discussed theories of forgetting?
I mentioned that one of the notions of forgetting is that if you learn something and then you go on to learn other things,
the things that you learn after may make it harder to remember the things you had learned earlier.
Remember the clothes on the floor notion?
Well, so maybe it isn't the case that sleep is really benefiting memory.
Maybe it's the case that those participants who stayed awake had experiences while they were awake.
And those experiences made it harder for them to remember the word list.
The sleeping participants did not have those experiences and hence found it easier to remember the list.
Or maybe the group that stayed awake is just exhausted and that's why they perform worse.
Well, in general, that's the problem with sleep studies.
No matter how clever the researcher is when designing an experiment to test some prediction,
it's really very difficult to manipulate some aspect of sleep without also changing other variables,
including a lot of variables that might be relevant.
So, because of this, most of the data that we have about the effects of sleep are more suggestive than definitive.
But, with that caveat in place, some of these suggestive findings are actually really fascinating.
So, let's discuss them a little along with some of the experiments used to support them.
So, do dreams serve to consolidate memory?
And if so, what kind of memory?
Well, let's consider REM sleep first, dream sleep.
In one study, rats were taught what the researchers described as a skill of shock avoidance.
Specifically, two groups of rats were tested.
Both were placed in a box that had two chambers with a metallic, great floor.
For the experimental group, the following events would occur.
A light would turn on and a tone would sound. These things would happen together.
Five seconds later, a small electrical current would pass through the floor of the chamber that the rat was in.
If the rat left the chamber, the current was turned off.
In fact, if the rat left the chamber any time during the five seconds between when the light and tone sounded
and the floor was electrified, the electrification would never happen.
Okay, so over a number of trials of this, these rats would learn to simply move whenever the light and tone came on.
And this behavior is assumed to reflect non-declarative memory systems.
Implicit memory learning the experimental contingencies, the regularities of the environment,
and procedural memory learning the appropriate behavioral response.
Move.
Now, the control group experienced the same events, but nothing they did would prevent the current from coming on.
In both cases, when the current was turned on, it was always terminated after five seconds.
Okay.
So what do we have?
We have one group of rats that are forming these new non-declarative memories.
And we have another group that is not, because nothing they did would prevent the shock.
If you now look at the sleep cycles of these rats, after they experienced these experimental events, you see something interesting.
The group of rats who were learning this new non-declarative memory, they ended up spending a lot more time in REM sleep than did the control rats.
In fact, over 25% more time.
The researchers argued that this is because REM sleep allows for the consolidation of new non-declarative memories.
The rats were reliving the experiment in their dreams and were consolidating their memories as they did so.
Of course, it's impossible to know what's going on in the rats' minds as they dream.
But when I first heard about these studies, they did make some sense to me.
As a teenager, I flipped burgers at a local fast food restaurant.
Now, flipping burgers is a pretty mind-numbing task, and I did this only so I could afford gas from my prize 1973 Super Beetle that I told you about earlier.
So, you can imagine that I would find it quite annoying when I would actually return to my workplace in my dreams.
Flipping burgers over and over all night long.
Now, more recently, I've been learning to play guitar.
It's another task with a very strong non-declarative procedural component.
Again, whenever I am learning some new fingering or riff, I often notice that I dream about it.
I repeat the behavior over and over, sometimes to the point where I badly wish I could dream about something else, anything else.
But maybe then this notion makes some sense.
Maybe the neurons we use when we're learning some new motor behavior somehow reactivate when we dream.
And that essentially allows us to learn better, at least at the level of the relevant brain connections.
If we go back to that evolutionary story that I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture, then we could add the following.
Yes, maybe we sleep as a way to conserve energy, and maybe we do that specifically during times when we can't be hunting or gathering.
But if we could both conserve energy and also improve our skills at hunting and gathering, that would be even better, right?
Well, perhaps that's exactly what we do.
Okay, but what about slow wave sleep? Does that have anything to do with memory consolidation?
Well, again, if we're willing to accept the imprecision that comes with most studies of sleep, the answer appears to be yes.
Here's how a typical study of slow wave sleep is performed.
Once again, we require at least two groups of participants.
One group might be allowed to sleep for three hours prior to seeing some list of items to recall.
The other group, they have to stay awake for those same three hours, okay?
Now, both groups are shown a list of items, and then both groups are allowed to sleep for three hours before a memory test.
Note then that in this case, we're going to test their episodic memory, their declarative memory.
All right.
Now, here's the critical point of these studies.
Remember when I said that the amount of time that we spend in each stage of sleep changes the longer that we sleep throughout the night.
Well, that fact is critical for the logic of these studies, because specifically, the group that we allowed to sleep for three hours had already spent a lot of time in slow wave sleep.
So now, after they see the items and go back to sleep, they won't spend that much time in slow wave sleep.
Instead, they'll spend a lot of time in REM sleep.
However, the group that we had stay awake for those three hours, awake right up until they heard the list,
they will be getting their very first sleep after hearing the list, and this sleep will be dominated by slow wave sleep.
So, we have one group that's mostly in REM sleep, and another that's mostly in slow wave sleep.
Who remembers the list of items better?
Well, despite sleeping only three hours, the group that was forced to stay awake, this group,
and therefore, the group that spent most of their sleep in slow wave sleep remembers the list better.
So, slow wave sleep seems to consolidate declarative memory, and in this case, episodic memory.
By the way, if you repeat the procedure I just described, but instead of learning a list of words, you ask participants to learn some new motor skill?
Well, then the group that was mostly in REM sleep performs better.
So, this provides further confirmation that REM sleep seems important for the consolidation of non-declarative memories.
So, that's pretty cool.
Different stages of sleep seem critical for the consolidation of different forms of memory.
Well, so when we think about this now, we can maybe kind of get a sense of how dreaming might consolidate a procedural memory.
I mean, if we are essentially reliving the relevant motor sequence, we can imagine that the brain areas relevant to that are getting trained up.
But how does slow wave sleep consolidate episodic memories?
Well, one clue might come from the following.
When we're in slow wave sleep, that part of our brain called the hippocampus becomes active.
And we know that the hippocampus is critical for the transition of memories from working memory to episodic memory.
And when people are performing deep levels of encoding, the hippocampus is also very active.
What is it doing?
Some researchers speculate that the hippocampus is like a conductor of an orchestra.
It somehow is gluing together different brain regions to form a meaningful overall pattern.
A pattern of brain activity.
And it may do so in both a receptive and a productive sort of way.
That is, during encoding, the various areas of the brain relevant to perception of some external event are activated by the event itself.
And deep encoding of that event may involve some sort of gluing together of these different areas.
And the hippocampus may be involved in that gluing together.
The hippocampus can then subsequently bring back that memory by stimulating those same brain areas.
And so if it can stimulate them to fire in the same manner, to activate in the same manner that they activated when the actual event occurred,
well, that may reflect our conscious reliving of the event, episodic memory.
The fact that the hippocampus is active during slow wave sleep suggests that maybe it is performing these sorts of functions as we sleep.
Reactivating and perhaps strengthening the episodic memories.
And, in fact, declarative memory more generally.
So any of these memories that are related to recent events may actually be reactivated and made stronger.
So procedural events, events that require some sort of sequential unfolding of muscle movements, they get replayed during REM sleep when our muscles are paralyzed.
However, episodic events, things that we saw or heard, might be replayed during slow wave sleep.
In both cases, the replaying might make the relevant memory systems more stable, more consolidated.
And perhaps this division of labor is based specifically on the fact that muscles are paralyzed during REM sleep.
Of course, they are also distinguished by another difference.
Working memory seems to be online during REM sleep, which is why we feel like we consciously experience our dreams.
In contrast, working memory is not online during slow wave sleep.
If we awaken somebody during slow wave sleep, again, a very difficult thing to do, but typically they will report no sense of having been dreaming.
We only seem to dream during REM sleep.
Now, there's one interesting addition to all this.
If we consider the stages of sleep across our lifespan, we see the following.
We spend the most time in REM sleep as infants.
Infants have been shown to spend 50% or more of their sleep in a REM state.
This makes some sense given all the new motor behaviors they're learning.
REM sleep, though, declines as we age.
And in some older adults, it can be missing altogether.
And perhaps this is why, as we like to say, it is hard to train an old dog new tricks.
Slow wave sleep also declines as we age.
In fact, older people spend more time in those transition stages than do young people.
So it takes them longer to get to slow wave sleep, and they often spend less time sleeping overall.
So their total slow wave sleep and REM sleep is often much less than it is for younger people.
This may simply reflect what I like to think of as coasting later in life.
Early in life, we need to learn a lot, and learning brings with it all sorts of new experiences.
But as we age, we can increasingly coast on our prior learning.
It may be less important to keep learning new things.
So memory consolidation in general, then, may be less important as we age.
And we're going to return to this issue when we talk specifically about aging and memory later in this course.
But this link to sleep may be part of the story.
Okay, so the main point to take away from this slumber party of memory is the following.
While encoding is clearly very important to getting information into memory, it's not the whole story.
Processes during sleep seem to play a role in further strengthening these memories,
that is, in consolidating these memories, the memories that we encode during the day,
and perhaps even days just previous.
What's more, the distinct stages of sleep differentially consolidate different kinds of memory.
Slow wave sleep seems critical for the consolidation of declarative memories,
and REM sleep is critical to the consolidation of non-declared memories.
Of course, the age when we sleep most of all is during infancy.
When we sleep more than half of every day,
and continue sleeping almost as much as that during early childhood.
So as we'll see in the next lecture, all this sleeping corresponds to a vast sleep
in the development of memory during early life.
