Lecture 14, Mapping Memory in the Brain
Now that we know a lot about our memory systems, how about we go visit the place where they live?
It's that really extraordinary place we call the brain.
By the way, it's about six and a half inches long, about five and a half inches wide,
and about three and a half inches tall, and it weighs about three pounds.
The number of cells in the brain is about a hundred billion,
and that's about the same number as there are stars in our galaxy.
And although our brain just makes up about two percent of our total body weight,
it consumes twenty percent of our body's energy.
Just transporting all this energy around takes about three soda cans worth of blood flowing through our brain every minute.
In just one minute, the brain will consume about a fifth of a cup of oxygen from that blood,
and almost all of that oxygen, ninety-four percent, to be precise,
is consumed by the brain cells in what we call the gray area,
and those are the ones that do the most hard thinking work.
Something must be going on up there.
Well, of course, the something that we are most interested in during this series is memory,
and in this lecture we'll be examining the links between the brain and memory in detail.
By the way, the kind of psychology that tries to understand the links
between cognitive processes in the brain is called cognitive neuroscience,
and it's perhaps the hottest area in psychology research today,
the area that is most dramatically increasing our understanding of human behavior.
Why is it having the impact it is, and why now?
Well, sometimes scientific progress is a function of the tools that are available to the scientists,
and over the last ten to twenty years, we have gained some new and very powerful tools
that allow us to directly watch the brain as conscious participants are performing,
well, really, any task we ask of them.
What's more, we can do this without having to remove the participant's skulls
or in any matter compromising their well-being, and obviously that provides a definite advantage.
So I have two goals in this lecture.
First, I want to describe the tool that has had the largest impact to date in cognitive neuroscience,
and that's a tool called Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
Once you understand how the tool works, I then want to highlight the things that it has helped us to learn
about the neural basis of the various memory systems we've been discussing.
So, let's jump in.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, which is often simply labeled fMRI,
is a method for watching blood flow through an active brain.
fMRI machines combine two powerful technologies.
The first is often used all on its own. It's called Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
You may have heard of sports figures going for an MRI when a shoulder or some other body part feels sore.
Well, essentially an MRI is like an x-ray, but with a whole lot more resolution and a whole lot more power.
In the case of an x-ray, radiant light is sent through your body,
and that light makes it through and is detected on a photosensitive plate on the other side of your body.
This light can easily pass through sparse tissue like fat and skin,
but it does not pass through denser tissue as well.
So the dense tissue, bones for example, leave a shadow on the photosensitive plate.
Those shadows clearly show you the structure of your bones,
and that's what allows a doctor to detect fractures or other structural abnormalities.
X-rays only provide two-dimensional pictures,
and that's because light is just sent from one location and measured at another.
So there's only one path of light, one image.
MRIs differ from x-rays in two different ways.
First, they use magnetic resonance as opposed to radiant light.
The difference that makes is this.
The images obtained from MRIs are much more detailed.
Much more subtle differences in densities can be detected.
So MRI images not only reveal stark density differences like bone versus fat,
but they can also detect and represent even small differences in densities,
like the difference between harder and softer bone, for example.
The second difference is that MRIs use a rotating set of sensors and emitters
that ultimately provide many different images from many different angles.
This large set of high-resolution images is then sent to a powerful computer,
and that computer is able to combine these images into full three-dimensional model
of whatever it is being scanned.
When MRI scans are performed on a person's head,
then it's possible to obtain a similarly detailed 3D model of that person's brain.
So the computer will display the brain exactly as it is,
almost as if the brain had been removed and you were looking at it from any angle you like.
In fact, you can virtually dissect the brain to look at the structures inside of it,
essentially slicing it and seeing what it would look like
if you had sliced and looked at it from that perspective.
It's truly amazing to be able to look inside the skull with this level of detail
without harming the individual in any manner, but it doesn't stop there.
What I've described so far is the MRI part of fMRI.
The f stands for functional, and this is the part that allows us to watch the brain in action.
Now to really understand this, let's move to the gym.
Okay, I have some barbells here.
Now, why? Well, it's always nice to dual-task.
Why not work out and do a lecture at the same time?
But seriously, if I do arm curls, as I'm doing now, my biceps are working.
And as they work, as they flex and unflex,
the muscle tissue that underlies them burns oxygen.
That's why you can feel your muscles burn.
And if I were to do this long enough, you would see me start to breathe a little bit more heavily.
Why is my breathing increasing when I work so hard?
Well, my lungs are pumping oxygen into my bloodstream,
and my heart is delivering this oxygen-rich blood to my biceps.
It keeps them fed.
This is not something I do consciously.
Working the bicep just makes it happen.
Here's the fascinating part.
Brain tissue works in exactly the same way as muscle tissue does.
Remember those statistics I mentioned before at the beginning of the lecture
with respect to blood flow and oxygen consumption?
Well, if we work a certain part of our brain,
it also demands oxygen and nutrients to compensate for what is being used.
What's more, if we inject a bit of radioactive isotope into the bloodstream,
we can detect this radiation and therefore follow the blood.
This is the fMRI machine in action.
It can literally detect where blood is going as people perform various tasks.
So when we combine these two,
an fMRI machine can both provide a very detailed structural model of a person's brain,
and it can show you which parts of that brain are demanding oxygen
when the person performs various tasks.
This literally shows you the part of the brain involved in performing that task.
I know I've said this before, but that's pretty freaking cool.
Okay, now it costs a lot of money to do experiments using an fMRI machine,
but as their potential became obvious,
more and more psychologists began using these machines
to perform what some label as brain mapping.
That is, they would ask questions like the following.
I ask my participants to say silently speak to themselves as we perform an fMRI scan
which part of the brain is demanding more oxygen
compared to a situation where I ask them to just relax and think about nothing.
Once they find an area or areas,
they then conclude that this area must be the part of the brain that is critical for silent speech.
So silent speech happens here in the brain, hence the brain mapping.
If this sounds like a bit of a simplification of how the brain performs various tasks,
well, to some extent it certainly is.
It doesn't really highlight the complexity of what's likely going on,
and it really doesn't tell you much about the processes of producing silent speech.
But still, it does give you a good sense of which parts of the brain are relevant for various tasks,
and that's a really good start for understanding the link between the brain and cognition.
And we have indeed learned a great deal from these brain mapping adventures.
Now, given that this course is about memory,
let's focus on some of the memory systems we've been discussing
to see which parts of the brain seem related to them.
Now, I'd love to begin by telling you where sensory memory happens,
but I can't, not definitively at least,
because as amazing as fMRI machines are, they have limitations,
and their biggest limitation is in terms of their temporal resolution.
What that means is that while they can indeed provide models of the brain
that have fantastic spatial resolution, that is very detailed images,
it takes the device about 10 or 20 seconds to do so.
For the functional part to work,
the participant has to be experiencing the relevant psychological state during that entire period.
If you recall, iconic memory lasts just about a second,
and echoic memory about five seconds tops.
Neither lasts long enough to be detected by fMRI.
Now, that said, we do know that when people are looking at some image
versus not looking at an image,
the area at the very back of their skull,
an area that we call primary visual cortex, is active.
So this is probably where iconic memory resides as well.
Similarly, when we hear sounds,
the area of the brain just above our ears,
an area called primary auditory cortex,
that's the part that becomes active.
So, echoic memory likely resides there as well.
So although we can't be certain that these are the relevant areas,
there's every reason to believe they are.
Okay, so what about working memory?
Well, to explain working memory properly,
let me step back a second and give you a general sense of brain structure.
Often when psychologists talk about brains,
they begin by kind of subdividing the brain into five areas.
The most primitive brain regions are in the very center of the brain,
in the middle of the brain,
and in terms of evolutionary development,
these are probably the oldest brain areas we have.
They're literally referred to as midbrain,
and the midbrain is then surrounded by the cortex.
The cortex itself tends to be divided into four lobes when we talk about it.
The occipital lobe I already introduced you to,
it's at the very back of the head,
and it's especially active when visual input is being processed.
So again, this is where primary visual cortex lies,
and this is the part likely associated with iconic memory.
The temporal lobe lies just above each ear,
and it's especially active when an auditory input is being processed.
So this is the lobe where primary auditory cortex resides,
and the part likely associated with echoic memory.
The very top part of the brain, and a little to the back,
is what's called the parietal lobe.
It's especially active when we're processing input from our bodies,
so-called proprioception,
or when we're processing spatial information about the world around us.
And finally, the very front part of our brain is called the frontal lobe,
whereas those other three parts are really important for processing information
that comes from the external environment.
The frontal lobe seems more relevant to decision-making and to action.
This is the lobe that controls our intentional behaviors.
Now, each of these lobes is sometimes further divided
when focusing on more specific functions,
and you'll see examples of that in a minute.
So back to working memory.
Well, remember, working memory is actually a very powerful memory system,
and we use it for all sorts of tasks.
Its main component is what I previously described as a virtual reality simulator,
some sort of mental workspace where we can combine information,
usually to solve a novel problem.
But we also highlighted two other systems it can call upon,
one being the phonological loop,
and another being the visual spatial scratch pad.
So let's begin with these two subsystems,
and then build our way up to a more complete picture
of the structures relevant to working memory.
All right, so we use the phonological loop
to essentially speak to ourselves within our mind,
and that's a process that's sometimes called subvocal articulation.
Note that when we talk to ourselves, we also listen to ourselves,
at least usually we do,
so really there are two processes involved,
subvocal articulation and what could be called subvocal reception.
It turns out that the brain areas relevant to these processes
are the exact same areas that we use when we're actually producing speech
or receiving speech.
With respect to production then,
there's an area in the cortex called Broca's area.
It's named after Paul Broca, and he was a physician in the late 1800s.
At that time, Broca came across a number of patients
who could show clear understanding of language,
but they could not produce speech themselves.
So if you asked them to do something like say,
go pick up that vase over there,
they would walk over to it and pick it up, just as you asked.
Clearly they understood that.
But if you then said, tell me to go pick up the vase,
they could not do so.
They would utter words, but the words would make no sense.
Now Broca did not live in the days of fMRI.
So to understand what brain area might be involved with this deficit,
he used a slightly slower technique, a much slower technique.
That is, he waited for his patients to die.
Once they did, he opened their skull and looked at the brains,
and each one showed evidence of damage to the area that now bears Broca's name.
This is the part of the brain that we use to produce speech,
and also the part used when we speak silently to ourselves.
Following Broca's lead, another doctor named Vernike
noticed that some patients also showed the reverse problem.
They could speak just fine, but they couldn't understand speech.
When these patients died, and when their brains were examined,
the damage was close to the same area, close to Broca's area,
but a little further back in the head.
In this area, we now call Vernike's area,
and it's the part of the brain that we use to understand speech.
Now the approach used by both Broca and Vernike
for studying brain-damaged individuals is something we call neuropsychology,
and we're going to talk about neuropsychology in detail in a couple of lectures from now.
For current purposes, though, it's heartening to know
that when we now perform fMRI studies on people as they silently speak and listen to themselves,
blood is clearly flowing in both Broca's and Vernike's area.
Thus, the phonological loop that seems to be involved
in the coordinated activity of these parts of the temporal lobe
seems to be exactly what underlies that subvocal articulation we've been discussing.
Okay, so now let's move on to the visual spatial scratch pad,
and just to remind you, early in the course I asked you to do things like
imagine some house or a house-like place that you know well
and to count how many windows it has,
and that brought an image to mind,
one that you could virtually walk around and counting the windows.
That's the visual spatial scratch pad in action.
Perhaps not surprisingly,
when people do such tasks as we scan their brains,
we see lots of blood flow in the occipital cortex.
That part of the brain that's at the very back of the head,
the part that also lights up when we experience a visual stimulus.
Now, you're likely sensing a trend here.
Whenever we are internally creating or manipulating something
that has a real-world analog, things like speech or vision,
we use the same parts of the brain as we would
when we're experiencing that real-world version of the same stimulus.
Okay, now the story gets a little more complex
when we deal with the manner in which we use working memory
to solve various goals.
So for example, in an earlier lecture,
I described working memory as a gateway
that will allow information to get into episodic memory.
In general, the notion was that if you think about some experience deeply enough,
just after it occurs, for example, if you organize it,
visualize the information, associate with other concepts,
then you will be able to increase the chance of that information
later being retrieved as an episodic memory.
So what's going on at the level of the brain in this sort of situation?
Well, it seems any time you ask participants to do this sort of encoding
while you scan their brain,
you see a lot of blood flowing in the frontal lobes,
especially a subarea known as the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Now, remember I said that the frontal lobes,
that area in the front of the brain,
is where decisions are made and where actions are initiated.
It is where we do our conscious thinking and problem solving.
So really, it should be no surprise that it's related to working memory.
However, it does not work alone.
When encoding information deeply,
you also see blood flow in areas of the midbrain,
especially the hippocampus.
You see blood flow in other areas, too,
that seem to depend on what it is you are trying to remember.
So for example, if you're trying to remember words,
you may see blood flow in Broca's area and Vernike's area,
and maybe even in the visual areas of the occipital lobe.
And that would be especially true when people are forming images of the words,
like I did when I demonstrated the method of loci to you.
So current theories suggest that the frontal lobes
are essentially activating the brain areas
that represent information that working memory is working with.
So for example, if you're thinking about something we just saw,
the parts of the brain stimulated by the experience may be active.
So, too, may be other areas that working memory is associating with that experience.
Now, the hippocampus apparently binds these active areas together
and does so in a way that allows them to become reactivated together in the future.
So the frontal lobes are creating the experience,
but the hippocampus is committing this experience to memory
by strengthening connections between active areas.
Remember when we said that slow wave sleep may be important
for the consolidation of declarative memory
and that this consolidation process seems linked to activity in the hippocampus?
Well, the suggestion from this work
is that the hippocampus doesn't just bind areas right after we have some experience,
but that this process of binding may continue as we sleep
and may be orchestrated by the hippocampus.
Now, this brings us to episodic memory.
In some sense, retrieving an episodic memory reflects the very same processes
as those involved in encoding,
though with the processes working a little differently.
Let's say I ask you where you last went on vacation.
This query would be represented by the relevant language processing areas,
in this case, Vernike's area,
and an answer would be sought by activating working memory,
which again seems to be located in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
Any connections between the linguistic area and other areas related to that query,
for example, any areas that the hippocampus had previously linked to last vacation,
could become active and could result in other related information becoming active.
At the same time, the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex also activates the hippocampus.
It's not entirely clear what role the hippocampus then plays.
Does it somehow help to activate other areas related to those becoming active already?
It may, and in so doing, it may aid in the retrieval process.
Or perhaps it is active in preparation for a gain in coding the active information for the future.
That is, if some experience becomes relevant, some past experience,
maybe this is an experience that's more likely to be relevant on a repeated basis.
So maybe we should give it another shot of encoding.
Now, it may also be the case that's doing both.
Aiding retrieval by somehow promoting appropriate co-activation of brain areas
while also strengthening the links between those areas as they become active.
At any rate, the result of all this is that the information in the query becomes a seed
that then activates other information previously associated with it.
So you think, hmm, last vacation.
And maybe that brings an image of you and a friend on a beach in Mexico,
which would likely be reflected, by the way, as activation in the occipital lobe, because it's an image.
Maybe you also remember doing the limbo, and you can almost feel yourself dancing.
Well, that would be reflected in activation in sensory cortex in the parietal lobe.
Perhaps you also hear the music, the music that was playing as you were dancing, as you were doing the limbo.
Well, that music would be reflected by activation in your right temporal lobe.
All of these activations together give rise to your episodic memory of that specific event in your life.
And as they become active, they form a sort of complex reliving of the experience in your dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
That is episodic memory.
Of course, that may then activate Broca's area in your left temporal lobe to allow you to respond,
Mexico, my last vacation was in Mexico, I remember.
Okay, now, so what about semantic memory?
Well, let's imagine that you've taken, in fact, a number of trips to Mexico.
Let's say 20 or more.
Each time you were there, you've noted things about the language, the currency, the music, the culture, the food.
So you encode strong links between Mexico and these things.
But each time you do, the links each forms to other more specific experiences,
things like that time when you decided to bury your friend in the sand, for example, they're not so strong.
So, if I now ask you, name three ingredients common to most Mexican foods,
you might quickly think, that is, you might activate the representations of tomatoes, lettuce, and some form of corn-based bread wrapper.
But because both the concept of Mexico and the concept of Mexican food have been associated with so many other more specific events from specific episodes,
there would be no convergence of activation from these concepts to a single specific episode.
Instead, you would get the answer without all the co-activation associated with a specific episode coming to mind.
So, to some extent, semantic memories are actually represented as brain areas activated by association.
I sometimes think of it as a convergent sort of process.
If I ask you about typical foods of Mexico, then you would activate the concept of food, then the concept of Mexico,
each of which might then activate other concepts that they're associated with.
The concepts that both are associated with would gain double activation.
And that might be enough to make them stand out as potential answers to the query.
All right.
Suddenly, I'm talking about things like concepts being represented and associated with other concepts.
Notice, first of all, that concepts are different from raw sensory experiences.
When I use the word concept, I'm actually referring to a generalized notion of some object or some idea.
So, for example, imagine a candle.
If you see a candle, the visual attributes of it, for example, the fact that it's cylindrical and has a bright pointy tip,
that would stimulate primary visual cortex, and that would allow you to see those attributes.
But after you've seen a number of specific candles from a number of specific angles across a number of specific contexts,
your brain is able to represent some general notion of what a candle is and what it's used for.
That is, in a sense, your semantic memory of a candle.
Where is that represented?
Well, within each lobe of your brain, there are areas referred to as association cortex.
And we think the role of these areas are to learn these abstract concepts,
these generalized notions of things we have experienced.
So this, then, would be where semantic memories are.
This is an issue we'll return to when we discuss brain injuries and the memory problems that can result.
So let's leave it there for now, but I assure you we will come back to this issue.
This brings us, though, to our last stop on our memory mapping of the brain tour, and that would be procedural memory.
Now, remember, procedural memory is all about coordinating muscle movements.
Two brain areas seem especially relevant to procedural memory.
First, there's a strip of cortex that runs over the top of your head.
If you had headphones on where the strip of the headphones would be.
This area is called motor cortex.
And when any behavior is initiated, this part of the cortex seems to be the source of that behavior.
It's activated first.
So if you decide to move your arm, for example, it seems that your frontal lobes stimulate a specific part of your motor cortex,
that part associated with your arm, and that part of motor cortex sends the signal onwards towards your arm.
Now, if that was the whole story, then all of our movements would be very crude.
Kind of like how we imagined zombies or mummies or our friend Frankenstein that we were talking about earlier.
However, the signal is actually sent through the cerebellum.
And the cerebellum is a part of our brain that makes our movements graceful.
It's located at the very back and bottom of our brain.
It almost sits under the brain near the back.
Now, maybe some of us are more graceful than others, but we are all actually pretty graceful in our movements.
Stubbed toes and things like that are really exceptions to the rule.
And this seems to be the job that the cerebellum plays to orchestrate very fine motor movements
and thereby allow us to move our muscles in a way that's both smooth and effective.
So when we're learning some new procedure, like dancing, for example, maybe we want to dance the waltz.
It's likely our cerebellum that's doing most of the fine tuning as we practice.
Wow, we've really covered a lot of ground in this lecture.
I've turned you all into cognitive neuroscientists.
But one thing that's really cool about all these new findings is the extent to which the neuroscientific findings match up
with the theories and ideas that came from cognitive psychology experiments.
Now, cognitive psychologists, they weren't particularly interested in the brain when performing these experiments.
Instead, they were interested in the processes of thought, and through empirical research,
they were able to identify specific components of memory.
The fact that these components map so well onto specific brain areas is really quite encouraging,
and that suggests that the story of memory that's emerging from both seems to be on the right track.
Our understanding of these basic memory processes seems sound,
and being able to link processes onto brain structures makes that understanding even more complete.
In the next lecture, we'll look at the rise of efforts to model this complexity of the brain
and get at the processes and how they interact more fully.
