Lecture 16 – Learning from Brain Damage and Amnesias
Welcome back.
In this lecture we're going to leave the research labs for a while and instead we're
going to play doctor.
In the last few lectures I've told you about the links between brain systems and memory
and I've done so in a way that's rather academic.
This seems to be here, that seems to be there and well here's how we might try to simulate
it all using neural network models.
All that is cool but in this lecture I hope to put a human face on well actually rather
several human faces on the relation between brain, mind and all in the context obviously
of memory.
I told you we were going to play doctor and that's because the field of psychology that
we're going to visit is a field called neuropsychology.
Humans are doctors who treat patients that have suffered from some severe forms of brain
injury and in so doing they get a clearer indication of the link again between brain
and behavior.
For many years psychologists have lesioned or in some other way damaged the brains of
animals again in an attempt to understand the relevance of specific brain areas and
while those studies can be informative they always come with a shadow of doubt.
We know that human brains are far more complex than the brains of animals and it's never
clear that what's true of the rat is also true of the human so how can we be sure?
Well the findings of neuropsychological patients give us one way of doing just that so let's
dive in a little deeper and see what we learn.
Let's begin with the famous anecdote of a Swiss doctor named Edward Clapper Ray.
Clapper Ray worked in a hospital that included patients suffering from various forms of amnesia
One female patient at that hospital could remember events from her youth just fine but
she could no longer lay down any new memories.
Each morning Clapper Ray would greet her and each time she would not remember ever meeting
him before.
One morning Clapper Ray had a little pin in his hand and as he shook her hand to say
good morning he intentionally pricked her with a pin.
The next day the patient again did not recognize him but as he reached out his hand to shake
her hand she pulled her hand back.
She did not want to shake his hand although she couldn't say why.
Now this example shows the complex behavior patterns that can be seen from patients who
have suffered brain damage.
One memory system may be damaged while others are fine.
This patient for example could retrieve old episodic memories but she couldn't form new
ones.
However she could clearly form some sort of new memory one that could aid her in avoiding
pain but she did so without any kind of conscious sense of what she was doing.
Now at this point in the course you likely do not find this complexity as surprising
at least not as surprising as you might have earlier.
You now know that there are a variety of memory systems and that different systems support
us in different ways.
So it's not really surprising that damage to the brain might affect some of these systems
more than others.
So armed with our current knowledge of the brain and how it's linked to memory let's
see some other patients and put some of these pieces together in the context of real people.
So let's return to a character we met a little earlier, the musician and conductor named
Clive Waring.
Now Clive was a very high functioning artistic man until an infection by a herpes encephalitis
produced a very high fever that essentially cooked the neurons in well in several parts
of Clive's brain.
The two sites of damage that I want to focus on most are damage to his frontal lobes and
damage to his hippocampus.
And let me also highlight two distinct memory problems that Clive lives with.
First, he cannot retrieve any events from his life prior to the fever and second he
cannot form any new episodic memory for events that occurred after his fever.
Often patients have just one or the other of these problems, Clive has both and that's
why Clive is essentially living in the moment for every moment of his life.
Clive's two memory problems are separately linked to the damage to his frontal lobes and
his hippocampus respectively.
So let's take them one at a time.
First let's address Clive's inability to relive episodes of his life that occurred prior to
the fever.
Now this form of amnesia is termed retrograde amnesia.
Retro is in old like retro clothes or retro music.
It's likely the case by the way that Clive hasn't really lost those memories, instead
he just likely has trouble retrieving them.
They're still there, he just can't get at them.
From imaging studies we know that the frontal lobes play an important role in terms of the
initiation of action.
His frontal lobe damage likely prevents him from initiating retrieval processes.
If you never start a retrieval process, you can never ultimately experience a memory even
if the memory is there.
It's just like that mayonnaise hiding behind the pickle jar.
It may be there, but if you don't look for it, you won't find it.
Can we really conclude all of this simply because brain imaging shows that the frontal
lobes are active when people retrieve?
Well there are other results as well that also support that interpretation.
For example you've likely heard of frontal lobotomies, which is literally the severing
of connections between the frontal cortex and the rest of the brain.
Why did anybody permit such a procedure to be performed on their loved ones?
Sounds very extreme.
Well, some people with mental disorders become very aggressive.
They become aggressive to themselves and they become aggressive often to anybody who gets
close to them.
And in the day before widespread use of tranquilizing drugs, the only thing to do with such patients
was to literally tie them down 24 hours a day.
There were special chairs called restraining chairs for exactly this purpose.
So imagine now that this is your family member and a doctor mentions to you a new procedure.
It's a procedure that will make the aggression of your family member disappear altogether.
They'll no longer have to be restrained.
Sounds pretty good, I would think.
Well a frontal lobotomy does exactly that.
Like retrieval, aggression must be initiated and when the frontal lobe is disconnected,
it simply is not.
I should not surprise you to learn that the patients who underwent these lobotomies have
poor memories and they often prefer to engage in habitual behavior.
Things like watching TV or playing card games that they know well or smoking, those seem
to be their favorite pastimes.
But of course they're no longer aggressive and that was a big plus at that time.
Less extreme versions of retrograde amnesia are actually quite common though they're typically
very short lived.
In fact, you or a close loved one may even have suffered from it at some point in your
own life.
Have you ever been hit very hard on the head?
Typically when somebody suffers a concussion there's a swelling of the brain and that includes
a swelling of the frontal lobes.
In those cases it's quite common that people who suffer from these concussions will initially
have little memory of themselves.
But then slowly they regain their memories beginning with those furthest in the past
and eventually recovering memories up to the last bit of time just prior to the concussion.
Some patients never recover the last few hours prior to the accident but otherwise their
memory is fine.
Given this progression this sort of amnesia is sometimes called temporarily graded amnesia.
Memory recovery may indeed take some time and patients can find this time uncomfortable
especially when interacting with those who know them well.
Imagine not knowing someone who treats you like a friend or a lover, it could probably
be a little odd.
But as the patient becomes exposed to retrieval cues, memories are recovered and often recovered
memories then cue the recovery of more memories and that's what makes retrograde amnesia
typically a short term problem.
It's really only in cases like clives where the damage to the frontal lobe is permanent
that it becomes a much more enduring problem.
So now let's move on to Clive's second memory problem, his inability to lay down new episodic
memory traces.
This form of amnesia is called interior grade amnesia where interior is a fancy word for
forward.
It's a forward acting memory problem, one that prevents the formation of new episodic
memories.
His interior grade amnesia is most certainly linked to the damage to his hippocampus which
is a structure we've already discussed at several points in this course.
We know that the hippocampus is critical for the transfer of information from working memory
to long term memory, both at the time of encoding and afterwards at the time of consolidation.
In fact we initially learned about the importance of the hippocampus not from Clive but from
another neuropsychological patient studied decades ago.
His name was H.M.
Now H.M. is a very special kind of neuropsychology patient because the damage to his brain was
performed surgically and that allows a much clearer understanding of the damage and the
behavioral issues that it causes.
Now why would anybody have parts of their brain surgically removed?
Well, this is yet another story of the lesser of two evils.
You see H.M. initially suffered from a very severe form of epilepsy.
It was one that resulted in him having upwards of about 10 grand mal seizures a day.
So literally at any moment H.M. could experience a seizure that would ultimately result in
him dropping to the ground, becoming unconscious and having his entire body convulsing.
Given this he hated to even leave his home and he was willing to consider any procedure
that might prevent these seizures from happening.
Seizures are caused by what we call negative feedback loops in the brain.
A brain area on say the left side of the brain sends a signal to a mirrored area on the right
and that signal then is bounced back to the left side right at that originating spot.
The signal then keeps going back and forth, back and forth and as it does so it strengthens,
it becomes stronger.
So imagine this electrical signal becoming stronger and stronger and stronger as it goes
back and forth and literally at some point the brain short circuits.
That results in the loss of consciousness.
In fact the convulsions that you see are due to the motor areas in the brain which we mentioned
that literally control our body and this electrical activity that is now surging all through the
brain is causing random activity in those motor areas which are then passing that random activity
onto the muscles they control and that results in the spastic muscle movements that we kind
of think of when we think of an epileptic seizure.
So given all this the process for preventing such seizures is actually quite straightforward.
All one really has to do is remove the brain areas partaking in this negative feedback loop.
Now doctors weren't exactly sure which areas were producing HM seizures but they suspected
the midbrain regions and so they removed the hippocampus and the amygdala from both the
right and the left sides of HM's brain.
Again a very nice clear surgical removal of brain tissue.
Now the good news is that the seizure stopped and this was good news indeed and we need to
stress that.
HM could now leave his house and experience the world.
The bad news is that just like Clive wearing HM could no longer lay down any new episodic
memories.
If you met him you could have a perfectly good conversation with him as long as it wasn't
about recent events but the moment you left the room and the moment he thought about something
other than you you would be completely forgotten.
If you walked back into the room HM would insist that he had no memory of ever meeting
you before.
This sort of damage by the way is really well depicted in the movie Momento and it's a movie
I highly recommend especially now that you guys all know so much about memory.
I think you'll find it very interesting.
So clearly though a functioning hippocampus is critical to the formation of episodic memories
and it's important to highlight that while the formation of episodic memories is impaired
many other memory systems are clearly intact.
So for example unlike Clive wearing HM has no trouble reliving memories that were encoded
prior to a surgery and we assume this is the case because HM's frontal lobes were not affected
by the surgery.
So while the hippocampus is needed to form new episodic memories it would be incorrect
to view it as the home of episodic memories.
Patients with damage to the hippocampus or even no hippocampus at all can still experience
episodic memories.
By the way both Clive and HM also clearly have a functioning working memory.
As I said you could have a conversation with either Clive or HM.
You could ask them questions and they would try to answer.
Now depending on the question their memory problems may get in the way.
For example if you if you ask them how high could you reach sitting on a camel that thing
we talked about earlier well I expect HM could probably work his way to an answer because
he could rely on past episodic memories.
Clive might have trouble and that would depend on whether he needed information in his episodic
or semantic memory.
Does he know how tall the camel's back is?
If he just sort of knows that if it's in a semantic memory then maybe he'll do fine.
But if he needs to remember a specific instance of standing beside a camel he just won't be
able to do that.
HM still will.
So within the confines though of the memory problems both of these gentlemen can think
just fine when they're in the moment.
Their working memory is intact.
As I just implied their semantic memory system is also intact.
With respect to semantic memory they still know things about the world and they can show
that knowledge either declaratively or non declaratively.
So for example if you show them a toothbrush and ask them what it was they could tell you.
They could also tell you in a sort of non declarative way by simply brushing their teeth
each morning.
I mean clearly they understand the function of a toothbrush if they can use it properly.
So now let's talk about procedural memory.
Procedural memory is perhaps the most interesting story in the context of these amnesias.
First both Clive and HM clearly retain their procedural memories even after the brain insult.
Clive in fact can still play piano he plays it very well and he can sing and he can conduct.
He can also still read and write.
I mentioned to you earlier that he writes in his journal constantly.
In a more mundane sense both Clive and HM also care for themselves.
So they know all the procedures that you need to know in terms of cleaning and getting dressed
in that sort of morning ritual that we all engage in.
But what is perhaps even more interesting is that patients like them, patients suffering
from anterior grade amnesia can also learn new procedural memories.
Procedural learning still seems to be intact.
Now one procedural learning task that's been studied in some detail is called mirror line
tracing.
So imagine the outline of a medium sized star within the outline of a slightly larger star.
Patients are given a pencil and they are allowed to see a mirror reflection of the star and
of their hand with the pencil but they can't see their hand directly so they're looking
at everything through a mirror reflection and they are now asked to draw within the
lines so that they're tracing between the two stars as they do so.
Now initially this is a very difficult task because one has to learn how to kind of reverse
all the directions of your actions because you're seeing everything through a mirror reflection.
When healthy participants are given this task they also find it initially challenging but
with practice they get better and better.
But here's the interesting thing, amnesics also get better and better and in fact their
improvement is very much similar to the improvement you see with healthy adults.
So day after day they improve while each day insisting that they've never performed this
task before.
Now if all this makes you think back to Clape Array and the patient that would no longer
shake his hand, bravo, that's exactly what was going on in that example.
The patient learned not to reach out her hand after just one experience of being stuck
with a pin.
She couldn't explain her behavior consciously because she did not recall the episode that
shaped it but shape it it did.
So the amnesias then represent problems with episodic memory but are there also neuropsychological
cases that show specific damages to other forms of memory?
Well yes there are and the one I want to focus on and spend a bit more time in the next little
bit are a pattern of damage that generally go under the term agnosia.
The word agnosia means a lack of knowledge and those who suffer from it clearly show
a disconnect between their ability to see and hear relative to their ability to understand
what it is they're seeing or hearing.
In his book The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat the author Oliver Sacks describes
one male patient who suffered from a visual form of agnosia.
Let me give you an example.
That patient was shown a glove kind of like this, happened to have one right here.
It was just held up for the patient and the patient was asked what it was they were seeing.
Now the man was not allowed to touch the glove, he could only look at it and that will be important
as I'll tell you in a moment but when he was asked to think aloud at what he was trying
what he thought this was as he looked at it he would say things like the following.
He would say hmm well there seems to be these five pouches, they're different sizes and
he would look at this and say what could that be?
Well maybe this could be a purse, a purse for coins of different sizes.
So you could put bigger coins in the thumb hole for example than the other ones which
obviously this patient didn't even view as a thumb hole.
He was seeing this as a purse.
Now when I first read about agnosias I found them completely fascinating.
I mean this guy can clearly see the glove, he's describing it, in fact he can see well
enough to read small print without any trouble, this patient reads all the time.
His problem is not a problem with vision, it's a problem of connecting what he's seeing
to things he has seen in the past.
This is semantic memory, our knowledge of the world and you know all of the things that
are within it.
So somehow this man's perceptual system has become disconnected from his semantic memory.
I say it in this way because he has not lost his semantic memory.
If we were to tell him it's a glove he would exclaim a glove of course and also as I alluded
to a little earlier if you actually let him touch it and hold it he would recognize it
as a glove pretty quickly.
If you ask him what gloves are used for he'll tell you to keep hands warm.
He hasn't lost his knowledge of gloves but he's lost the access to that knowledge via
sight.
When I discuss agnosias with my class there's a demonstration I like to use.
It's difficult to give somebody a really clear sense of what it's like to suffer from visual
agnosia but it's quite easy to create the sense of what it would be like to have auditory
agnosia.
As I'm speaking to you now, your auditory brain, those systems in there are receiving
the sounds but they almost instantly recode those sounds into words that you know and
understand.
That latter part again represents your semantic memory and it's linking the sounds to the
meanings.
What would it be like if that system was not able to do what it does?
Well, listen to the sound clip and notice what you hear.
Okay, so you can hear the sounds just fine right?
Your hearing works just as it should but all you get is the sounds.
You can't translate those sounds into meanings.
To do that you would have to learn the language.
That is, you would need the semantic memory that allows the translation.
This is what it's like to suffer from agnosia.
You see things, you hear things but you just cannot understand what it is that you're seeing
or hearing.
Okay, I want to take this opportunity to return to a common misconception of memory.
It's what I mentioned a little earlier and that's the tendency to think of memory as
a final step of processing.
For example, in my lecture about transferring information from working memory to episodic
memory, the basic scenario was that you encountered some new information, you then worked on encoding
it, and if you did everything really well then it would be transferred to long-term storage,
making it feel like that's kind of the last stop.
What the agnosias really show us so clearly is that memory is not just an endpoint.
Once memories are created and stored, they literally affect the way we perceive the world.
We use our memories to interpret what it is that we see, feel, hear, taste, or smell.
Every time we recognize something or someone, it is memory that has allowed that recognition.
So memory is as much about forming an experience as it is about holding on to the experience
for later.
And all of this is especially true of semantic memory.
Now by the way, patients with the sort of agnosia I've been highlighting so far, they
tend to have damage to cortical areas that surround the primary cortex of the affected
sense.
So for visual agnosia, for example, I mentioned that vision is primarily processed in the
occipital lobe, placed right at the very back of the head.
Well, the raw visual signals of vision are processed in the middle of that area.
It's a sub-area called primary visual cortex.
And if you damage that area, you would literally have trouble seeing properly.
So before going on, let me highlight what is going on in that primary visual cortex.
In 1981, psychologists David Hubel and Thorsten Wiesel of Harvard University won the Nobel
Prize for demonstrating that neurons in the primary visual cortex act as feature detectors.
That is, each neuron fires when some very specific stimulus, some very specific feature
is present in the environment.
For example, a single neuron might fire when a line is present at a 60-degree angle at
some very specific point in the environment.
Other neurons, well, they might respond to different orientations, and still others might
respond to colors or movement, that kind of thing.
So the primary visual cortex is essentially deconstructing the visual input into raw sensory
features.
And then these raw features are then reconstructed by the brain by passing these features up
to further processing areas that are sensitive to, say, combinations of features.
So the visual signal is broken down and then reconstructed as objects located at very specifically
spatial locations.
This reconstructed visual input is then passed on to the area around the primary cortex, an
area termed secondary or association cortex.
And this is the part that we think is responsible for recognizing what it is we're seeing.
Damage to this area leads to these sense-specific agnosias we've been talking about.
So to some extent, very basic sensory memories are apparently represented in these brain
regions.
And each lobe has its own cortex relevant to the kind of stimulation it deals with.
Sometimes these agnosias can even be much more domain-specific than just affecting things
that we, for example, hear.
There's an especially interesting form of agnosia called prosopagnosia.
Prosopagnosia, it refers to a distinct inability to recognize human faces.
So to kind of make this clear and concrete, let's imagine that my sister suffered from
this and she was laying asleep in a hospital bed.
I might then walk into the room and stand quietly in front of her, not move, just stand
there.
If a nurse were then to wake her up and say, hey, look who's here, then when she looked
at me, she might not be sure at all who I was.
She would sense the familiarity of my features, which is likely the result of her implicit
learning, but she might not explicitly recognize me.
She might be thinking things like the following.
Is this someone I know from work?
Or maybe this is a TV star or a rock star?
Or maybe it's my brother.
All of these options would seem possible.
Now, as soon as I spoke or moved, she would recognize me right away.
But based only on the visual features of my face, that recognition would not occur.
So the conscious declarative memory is blocked, but a general sense of familiarity remains.
We're going to be talking about this familiarity notion in detail in subsequent lectures.
But prosopagnosia occurs really when a very specific part of the brain is damaged.
It's an area called the fusiform gyrus.
We now are pretty sure that this brain area is critical for allowing us to form what we
call holistic perceptions, which are perceptions that are based on how collections of features
occur together.
So let's think about faces for a moment again.
We don't recognize somebody's face based on any specific feature, not the shape of
their nose or their lips or their eyes.
It's not one feature that defines who you are by your facial appearance.
Rather, it's the way the various features of your face combine.
That's what makes us all unique.
And that's what the fusiform gyrus seems critical for, allowing perception and recognition
at this holistic level, this combination of features.
Now, neuropsychological cases can be especially interesting when one finds two syndromes that
are essentially opposites of one another.
And with respect to the agnosias, a fascinating mirror disorder to prosopagnosia is something
called capgrass delusions.
Remember, prosopagnosia is familiarity without recognition.
Well, people with capgrass delusion, they suffer from an opposite kind of state of affairs.
They can recognize things just fine, but the things that they recognize do not feel familiar
to them.
In fact, they feel decidedly unfamiliar.
Patients with capgrass syndrome who live with a spouse or somebody close like that,
they often report things like the following.
They will say that their spouse, yeah, that's them, that looks like them, that the sound
of their voice is them, you know, I can recognize it as them, but they don't feel right.
There's something about them that feels wrong, they don't feel familiar.
And in fact, they sometimes become so convinced that this person is wrong, that they come
up with kind of extreme ideas like maybe this is a robot, or maybe this is an alien that
somehow is within their spouse's body.
In fact, in a few dramatic cases, they've even killed their spouses and done things
like remove their heads.
Why?
Because they want to show the wires, or the alien anatomy.
They want to convince others that they're not crazy.
So to the extent that familiarity arises from these implicit learning systems we talk about,
this disorder reflects a failure of non-declarative memory in a context where declarative memory
recognition is working just fine.
Some disorders also target procedural memory.
You may have heard of Tourette's syndrome, and perhaps when you think of it, you think
of patients who suddenly and uncontrollably blurt out obscenities.
It turns out that only a minority of patients display that behavior, most just show some
sign of what we would call ticks, like a compulsive eye blinking, or throat clearing,
coughing, sniffing, things like that that occur in the background of otherwise normal
behavior.
In addition, patients with Tourette's syndrome are also slower to acquire procedural memories.
Patients with HIV show a decreased ability to execute procedural behavior, and that suggests
some deterioration of the brain systems is going on there as well.
Well, what do these two health issues have in common, Tourette's and AIDS?
They both negatively affect a brain area called the striatum.
Perhaps this brain region controls learning and performance of procedural memory.
Well there's further evidence to support that possibility, and that comes from patients
with obsessive compulsive disorder.
Patients who can't help but obsessively engage in specific thoughts or behaviors.
So for example, an obsessive compulsive patient might feel the need to repeatedly check to
ensure that the oven has been turned off, and they may have to do this 10 or more times
before they feel convinced that it was.
What makes these patients especially interesting is that they actually have a larger striatum
than normal.
And if the striatum underlies procedural memory, these patients should have an enhanced ability
to learn and perform procedural memory tasks.
And they do.
It turns out that the motor movement itself is very complex, especially when performed
with the level of precision and grace typical of our human performance.
Other brain regions also play roles in the initiation and the smooth execution of behavior,
including the frontal lobes and the cerebellum.
When those areas become damaged, as they are for example in Parkinson's disease, movements
can become much less graceful and hard to initiate.
But in terms of procedural memory, it really seems that it's the striatum that's where
most of the learning occurs.
As these various conditions show, damage to specific brain areas related to memory can
give rise to very specific deficits, and these deficits can have a real human toll.
My hope was that by introducing you to some of these patients, I could communicate the
relation between the brain and memory in a different and more human way, one that shows
just how important these systems are to our abilities to smoothly interact with the world.
All of these conditions I describe represent situations where specific memory systems are
impaired.
But really, these situations all pale when compared to the greatest thief of memory.
That thief is Alzheimer's disease, and it will be the subject of our next lecture.
