Lecture 17 – The Many Challenges of Alzheimer's Disease
At the end of the last lecture, I described Alzheimer's disease as the greatest thief
of memory we have ever known.
That characterization applies both to how much it steals and how many it steals from.
What's more, those whose memories are stolen, they're not the only victims.
In fact, the odds are very high that many of you watching this lecture will have been
touched by the disease itself, or that you know someone who has been.
It is estimated that the disease itself will affect one in 85 people by the year 2050.
And for every person that's directly affected, there will be another one to three caregivers
whose lives may also be changed almost as dramatically as the life of the patient herself.
It really is not an exaggeration to say that Alzheimer's disease often attacks at least
two people at once, the patient who suffers from it, and typically a very close family
member who becomes the primary caregiver.
And often it actually seems as though the caregiver experiences a sort of pain and suffering
that is in some ways worse than that suffered by the patient.
In this lecture, I will be highlighting some of the characteristics of Alzheimer's disease
and emphasizing the way it affects the memory of the patient, but also the social bonds
between the caregiver and the patient.
I have to say in advance this is not a pleasant story.
Alzheimer's disease is progressive and it's terminal, meaning it only gets worse with
time and it's invariably fatal.
As one caregiver states in a documentary on this subject, it is the long goodbye.
These caregivers watch their loved ones recede slowly into themselves and then ultimately
into death itself.
As horrible as all this sounds, I'm also going to try to bring some hopeful and useful
information forward.
Specifically, I'm going to highlight some of the factors that may help prevent Alzheimer's
disease, factors that you may wish to introduce into your own daily living.
In addition, I will use this disease as an example of how technology can be used to provide
what some are calling cognitive prosthetics.
These are aids that can help patients maintain their dignity and their abilities and that
may even provide tools that can help the search for successful treatments.
But let's first be clear that those who are suffering from Alzheimer's disease are going
through an entirely different process than those who are simply aging.
Aging is sometimes referred to as reflecting what's called normal dementia.
As I'll argue in a subsequent lecture, this use of the term dementia seems a bit misleading
to me.
I prefer the expression cognitive transition or cognitive transformation.
These terms emphasize a change, a change that's perhaps not entirely unlike the transition
from adolescence to early adulthood.
But however one refers to it, the normal characteristics of aging are very different
from what happens in the case of Alzheimer's.
We may lose some memory function as we age, but nothing nearly as dramatic or progressive
as that experienced by an Alzheimer's patient.
In fact, one of my primary goals in this lecture and in this course is to help you recognize
the difference between changes that are normal in the aging brain versus what happens in
Alzheimer's.
As widespread as Alzheimer's has become, misinformed fear is perhaps even more widespread.
Whole neighborhoods can sometimes devolve into gossip and worry over who might or might
not be showing signs of it.
So understanding the differences between Alzheimer's and normal aging, that could help to relieve
some needless anxiety.
So let's look at what actually happens in Alzheimer's.
The progression of the disease is typically broken down into three stages, sometimes preceded
by a preliminary stage.
It's this preliminary stage which some are hesitant to definitively link to the disease
at all.
It's a stage characterized by what is termed mild cognitive impairment.
It's the preliminary stage of mild cognitive impairment that triggers more widespread anxiety.
Patients suffering from this sort of impairment do not exhibit symptoms severe or constant
enough to be identified as Alzheimer's patients given the tests that we have to detect the
disease.
But even though the clinical term is mild impairment, this refers to memory impairment
that is worse than is normal for people of the same age.
I'll discuss that more in a moment.
Moreover, it's always not clear whether all those experiencing mild cognitive impairment
progress to full-blown Alzheimer's disease at all.
So this preliminary stage doesn't show actual symptoms of Alzheimer's and it's not clear
it leads to Alzheimer's.
Furthermore, although it is likely that those who do end up with Alzheimer's did previously
experience a period of mild cognitive impairment, that seems not always to be the case.
So even someone suffering from mild cognitive impairment may not progress to Alzheimer's
disease.
Mild cognitive impairment does typically progress to Alzheimer's disease though and
does so after a period of perhaps two to five years.
From there, the disease progresses to early stage Alzheimer's, then moderate, and then
to advanced stage Alzheimer's.
And through these various stages can take between seven and fourteen years, with only
three percent of patients living more than fourteen years beyond diagnosis.
This progression through these three stages is the period of that long goodbye.
I should also mention that while the disease typically strikes later in life, when a patient
is sixty or older, a small percentage of patients suffer from what's called early-onset Alzheimer's
disease.
And this version of the disease has a very strong genetic link.
Patients in their forties or younger may already begin experiencing the symptoms.
And it's not uncommon that more than sixty percent of deaths in a family may be due to
Alzheimer's when the family have a specific gene that's linked to early onset.
But regardless of the age of onset, the general progression of symptoms is the same.
So let's visit those symptoms now.
Generally speaking, the disease targets memory systems, and it destroys them in almost an
order that's the reverse of how they were built up early in life.
Early on, it's the episodic memory of most recently learned information that's most
likely to be impaired.
And note that this sort of memory loss is also typical of normal dimension.
That's one of the reasons why it can be difficult to detect the difference between the two very
early on.
However, even during the preliminary stage, that stage categorized as mild cognitive impairment,
there will be times when the patient will suffer periods of almost complete memory loss.
They literally will forget who they are, where they live, and if they happen to be an unfamiliar
location, they may also forget where they are and where they were going.
In essence, it is like they suddenly suffer a catastrophic loss of all of their personal
information.
And note, this is just the preliminary stage, and there has already been a catastrophic loss
of personal information.
The practical point is this, you are not showing early signs of Alzheimer's disease when you're
having the normal experience of forgetting.
The person suffering a catastrophic loss of personal identity is aware that what they're
experiencing is not normal.
Now unfortunately, they very often react to that experience with an inward sense of embarrassment.
They feel like they should know these things, and that they must be stupid not to know them.
So a patient may enter a room, for example, where family members are, and they may begin
saying something.
But then they may suddenly completely forget who they are and what they were saying.
But rather than just admitting this to the people in front of them, people that might
suddenly not, they might not even recognize these people as their family anymore, they
try to cover this up.
They cover up what they're experiencing.
Perhaps they make a joke, perhaps they head to a bedroom or a bathroom.
Eventually their memory returns, and they kind of forget about the experience, and if
they do remember, their understandable but misplaced shame can prevent them from admitting
their symptoms, and that leaves it really up to the family members to detect.
What's worse, if a family member does detect something odd, and even if they're proactive
enough to book a screening for Alzheimer's, if the patient is not suffering such about
during the test, the Alzheimer's may not even be detected.
I've been trying to give you tips now and then throughout this course.
So my tip here is to be aware of these signs of Alzheimer's, and to make sure that older
people that you interact with are also aware of them.
These boats are not subtle.
Losing your sense of identity is, well, it's rather dramatic.
If, let's say, your mother knows about this, and then she acts in a manner that you worry
about, you think perhaps she has suffered one of these boats, well, perhaps knowing
about them will give you an opportunity to figure things out early.
Now that said, even this can be tricky.
When it happens, when the patient is the middle of a boat like this, they're confused, they're
embarrassed, they're defensive, and they may not respond to queries by saying, you know
what, you're right.
I don't know who I am right now, and I don't know who you are.
Don't expect a nice calm intellectual discussion, but I do think it's okay to ask a question
or two if only to assess if the response is more defensive than you would expect.
And then once the person is feeling better, maybe then you can talk about it, and then
you can try to get a better sense of what may or may not be going on.
Okay, so these boats continue into the early stages of diagnosed Alzheimer's, and within
both of these stages, mild cognitive impairment and the early stage of Alzheimer's, this symptom,
these bouts of memory loss can become especially dangerous when they occur in combination with
another common symptom.
That is, sometimes during these early stages, patients become hyperactive.
They may have really serious problems sleeping at night, and they may sometimes just feel
like they have to get out and walk.
Now of course, at a very general level, exercise is great.
However, it becomes dangerous when a loss of self-awareness occurs while a patient is
walking.
Remember, patients feel stupid and embarrassed when these bouts occur.
So let's imagine a patient walking down a road only to suddenly lose all of their personal
information.
They don't know which way to go, and they don't want to ask anyone for help because
they feel stupid.
So they walk, and they walk, and they walk without any sense of where they're going
and what they're hoping to find.
In fact, in many communities, patients are asked to wear bracelets that include information
that this person does indeed suffer from Alzheimer's disease.
Bracelets that also tend to include a phone number and some sort of identifying information.
When the number is called, the person answering consults what's usually called a wandering
database, and that database identifies the patient, and it provides information on the
caregivers who could then be called to pick the patient up, so typically a family member.
It's either that or a police officer comes and brings the patient back home.
Now I'd like you to imagine this though from the perspective of the patient for a moment.
You are walking.
Suddenly you forget everything, and you feel like an idiot.
You keep walking and walking, probably doubling back and taking different streets, until eventually
somebody notices that you're acting lost, and they confront you about it, likely offering
assistance.
So they confront you in a positive way, but still they confront you.
You must admit to this stranger that you don't know who you are and where you're going.
Hopefully they notice your bracelet, and they bring you to an unfamiliar home, and ultimately
the police or some family member you may not even recognize in the moment brings you home.
When you arrive at home, you see many worried faces, and it's obvious that you have caused
all sorts of distress by being such an idiot, or at least that's how it may feel to you.
What emotional state will this likely produce, and what will be the consequences of all this?
Well if it happens repeatedly, and it will, then sooner or later your caregiver will insist
on controlling your movements.
Doors will be locked, you will essentially be jailed, and the next time you suffer about
a memory loss, you will find yourself locked in some strange place.
If you make a fuss, then some person that you may or may not recognize will not let you out.
If you're confused, you're angry, and you may even say something really nasty.
From the caregiver's perspective, this is also a horrible situation.
In trying to do their very best for a loved one, they are forced to control them, and
that often results in frustration and anger being directed at them.
It's an extremely bitter reward for perhaps the highest demonstration of love and caring.
During this early stage, patients will often also forget recently learned information,
even when not suffering one of these bouts of complete memory loss.
So a caregiver, for example, might ask them to do something, could you do the dishes while
I'm at work?
And the patient will forget that, and when it's not done, the patient might say something
like, you never told me to do that, you never asked me to do that.
You can see how this could lead to more frustration within that caregiver-patient relationship.
The patient is also frustrated during this period by language problems.
They will have problems finding specific words for things they want to say.
Now we all have that problem sometimes, so-called word-finding errors, but it's worse with
Alzheimer's patients.
They experience this much more commonly, and they also have language fluency problems
in general.
Their semantic memory is breaking down, and all of this combines to make the disease one
that targets social relationships almost as much as its targeting memory.
In fact, that's one thing to take from this, is the realization of how important memory
is in terms of supporting strong social relationships.
When memory fails in such a catastrophic way, it can take down even our very closest social
relationships along with it.
Eventually, the symptoms become worse as the patient moves in to the so-called moderate
stage of the disease.
From a memory perspective, this is where we begin to see further deteriorations in both
semantic and procedural memory.
Patients forget how to brush their teeth, they may forget how to get dressed, how to
take a shower, how to do many of those things that they used to do routinely and do on their
own.
Even their habits are lost, and without reliable habits, they also lose their independence.
So at this point, they now need a lot of assistance just to function.
And this is the time when some caregivers will move the patient to a nursing home.
That alone is usually a very expensive and also very heart-rending decision.
To the patient, it may seem that they're being abandoned.
Because of this, some caregivers will actually try not to make this move, those caregivers
really have to become nurses themselves.
They have to take control.
So either way, if you make the move, then sometimes the patient is being angry and feeling abandoned,
but if you become the nurse, you are now a nurse to a patient who, in place, is still
angry, frustrated, confused, and seemingly ungrateful.
During this moderate stage, language problems become further increased, and wandering can
become even more pronounced.
Mood is also greatly affected.
So the patient may cry or become aggressive, just without warning, out of the blue.
And the decreased language abilities make it even harder for a caregiver to connect
with that person they love and remember.
It can seem like this person is transforming in front of their eyes, and they're losing
touch with the person they once knew.
Literally, the person they love is receding, and the person they are interacting with is
often very difficult.
The patient may also lose disease awareness at this stage.
So despite everything that's happening around them, they're not even aware that they have
any sort of problem.
This complicates things considerably.
Now in the advanced stage of Alzheimer's, patients are completely dependent on the care
of others.
Language gets reduced to just words or very short phrases.
Patients typically exhibit exhaustion and will not be able to perform even the simplest
task without assistance.
Sometime during this stage, patients typically become bedridden, and eventually they will
pass away, though typically not from the disease itself.
Usually they will die of pneumonia or adrenal failure or the loss of some other critical
system.
As I warned, this is a grim and potentially depressing progression.
Personally, I find it absolutely horrible that we could have such a rich, warm relationship
with someone we love dearly and then have it end this way.
Our whole typical notion of a caregiver-patient relationship is one where we kind of think
of the patient as understanding the sacrifice of the caregiver and responding with love
and deep thanks.
In the case of Alzheimer's disease, the lack of disease awareness and the general confusion
and frustration and embarrassment that the patients feel can make them react negatively
to someone they no longer even recognize as a loving family member.
So instead, they come to see this as someone who is controlling them or confining them,
and certainly this can break the hearts of those who are showing their love in the strongest
way they possibly can.
So what can be done about this?
Well, many people are trying hard to understand the disease better and to figure out how to
treat it.
However, the punchline is this.
We currently just don't have a good understanding of the disease.
We do know that patients with Alzheimer's disease show abnormalities in their brain.
They have abnormal clumps that are called amyloid plaques, and they have more tangled
fibers called neurofibrillary tangles.
The plaques start in several locations.
While the tangles start deep in the brain in an area called the entorhinal cortex, later
they spread to the hippocampus, and as these plaques and tangles spread, they interfere
with the functioning of more and more healthy neurons.
As neurons lose this ability to communicate with each other, they die.
This is one of the reasons that agents that reduce the plaques and tangles do not reduce
the symptoms.
The brain cells are already dead.
So the best we can do right now is really to offer some treatments that provide small
benefits in the severity of the symptoms.
There is no cure, nor do we even seem to be able to slow the progression of the disease
to any significant extent.
So we have a long way to go in terms of understanding and treating the disease.
Given that no cure is available, I want to spend the remainder of the lecture highlighting
two other ways we can react to Alzheimer's disease.
The first is the possible role of lifestyle in terms of prevention.
As you'll see, there may be some things we can do that may reduce the likelihood of getting
Alzheimer's disease, although the evidence is not nearly as firm as we might like.
In fact, given that genetics in one's early environment also appear to contribute to the
disease, the possible benefits of lifestyle change may vary from person to person.
The second issue we'll discuss concerns ideas of how to respond once the disease has already
been diagnosed.
One idea is something that I myself have been working on, the notion of using technology
as a cognitive prosthetic.
This is something that might both enhance the life of the patients and caregivers, while
also offering a new tool that might help us gather information and perhaps even assess
treatments.
But let's start with prevention.
First it's important to stress that it's extremely difficult to perform really tight
scientific experiments that firmly link any behavior to higher or lower rates of the disease.
Instead, we're often looking at correlations.
So for example, we know that there's a lower incidence of Alzheimer's disease in Mediterranean
regions and it seems for those who eat Mediterranean diets.
This has led some to suggest that we should be eating a diet rich in fruits, vegetables,
olive oil and of course red wine and if we do so, that may help prevent Alzheimer's disease.
When I say we need to be careful with such claims, it's for the following reasons.
The people who tend to eat such diets tend to be people of Mediterranean descent and
it may simply be the case that there is some aspect of their genetics that is different
and as a result of that shared heritage, they have that shared genetics and that's what's
actually giving them some insulation to the disease.
It may not have to do with the food they eat or maybe it does.
It's really hard to know for sure.
But with this caveat in place, here are some other similar factors.
People who engage in activities that involve cognitive stimulation, they seem less likely
to get Alzheimer's disease.
So this could include activities like playing chess or card games, crossword puzzles, playing
a musical instrument or even those who commonly engage in social interactions.
The notion is not that these activities prevent Alzheimer's directly, but that they
firstall conditions of cognitive decline that may be more hospitable to Alzheimer's.
So according to this idea, for example, those London taxi drivers we were talking about,
the ones with a large tip of campus, that's creating a less hospitable environment for
Alzheimer's to take off and by engaging in a lot of intellectual activity, you're kind
of doing the same thing.
Interestingly, medical marijuana seems to delay the onset of Alzheimer's disease and
it's apparently because the active ingredient in marijuana, THC, prevents the formation
of the brain deposits associated with the disease.
Alzheimer's disease is also more prevalent in industrialized areas, that leads some to
speculate that exposure to metals, especially aluminum, may be a contributing factor.
Everything also increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease.
So if you believe in these sorts of findings, then the prescription is obvious.
Move to the country, eat lots of fruits and vegetables, drink wine, smoke only marijuana
and take up a musical instrument.
In these respects at least, someone like Willie Nelson is probably not a candidate for Alzheimer's
disease.
But what if you or a loved one has Alzheimer's disease?
Then what?
Well, you should be aware that medications already exist to slow the progress of the
disease itself, especially during early and moderate Alzheimer's.
The specific drugs will change, but one of the reasons to identify the disease early
is to seek treatments that have been found to slow its progress for months or years.
There are also a variety of treatments to address the behavioral consequences of the
disease, things like depression and loss of regular sleep.
As for the future of managing this horrible disease, I also want to talk about how technology
might help.
Just as a prosthetic limb can replace a missing leg and thereby allow somebody to walk rather
than use a wheelchair, perhaps technology can fill in for at least some of the missing
cognitive abilities.
This is a notion sometimes called cognitive prosthetics, and my students and I are currently
working on just such an approach to Alzheimer's disease.
I want to discuss this, not because such a solution currently exists, because it is
yet another example of how science might address this disease, but also because it puts a different
light on more general issues of technology and memory as well.
So here's a possible scenario.
Patients in the preliminary stage of Alzheimer's disease, that is, those who are perhaps experiencing
mild cognitive impairment stage, they might be given a mobile computing device, one that
has been equipped with appropriate software.
Now this device would be capable of receiving global positioning system signals.
In addition, the caregiver and the patient would work together, and they would specify
certain locations that the patient may frequently wish to visit.
The GPS coordinates of those locations would be indicated to the software, each of which
is given a very specific and easy label, like the park, or my brother's house, or the
grocery store, or home.
Other personal information would also be entered in the device, including things like, well,
the caregiver's contact numbers, maybe numbers of the police, and really any personal information
about the patient, like their name and their age and where they live.
Finally, a number of messages are recorded by the caregivers, and I'll describe the role
of those messages in a moment.
Okay, now, anytime the patient wishes to go for a walk, they are allowed to do so, but
only on the condition that they first indicate the route they plan to take, and they do so
by punching it into the device.
They also must take the device with them.
Now the device itself stays dormant, but even while dormant, it tracks the GPS coordinates
of the patient, and it constantly monitors them to detect if the patient has become lost.
Well, how would it know that the patient's lost?
Well, built-in algorithms might do two things.
First, they would compare the route the patient is following with the route they said they
were going to follow.
Second, it would look out for things like double backs, or slowdowns and speed-ups, or
other wandering type behavior suggestive of someone who is not simply walking in a determined
purposeful way.
All of this information would be combined to form an assessment of whether or not the
patient seems to be acting lost.
If the patient acts lost, then the phone rings, and it literally keeps ringing until the patient
touches the screen or responds in some other way, something that's designed to be easy
for them, something that works.
And then at that point, a prerecorded message from the caregiver could offer advice, which
perhaps could include contacting the caregiver himself.
So the idea here is, in this way, the patient might actually be able to find their own way
home.
There might be no need to confess an embarrassing lack of memory, less need to worry caregivers,
and less aimless wandering into potential harm.
This also means that the caregiver would not need to jail the patient.
So for example, the device might monitor progress as it gave directions, and if the patient
was not following them properly, the device could call the caregiver directly, notify
them of the precise location of their family member.
Now obviously, an approach like this is more of a crutch than a cure, but it could also
aid in the search for a cure.
That is, by keeping track of how often a patient gets lost while they're walking, we would
have a clear objective measure of disease progression, one that's measured unobtrusively
and in the context of normal life.
If some biometric monitoring were added, the data gathered could be even more informative.
So let me give you an example of that sense of it.
Let's say there was some drug that we thought could be potentially beneficial.
We could now directly test this possibility by comparing how often a group on the drug
became lost compared to a group not on the drug.
This is the crutch that can inform the cure, and it could do so while enhancing the lives
and the relationships of all caught up in this horrible situation.
In fact, many of us already use our technologies in this way.
Anyone who uses some form of electronic calendar is essentially allowing it to remember important
meetings and important dates so that they don't need to.
Similarly, cell phones remember phone numbers that we previously used to have to use our
memory to remember.
Of course, some people worry that too much reliance on technology may be robbing us of
what otherwise might have been very useful cognitive exercise.
In this very lecture, I stress that cognitive exercise can be important for the prevention
of Alzheimer's.
So perhaps that is true, and perhaps we should consider that.
But in the case of patients suffering from a debilitating memory problem, it is hard
to see such a tool as anything but positive.
Now although the technology of the future may become a cognitive prosthetic, so too can
a caregiver.
Caregivers' disease is, at its core, a horrible disease, and it's one that's very hard to
deal with, but I can offer one small idea.
Yes, the patient may sometimes have to be jailed, unpleasant though that can be, but
to the extent that a caregiver is able to walk with the patient, that can have many
of the same benefits, especially if the walk can be shaped to give the patient some freedom
and not feel like the caregiver is just supervising.
In fact, you might even want to plan special walks together.
Especially during the stages of mild cognitive impairment, and even in the early to moderate
Alzheimer's.
In these stages, the patient may still be lucid, and these can be really great times
for the caregiver to be with the one they love.
And when there are bouts of confusion, of course, the caregiver will be there to assist.
Alzheimer's is such a horrible disease because, in part, it destroys everything that's familiar.
In our next lecture, we will turn to the subject of familiarity itself.
