Lecture 18 – That Powerful Glow of Warm Familiarity
Earlier in this course, I introduced you to your memory systems and the experimental data
relevant to them.
We then discussed the links between these systems and the brain, and we just did that
from a number of different perspectives.
But with all this groundwork under our belt, the remainder of the lectures will focus on
how memory influences us in our daily lives.
We're going to talk about contexts that range from ballot boxes, the issue that we'll
discuss quite a bit in this lecture, to courtrooms and beyond.
Basically, we will take all of the theoretical and empirical knowledge that we've been building
up and use it to think about influences of memory the way they play out each and every
day.
In this lecture, we're going to focus on a concept I've already mentioned a few
times – an influence of memory that is often called familiarity.
To begin illustrating this concept, think back to your last local election.
Do you remember what happened as the election got closer and closer?
That's right, big signs, little signs, containing only names and political affiliations began
to pop up all over the place, like dandelions in the summer.
Why do politicians and politician wannabes do this to us?
If we thought about it all consciously, shouldn't these be the last people we vote for?
Given their willingness to clutter up our public spaces and the seeming endless repetitions
of the same signs, well, of course, the unfortunate truth is that they do this because it works.
It does indeed increase the chance that we will vote for them.
It's the same reason why advertisers insist on getting the name of their product in front
of our eyes as often as they can, and if possible, associating their product with other stimuli
that produce positive reactions in us.
The world is trying to influence us, and they are using low-level memory processes to do
it.
And the worst part of it is this.
Even if you know it's happening, you still fall prey to its power.
It's the power of perceptual fluency, or what many of us call familiarity.
In the earliest days of psychological research, Edward Titchiner referred to the glow of warmth
that one feels when they're in the presence of the familiar.
This could be a familiar context like home, the familiar sound of a mother's voice to
a newborn baby, a familiar friend, or maybe even a familiar name on a ballot box.
How does this familiarity come to exist, and how do we interpret it as humans?
Well, familiarity is obviously the result of previous experience.
It's not so much though the re-experiencing of some past event as it is some form of resonance
with that past experience.
How are we to think of this in terms of memory systems?
Well, in terms of a specific stimulus feeling more or less familiar, this feeling of familiarity
is assumed to arise from something called perceptual fluency.
The notion is that when we experience something over and over, we become better, that is more
fluent at recognizing it.
This is what is meant by perceptual fluency.
Remember for example when I told you about the agnosias, visual agnosia for example.
I told you that for most of us, the semantic information that we have about objects in
the world is represented by our association cortex.
By contrast, when we see something that we originally represent what we are seeing in
the primary visual cortex, that is then passed on to the association cortex where that object
is recognized.
Association cortex allows us then to know what it is we are seeing, and for those suffering
with visual agnosia, the second step sometimes does not occur.
Okay, by this depiction, the recognition of some object seems to either happen or not,
but that is actually an oversimplification.
In actuality, the process linking visual features to our semantic knowledge of objects
is really much more graded.
So for those of us with intact association cortices, the more accurate way to think of
things is that the more experience we have had with some object, the more quickly we
are able to recognize it from its features.
The notion then is that processes of perception themselves can be thought of in terms of procedural
memory.
Repeated experience viewing some particular stimulus enhances the fluency with which that
stimulus is processed.
Just like repeated experience riding a bike, for example, enhances our fluency on the bike.
The only new aspect of this is the assumption that we can subjectively feel this fluency.
Fluent perception is one way in which a stimulus can come to feel familiar to us.
So for example, experiments have been performed in which words are presented very briefly
and then covered up by strings of random letters.
Participants are merely asked to report what word they saw, and that's something called
the perceptual identification task.
Will these experiments show that the more common a word is, the more likely that it
will be perceived when it's presented, especially when it's presented for very short durations
as I describe?
So this fluency of processing can be felt, and when we feel it, we often attribute it
to past experiences, which makes sense because that's usually what produces it, but we don't
always attribute it in that way.
And even when we do attribute it to past experience, we don't always get the specific
past experience right.
So feelings of familiarity are open to interpretation, and the interpretations we make can allow
us to be fooled, or even to fool ourselves.
Some of the most interesting experiments on potential misattributions of familiarity
were done in the context of something called the mirror exposure effect.
Dramatic effects related to the mirror exposure of a stimulus.
In those experiments, stimuli are presented to participants, one after the other, in very
quick succession at the same screen location.
This is a method called RSVP, or Rapid Serial Visual Presentation, and it feels like the
moment you see one word, it's replaced by another, then another.
Boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, all at the same screen location.
So you literally feel bombarded by the stream of words.
Now, if the words form the sentence, you could read the sentence.
But in most experiments, the words are randomly selected items, and in that case, you feel
like all you can do is watch.
Okay, so in the initial studies, a series of words would first be presented in this
way, random words, one after the other, same screen location.
Then either immediately or after a little bit of a delay, some other task is given.
If you simply ask people to recall as many words as possible, they will recall almost
none.
They felt like the words were seen, but the pace of presentation was so quick that no
words could be encoded enough to allow subsequent memory.
However, if you instead present a recognition test, then one can find evidence of memory.
Now, remember, in a recognition test, complete items are presented at the time of test.
So typically, half of these items would have been part of that RSVP stream, and half would
have been, would not have been part, the latter of which we call new items.
So participants have to decide whether they think each item at test either was on the
list, that is, it was an old item, or was not on the list, a new item.
When memory is tested in this way, you do see evidence of memory for the items.
Specifically, people say old more to items that were presented than they do to items
that were not.
So clearly they have some sense of whether or not an item was presented.
However, when you ask the participants, they feel like they were just guessing.
If you probe them enough, they would likely say something like, I couldn't remember any
of the items is occurring, but some felt a little more familiar.
So I just guessed that those ones were old.
In this case then, participants are explicitly using familiarity to infer previous presentation.
Instead in another way, they attributed the familiarity of the item to its occurrence
in that earlier RSVP list.
But here is what makes all of this interesting and relevant to life in the real world.
If you change the question that you ask, then familiarity has its influence in different
ways.
For example, assume we use a recognition-like experiment, but instead of asking participants
whether items were in that RSVP stream or not, we instead ask them to categorize items
in terms of how much they like them.
So they're basically to say, I like that one, I don't like this one, like, dislike.
What you'll see is that participants will say that they like more of the words that
have been presented in the RSVP stream.
Their mere exposure during the RSVP stream makes them subsequently more likable.
What's going on here?
Well memory researchers would say that by presenting the items even briefly in that
RSVP stream, that presentation is enough to strengthen slightly their pattern in memory.
When those items reappear later at test, the strengthening of their memory pattern results
in them being perceived a little more fluently than they otherwise would be.
You can literally recognize the item more quickly and you can feel this fluency.
The feeling is one of familiarity.
Here's the kicker though.
This feeling of familiarity, or warmth in Titianer's words, is what we call un-differentiated.
We are not sure of its source, we just feel that feeling.
The feeling will then be interpreted or attributed in terms of whatever task we have at hand.
If we're asking whether an item has been presented earlier in the experiment, as we did in a
typical recognition experiment, then we assume that the fluent items were in the experiment
earlier.
If we're asked which items we like, then we like the items that we experience as fluent
better.
Now this sounds a little far-fetched.
Consider a really interesting follow-up study.
Again, a set of items are presented in an RSVP stream and then they are re-presented
at test, intermixed with new, non-presented items.
In this study, a number of different tasks were presented to different groups of participants.
All of these tasks are what we call shams, and I'll explain that in a moment.
So for example, in one context, participants were told that while it would be very hard
for them to consciously notice this difference, some of the test items will be presented
a little longer than others.
And their task was to indicate whether they think an item was presented for a slightly
longer or not so long duration.
Now we call it a sham because in reality, all items are presented for the exact same
length of time.
But participants were more likely to say that a previously presented item was presented
longer.
Similarly, if you ask them which ones are presented a little brighter, again, there's
not really any brightness difference at all, they will choose the previously presented
items as the ones they think were brighter.
But the really interesting twist is the following.
If participants were instead asked which items had been presented for a shorter duration
or in a slightly dimmer color, they again categorized the previously presented items
as either shorter or dimmer.
So the question itself doesn't seem to matter.
Okay, this is one of those points that bears repeating.
The specific question you have in your mind doesn't seem to matter.
Instead, it seems that whatever the participant is looking for, be it an old stimulus, a likeable
stimulus, a long or short duration or a bright or dim font, the relatively fluently processed
item gets chosen.
So perceptual fluency is attributed in a very powerful and context specific way.
It essentially makes something fluent stand out from the crowd, allowing it to become
the target of whatever the person might be looking for.
So now, put yourself in the voter's booth, looking at a voting card that features a sea
of potential candidates.
What's your task?
Well, your task is to choose the person that you think would do the best job at whatever
they're running for.
If you're like many of us, you didn't really have the time or the interest to research
every candidate for every position.
So how do you make your decision?
Well, what the candidates hope is that their name will stand out and that you will be drawn
to them as your selection.
How can they help that along?
Well, by previously exposing you to their name over and over and over.
They don't even care if you think much about their name.
They just want that name to be a pattern you know, a pattern that has been primed and hence
a name that feels warmly fluent.
A fluency you may indeed attribute to them being the right person for the job.
Of course, it's important to again emphasize that this all works out for them because of
the specifics of the question that's in your mind, which is, which of these people do I
think will be best for the job?
Had the question instead been, which of these people do you think is most likely to be involved
in a scandal, well, your eyes and mind again might have been drawn to the most fluently
processed name.
Another important aspect of this phenomenon is that it depends to a large extent on human
beings being relatively naive to this powerful effect of perceptual fluency.
Sure, when we look at the names in the ballot box, we might remember seeing some election
signs bearing those names and maybe we understand that this may even make that name feel a little
familiar or stand out, but we don't think we're making our choices on this basis.
Do we feel like our decisions reflect some higher level thinking that is not influenced
by the mere repeated viewing of a name?
Well, the research suggests that our decisions are indeed affected by simply experiencing
things and advertisers make heavy use of this phenomenon when trying to get us to buy certain
products.
So let's say you're in a store trying to decide which laptop you want to buy.
Maybe you did a lot of research and maybe you have analytically decided on the best
one to buy, or maybe you didn't and you're just looking at them trying to find one that
looks good, whatever that means.
If you see a brand name that's fluent that feels warmly familiar, that one might pass
the looks good test.
We might attribute the fluency to quality of the product.
You might have even noticed that in both of these examples, I have suggested that maybe
you had done some research on say who to vote for or which laptop to purchase, but maybe
not.
Perceptual fluency has its largest effects in context where we really have little real
information to rely on.
Of course, the scary thing is there are a lot of those contexts.
We very often make choices based on little deep research.
Instead we might say we just went with a choice that felt right.
Well, that feeling we're relying on is fluency and given that fluency can be manipulated,
it doesn't always provide us with the right choice.
It's because of this sort of research that people say things like, if you say something
often enough, it becomes true.
It's another thing that politicians clearly believe in.
But literally, if you hear something over and over again, it will become a fluently
processed familiar message.
Should you be in a position of deciding if that message is true, a familiar message will
be more likely to feel true.
So all I can really add to this is the following.
I'm doing a really fantastic job giving these lectures.
I'm doing a really fantastic job giving these lectures.
Okay, you get the idea.
The notion of attributing familiarity in an undifferentiated manner also explains a phenomenon
that some call unconscious plagiarism.
So let's say that you're a writer and you're currently writing a novel.
As a writer, you've likely read a lot of books yourself.
So now you're looking for that perfect thing for your male character to say to a woman
he's angry with.
You're mulling it over in your mind and suddenly it comes to you, frankly, Violet, I don't
give a damn.
The more you think about the line, the more it feels just right.
Now, of course, that's actually a line from a rather famous line from Gone with the Wind,
although the heroine of that was Scarlet O'Hara, of course, not Violet.
But in fact, this line is so famous, you probably would remember it from that book.
But if I'd chosen something a little less famous, something you may have read, but you
read it without really taking note of it, then when you later come up with the same line
yourself, it could feel familiar and you could attribute that familiarity to your brilliance.
Many writers of books and songs, when faced with the similarity of their work to previous
work, have made just this claim, yes, they know that other book or song, yes, they agree
that what they created is pretty darn similar, but no, they did not realize they were plagiarizing
from it.
This sort of plagiarism isn't reserved for writers either.
Sometimes we unconsciously plagiarize somebody else's ideas.
So again, we heard an idea voiced by another at some point, but maybe we didn't think about
it too deeply at the time.
Later we're thinking about the same issue and that very idea comes to mind quite fluently.
It feels like a good idea.
It feels warm.
Well, once again, we assume that's because we're brilliant.
When in doubt, assume you're brilliant.
Now of course, the unfortunate reality of these situations is that, as highlighted earlier,
these humans don't understand how powerful the effects of perceptual fluency can be and
how open they themselves are to misattribution.
So if you find yourself in a courtroom trying to argue that, yes, apparently you plagiarized
something, but that there was no intent to plagiarize and therefore there should be no
punishment, it's unlikely you'll get far.
Most jurors would simply see the similarity across the original writing, the original
song or idea and whatever it was that you provided and they would find the evidence
overwhelmingly strong.
Surely you had to know.
In fact, courts have ruled that your intent doesn't even matter.
If you plagiarized, you plagiarized.
Whether it was a conscious plagiarism or unconscious is irrelevant.
So the brain is biased to process fluently anything that it has seen before.
But interestingly, if the conditions are right, it can also be tricked into fluently processing
things that it has never actually seen.
Now to get a sense of how this can happen, consider the following experiment.
We first create some random pattern of dots, let's say 10 dots arranged in some relatively
random way and we're going to refer to this pattern as our prototype pattern.
We then create 10 new patterns.
We start with the prototype in each case, but then we slightly move one dot or several
dots a little one way or a little another way.
And we do that in a different way for each of the 10 patterns.
Each of those 10 that we create from the prototype is called an exemplar of the prototype.
They each represent instances or exemplars of that class defined by the prototype.
So all the new patterns have as many dots in the same position as there are in the prototype
pattern, but all the new patterns are different slightly from the prototype.
We then select randomly 5 of these new patterns and we present them to people to study.
Following that we have a test in which all 10 patterns are shown and we also show the
prototype.
Participants are asked whether each pattern they see was or was not one of the 5 that
they studied.
Well generally they have a very hard time telling the difference between presented and
non-presented patterns, but they do all show one consistent tendency.
When the prototype is shown it is almost always called old.
Even though that particular pattern was never shown itself, it seems to be the most familiar
of them all.
Why?
Well remember implicit memory.
That tendency we have to extract the structure, the regularities from stimuli we see.
Well when we do that, the structure becomes encoded even when it itself may have never
been explicitly presented.
Each stimulus we showed had a lot of overlap with the prototype.
So parts of the prototype pattern were learned every time a new stimulus was presented.
What's more, the manner in which those patterns did not match the prototype was random.
As a result, over the course of presentation all parts of the prototype pattern were seen.
So even though it was never presented as an intact whole, the consistency with which its
parts were shown lead its pattern to also be reinforced.
Reinforced enough to produce all the same sorts of tendencies that we see in the case
of the mirror exposure effect.
So the prototype fits the implied structure of the experience even better than the exemplars
that were created do.
This complete alignment with the implied structure allows it to be processed fluently, which
again makes it feel familiar.
Slightly different source this time, same end result, familiarity.
The conditions I just outlined may seem a little contrived, but they're not really too
far removed from situations we all experience daily.
So for example, let's consider our concept of female beauty.
Many of the female actresses that ultimately portray beautiful women got their start in
modeling and female models themselves are often projected as images of beauty.
Is it fair to say that most of these models have something in common, kind of like the
new patterns we created from some prototype pattern?
Well, the average model weighs perhaps 25% less than the average female and may maintain
a percentage of body fat that's about 15 to 20% below what is considered to be healthy
given the model's height and age.
This is what they have in common.
Most project variants of a body that is likely to be too thin to be healthy.
In fact, modeling agencies have been reported to actively pursue models known to be anorexic.
So we see these women, each beautiful in their own right, and we form a prototype of beauty
that pattern of features that we find the most warm.
Now is this innocent enough?
I mean, the Greeks had mythology to entertain them, and the gods and goddesses in their
pantheon were absolutely beautiful or abnormally strong or fast or intelligent.
We find extremes entertaining.
And so maybe this is just another such case of the same thing.
Maybe the media is our Mount Olympus.
Of course, the problem is that the abnormality of the prototype becomes lost.
The women we see are not seen as abnormally thin and beautiful in that way.
Rather, they come to define beauty, and thus the thinness they represent becomes viewed
as how one should look.
Young girls are seeing these images, and they're attempting to become them because when they
do, others see them as beautiful.
And that's concerning.
Again, the general idea is that when we see exemplars of some prototype, we come to form
a representation of the prototype, even though it itself may never have been presented.
And that representation can guide the decisions we make about the general class of items from
which the exemplars have been drawn, beautiful women, for example.
This isn't necessarily a bad thing.
It isn't if the exemplars we see are truly representative of the category to which they
belong.
In that case, the prototype ends up being a sort of average, and it makes sense that
this average would feel familiar or right in terms of representing the stereotypical
exemplar of the category.
So using that prototype as a basis for our decisions might seem appropriate.
If any of the sounds, dare I say, familiar, well, prototypes are just another word for
scripts or schemas.
That is, we could talk about some restaurant as being a stereotypical fast food restaurant,
meaning everything you do in that place follows the standard or prototypical fast food experience.
As I've highlighted before, these stereotypes or scripts, they can be extremely useful in
helping us to negotiate our way through the world when our stereotypes are valid.
So if the exemplar experiences that give rise to the stereotype are real and accurate depictions
of fast food restaurants, then we end up with an accurate schema.
However, the problem is that once again, while we use the prototypes to guide our decisions,
we do so in a manner that is often blind to the accurateness of the experiences that gave
rise to them.
And sometimes these experiences are not representative.
For example, those who write scripts for movies are sometimes accused of consistently portraying
women or people of various minority groups in some non-representative ways.
When I was a young boy, it was during the Cold War, and the bad guys in many of the
movies that I watched were Russians.
I doubt that I ever saw a Russian portrayed in any sort of positive way.
Thus my stereotype of the prototypical Russian was pretty negative, which could clearly affect
the way that I might interact with Russians.
Now luckily, I have met many very friendly Russians since, but this example does show
you the power that prototypes can have.
So the main point of this lecture is that past experiences have a power to affect us
in ways that we often underestimate.
Through simple repetition, or through similarity to something we have seen repeatedly, items
come to be perceived fluently, and that fluent perception can be misattributed in ways that
make us think we are acting rationally when we are not.
This happens most when we're making decisions based on very little research or deep thought.
So if we don't like the idea of being influenced by familiarity, well it's a good idea to research
your decisions.
In addition, experiences of exemplars from some category can also form prototypes that
are themselves processed fluently, even if never actually experienced.
These prototypes can guide the way we interact with subsequent exemplars from that category,
all without us truly appreciating the power that those previous experiences have had on
our current behavior.
So the next time that you're tempted to make some generalized comment about some group
or some concept, it is worth taking the time to ask yourself whether you think you've really
interacted within the representative sample of that group or concept.
If not, accept that the possibility that your perspective may be biased, and again, seek
out more information that might help you form a more representative viewpoint.
The situations I have discussed in this lecture are real-world situations involving perceptions
of familiarity and the attributions that can arise from that.
But in the next lecture, we're going to leave the real world, at least the physical world,
and we're going to enter the metaphysical as we consider attributions of familiarity
in the context of that creepy feeling we all love to experience.
That's right, it's finally time to talk about deja vu.
