I remember the first time my wife and I visited Amsterdam together, which was when I experienced
a distinct episode of Déjà Vu.
We approached a bridge over a canal on one of those typical streets of Amsterdam.
Like most streets, it featured a canal and four to five storey stone buildings on either
side and a pair of roads flanking each side of the canal.
I remember looking to my left and as I watched a group of bicycles approaching me and that
clearly European vehicle backing onto the street and even the birds flying over the
way they did, it all felt eerily familiar.
Just like I was watching something I had seen before.
But I had never been here before with my wife, I was sure of it.
Yet everything felt so familiar leaving me with this unsettled feeling and a desire to
make sense of it all.
Could I have dreamed this event before?
Was it some sort of prophecy almost?
Did I experience it in some past or some parallel life?
Is some force trying to tell me that this experience is in some manner important, no
matter how benign it may seem?
These are the feelings that we associate with deja vu, seeing again.
As humans we really do enjoy the abnormalities of life.
The vast majority of things that we encounter in our lives are explainable, often in relatively
mundane ways.
But every now and then we come across something that seems unexplainable, something that seems
to defy all we know to be true of the world.
And those things really capture our thoughts and imaginations.
We want to understand them.
Is the experience of deja vu one of those things?
On its surface it feels like an intense reliving in the flesh of an experience that we can't
consciously recall ever having.
It is almost like we are the actors in the recreation of an episodic memory and yet we
cannot form the true episodic memory of that event as occurring in the past.
Are there scientific explanations of deja vu?
Well there certainly are theories and most of them describe deja vu as an illusion of
memory.
Sometimes illusions have a very important place in science.
So for example before perhaps you've been to a science museum and you've experienced
some so-called optical illusions, things that trick the eye into seeing something that
really isn't there at all.
As researchers discover these illusions they try to understand them because often in understanding
the illusions they gained a better understanding of this system that was prone to them.
In that case the visual system.
Well, is deja vu an illusion of memory?
And if so can we learn more about memory by trying to understand how deja vu comes about?
Many believe so and in this lecture we'll explore some of the theories that have been
forwarded so far and we'll see what those theories tell us about memory.
Before diving in too deeply into these memory based theories though let me highlight two
explanations of deja vu that are not memory based really.
The first suggests that deja vu arises from random electrical stimulation of the temporal
lobes and this argument is based on reports from people who suffer from epileptic seizures.
It turns out that they often report a deja vu like experience just prior to each seizure.
When we're monitoring their brains we know that just prior to the seizures there are
small amounts of random electrical activity in their temporal lobes and that's the area
where most epileptic seizures originate.
So maybe we all experience that kind of random activity once in a while and maybe that's
what causes the deja vu experience in us all.
It's not a very exciting explanation and many people argue that the sort of experience that
epileptics have is distinctly different from typical deja vu experiences.
Still, it is possible that the cause of deja vu is as simple as occasional random activation
of some brain areas that lead to a feeling of strangeness and an illusion of previously
experiencing the current event.
Now another relatively simple explanation of deja vu is that it reflects the very small
time difference with which visual information sometimes reaches one of our eyes relative
to the other.
The claim is that sometimes one eye gets information just a little before the other.
The first eye gets processing started essentially greasing the path for when that exact same
information follows just milliseconds later through the other eye.
This slight temporal displacement of processing makes the processing feel familiar despite
all other information suggesting this is a novel experience.
Now I want to make two points about this theory of deja vu.
First in terms of the specifics, it does not fare well as a general theory of deja vu.
Deja vu is not always a visual experience and it also occurs for people with only one eye.
So again, it's likely incorrect.
But the second point is this, the idea that deja vu may reflect some misattribution of
perceptual fluency may have some merit, even if the specifics of the theory do not.
We talked about misattribution of familiarity in the previous lecture.
We know it does occur in the situations that I described.
So it may provide a good way of thinking about deja vu.
As you'll see, several of the current theories fit with this notion, including the way I
will highlight.
Well I guess if we're trying to be somewhat inclusive in our consideration of deja vu,
we should also consider the most common theory people have.
Clearly, deja vu reflects us dreaming about the experience in detail before it happened.
Or perhaps even living that experience already in some past or parallel life.
Okay, clearly this is not a scientific theory, but I mention it primarily to emphasize the
following.
When we have intense feelings that something has that warm glow of familiarity, we often
feel the need to attribute that glow to something, and we are willing to stretch credibility
pretty far sometimes to find a source.
In the memory theories I will now turn to, this aspect of deja vu is explained by assuming
two things.
Humans are very uncomfortable when something feels familiar and they don't know why.
So they feel compelled to attribute the familiarity to something.
If they miss the true cause of the feelings of familiarity, then they are quite willing
to accept even bizarre metaphysical possibilities.
With respect to this latter point, I think an analogy to magic is useful.
Even when we are sure that magicians are really illusionists, and we know that they perform
the tricks they do by somehow diverting our attention at critical times, we can still
feel the metaphysical aspects of magic.
That is, if we miss the sleight of hand, then we are left with an event that we have no
explanation for, and somehow that gives us this creepy feeling.
It's metaphysics at work, it's magic.
But if we see the sleight of hand, then the feeling of magic does not happen, we just
appreciate the trick.
Well deja vu is not a sleight of hand, but it may be a sleight of mind, with familiarity
being caused by something the mind simply missed.
What is the sort of illusion we are looking for?
Virtually all of the memory experiments that inform our understanding of deja vu utilize
the recognition test.
And in previous experiments that we've done together, we usually use the free recall test.
I would just read you a list of items, and perhaps wait for a bit, and then simply ask
you to recall what you can remember.
That recall test is very much a test of your declarative memory systems, and there isn't
much role for perceptual fluency, and thus familiarity to play in that sort of task.
Over as I emphasized in the previous lecture, perceptual fluency plays its largest role
when there are options to choose between, like the names on a voting list.
So to create this sort of context, we use the recognition test.
And as you know, in a standard recognition test, items are first presented as study
lists.
These items are presented, and then referred to as old items.
After the study, there may be a pause or not, and then a test is presented.
The test items consist of the old items, shuffled up and intermixed with an equal number of
new items, items that were not on the study list.
For each item on the test list, the participant must make an old new decision.
That is, do they think this current item was or was not on the study list?
When people perform this kind of test, they typically report calling items old for one
of two reasons.
Either they explicitly remember seeing the item on the list, or they don't, but that
item felt familiar.
So they assume it was on the list.
So familiarity plays a role in this task, and that's why it's appealing to the study
deja vu or any potential illusion of familiarity using recognition.
In fact, when studying illusions of familiarity, researchers are especially interested in what
are called the false alarms on a recognition test.
Now, false alarms are said to occur when participants incorrectly categorize new items as old.
That is, they think these new items were on the list even though they were not.
Given that new items were not presented on the study list, it would be impossible for
these old responses to reflect the person remembering the item's occurrence.
So instead, it must reflect the item just feeling familiar.
So if familiarity is your focus of interest, then false alarms on a recognition test provide
the best instrument for measuring it.
Okay, so now let's jump into an experiment to make this all a little bit more concrete.
Let's say you present a study list that maybe has many items, but it includes items like
the following, rose, tractor, pistol, platter, and currency.
Now when we present the test, we again have all sorts of items, but among the new items
are tulip, plow, gun, plate, and money.
The critical point is that some of these new items are very closely related to the study
items in terms of the meanings they convey, and that's a variable we call semantic overlap.
So given our discussion in the previous lecture, it may not be surprising to learn that participants
will often false alarm to those semantically related items.
That is, a relation between the items can allow fluency to bridge from one item to another
item it's related to.
For example, from rose, which was presented, to tulip, which was not.
Thus, the overlap in semantics allows this new related item to be processed more fluently,
and this fluency translates into a feeling of familiarity.
That increased familiarity makes participants want to call those related new items old.
The participants themselves do not realize that the feeling of familiarity comes from
the similarity to the studied items, and instead they assume it's due to those items specifically
being on the study list.
That's why they call them old.
So this is already a very basic illusion of memory, and this again points to the general
point that fluency of processing can be caused by one source and attributed to another.
The real source of the feeling of familiarity is missed, and another is blamed.
Let me give you one more less exotic example of that.
Let's imagine another recognition experiment.
This time our experiment includes some new items that are words that are common in the
English language and some that are not.
So an uncommon word would be a word like chassis.
For example, common word might be table.
Well, even though these are both new items, participants will false alarm more to the
common words, more to table than to chassis.
Again, in psychological terms, because common words have been processed so often, outside
the experiment of course, but they've been processed so often that their patterns of
activation have been repeatedly reinforced, and thus they can be perceived very fluently.
They're like a well-developed procedural memory.
This fluid perception caused by them being experienced commonly in life makes them feel
familiar.
However, when the participants feel this familiarity, they do not attribute it to the commonness
of the word.
Within the experimental context, they falsely attribute the fluency of that word to presentation
of the item in the study list, and therefore they call that item old.
Okay, the point here is not that different from the point I emphasized in the previous
lecture.
We can feel familiarity, but we often aren't very good at knowing its true source, and
we're prone to misattribute it.
This is one part of the story we need to explain deja vu.
Now let's move to the second part, and it's with respect to something called priming.
Some of the situations that we've discussed in these lectures have involved priming, but
I haven't really highlighted it until now.
So to make the concept of priming explicit, let's talk about a couple of other experiments.
Across a number of trials, let's say I show you letter strings, and some of those letter
strings are correctly spelled English words, like table, T-A-B-L-E.
Words are what we call non-words, like fair, T-H-A-I-R.
Your task is to decide, as quickly and accurately as you can, for each item presented, is it
a word or is it a non-word, and I record your speed and your accuracy.
Now let's say I show you a bunch of words and non-words, but the critical ones are the
words.
Let's pick on four words.
Let's say doctor, notes, class, and scalpel.
Those are four of the words that are within this larger experiment.
Note that two of these words are related to medicine, doctor and scalpel, and two are
related to learning contexts, notes and class.
Now imagine I do this exact same experiment, but I test some people within a hospital,
and I test other people within a university.
What you would see is that decisions to these medically related words are faster when it's
tested within a hospital.
So they can respond to the doctor and, well, any medically related word at all, faster
in a hospital than they could respond to those university related words.
But if you do the test in the university, the opposite's true.
So that suggests there's something about the context in which you're tested that literally
prepares you to perceive certain items.
When you're in a hospital, you're ready to perceive hospital items.
When you're in a university setting, you're ready to perceive university items.
So the associations that you've formed in the past, perhaps between places and concepts,
but also between pairs of concepts, are preparing you in advance for things that might occur
in that context.
Remember when I was discussing agnosia, I told you that memory is critical for understanding
what it is that you're currently seeing or hearing.
But really, the truth is that memory is actually preparing you in advance for what you may
be about to see or hear.
When we walk into any situation, we walk in primed for what may happen.
And this is really great because it allows us to react more quickly and more efficiently
when these expectations, even the very low level ones, are correct.
Now, what makes priming potentially relevant to deja vu is that stimuli can prime us even
when we're not aware of them occurring at all.
Many studies, in fact, have documented so-called subliminal priming effects.
For example, let's again say that we are presenting words and non-words, and we're asking participants
to categorize them as quickly as possible.
But this time, just before each word or non-word, we very quickly present a prime.
And that prime is either semantically related to the critical item, or it's not.
So for example, if the critical item was nurse, we might just before it present either the
word doctor, which is related, or printer, which is not.
We present these words very quickly, so quickly that participants say they only see a flicker.
So it's like there's a flicker, and then nurse comes, and they decide.
Now, despite not seeing that initial word, the prime, decisions to nurse are faster when
it's preceded by a related item, like doctor.
That's subliminal priming.
OK.
So now let's return to Amsterdam, figuratively speaking, of course.
And let me specify what we're going to call the priming misattribution theory of deja vu.
There I was at that street corner.
Maybe, just maybe, the following happened.
I glanced down the street to my left, but just as I did so, something to the right grabbed
my attention.
Maybe it was a loud noise.
Maybe it was a paddle boat tipping over in the canal.
Whatever it was, I glanced over very quickly, but whatever was caught my attention so quickly
that I didn't even remember glancing to the left.
I just remember being pulled over here.
However, that glance, brief as it was, may have been enough to begin processing of the
scene.
Not so that when I looked to the left again, my perceptual system had a head start.
It was primed.
So now, as I look at that scene, I am able to process it more fluently than I think
I should be able to, given that I never seen it before.
I can only conclude that I have seen this scene before, which of course is correct at
some level.
I saw it just milliseconds ago.
I just wasn't aware that I'd seen it.
So, since I do not glance left, the true source, I don't realize it's the glance to
my left, the true source of my fluid perception, I don't notice.
I cannot correctly attribute the familiarity to its real source.
This is my mind missing the sleight of memory, which in this case was that quick first glance.
As a result, I'm left with this intense feeling of familiarity that I cannot attribute to
anything, not anything that makes sense.
This is not a comfortable feeling.
Just as it's not comfortable to see a magician do something, you cannot understand.
When we have intense feelings that something has that warm glow of familiarity, we often
feel the need to attribute that glow to something, and we're willing to stretch credibility pretty
far sometimes to find a source.
Whoa, did you feel that?
Did you just experience some sort of deja vu?
Okay, honestly, I have no idea if you did or not, but I just tried to create it using
the principles of priming attribution theory to give you an experience of how it might
work.
Specifically, I asked the producers to splice in that last sentence in the exact form it
was in when I said it earlier in this lecture.
Therefore, it was an exact copy of my words and how I said them repeated.
My hope is that, given that earlier presentation, this sentence was nicely primed, and thus
that its relatively fluent processing gave you a sense of familiarity, but one that you
couldn't immediately figure out.
Perhaps this led to a creepy feeling of the sort as you struggle to figure out why that
sentence felt so familiar, a feeling not totally unlike deja vu.
Well, if we did actually cause even some of you to experience deja vu, then that might
be a procedure that could be used to produce and therefore study this phenomenon more directly.
False alarms are interesting, but they're not really deja vu.
Deja vu needs to include that sense of oddness, that subjective creepy feeling that makes the
soundtrack from the Twilight Zone play in our heads.
That's very hard, if not impossible, to create in a laboratory, and that's why most theories
of deja vu will be just that, theories.
Okay, I focus so much on the priming attribution theory because it's the one that I think makes
the most sense from all we know about memory.
However, there are also other theories, some of which are similar in some ways, but different
in others.
While it may be hard to experimentally show that one is superior to another, they are
each worth visiting if only to see what they may tell us about memory and the interaction
between memory systems and the way those interactions can lead to illusions of previous experience.
So let's consider some of the other memory-based theories as well.
The first one I want to discuss isn't so much a theory of deja vu per se, nor is it really
even a competitor to the notion I've just described, but it does allow us to connect
some of this to the brain, including some of the regions we've been discussing.
I told you about work suggesting that the hippocampus is critical to conscious memory.
Well, other imaging studies have suggested that a brain region just below the hippocampus,
an area called the parahippocampus, is active when stimuli feel familiar, irrespective of
whether those stimuli are consciously recognized or not.
So in brain terms, it seems that deja vu reflects situations in which the parahippocampus is
active, but no conscious memory is retrieved, because there is no memory to be retrieved.
So something activates the parahippocampus, perhaps it's just the sort of random activation
that was previously discussed in the context of epilepsy, or perhaps it's the sort of
perceptual head start I highlighted in the perceptual priming theory.
What other experiences could cause a sense of spooky familiarity?
Well, based on a hologram theory of memory, a Dutch researcher named Herman Snow argues
that memories, like holograms, are recreated out of little bits of themselves.
The smaller the bit, the more blurry the ultimate memory.
He claims that some small aspect of our current experience may be enough to retrieve a very
blurry version of some past experience.
So for example, perhaps you go on a ride with a friend in his 1964 Plymouth.
As you ride, you begin to experience intense deja vu.
Although you have no conscious memory of it, perhaps your grandfather owned just this kind
of car, and you rode in it when you were very young.
Thus the look and the smell and the feel of the car may bring that memory back, but in
such a degraded form that it is really more like the ghost of a memory.
Perhaps this ghost is strong enough to trigger brain regions that respond to familiarity,
like the parahippocampus, but not strong enough to give rise to an episodic memory.
Another somewhat similar theory highlights the potential role of memories that we have
indirectly experienced through, say, books or movies.
So for example, imagine that as a child you watched a movie in which some character drove
up to a famous landmark, maybe the CN Tower in Toronto.
Then much later in your life, you yourself are visiting Toronto for the first time and
you drive up to that landmark.
That might be enough to trigger a strong sense of familiarity that cannot be easily attributed.
After all, you have never been to Toronto.
Unless you remember that movie distinctly, you again have familiarity that you know cannot
be derived from personal past experience.
This is your first time in Toronto.
Perhaps the most interesting aspect of this theory is its suggestion that some of our
memories may not be directly personal memories at all, but rather maybe memories indirectly
derived from other characters that we have been associated with.
In that sense, their memories become ours, and yet they're still distinct.
And one thing to notice about both of these latter theories I've described to you, the
hologram theory and the indirect experience theory, is that they're really both alternate
forms of that priming attribution theory.
Instead of arguing that a quick glance might have caused the priming, they argue that a
vague memory, or an indirect memory from a book or movie, might cause the fluent perception.
Like the priming attribution theory, they assume we're unaware of the true source of
the priming and hence we resort to these metaphysical explanations.
In the case of my Amsterdam story, for example, well, my last name is Jordans, which perhaps
is a clue to you that I'm Dutch.
Maybe on some past trip to Amsterdam with my parents, when I was very young, maybe I
saw scenes much like the one that caused déjà vu for me later when I was with my wife.
That sort of ghostly memory that I cannot recall.
Or maybe in home movies that Dad used to show us, there were scenes that I experienced
indirectly, scenes that included scenes like the one I saw with my wife.
That may have produced the déjà vu experience.
So yes, the source of the priming is different, but the basic explanation of the memory illusion
is the same.
Okay, so maybe despite the difficulty of showing déjà vu in the lab, we are nonetheless converging
on a theory that explains the illusion and what we can then ask, well, what do these
converging theories tell us about memory?
Well, one thing that it tells us quite clearly is that declarative and non declarative forms
of memory can become dissociated, decoupled, and that we feel it when they do.
That is usually when we experience some event, it increases the likelihood both that it will
be fluently perceived and that we will remember it episodically.
So things we remember usually feel familiar and that's great, but occasionally things
can feel familiar without us remembering the events that cause the increase of familiarity.
Now actually, the reverse can happen as well.
If you take any word and you repeat it over and over and over, eventually that word will
not feel like the familiar word you know anymore.
You will know it's a word and you will know it's a word you know.
You will have a memory of it as a word, but through repetition it somehow loses its sense
of familiarity, which sounds odd, but it's true.
Give it a try.
Take any word, let's say truck.
Say it a hundred times.
Just listen to me say it a few times.
Truck, truck, truck, truck, truck, truck, truck, truck, truck.
You say that over and over again, it becomes a sound.
It doesn't become a word.
Its wordness slips away.
This sort of experience is called jamais vous, which translates to never seen.
It's the odd feeling of seeing a stimulus that you know you've had previous experience
with, but that stimulus does not seem familiar.
Just like you've never really encountered it before.
So it's really the opposite of déjà vu.
Remember the cat grass delusion I told you about?
It's like this.
So yes, recognition and familiarity can become detached.
And when they do, they give rise to a desire in us to understand and explain the odd feelings
that that creates.
Deja vu and jamais vu are perhaps extreme versions of this, but there's also a much
more common version.
So imagine the following.
You step on a bus.
You see that face in the back and you know that you know that person, but you don't know
where you know them from.
Familiarity without any conscious memory.
Once again, this is an uncomfortable feeling and I want to stress this.
It's one that seems to demand some form of resolution and we've all been there.
We initially ignore the person in case we don't really know them or in case we end up
in a situation where we have to talk to them and we can't remember why we don't know them
at all.
So instead we cast these furtive glances their way as we try to figure out where we know
them from and our minds are working hard to do just that.
So this is the next thing we've learned from this discussion.
When our memories do become dissociated, that event kicks off a cognitive investigation.
Where do I know that person from?
Why does this scene seem so familiar?
Just like a good detective, our memory systems do not like loose ends.
