Lecture 20 – Recovered Memories or False Memories
I ended the last lecture by saying that our memory systems do not like loose ends, and
I highlighted some illusions of memory that can follow from that.
Well, what is true of familiarity, as supported by non-declarative memory, can also be true
of episodic memory?
Of course, we all forget or miss-remember details of past events, but the claim here
is much stronger.
The claim is that you can actually remember past events that never occurred at all.
Memories so fundamentally false are truly fascinating, and they raise all sorts of questions
about the true basis of conscious memories.
We'll begin our exploration of this topic in the context of a famous debate that occurred
in the 1990s, one that pits Freudian psychodynamic therapy against laboratory studies of false
memory.
The main context for this debate, the courtroom, but the academic and public debate in the
media was even more intense.
So let's talk about the story that initiated this all.
In 1990, George Franklin was convicted of murdering a girl named Susan Nason, a murder
that was committed 21 years earlier.
The sole basis of his prosecution was testimony from his daughter, Eileen, testimony based
on a memory that she had had after undergoing therapy.
Theoretically, the memory had been repressed but recovered by the therapeutic process.
This conviction and others based on similar testimony raised many questions about the
accuracy of memory in general and have recovered memories in particular.
The Franklin case opened a decade in which many more cases based on repressed memories
began to be heard throughout the decade.
Until that time, cases not involving murder were bound by the statute of limitations for
prosecuting someone for a crime.
After the Franklin case, some states in the U.S. changed their statute of limitation for
some crimes to acknowledge that memories, in fact, can be repressed and then subsequently
recovered, thereby allowing a critical witness to come forward with memories of a crime when
a longer period of time had passed.
A large part of what makes these cases controversial was debate over when or whether recovered memories
are even accurate or whether they are just creations of the therapeutic process itself.
This debate itself tells us a great deal about memory as it occurs in real life situations
and puts questions about the veracity of human memory squarely at center stage.
But before we get to all that, we have some participants here in the studio as well.
They are here because I want to do another memory test with both you and them.
When we get to the memory test itself, I want to ask you a question or two about what people
remember, so having these guys here will allow me to do that more directly.
Of course, I'd like you to participate in the memory test as well.
Unexpected memory challenges give you a much better workout than familiar challenges like
crossword puzzles, so why not give it a try?
I'll explain what I am up to a little later in the lecture when we get to the test itself.
For now, though, I just want to read you a list of words and I want you to try your best
to remember them.
Again, no writing anything down, just listen to the words as I read them and try your best
to remember.
Okay, ready?
Here it goes.
Mulhill, horn, peak, melody, plane, band, top, radio, summit, sing, climb, piano, valley,
sound, hill, note.
Fantastic.
Thanks.
Now, let's get back to the interesting issue of recovered memories.
As a first step, I need to explain some aspects of Freudian psychoanalysis since the details
are highly relevant to the debate.
It's important to be clear that there are actually various approaches that a therapist
might use when they're trying to help a client who's suffering from some mental health issues.
Freudian psychoanalysis is just one of these approaches, but it's the one that's almost
invariably linked to the notions of recovered memories.
So for the rest of this lecture, that will be the approach I'll be focusing on.
Freud himself believed that when people have mental issues, the issues they are having
are best viewed as symptoms, symptoms of some deeper psychological issues.
So much like a virus, the way it causes, say, the symptoms of a flu, the psychological trauma
causes the behavioral problems.
As such, a therapist should attempt to treat that virus and not the symptoms, and to do
that, they need to uncover the psychological conflict because it is only by acknowledging
and dealing with that conflict that one can ultimately become free of the symptoms.
However, the assumptions underlying psychotherapy predict that uncovering these deep-seated
psychological traumas will be quite difficult.
That's true for two reasons.
First, it is assumed that the worst psychological conflicts are buried well below our consciousness.
Thus, the patients themselves do not even know about them at all.
Second, it's further assumed that there are some active cognitive processes that attempt
to keep those memories buried.
They are not available to consciousness because they are being repressed from consciousness
by exactly that sort of mechanism, a mechanism that is apparently attempting to spare the
individual from some deeply troubling memory.
If the therapists were to try to directly probe the mind to try to uncover this conflict,
he will be met with resistance.
These defense mechanisms will literally get in the way of such a direct attempt.
So given these assumptions, psychoanalysts believe that the only way to uncover the
conflict is to use indirect methods, methods that gently probe the mind and try to allow
the painful memories to essentially expose themselves.
You've likely heard of things like the inkblot tests.
They might try to show a patient perhaps a somewhat ominous looking inkblot, and perhaps
the patient, when they look at it, the first thing they say is, uncle.
Maybe they show the same inkblot in another time, and the patient says, fear.
Slowly the psychiatrist, and perhaps the patient as well, begins to see patterns in the responses,
patterns assumed to reflect aspects of that internal conflict.
Now these patterns might also be mined using other free association tests.
And so for example, in the classic free association test, psychoanalysts might intentionally include
a word like uncle, to which perhaps the patient says something like overpowering.
The analyst might also ask the patient to do something like draw pictures.
So they might say, draw a picture of Thanksgiving dinner.
Now a particular interest might be the way in which the uncle is portrayed in this picture.
Does he look scary?
If the therapy goes well, the patient might ultimately reach a point called catharsis.
Now catharsis is the realization of this internal conflict, a sudden understanding of what it
is that's been giving rise to all the problems all along.
This is the point when the recovered memories might appear.
The patient might suddenly remember the uncle, let's say, sexually abusing them.
Or they might remember their father killing their friend.
The memories obtained from this process tend to feel clear and accurate.
And the patient is certain they are real.
Finally the patient feels like everything makes sense.
Now reaching catharsis is typically not considered enough for the patient to achieve true healing.
Many patients are advised that they must take the next step, and that means achieving justice.
In the case of recovered memories, that often means bringing the culprit to court, charging
them and ultimately sending them to jail for their crime.
Only then will the patient be able to move forward with their lives.
Now everything I just told you rests on the assumptions of psychotherapy.
These ideas have entered popular culture, but unfortunately these assumptions are not based
on scientific findings.
Instead, they are based primarily on the theories of one man, Sigmund Freud.
Doubts about these assumptions have only increased over time, and many other therapies exist
that are based on entirely different assumptions.
But that said, in the 1980s and 1990s it seemed that many patients were recovering memories
in just this way, and with that change of statute of limitations, more and more court
cases were based solely on recovered memories.
Now these cases were tricky because they were often one person's word against another.
And again, they rely on the assumptions of Freudian psychotherapy being accurate.
But often the patients were so sure, so confident, that like Mr. Franklin, many were prosecuted
and found guilty.
Jurors tend to be swayed by confident eyewitnesses, even when they are reporting on an episodic
memory that they couldn't even retrieve for 20 years.
Are recovered memories to be trusted?
Sometimes maybe?
Never?
Always?
Well, a psychologist named Deese published a study in the late 1950s, and that study
suggested that people could actually have episodic memories for things that never actually
occurred.
That might sound ridiculous, right?
How could you have a memory for something that never occurred?
Well, when Deese's paper first came out, that seems to have been the reaction of many in
the scientific community as well.
Deese's work was largely ignored.
However, as all these cases based on testimony of recovered memory began stirring the public
in the 80s and 90s, two psychologists named Roddy Rotiger and Kathleen McDermott remembered
the Deese findings and brought them back to light.
They devised a specific methodology for creating false memories, and the really startling thing
is that that methodology they came up with bears a striking resemblance and a lot of
similarities to some of these aspects of clinical psychotherapy that I've been telling
you about.
Now before I give you the details of their methodology, I think it's time to test your
memory for the items that I read you a few minutes ago.
So what we're going to do is a recognition test, but it's a recognition test with a twist.
I'm going to read out some items for you, and for each item, I want you to think about
the item first, and if you want, you can write them down, and then think about three things
about the item.
The item itself, whether you think the item was in the list, and how confident you feel
that the item was on the list, let's say on a five-point scale.
What we're going to do in the studio here is when I read these items, I'm going to ask
the people in the studio to raise their hand if they think an item is old, that is, if
it was on the list, and to raise a number of fingers on that hand that reflects how confident
you are that that item is on the list.
So the first item I'm going to ask you about is the word table.
So think about it for a moment, and then I'll just ask everybody to consider the word whether
you think it's old, how confident you are.
Anybody here?
Raise your hands if anybody thinks it's old.
And how confident?
Five?
Three?
One person?
Three confident.
Okay, that's cool.
All right, that was not on the list, by the way, but it's a good point for me to mention
actually that when you do recognition tests, that happens all the time.
People remember items not being on the list.
It's called a false alarm.
That's okay, no big deal.
So now let's go to another one.
How about melody?
Okay, yeah, go ahead and raise your hands.
So we have about five hands, and everybody's at about four or five confidence.
Melody was on the list, okay.
So now how about snooze?
Okay, nobody thinks snooze is on the list, snooze was not on the list.
How about music?
Nope, okay, okay, so we have three people, and we got threes and twos and threes.
Okay, cool.
And finally, how about mountain?
It's the last one I'll ask you about.
Think about it.
Anybody?
It's okay, some fives, threes, and four.
Okay, cool.
Thank you very much.
Well, it turns out neither music nor mountain were on the list, but these were the classic
items we would test in these situations.
So in both of those cases, we did find some people who thought they were on the list,
and in the latter case, in the case of mountain, we found people who were saying fours and
fives.
It is in fact a common finding that many people remember at least one of those two
absent items as being on the list, and that they feel pretty confident about them.
So some people actually, though, are more confident for the items that were not on the
list than they are for items that were on the list.
And in case you had difficulty experiencing this yourself, let's listen again to the part
of the lecture where I'm reading the list so that you can hear the list and you can
be assured that I am telling the truth, those two items were not on the list.
As you listen, I also want you to notice the structure of the list.
Beginning with the first word, I am actually alternating between two lists, two related
lists.
The first list is a list of words related to the word mountain.
So you'll hear things like molehill and peak and plain and top.
The second list is a list of words related to the word music.
So you'll hear words like horn, melody, band, and radio.
Okay, so here's the replay.
Okay, ready?
Here goes.
Molehill, horn, peak, melody, plain, band, top, radio, summit, sing, climb, piano, valley,
sound, hill, note.
I would also like to point out that I have often done the same experiment in my university
classes.
And in those cases, quite a few people do have these false memories.
And when they do, they are sometimes very confident that their memory is accurate.
The most recent class I did in which I did this experiment used the same words you just
experienced.
And about 30 of 100 or so students demonstrated the illusion of memory we're discussing
here by raising their hands when I asked how many of them heard the word mountain.
How about mountain?
How many people say yes, mountain was in there?
Okay, how many people say no, it wasn't.
Okay, mountain's a cool one.
Mountain was never read, was never shown.
This demonstration that you can create false memories in the lab is relevant to the false
memory debate in two ways.
First, it clearly shows that people can remember events that didn't happen.
For example, hearing the words music and mountain.
That in and of itself is not all that surprising, but what is really surprising is that when
they do remember these words, they can sometimes be very confident that their memory is accurate.
Just as confident as they were when they were remembering words that actually were on the
list.
That is a true episodic memory.
That alone makes it hard to just accept the testimony about a recovered memory is accurate,
even when the witness is highly confident.
But there's a second aspect of creating false memories that's even more worrisome.
Remember when I said that this process for recovering memories involves at getting at
the inner trauma in a very indirect way.
Hinting around it, but never actually saying it directly.
The therapist may think that the patient was, let's say, sexually abused by an uncle, but
the therapist will never say that directly.
Instead, situations are created that encourage the client to think of things along the lines
of what the therapist is thinking.
And at some point, the client may remember that target event, even if it never occurred.
In many ways, this is very similar to the laboratory way of creating false memories.
Think of that again.
We didn't ever present the words music or mountain in the list, but we present a bunch
of words that are related to music and a bunch of words that are related to mountain.
We essentially hint all around the critical word without ever mentioning it.
Then when we tap memory, we find that we have created a memory for that concept we hinted
around.
Perhaps in the way a therapist might create a memory by hinting around what they hypothesize
to be the event causing the inner conflict.
Again, if this feels a little like our discussion of prototypes two lectures ago, well, at its
heart, it is a very similar illusion of memory.
It's just played out in a legal context, the sort of context that can have innocent
people end up in jail for decades.
Sometimes illusions can have very palpable consequences.
Okay, well, I've described this as a debate, but I likely should have called it a heated
debate, and you likely now have a better understanding why.
After all, rapes and murders really do take place.
So imagine listing this story I just told you from the perspective of Freudian psychoanalyst.
You thought you might be able to help bring criminals to justice and also to give closure
for your client, but in essence, you have just been accused of helping to implant false
memories that are ultimately used to put innocent people behind bars for horrific crimes that
they didn't actually commit.
Now clearly some analysts would be, and some were, very upset by such a depiction.
What's more, many of them rightfully pointed out that just because you can create false
memories in the lab, and just because the procedure used to do it bears some surface
similarity to the therapeutic techniques, that certainly doesn't prove that all memories
recovered in the psychoanalytic setting are false memories.
Maybe some are false memories.
In fact, some have been conclusively shown to be false after the fact, but still, perhaps
some are not.
Perhaps some are accurate, recovered memories.
In this case, we could end up actually re-victimizing somebody and thereby compound their mental
health issues.
Let's think about this a little bit.
They finally feel like they understand the root cause of their trauma.
They reach that state of catharsis.
They move forward to get justice, and now we refuse to believe them.
We tell them that no matter how clear it may seem to them, their cathartic memory is surely
false, and they are deluding themselves and making false accusations against innocent
people.
Wow.
Okay.
So, this really is a fascinating and a multi-faceted issue, and one that has no easy solution,
at least for those who believe in the assumptions of psychoanalysis.
To most others though, the assumptions of psychoanalysis lack scientific support, while
the evidence is too strong that memories appearing for the first time in a psychoanalytic context
may be inaccurate.
The justice system has responded to this more general perception, and now in order to convict,
there's a need for someone to show some other form of evidence, something in addition to
the recovered memory, something that can give at least some sort of further credence to
the accuracy of what's being described.
Even what we learned about memory during the first decade of the 21st century, it has
become extremely unlikely that anyone would be prosecuted on the basis of recovered memory
alone.
These scientific results have also resulted in the overturning of many of those initial
prosecutions that were based on recovered memories.
Remember the case of George Franklin, the one I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture?
Well George's conviction was overturned in 1995, and no further charges or accusations
were ever leveled.
In fact, no further evidence could be found to support the memory of his daughter, and
what evidence that was still available seemed to refute it.
George spent five years of his life in jail for what seemed to have been a false memory
created during therapy.
So what does this debate about false memory tell us about the accuracy of our memory systems
more generally?
Well, if we consider both the experimental technique that's used to create a false memory,
in the clinical context in which recovered memories are said to occur, in both cases
it is not completely accurate to say that the stimulus was in fact never presented.
It's true, it was never presented in the environment, so I never read the words music or mountain
aloud.
But when you hear all those words related to mountain, it's completely possible that
the concept of mountain that was so primed by all of those related words did come to mind.
So while mountain was never explicitly presented at study, it may have occurred in your mind.
Now this depiction highlights one of the real challenges that our memory systems face when
trying to account for things that really happened.
When doing so, we have to separate the real experiences from the imagined experiences.
And of course, all experiences are really experienced in our mind, even those that initially
were stimulated by the outside world.
The process that allows us to perceive the world around us, they do their thing by essentially
bringing information from the outside world into our minds.
So what we really have are mental experiences prompted by external events, versus mental
experiences prompted by internal events, things that we thought about or imagined.
Now of course, schizophrenics have a horrible time discriminating real from imagined, and
can even happily have conversations with people who really aren't there.
What is quite fascinating, given what we're learning about memory, is that, well, why
don't most of us do that?
Why is it the case that most of us seem to be able to distinguish real from imagined?
I mean, it's not like we don't hear voices in our heads.
We sometimes say that about schizophrenics.
That's what they hear voices in their heads.
Well, I hear voices in my head all the time.
I imagine talking to people.
They talk back.
So sometimes that voice that I'm hearing isn't even my own voice.
It's someone else's voice.
And yet nonetheless, I somehow take ownership of all of that and see it as something that
I've generated.
And that's what separates us from schizophrenics.
Not the presence of voices, but the attributions we make about them.
So maybe when priming is consistent enough, as it is in the false memory experiment or
in the psychoanalytic context, then the imagined events become so well represented that they
can begin to feel more and more like events prompted by external experiences.
In fact, studies of the effects of hypnosis support this notion.
Hypnosis allows us to imagine things with enhanced clarity.
Because of this apparent clarity, hypnosis is sometimes used to help a witness remember
some critical details of, say, a crime scene that they witnessed.
And through hypnosis, the person can imagine going back in time and retracing events,
and it all feels quite real.
What that means is that the cues that we can use to prompt memory are stronger.
And that can indeed prompt and promote the recovery of memories.
But there's a real problem as well.
Hypnotized people are highly suggestible, and if pushed slightly, they will provide
confident answers even when they give inaccurate information.
So for example, if you ask somebody who witnessed a bank robbery, what color were the robber's
shoes?
The witness will likely give you an answer.
If you push hard enough, they will say, red, maybe that answer is due to enhanced memory.
Maybe they were suddenly able to recollect that.
Or maybe they were just going along with your suggestion, and they provided an answer through
a process that we sometimes call confabulation.
The filling in of memory gaps by fabricated information just to provide the answer.
The problem with hypnotized people, once they've been hypnotized, is they believe these things.
They believe it's true.
And so they're not sure what's real and imagined.
And after they've been hypnotized, we can't tell the difference either.
It's because of this that often in criminal investigations, police will really resist the
temptation to hypnotize a witness.
Once hypnotized, it's very difficult to trust the memory that that witness has.
Again, we can't separate the confabulations from the real memory.
So this person automatically loses some credibility in a relatively automatic way.
And that makes it hard that the court system knows this, so it makes it hard to trust anything
they say.
And because of all this, police will usually only hypnotize people as a last resort when
they feel like they have nothing to go on in a case.
And they hope that the testimony from a hypnotized subject might bring some new leads that ultimately
might give them some more concrete way to solve the case, even potentially without that
witness's testimony.
Now this adds more suspicion to the memories recovered in the psychoanalytic context, because
often hypnosis or other forms of guided imagery are among the techniques used to indirectly
probe the unconscious mind.
Have you ever seen those people on TV who first experienced some odd event and they
couldn't make sense of it, and then they went somewhere and they got hypnotized?
And then under hypnosis, they suddenly remembered it all.
It was aliens.
They were kidnapped.
The aliens kidnapped and probed them.
They're very confident in these memories.
They go on TV shows and tell you all about it.
Well, once the event is experienced with such rich imagery, once you go through that memory
under hypnosis, it becomes very hard to discriminate imagined events from events that really occurred.
It's important that I make clear, though, that everything I've been saying about the
fallibility of memory in court cases, it should not be taken to imply that our memory for events
is not a sufficient basis for investigation.
On the contrary, memory can produce valuable leads that can be confirmed or denied using
other evidence.
Rape victims may be able to identify their assailants, or witnesses may be able to identify
a murderer, and so on.
It may even be possible for someone to forget a traumatic event entirely, but then later
remember it spontaneously.
But then all the cautions would apply, just as what we've already discussed.
And that's my main point in this lecture.
More than we can realize, episodic memory can go drastically astray.
Unfortunately, being convinced that we've remembered accurately is no guarantee that
we have remembered accurately.
After all, we all interact in highly complex environments.
Often we're switching attention between various stimuli that we experience.
Memory works to kind of piece together these experiences that were part of some specific
event without mixing things up.
But our memory hates loose ends, and sometimes memory fails quite dramatically.
I'll conclude with an example where no hypnosis or psychoanalytic prompting were involved.
Consider the following case.
A woman who was home alone watching television went in assailant, broke into her apartment,
and raped her.
When the police arrived, the victim said that she had a very clear memory of the rapist's
face, so a sketch artist was brought in and immediately a sketch was drawn up.
Sketch in hand, the police were able to quickly identify the accused perpetrator.
His name was Donald Thompson.
He was a professor at a nearby university.
However, the police quickly realized that he could not have committed the rape.
He had an airtight alibi.
He was on live TV at the time.
Ironically, he was on an educational show talking about distortions of memory.
The victim of the crime had indeed seen his face just before or perhaps even during the
crime because she was watching him on TV when the assailant broke in.
Somehow, the two events, the TV show and the rape, had become fused in her mind.
She remembered the face, but the source of the face was distorted in her memory.
Now it became the face of the rapist.
As this example shows, while memories often serve us well, even drastic distortions are
possible.
So all of this highlights the fallibility of episodic memory.
And let's go back to something I said much earlier in the course when I described episodic
memory as analogous to the bookshelves in a library or the hard drive on a computer.
Clearly we need to revise that.
After all, as we've seen, those analogies are too clean for the kinds of cases we've
just been discussing.
Human memory does not store perfect copies of experience that are then replayed in a
manner that provides a perfect copy of that event.
Video cameras do that.
Human memory does not.
So how does it work then?
Well, in our next lecture, we'll revisit how we really remember the events of our lives.
It's actually more like, well, wait and see.
Let's be constructive on this topic, and let's see what sorts of analogies you can
come up with.
