Lecture 21, Mind the Gaps, Memory as Reconstruction
We followed a progression in this course that mimics in some ways how the study of memory itself has evolved.
Tricks to improve memory, understand the different systems of memory, figure out the underlying biology
and bring everything to bear to what we're learning back into our everyday life.
In recent lectures, we've also been chipping away at a major oversimplification.
It's a simplification that can be very misleading.
As we've begun to see, as we consider how memory hates these loose ends,
the pair of images I gave you much earlier about long-term memory,
the notion of files being retrieved from a hard driver, books from a library,
that clearly needs to be revised.
In actuality, our long-term memories are not really like either.
And we don't retrieve them from memory in that way either.
We, in fact, recreate our memories anew, each and every time.
And this is especially true for episodic memories.
And they are our most personal connection to our past.
It's very important to me that you leave this lecture series with an accurate sense of how episodic memories work.
In so doing, you'll also gain a more nuanced picture of how these memories
have also created your ongoing sense of who you are.
Now, to frame this discussion, I want to briefly tell you about another neuropsychological syndrome,
one that also involves anterior-grade amnesia.
Here's the story.
A Russian neuropsychiatrist named Sergei Korsakov noted that many patients he encountered
shared the same two symptoms.
First, they had severe trouble laying down new episodic memories.
Why?
Well, one thing that Korsakov noted about these patients is that the vast majority of them were alcoholics,
and those who weren't alcoholics had suffered from some form of malnutrition.
And while it turns out that one can indeed survive on alcohol,
that is, there's enough calories to sustain life,
it doesn't have many nutrients,
and thiamine especially is critical for a healthy hippocampus.
Without thiamine, the hippocampus slowly dies,
resulting in progressively more severe anterior-grade amnesia.
The second symptom that Korsakov noted is also going to be important to this lecture.
He noticed that the patients suffering from this progressively worsening anterior-grade amnesia
also showed a tendency for confabulation, saying things that just were not true.
Now, they weren't lying per se,
and what I mean by that is they weren't really intending to deceive anyone.
So why were they confabulating then?
Understanding the answer to this question will also provide a deeper understanding of episodic memory
just as this lecture is meant to do.
So we're going to return to these patients at the end of the lecture
to explain their behavior in light of this new understanding.
Now, to move towards an understanding of confabulation,
let's use our working memories to transport ourselves to Cambridge University in England.
Early 1900s.
And once there, we will meet a professor named Frederick Bartlett.
Now, serve Frederick Bartlett.
Now, like many British professors at the time,
he would travel from his flat to the university on a bicycle,
and he would meet many of the same people each day,
and he would stop and chat with them all a little.
At some point, Bartlett decided that he would use this daily routine as a context for a memory study.
No, not in the sense of the method of loci in a different sense.
Specifically, he found a somewhat oddly written American Indian legend,
and it's called The War of the Ghosts.
At least it was oddly written by British standards.
It used language in different ways.
It referred to spiritual notions that few Brits knew,
and generally, it told the tale in a manner that seemed to leave out some details.
If you're interested, I'm sure you can find this online.
Bartlett decided one day to read The War of the Ghosts to each person he met,
asking them to try to remember it.
Then, after various intervals had passed,
he would ask these people to recount the tale back to him,
and he recorded and analyzed what they said.
So virtually, nobody was able to recount the story correctly.
Everyone made errors.
Some of these errors would be what we could call omission errors.
That is, parts of the legend were actually missing,
and these errors could perhaps be attributable to forgetting,
but Bartlett noticed that all parts of the legend were not equally forgotten.
The parts that made the least sense,
or that fit least with the stories that were commonly told in Britain,
those were the parts most likely to be forgotten.
So that alone was potentially interesting,
but these were not the only errors made.
Another very common error was what Bartlett termed regularization errors.
Essentially, when people recounted the legend,
they did so in a way that fit more closely with the sorts of stories people were accustomed to,
and they also were made to fit with the beliefs that people had.
So for example, Christian references ended up replacing the references to native spirituality.
The legend itself was generally made more flowing,
and sometimes parts were added to bridge these perceived gaps that were present in the original legend.
Also, the legend ends in a way that seems abrupt and confusing to many British people,
and they would tend to alter the ending to make it more, well, more like a conclusion.
So based on these data and other experiments, Bartlett published a book in 1932
that made a strong claim about memory.
He claimed that we do not retrieve memories,
and we certainly do not retrieve them as complete holes,
but rather we reconstruct memories by piecing together certain bits
that we had newly stored and bringing these together with things we already know.
For example, if I asked you to recall your last visit to some nice sunny beach location,
Bartlett would claim that the memory you would recount to me would first have to be constructed,
not retrieved as a whole.
The construction would begin with the retrieval of certain specific facts that you had stored,
perhaps where you went, perhaps some memory of fellow travelers you met there,
perhaps even some event that occurred on the beach, that sort of thing.
You would then take these bits of retrieved memories,
and then you would glue them together into a story and make that movie of the mind that we see.
Of course, you aren't going to remember every little detail of the trip,
so to piece together the story, you use your semantic memory to fill in the gaps,
your general knowledge of geography and beaches and resorts and how all those things work.
Now, the problem is, we sometimes have trouble knowing the differences between the bits we actually remembered
and the bits we filled in to complete the story.
We have to mind those gaps, and sometimes that can be trouble.
The fact and the filler are hard to discriminate,
so the entire memory can seem like one seamless and accurate recounting.
Well, when you think of the sort of memory system described by this account, it actually makes a lot of sense.
Using semantic memory in this way allows us to not have to episodically remember
every single event that occurred in some past experience.
Really, that sounds pretty inefficient when you think of it,
because most of the details of any experience,
well, they're just mundane, common aspects of the way the world works.
Why store all that information over and over with each new experience?
Why not just store the relevant bits of some experience,
then use our knowledge of the world to paint in all of those less relevant details?
For this to be effective, though, for it to provide a seamless feeling of replaying that past event,
it would also make sense to not make the distinction between retrieved and overlaid memory clear.
We'd like them all to blend together to provide one nice movie in our minds.
Seems like a pretty good outcome,
even if we do sometimes feel overly confident that the details we filled in were really part of the real episode.
By the way, you've likely repeatedly experienced a much more everyday version
of how the accuracy of your memory can differ from your confidence in it.
I remember one occasion when my wife and I had been invited to a colleague's house for dinner.
Sometime thereafter, she made a remark to a friend about the odd shade of green on the outside of the house we visited.
I found the comment strange because I distinctly remembered the house being painted brown.
And I said as much.
And the two of us began nicely debating the issue.
Each of us, though, sure that our memories were correct.
But of course, despite the fact that we were both absolutely confident in our memories,
one of us had to be completely wrong.
One of us was both confident and inaccurate.
Who?
Well, I can't really remember, and it's not really the point anyway.
The point's this.
You have likely experienced a similar situation sometime when you and somebody else were both sure about different versions of the same memory.
So we know that memories are often inaccurate and that these inaccuracies are often due to the reconstructive nature of memory.
We also know that these inaccuracies are sometimes accompanied by high levels of confidence.
What are the consequences of all this?
Well, the consequences are minor.
We seem to remember the important aspects of shared memory, and if we quibble over the details now and then, that's really no big deal.
Or is it?
Let's return again to the courtroom.
Why the courtroom again?
Well, as our previous lecture on false memories so clearly illustrated, the consequences of inaccurate memories are amplified when one's freedom may be on the line.
Thus, it is perhaps not surprising that many experimental studies of inaccurate memories are conducted within a legal context.
These are the studies that tell us the most about how episodic memories are formed and the distortions that may be part of that process.
So if we must follow them into the courtroom, so be it.
Let's actually begin with some sobering statistics.
According to the textbook I use when I teach psychology and the law, over 70,000 Americans a year are charged with crimes solely on the basis of eyewitness testimony.
And of course, eyewitness testimony is episodic memory.
And these are not necessarily weak cases.
So, for example, in one experiment, Elizabeth Loftus, a leader in the study of memory in the legal context, provided participants with a description of a hypothetical case in which a grocery store owner was robbed and murdered and a suspect was arrested.
Three groups of participants were asked to pretend they were jurors in the case.
Now, one group was provided with circumstantial evidence that the suspect was guilty.
He had money in his apartment.
He had traces of ammonia on his shoe that matched that of a common floor cleaner that was used in the store.
18% of this group voted for conviction based on this circumstantial evidence.
A second group was given the same evidence, but they were also told that a witness had seen the suspect shoot the grocery clerk.
72% of this group voted for conviction.
So clearly the eyewitness account had a strong effect.
But here's the really interesting part.
There was also a third group.
The third group were told the same thing as the second, but this time the defendant's lawyer discredited the witness by showing that the witness's vision was extremely poor, 2400 to be precise.
Thus, the witness couldn't have seen the suspect clearly at all.
68% of the third group voted for conviction.
So only 4% of the jurors seemed to see this discrediting of the witness as important.
Even with his horrible eyesight, his testimony still had a powerful effect.
Why?
Some psychologists believe that eyewitness testimony is itself highly memorable to jurors.
And that's why it has such a big impact on their deliberations and on their decisions.
And it doesn't really matter whether the testimony is discredited or not.
This is worrisome because a number of psychological studies have detailed how inaccurate eyewitness testimonies often are.
So for example, in one study, customers were asked to engage in an unusual but otherwise safe interaction with a store employee.
So for example, a customer might enter a shoe store and insist that he wanted the clerk to sell him some milk.
When the employee refused on the grounds that, well, they just don't sell milk, the customer pushed the point further, then left frustrated.
Later, the employees were shown lineups consisting of the bizarre customers along with other faces.
While 42% made a correct identification, 22% could not recall well enough to make a choice.
More scary though, 36% chose someone else, an innocent person.
Thus one can indeed accurately remember a perpetrator, but they can also get it wrong at startlingly high rates.
Now this wouldn't be a major issue if jurors could tell the difference between accurate and inaccurate memories.
One could imagine that maybe some feature of the recounting might tip them off.
However, there's good reason to doubt that even this is true.
For example, in another study, witnesses viewed a perpetrator in the act of robbery.
For some witnesses, the perpetrator had on a hat that covered most of his hair.
For others, the hat was a little higher, showing quite a bit of his hair.
For a third group, there was no hat at all, so all of the perpetrator's head was visible.
These groups identified the correct individual at rates of 33, 40, and 74% respectively.
So they showed clear differences in the accuracy of their memories.
However, when mock jurors were completely informed of what the witness had seen,
they convicted at rates of 62, 66, and 74% respectively.
So said another way, even under conditions where the witnesses were choosing the correct perpetrator
only a third of the time, choosing an innocent person the other two thirds,
jurors still found whoever they chose to be guilty 62% of the time.
Now, part of the explanation of this has to do with the confidence with which witnesses testify.
And there are two issues here, really.
First, jurors are heavily swayed by confidence.
If a witness says, I am absolutely certain that that is the man I saw,
jurors are more likely to convict them than if a witness says, I'm pretty sure that was the man.
Troublingly, though, the second issue is that confidence is often only weekly correlated
with the actual accuracy of a memory.
In fact, most of the research examining the relation between memory confidence and memory accuracy
suggests that most of us are as confident in our inaccurate memories as we are in our accurate memories.
People deprived of adequate sleep, for example, have been found to be more confident in their memories
and to become even more confident about memories that turn out to be inaccurate.
Our memory systems hate loose ends.
And this all comes back to Bartlett's notion of memory reconstruction.
Our reconstructions are part retrieved fact and part filled in fiction,
but we ourselves have a lot of trouble telling the difference.
Consider the following study.
In 1992, a cargo LL Boeing 747 crashed into a tall apartment building in Amsterdam.
This disaster was covered extensively in the media, including many images of the aftermath of the crash.
But, given that there was no video of the crash itself, only the aftermath was shown.
Despite this, when psychologists questioned students about their memory of the event,
66% claimed to remember seeing the airplane crash into the building.
In addition, they also offered further details.
Some remembered the plane hitting vertically, others remembered it hitting horizontally,
and some claimed seeing it already on fire before crashing into the building.
There's no doubt that when we hear about such an event,
our mental recreation of the event includes details we may not have actually witnessed.
Details like those just described.
But this all becomes tricky when, upon repeated remembering of the event,
these details become indistinguishable from the details we actually saw.
This sensitivity of memory to additional details can be especially problematic
when one becomes exposed to the information after experiencing the event, before recounting it.
In the Dutch study described before, the student might well have read accounts from witnesses at the scene,
some of whom may have described their memories,
memories which may have included details that were not included in the news reports.
So a little like that rape victim described in the last lecture,
the students may actually experience problems with what we call source memory.
They did indeed hear some things, and they saw some things,
but those things became merged, and that's what they saw in the movie in their minds.
When the psychologist only asked them about what they actually saw,
they have trouble separating those seen-only events from the larger movie,
and they remember actually experiencing events that only the witnesses on the ground actually experienced.
Now, of course, the justice system does what it can to try to find jurors with relatively pure memories and weak biases,
and then to control the details of the case those jurors are exposed to.
This first part of the trial is sometimes called wadier.
It's a term from old French which translates as to speak the truth.
During this phase, lawyers question prospective jurors in hopes of uncovering any biases that they might bring to the case
that could color the way they remember the trial details.
And also they want to ascertain whether potential jurors have already been exposed to biasing details about the case
from media sources or things like that.
The hope is to find jurors who currently know very little about the case
and who seem to have no preconceptions that would bias the way they consider evidence.
After all, other controls are in place with respect to what evidence is even considered admissible,
and the goal is to have jurors make their decision based on a balanced consideration of the evidence that they were exposed to in the courtroom.
Thus, we really want to make sure that they aren't already bringing other evidence in with them,
evidence that they may have read or they may have heard about already.
In very high-profile cases, the justice system, their attempts to kind of keep this juror's memory pure
can also continue throughout the duration of the case.
So that is, jurors might be sequestered, kept apart from their jobs, from their friends, from family, and of course from the media.
This sometimes means that jurors end up living in a controlled bubble within a hotel room,
allowed to speak only with other jurors or with other members of the justice system.
They may be allowed to speak with family members as well,
but on strict condition that they not talk about any of the details of the case.
But is that sufficient?
Does that mean we've started out with pure jurors, we've insulated them from all their biases and details that might come from media or friends?
If we do that, have we handled everything we need to handle?
Well, that all works as long as the information they hear in court is presented in an unbiased manner.
But is that true? Can we accept that that is in fact occurring?
Well, lawyers know a little bit about memory recreation as well.
And given the chance, they will use that knowledge to their advantage.
Consider the following experiment also performed by Loftus and her colleagues.
Participants first saw a short slideshow in which a red car went through a stop sign before running into a white car.
Sometime later, the participants were questioned about what they had remembered.
However, the way they were questioned was varied across groups.
The first group was asked, how fast was the red car going when it contacted the white car?
For the remaining groups, the term contacted was changed.
It was changed to either hit, bumped, collided, or smashed.
So the fifth group, for example, was asked, how fast was the red car going when it smashed into the white car?
The speed estimates mirrored the verb that was used, with estimates of 31, 34, 38, 39, and 41 miles per hour respectively across those groups.
Simply by changing the wording of the question, the participants seemed to remember the red car going up to 10 miles an hour more.
But was this really how they remembered it, or were they just kind of trying to match the context presented by the questioner?
That's actually a hard question to answer definitively, but the experimenters tried.
They called the participants back a week after they had viewed the slideshow, and they asked them to remember the event to gain in their minds.
And then they asked them if there was any broken glass on the ground after the accident.
Note that all participants were asked the same question this time, and the correct answer was no. There was no broken glass.
But those exposed to the more extreme verbs earlier were also more likely to remember broken glass being presented.
In fact, 32% of the participants in the smashed condition remembered seeing broken glass, despite the fact that it wasn't there.
Once again, a false memory, perhaps caused by the suggestion of broken glass and supported by the use of the word smashed.
If you watch court shows it all, you've probably heard some lawyer exclaim at some point.
Objection, she's leading the witness, Your Honor.
That term, leading the witness, refers explicitly to the situation in which a lawyer has asked a question in a way that suggests a certain answer.
This is the extreme form of what we've just been discussing. Often they do the same thing in much more subtle ways.
Now, as Loftus' work shows, one can definitely lead a witness, and thereby they can indeed affect the way they remember events in much more subtle ways.
So, for instance, by selecting the words one uses carefully when asking questions.
Good lawyers know this, and they use it. It's one of the things that makes them good lawyers.
Okay, so I've been talking a lot about memory in the context of the courtroom.
This really is an interesting context because, as mentioned earlier, nowhere else is memory usually under such scrutiny,
because nowhere else are the consequences of incorrect memories so severe.
It seems that we hear almost every week about someone who is falsely imprisoned, often for decades,
only to be released when new DNA procedures conclusively show that some witness's memory was inaccurate.
So, to some extent, the legal context has indeed become the primary laboratory for investigating errors in memory.
However, it's important to emphasize that all the sorts of errors that we've been discussing occur for each of us in our daily lives on a regular basis.
I often find myself in situations where my memory of some event conflicts with someone else's memory of the very same event.
Knowing all I do about memory, I cannot help but now say things like the following.
Well, I may very well be wrong about this, but all I can really say is, this is how I remember things occurring.
Occasionally, I may try to highlight some detail that I recalled, some detail that I'm pretty sure is correct,
a detail that perhaps corroborates my recounting relative to that of somebody else.
And I hope that when they think about this detail, they will also recall it,
and in so doing will realize my reconstruction is more accurate than theirs.
But often, I must simply agree to disagree.
I remember things the way I do, and I'm hesitant to believe deeply that any memory I have is actually a completely accurate rendition of the actual event I witnessed.
I am very far from being the only memory researcher whose education has resulted in an appreciation of the dangers of believing all the details of my episodic memory.
I've mentioned Elizabeth Loftus in her work a couple of times in this lecture.
In fact, she is THE expert on the sort of memory distortions we've been discussing.
In light of that, consider the following story.
One day, the 44-year-old Loftus was horrified to hear from her uncle that at the age of 14,
she had been the one to discover her mother's body floating in a pool.
Until then, she had no memory of discovering her mother.
She didn't even precisely know how her mother had died.
But after hearing this from her uncle, she began to remember some horrifying details.
For example, in her words, my mother, dressed in her nightgown, was floating face down.
I started to scream.
I remembered the police cars, the lights flashing.
For three days, my memory expanded and swelled.
But then early one morning, my brother called to tell me my uncle had made a mistake.
That's right, Loftus had not discovered the body.
Her aunt did.
This was all a false episodic memory.
And even a leading scholar in the field of eyewitness testimony,
who had published important books on the subject before this incident,
well, not even she was immune to the effects of memory distortion.
As incredible as some of these distortions are, though,
it is important to put all of this in context.
These distortions arise from a memory system that efficiently provides us records of past events,
and in the vast majority of cases, the important aspects of those events are correct.
Usually it is just the details of an event that are prone to distortion and confabulation.
The false memory of Elizabeth Loftus is obviously much more extreme,
and it does show how dramatic memory distortions can be,
especially under the influence of powerful new stimulus,
together with circumstances that make it more suggestible.
But, like the creation of memories in the psychoanalytic setting,
the way that Loftus reconfigured her memories at the prompting of her uncle
is really the exception that shows the rule.
Usually our episodic memories reflect a combination of accurate memory for aspects
we thought were important at the time of encoding,
and then semantic memory pieces the aspects we thought were important together
to provide a seamless replaying of the event.
So what does this all tell us about the Korsakov patients
that were suffering from bad nutrition and confabulation?
Well, their interior grade amnesia was not as dense as the cases of Clive wearing an HM that I described earlier.
They could still encode some parts of what was happening,
and remember those parts subsequently,
so they didn't have a complete loss of memory going forward.
But they had much smaller pieces than you or I had,
and so they had much bigger gaps to fill in.
That's what was causing their confabulation, their attempt to fill in these large gaps.
So just like us, they really were trying to make sense of what they had,
and they were piecing it together using assumptions about what must have happened.
That was an attempt to link the events.
They just weren't very good at it.
The gaps they had to fill were too large.
Thus, their confabulations were obvious.
But we all do the same thing as Korsakov's alcoholics, just to a less noticeable extent.
Well, this leads us all very nicely to our next lecture.
The implication of all we've discussed today is that, at encoding,
we must somehow decide which details of an event to encode,
and which not to worry about so much.
What factors do we base that decision on?
We've mostly focused so far on how the stimulus fits with other memories that we may already have.
But other factors are also relevant to this,
including the relevance of some aspects of the experience to our lives
and the emotions that some events produce.
So our subject for the next time is,
How do we choose what to remember?
