Lecture 22 – How We Choose What's Important to Remember
Last time we developed a picture of memory, episodic memory specifically, that makes a
lot of sense, yet that also differs from how we typically feel about our memory.
And his memory feels like you are replaying some previous event exactly as it happened.
But really what you're seeing is only partly true retrieval of that event.
A lot of that internal movie is filler, and the context that's provided by semantic
memory.
This explains both why human memory is so powerfully efficient, while at the same time
also explaining why we get minor details wrong all the time.
It's two sides of the same incredible story.
But sometimes we care about those minor details, at least after the fact.
That's what happens in court cases, and that's what happens with lots of ordinary details
throughout daily life.
The picture of memory we developed last time makes it urgent to figure out how our memory
systems decide which parts of an actual experience to encode.
If we remember some features directly while we just fill in the rest, it becomes critical
to understand which parts of the things we experience end up being stored in our memories,
and which are just glued, cooked together using pieces from other memories that we already
have.
So there are two things we'd really like to know.
First, do we usually have any control over which aspects of an experience are stored
as memories, or does our brain just make these decisions for us with maybe little or
no help from working memory?
Second, during an experience, how can we tell what parts of that experience we might want
to be accurately retrieved when we retrieve that memory later?
Those are the questions we will try to address in the current lecture.
So let's begin with the question of how much control you have over what details you might
later remember with accuracy.
The answer seems to be this.
You can have some control, indeed more than most of us normally exert.
Most of us, though, often seem content to just let our brain handle things.
Why?
Well, as demonstrated in that early lecture on mnemonic strategies, effective encoding
is effortful.
But by now you should know the mantra well.
If there is some detail that you wish to never forget or misremember, then encode that detail
in a way that optimizes the use of organization, association, and, when possible, dual coding.
If you do that, you will be maximizing the chance that that specific detail will be one
of the facts that your subsequent episodic memory of the event will get right.
Of course, the problem is that we have so many experiences in the course of any given
day, we simply cannot engage in this sort of effortful encoding for everyone, or even
for very many.
Usually we're too busy just living, which means that, yes, for the most part, we let
encoding happen itself without much intentional interference from our working memory.
So if we are just leaving things up to the brain, how does the brain decide what is important?
Well, the first factor I want to highlight is something called personal relevance.
In some studies, participants are first shown a set of pictures, and they are asked simply
to rate how relevant each picture is to their lives.
So if it were me, for example, I might rate a picture of a guitar as quite relevant, but
a picture of a flute less relevant.
After all these pictures had been rated, there was a bit of a break, and then memory for
the pictures was tested.
Now note, participants were not warned of this memory test.
They assumed that the purpose of the first phase was just to get those ratings of relevance.
But when memory is tested, the more relevant pictures are remembered better.
Now this likely reflects a more natural, less effortful version of those same mnemonic principles.
Things that are relevant to us are easy to associate to other things in our life, and
therefore easier to naturally organize.
I see a guitar, I automatically think of one of my guitars, especially perhaps one that
it might resemble.
Or perhaps I even imagine playing that guitar, giving me both a more complex image than the
one that was present, and maybe even some proprioceptive form of representation.
A dual code, what it feels like to play that guitar.
So as we go through life, some of the things we experience seem relevant.
The vast majority do not.
We think more about the relevant ones, and that increases the chance they will become
future facts in our episodic memory.
Of course, the problem with this is that what is relevant later might not seem relevant
now.
Relevance of information can change over time, but what can we do?
We can only know our future self so well.
There are some other cases when relevance though is literally thrust upon us, and sometimes
in very dramatic ways.
Perhaps the most extreme example of this is something called the weapon focus effect.
Police are often frustrated when they're interviewing witnesses of some crime with
the hope of trying to get a better sense of the perpetrator, and specifically obviously
what that perpetrator may have looked like.
Well, if the perpetrator was brandishing a weapon, then it is very common that the witnesses
don't provide many details about the perpetrator himself, but they can tell the police a whole
lot about that weapon he was wielding.
At that moment in time, that weapon could literally mean the difference between the
witness's life or death, and apparently they have a very hard time looking at or thinking
about anything else.
Their attention focuses in on the one thing that really matters, and encoding of all other
details is minimal at best.
In fact, the weapon focus effect allows us to highlight a more basic principle that the
brain uses when deciding which experiences to encode deeply.
Generally speaking, if some detail of current experience is relevant to your future survival,
then it should be encoded.
To justify this, we can just resort to a pretty straightforward evolutionary argument.
Imagine that some of our ancestors took particular note of things linked to future survival,
and others did not.
Which group is most likely to have the greatest subsequent reproductive success?
Well obviously those who noted the relevance of such items.
So yes, we have likely evolved from those who attended the factors in their environment
that were linked to survival, and attention to some factor now increases memory for it
later.
In fact, in extreme situations at least, it is actually very easy to tell if some organism,
humans included, have recognized some stimulus as relevant to their future survival.
You see we all actually have two modes of operation, and they're governed by something
called our central nervous system.
These modes are called the parasympathetic, and the sympathetic modes respectively.
And they're kind of like two sides of a coin.
One can only be in one of these modes at any given time.
When all is peaceful, and we're relaxing, then the parasympathetic mode takes over.
The parasympathetic mode is worried about long term survival of our bodies.
And so when it's in control, our heart rate slows, our muscles relax, and basic housekeeping
functions, like those involved in digestion, kick into gear.
Also we digest the foods we eat, we extract the nutrients, we ship those nutrients out
to body tissues that need them, we prepare the waste for disposal, that sort of thing.
However, imagine you were laying back on your couch, when suddenly an explosion occurs
and blows in the front window of your house, boom, what happens then?
Well, almost instantly, your heart rate increases, your breath increases, adrenaline pulses through
your bodies, your muscles are ready for action, your mind sharpens.
Oh, by the way, your digestive processes also slow to an almost stop.
That's why your mouth can feel dry in those situations.
There's no need to worry about long term survival right now.
You are in the midst of threat, and it's your short term survival that matters.
You are now in what some call fight or flight mode.
And that's what it feels like when your sympathetic nervous system switch has been flipped.
And it's very dramatic.
By the way, when all this happens, things are also happening in your brain.
In fact, if there is a part of you that actually flipped that switch, that part of you is your
amygdala.
It's an almond sized area in your mid brain, whose primary job is to sense threat in your
environment.
When it does, it triggers the sympathetic nervous system into action.
When people suffer from so called panic attacks, it is often an overactive amygdala that is
typically to blame.
So these people can suddenly feel like they're under threat, but they can't even say why.
Because in fact, there was no stimulus that triggered the threat.
It was internal, and that can be even more scary.
So anyway, the amygdala triggers the sympathetic nervous system.
It also does something else though.
It also activates the hippocampus, which results in deeper encoding of everything that's happening.
It is almost as if the amygdala is saying, hey, danger is present.
Record everything that happens because we may need to know about this later so that
we can avoid being in this situation again.
By the way, if you're a Spiderman fan, the amygdala, it's pretty much akin to his so
called spider sense, that feeling he would have anytime danger is present.
This close interaction between the amygdala and the hippocampus is the basis for a theoretical
notion called the emotional binding hypothesis.
The hypothesis suggests that events that have a direct link to our future survival stimulate
the amygdala, which then activates the hippocampus, and the result of this is a binding together
of as many details of the event as possible.
Remember we've talked before about the hippocampus performing binding functions.
So the claim is that this circuit, this brain circuit, is indeed working to remember as
much as possible about the details of the event, and to form associations among those
details that bind it all together.
Now at some level one could ask, why is it so important to do all this binding?
I mean the body is essentially under attack, right?
Aren't we worried about surviving right now?
Well of course the notion is that the vast majority of threats we encounter in life
are not fatal.
By definition only one can be fatal, cats aside of course.
So usually we live another day, and if we have formed strong associations between all
the details of the event related to the threat, then maybe in the future sensing the presence
of one of those details could allow us to prepare for the threat in advance.
That's a true spider sense.
So remember my dogs learning that when I opened a certain cupboard a treat might be coming
soon?
Well, maybe we will learn that when a snake with that specific color pattern is present
a nasty bite is coming real soon, unless we detected earlier next time in which case forming
the association might literally allow us to avoid the bite.
Evidence from MRI studies appear to confirm the basic tenets of this emotional binding
hypothesis.
That is when emotional stimuli are present the amygdala definitely becomes active and
it definitely activates the hippocampus.
So we know that the system does indeed react to threat.
But is it really binding together all sorts of contextually relevant information as the
emotional binding hypothesis suggests?
Well, please take a moment and think about the morning of September 11th, 2001.
What do you remember?
Of course you remember the horrific events of the day, made even more horrific by the
fact that a group of humans had actually wanted them to happen and had actually made them
happen.
So we all have those terrible images etched in our minds, planes crashing into buildings,
waves of dust clouds, smoke billowing across the New York skyline, days looking reporters
trying to understand what had just happened.
But do you also remember where you were and who you were with and what TV you were watching?
Some people even claim to remember what they were wearing or other such details, almost
like those details had been burned into our memory.
In fact, the term flashball memory was first coined by Brown and Killick in 1977 to describe
such detailed memories.
While 9-Eleven provides the most dramatic case of a flashball memory for many of us
today, similar sorts of dramatically detailed memories have been reported for a range of
world events.
These include things like the assassination of JFK, the death of Princess Diana, the
explosion of the Space Shuttle Challenger, and various other tragic events of that sort.
So in fact, the emotional binding hypothesis was primarily proposed to account for these
kinds of flashball memories.
Why can we remember the details of those events so well?
Well, perhaps because the hippocampus has bound all of those details together into a
very rich episodic memory, one that is far more fact than filler, and somehow just the
sheer amount of those details that we remember convinces us of this.
Flashball memories feel like very accurate, very detailed memories.
Are they really as accurate as they seem?
Well, flashball memories themselves can be somewhat difficult to study scientifically,
but some try.
When some highly emotional event of that sort happens, there's a group of researchers that
scramble to test memories right after the event, and then at various intervals after
that.
The goal is to examine how stable and accurate these flashball memories truly are.
Unfortunately, the data from such studies have been mixed in well complicated.
So for example, studies of the Challenger Space Shuttle explosion have suggested that
although people reported clear and vivid flashball memories six months after the disaster,
the details of the memory they reported had actually changed a fair amount.
These findings challenge the notion that flashball memories are actually accurate.
Perhaps reliving any emotional event stimulates the amygdala, perhaps only slightly, but that
may be enough to make any memory we have feel more vivid, more powerful, regardless of the
actual accuracy.
However, follow-up studies have also examined some personal characteristics in more detail,
and these studies suggest that for people who felt more personally attached to the event,
their flashball memories did retain accuracy even over long periods of time.
So relevance comes in here too.
For example, one study examined memories for the 1989 earthquake that occurred in California
during the World Series.
Many of us witnessed that earthquake unfolding as we tuned into the baseball game on television,
and given the reaction of the announcers, we realized the emotional significance of
the event that we were witnessing.
Many TV watchers reported flashball-like memories.
Now, of course, for those people who were actually in California, the earthquake was
much more relevant, much more personally relevant.
When memory was examined months after the event, the flashball memories of TV watchers
were found to be quite unstable, but the memories of Californians were much more stable.
So perhaps one has to literally feel that sort of personal danger for the flashball
system to really do its thing.
Unfortunately even here there are complicating factors that also get in the way of a really
clear understanding.
So for example, the study of the California earthquake just examined how often people
talked about their flashball memory with others.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the study found that those directly involved in the event
talked to many people about it during the time right after the event.
So they told and retold and retold their story in the hours just after the event occurred.
It's likely not a stretch to say that little else was probably discussed in California
during that time.
Virtually all conversations were about that earthquake.
Now those who watch TV, they also swapped flashball memory stories, but not nearly to
the same degree.
It is entirely possible then that the durable memory trace is due, at least in part, to
a rehearsal process of the re-living of the events over and over when they were still
fresh.
Now this should remind you of our earlier discussions of working memory as the gatekeeper
to long-term memory.
The more often we rehearse some bit of information, the more likely that it will be accurate
transferred to episodic memory.
So maybe the emotionality of the event simply promotes discussion rather than enhancing
memory more directly.
This is a good point to think about, the cumulative effect of retellings and how that can kind
of affect memory in general, including flashball memories.
Each time we retell some memory, we first retrieve it.
And what we get, of course, is a mix of these accurately stored details along with inferences,
the facts and the filler.
As we exchange this story with someone else, our discussion brings up more information,
including, for example, information that the other person's version has that ours may
not have.
And of course we then store a memory of this discussion in memory.
And the newer memory is not entirely separate from the original one.
So the original memory was now exposed to new information that is highly related to
it, information that is so similar it could be very easy to include some of the new details
in our new reliving of the event.
Perhaps something the other person said made a lot of sense.
So we incorporated an entire version of events and then we now store this new altered version
of the memory.
If we do this over and over, we are both strengthening some of the core parts of our memory through
rehearsal, but we are also allowing the memory to morph somewhat thanks to this exposure
to new related information.
To some extent, this is a little like that telephone game we used to play as kids, where
some bit of information is heard and then repeated.
And while new bits are added, as the information goes down the line, and eventually we end
up with a very different story.
It may not be so different in case of flashball memories, but the same notion could be acting.
So this example points to the difficulties in studying memory in real life contexts.
There are so many variables and there is only so many that a researcher can control.
It would be fantastic to find some group of participants right after some emotional event
and then to ask them not to talk about the event to anybody, thereby allowing you to
see how much of a role talking plays in terms of shaping the eventual memory.
However, researchers would have to swoop in as fast as first responders, and even if
they did, even if the traumatized people agreed not to talk about the event to anyone else,
those people would still have time to think about the event over and over.
So it is really difficult to rely on real world studies of flashball memory as either
support for or refutation of the emotional binding hypothesis.
What we would like to do is test this in the lab instead, but of course it is considered
unethical to make some participant feel some form of large or direct threat.
So we really can't simulate some event on the magnitude of say 9-11.
We must instead turn down the threat level to a point where it is not as psychologically
shocking.
Now I suggest this may be an opportunity, because maybe this emotional binding hypothesis
is a more general theory.
Perhaps this circuit always operates to some extent, not just when the threat level is
very high.
Sure, it would likely work at a level appropriate to the threat, but we may even see it operating
at much lower threat levels.
If so, that would make a clearer link to the events of everyday life.
So with this in mind, let me describe an experiment by someone named Donald McKay.
McKay's study relied heavily on so called taboo words.
Now some of these words are the kinds of words that would give a movie in our rating.
Some for example were racially or sexually charged words.
Generally speaking, these are the sorts of words one would never say around their religious
leader or their grandmother, the sort that might get your mouth washed out with soap
if you spoke them.
Now in McKay's study, these kinds of words were intermixed with neutral words and then
were presented to participants in various colors.
So on a given trial, one of these words would appear either a neutral or a taboo word and
it would be presented in some color of ink.
The participants were simply asked to categorize the ink color of each other item by pressing
an appropriate key on a keyboard as quickly as they possibly could.
Alright, two findings from this study are of interest.
First, participants were slower to indicate the color of taboo words than they were to
indicate the color of neutral words.
According to McKay, this is because the taboo words initiated an emotional binding process
and that took some time.
Of course, these words were no direct threat to the participants, but seeing those sorts
of charged words in the context of a psychology experiment is definitely odd and the claim
is that this oddness was sufficient to trigger the amygdala.
And there seems to be evidence that this is true in the form of their second major finding.
After indicating the color of all those words, both neutral and taboo, participants were
given a recognition test for the items.
The recognition test asked two questions for each item that was presented.
Was the item one of the items you saw in the earlier color categorization part of the experiment?
If so, what color was it presented in?
The data showed that participants did indeed remember the taboo items better than the neutral
items, so some sort of memory enhancement was happening there.
But perhaps even more important, they could also remember the color of the taboo items
better than they could remember the color of the neutral items.
This is exactly what the emotional binding hypothesis predicts, that various aspects
of the stimulus, what it was and what color it was presented in, seemed to be bound together.
The memory may not be a flash bulb memory in the sense of our memories of 9-11, but
it does seem to have more details in the context in the way that is similar to a flash bulb
memory.
However, it also may be operating to a lesser extent all the time, and it is likely a major
player in terms of deciding which stimuli we encode deeply enough so that they will
subsequently form the facts of our episodic memories.
Well, and considering then how the brain decides which events to encode deeply, we've ended
up in some pretty dark lands, and I'm a little worried that I could leave you with the wrong
impression.
So let me highlight a couple of points.
First, in this lecture I've highlighted both relevance and a general notion of threat as
factors that affect what information we naturally encode more deeply.
Yes, the threat examples are more dramatic, but when we look back at our memories, they're
not full of all these dangerous incidents.
Well, why?
Simply because encountering things that are relevant is very common.
Encountering threats is relatively rare.
If one of these factors is more dominant, it is relevance.
What's more, the studies that have been done on relevance likely underestimate its relevance
by a lot.
I mentioned the study where participants were presented with sort of generic pictures, and
they were asked to categorize them as relevant to their lives or not.
Well, really, how relevant can a generic picture be?
A little, sure, but the things we encounter regularly in our lives are much more specifically
relevant to us, to our lives.
It's hard to do psychology studies that are sensitive to the details of a particular
participant's life, but in skipping over the personal details, we inevitably underestimate
how important relevance is.
And again, relevance and threat are the factors that I am highlighting with respect to things
your brain uses when it decides what to encode.
This is only part of the story, of course, the unintentional encoding part.
Yes, we are often busy just living our lives, but at the same time, we do often run into
situations where we explicitly decide we want to attend to some factor experience, and this
is the important other side of the story.
So one thing I'd like to really emphasize is that you can play a very central role in
determining what sorts of episodic memories the future version of yourself will reconstruct
and what details are prominent in that reconstruction.
You have learned the basic techniques of deep and powerful encoding.
If you want your future memories to be based on the positive events of your life, then
cherish those positive events as they occur.
And by cherish, I mean organize them and share them.
We seem to have a natural tendency to take pictures or videos of great events in our
lives.
Think of weddings or the birth of a child, for example.
So we take the time and effort to create externalized memories, ones that we sometimes
only seldom ever revisit.
My suggestion is to do the same with your internalized memories.
Think about them when you can, and talk to your friends about them.
If there's a good lesson to take from that discussion of flashball memories, it is that
events we choose to discuss with one another will have an impact on our subsequent memories.
So if something really great happens to you or someone close to you, talk about it.
If you want to take it a step further, then right after some personal event, maybe even
organize it carefully in your memory and form dual codes using mnemonic strategies.
Doing that sort of thing will increase the chance that in the future, those memories
will come to mind and again color your life in a positive way.
At the same time, do the opposite for your negative experiences.
Obviously, learn what you must from them, but don't dwell on them, especially the seemingly
random negative events in your life.
As they say, the only path to success leads through failure, and look at negative experiences
that way as opportunities to learn and to move closer to success.
Whenever my wife and I are about to engage in some new adventure, I have a rule for myself.
It's obviously an imprecise rule, but it's one that I use to kind of downplay negative
events, and it goes like this.
At the beginning of the adventure, just assume that at least three things will go wrong.
Expect it, and when it happens, don't get angry, just count them off.
So if you get to your vacation but your bags don't, oh well, there's one negative thing
down already.
Don't let your amygdala get in the knot over it, just let it go.
And that's the larger point.
What you encode as important is something that you do have some control over, and you
have even more control when you begin taking that control in advance.
