Lecture 23, Aging Memory and Cognitive Transition
Do you feel your memory isn't as accurate as it once was?
Maybe it seems that you can seldom remember the details of some event,
the people you met, their names, the order with which things happened,
or the little parts of some experience.
Or maybe your kids keep complaining that you've been telling the same story to them over and over again.
If none of this is yet happening to you, maybe you have seen this behavior in others,
perhaps older relatives that are telling you the same stories over and over again,
and you're worried that one day this will be you.
Are changes in memory just part of the normal aging process?
And if so, how dramatic are they?
Is there anything you can do to minimize this deterioration in memory if it does occur?
Well, in the late 1980s, many of the so-called baby boomers were approaching 50 years old,
and they were beginning to worry about their memory declining,
and given their numbers, baby boomers represent a really big voting block.
As a result, wise politicians are often attuned to their concerns.
They would like to act in ways that reflect this sensitivity.
So it's no coincidence that the story of what we know about aging effects on memory begins in the 1980s
when funding for research on the effects of aging became available.
Now the story I'm going to tell you is one with a number of twists.
These twists and turns are kind of interesting because they reveal a lot about the scientific process.
And I look forward to telling you this story because as I do so,
I'm going to have the opportunity to emphasize why even scientific results need to be viewed with caution.
As well-intentioned as scientists generally are, they can sometimes miss important variables,
or they can get locked into seeing things in a certain way.
And in so doing, they sometimes miss a bigger picture that tells a more accurate overall story.
But I'm getting a little ahead of myself. Let's start in the 1980s and move forward.
First though, it's important to again stress that memory is not a single thing.
As you know very well now, we humans possess a number of memory systems including procedural memory,
semantic memory, and episodic memory.
So when it comes to the question of whether memory declines with age,
it's important to realize that that's not really one question.
It's actually at least three questions, and that's if we just focus on long-term memory.
So let's start with some good news then.
Many of the initial studies of aging effects on memory included episodic memory, semantic memory, and procedural memory tasks.
For the most part, semantic memory and procedural memory seem to show very little decline.
In fact, it seems that as we age, we simply continue to gain new knowledge about the world and new motor skills.
And there seems to be no apparent cognitive degeneration with respect to the knowledge and skills we've had all along.
Now, I say cognitive degeneration because the actual performance on things like procedural memory tasks
may decline due to things like arthritis or muscle atrophy or other conditions that make it harder to move in certain ways.
But this is really a decline in motor abilities, not in the cognitive processes that support them.
Similarly, if one's sight or hearing is not good, then they may seem to not be as good at some skill, like driving, for instance.
But again, this isn't a reflection of procedural memory per se, it's a reflection of the input to procedural memory.
So, again, some good news.
No need to worry about your semantic or procedural memory systems.
They seem to age pretty well, especially if you take good care of your body and if you listen to your eye and ear doctors.
But of course, it isn't semantic or procedural memory that older people or those that interact with them complain about.
It's episodic memory.
The classic complaints are things like not being able to remember the name of a person we just met.
Now, clearly, that's episodic memory, and it's an episodic problem, perhaps a problem with the encoding step.
And again, nearly everyone notices the tendency of an older person to say, tell the same joke repeatedly to the same person.
This again is an episodic memory issue.
The only reason most of us do not tell the same people the same stories repeatedly is because we remember that we already told them.
That is, we recall a previous episode of telling that story to that person.
If a story or joke comes to mind and I don't recall telling it to this person, why not tell it?
Especially, for example, if it's a really good joke.
Well, let's talk about that specific tendency for a moment.
Because I once gave a talk about aging and the effects of aging on memory, and somebody said something very interesting to me.
It was something that really resonated, at least with me.
They said that maybe this tendency of older people to retell stories was actually a good thing.
A tendency that occurs naturally and serves a very important role at a more general level.
That is, most of the stories older people retell are stories about the past, stories full of our ancestors,
our aunts, our uncles, our grandparents and cousins, and what life was like when they were young.
In a very real sense, this is the oral history of our families.
The episodes of our family members who went before us.
And in a list written down, these episodes could be lost with the passing of that older person who is now telling the story to us.
It is, in a sense, a cross-generational memory system.
Sure, they tell us the same stories over and over as you know very well now,
but as you also know, repetition is an effective method for passing along a memory.
And perhaps that's exactly what's going on.
It is a passing of memories from one generation to the next in a manner perfected over years of evolution.
Okay, I told you that story resonated with me.
Well, I heard that perspective less than a year after the passing of my father.
I love you, Dad.
As it turned out, I had just been bringing my mother to visit her brothers and sisters.
A kind of reconnection for a woman I love deeply who suddenly felt very alone.
As we drove from one relative to another, mom would relate stories about all of them as kids.
Now, I knew these stories. I had heard them many times. I still hear them many times.
But this time, with the grief of losing my father still heavy in my heart, as it still is,
and the context of literally spending time with each of them as we arrived at their place,
the stories gained a new significance, a new dimension of reality and importance.
So what the questioner at my talk spoke of,
that notion of repetition serving an important role in telling families their oral history,
it really hit home for me.
So one take-home message from all of this already is the following.
If someone complains to you that you keep telling them the same stories,
or if you ever want to complain to another older relative for the same reason,
just remember the role this behavior might serve.
Okay, all that aside, the tendency to repeat a story to the same person still does suggest a decline in episodic memory,
even if that decline serves a purpose.
So that begs the following questions.
How soon does episodic memory decline?
And how dramatic is that, is the impairment?
These are the questions that the initial studies of memory and aging were trying to answer,
and the answer they suggested seemed like bad news indeed.
Yes, episodic memory declined.
Its decline began as early as 50 to 60 years of age,
and relative to the memory of younger participants, the decline was pretty dramatic.
If baby boomers were worried about their memory decline before the late 1980s,
well, they were even more worried as the results of those initial studies came out.
But, here is where the first twist occurs.
About a decade ago, a researcher named Lynn Hasher was a little worried about the previous studies on memory and aging.
In addition to being interested in aging effects,
Hasher was also a researcher on what's called the time of day effects,
and she was worried that the previous studies might have literally mixed these two.
Before explaining that worry in detail,
let's first talk about time of day effects and then come back to the memory issue.
So our bodies, well, they all show evidence of something called circadian rhythms,
and these are natural rhythms in our bodies that orchestrate the flow of hormones and other neurochemicals,
which in turn directly affect both physical and cognitive cycles.
So for example, if I may venture into the generally less talked about aspects of life,
we all tend to have bowel movements at roughly the same time or times every day.
That would be a physical cycle.
But similarly, on the cognitive side of things, we all tend to be more alert at certain times of day.
For example, we tend all to be the most tired at 3 a.m.
but we also feel drowsy at about 3 p.m.
These cycles also underlie our sleep patterns.
Now normally we don't really notice these cycles until they're disturbed,
and of course the classic disturbance is travel across time zones,
which leads to what we call jet lag.
What is jet lag?
Quite simply, it is when the cycles of your body do not match with the time of day anymore.
You want to sleep, but it's daylight,
and you cannot use the washroom at your normal time either.
You have become what we elegantly refer to as irregular.
I kind of like that term, it strikes me as funny for some reason,
but really it directly reflects the notion that your body has certain temporal regularities
and these regularities are being disturbed by the travel.
Now here's the really interesting part.
Our circadian rhythms shift as we age.
So think for a moment of a typical teenager, especially if you know one.
When would they like to go to bed?
If it were completely up to them, what time would they choose to go to bed?
Really late, right?
Like maybe midnight or even later?
And when would they like to wake up?
Late again, probably 10, 11 a.m., maybe even noon.
Now think of some older person.
Maybe you, I can't tell how old you are from here,
but if not you, then maybe your parents or your grandparents.
When do they like to go to bed?
Much earlier, right?
More like perhaps 8 or 9 p.m.?
And when do they like to wake up?
Well again, earlier, right?
6 a.m., 7 a.m.?
Likely no later than 8.
Why is there such a difference?
The answer is actually quite simple.
For whatever reason, as we age,
our natural circadian rhythms shift earlier.
We are alert earlier in the day and we get drowsy sooner in the day.
As a result, older and younger people are essentially living within different time zones,
even though they're living in the same context.
And you've likely heard about this disconnect
with respect to public schooling.
Let's think about this for a moment.
Who runs the schools?
Well, older people do.
So, when do they set their hours for learning?
Well, they set them at times that make sense for them.
They start the students early in the day
when the older people are feeling alert
and they let them leave in mid-to-late afternoon
when older people are starting to feel tired.
Of course, the problem is
that the students are still really tired early in the day.
They don't even begin to really be alert until almost lunchtime.
Then school ends just as they're starting to feel cognitively strong.
So, because of this, some people have suggested
that we should shift the school day, the school hours,
to match the young people's rhythms.
After all, school is about their learning, right?
It's about them.
So, maybe school should start at maybe 11 a.m. or noon,
and maybe it should end at 7 or 8 p.m.
Now, how many older teachers do you think
would be comfortable with that schedule?
And how many parents?
Well, not many, it seems,
because this kind of change in schooling
has definitely not caught on.
Yes, we want our youth to learn,
but we want them to do so on our schedule.
Okay, so what does this all have to do with memory?
Well, as Hasher found out,
studies of memory work almost in the opposite way as school days.
That is, who actually collects the data in psychology experiments?
Well, usually it's the relatively young,
say 19 to 22-year-olds.
So, if they are charged with running an experiment,
they decide when to invite participants into the lab.
When do they do that?
Well, Hasher asked exactly that question
for a number of the labs that were conducting research
on aging effects on memory.
The logs were checked,
and it was revealed that most of the studies were conducted
during a period that ranged from approximately early afternoon
to mid-evening.
This really shouldn't be surprising.
This is when the young researchers felt alert.
So, given this, though,
let's think about the research again.
They are testing the memory of young participants later in the day
at a time when these young participants feel maximally alert,
and they're comparing them to older participants
who are also tested late in the day,
a time when they're feeling really drowsy.
Okay, so now we find that the older participants
are performing worse than the younger participants.
But why is that?
Is it because they're older,
or is it simply because they are tired?
This situation is what scientists like to refer to as a confound.
They want to assess the effects of age,
but age is not the only difference between the groups.
Another variable, in this case general alertness,
also varies across those two different groups.
So we end up comparing the young and alert to the old and tired,
and when we do that,
we don't know if any differences we see are due to age,
or alertness, or some combination of the two.
Now, luckily variables can be unconfounded.
That is, you can redo the experiment
in a way that avoids the confound,
and that's exactly what Hasher then did.
She assessed memory performance for both young and old participants,
but she did so both early in the day and late in the day.
This now allows a comparison of memory performance
where both groups are at their most alert,
later in the day for young participants,
earlier in the day for older participants.
It also allows one to compare old and young
at both early and late times.
So what did she find?
Well, when you compare old to young late in the day,
well then you find a standard finding.
The older people perform far worse than the younger people,
so that replicates the finding that we knew about for many years.
However, when you compare older people at their optimal time,
which for them is early in the day,
to younger people at their optimal time,
which is late in the day,
the difference in memory is far less.
Yes, old people still perform worse than the young,
but the difference is far less than those initial studies suggested.
So a little bit of good news there.
The decline in memory with aging
is not nearly as dramatic as the initial studies suggested.
The other interesting thing that came out of this study is the following.
If you actually compare older and younger participants in the morning,
the older participants actually do better than the young.
So the time of day effect is actually stronger than the aging effect.
Now, the moral here is if you are a little older,
and let's say you ever want to challenge your grandkids
to some sort of game that has a mental cognitive component,
do it first thing in the morning.
Get them out of bed at 6 a.m.
You'll kick their butts. I almost guarantee it.
Alright, so at any rate, this is better news.
Episodic memory does not decline as much as we thought,
but it still does decline.
But is it actually wrong,
or perhaps maybe we should say short-sighted,
to think about it this way?
Consider the following study,
also conducted by Hasher and her colleagues.
This experiment began with a study phase
in which a pair of words was presented on each trial,
one just to the left and another just to the right.
Participants, some of whom were young and some of whom were older,
were asked to study the left words for a later memory test
but to ignore the words on the right.
Once the study list was over, the memory test began,
and it was a standard recognition test, a sort of standard.
There was a trick. Psychologists sometimes have these tricks.
Memory was tested for both the left and the right items,
despite the instructions that were given to the subjects.
So participants were told that they only had to worry about the left items,
but they were lied to.
The question though was, in both cases,
was this word presented earlier?
And sometimes the words came from the left,
sometimes the words came to the right,
but in either way, the person should say yes
if they think the word was presented earlier.
Now if you look at the memory performance for the words on the left,
the words that participants were told to attend to,
well then you see that the younger participants, in fact,
remember these words better than do the older participants.
So that's the expected memory advantage,
and you see it here too.
However, if you look at performance for the words on the right,
the words that participants were told to ignore,
now the older participants actually remember these items better
than the young participants do.
So what this implies is that really the better memory for younger people
is a result of them being better able to focus in on the important information.
They remembered what they were supposed to,
and they ignored, and didn't remember so well,
what they were told was unimportant.
In contrast, the older people seemed to attend to the list in a more general way,
less focused, more likely to process both the things they were supposed to focus
and also the things that they were told were not important.
So older people really were not as good at focusing in on the information
that they were told was relevant.
Now here's something that makes this finding interesting.
If you do the same study, but instead of using younger and older people,
you instead use so-called normal people, whatever they are,
and people who are known to be creative,
so people who do well on some test of creativity.
Well, creative people attend to the world more generally.
They are less focused.
They remember, just like the older people,
the things that they were told were irrelevant.
So they show a pattern very much like the older participants do.
And one suggestion to come from this is that maybe old people interact with the world
the way that creative people interact with the world.
Is this coincidence?
Hasher argues it's not.
She argues that it's merely something called cognitive transition.
You see, when we're young, our lives are filled with a million details
that we need to keep track of.
You know, this report is due on Friday,
and I have to email that client.
And, oh, the kids have ballet tonight,
and I have to stop at the store for milk,
the meeting at two, on and on the list goes.
You all know that list quite well.
Now, to remember all those details,
we have to really focus our attention regularly.
Well, we do until we retire,
but as we approach retirement,
these little details of life kind of fade away.
Fewer things need to be done at specific times,
and our schedule becomes much more free
and much less imposed by our environment.
As a result, we may literally change the way we interact with the world,
and we may spend less time thinking about details.
So in a sense, we become less left-brained, as they like to say,
not always talking to ourselves to remind ourselves of these little details.
Instead, we spend more time looking at and thinking about the bigger picture.
Details become less relevant,
and as a result, our brain changes to match this new way of interacting.
Now, accurate episodic memory, of course, is all about the details.
Our last lecture really made that point clear.
If we want to remember the details of some event well,
we really need to focus on them.
So if we spend less time focusing on details,
less time encoding details,
well, then our episodic memory will appear to degrade.
We will forget people's names after just meeting them
because we didn't really pay much attention to them in the first place.
We will tell the same stories to the same people
because we weren't really paying attention that much
to who it was we were telling the stories to in the first place.
If we don't focus on the details, we won't remember the details.
But, and this is a big but,
this is only part of the story.
That is, the part that talks about what gets worse as we age.
The other side of the story is this.
We are spending more time on the big picture.
We are, often in a very real sense, becoming more creative.
In fact, it's not at all unusual for older people to take up hobbies as they age.
Now, perhaps these are things they've always wanted to do,
but they just haven't had the time.
Some might take up, say, photography,
or they might learn how to use computers,
or paint, or knit, or a myriad of other activities
that allow them to exercise their new creative inclinations.
And this is the positive side of cognitive transition,
and it's a side that's often overlooked.
So, yes, if you think of the situation involving, for example, young boys.
As a young boy goes through puberty,
they may lose the sweetness of their young voice,
but they may gain in height
and suddenly be able to play basketball better than they did before.
Transitions include both losses and gains,
and aging may be no different.
Now, I personally find this a really satisfying and sensible,
and just generally a really nice way to think about the effects of aging.
Some things get better, some things not so much.
Aging is not really about deterioration, it's about transition.
And as the way we interact with the world changes,
it should come as no surprise that our mental processes change along with that.
Well, okay, maybe you're now saying to yourself,
that's a really nice way to spin all this aging stuff, Jordan's,
but if we could avoid that memory decline part,
well, that would make this whole transition even better.
Is there anything we could be doing to keep our memory sharp?
Well, I'm sure many of you have been told to do things like crossword puzzles
or Suduko or that sort of thing to keep your brains working hard,
and therefore to keep your cognitive processes in good shape.
I think this is sort of correct.
There's definitely nothing harmful in it, but it's not quite right.
These are enjoyable things, and if you do them a lot,
you will get better at them,
and you will be exercising your semantic memory at the same time.
But of course, semantic memory doesn't decline with age.
If you're really hoping that your general world memory skills would stay sharp,
and especially your episodic memories,
well, then I recommend something a little more complex,
something a little more general,
especially something that might allow you to develop or use that creative instinct
that we've just been talking about.
So perhaps you might take up something like,
well, maybe dancing or painting or photography or writing.
Any other hobby that includes the need to learn new things
and to repeatedly bring to mind what you have learned.
That's the episodic memory part.
So let me stress that.
The best thing to do is to learn things that you will later need to recall.
And I can't help but point out that's exactly what you're doing right now, by the way,
to expose yourself to new information, new lectures,
to then think about them,
and hopefully to retell some of what you've been learning to other people.
Well, when you do all that,
you are exercising your episodic and semantic memories in a really fantastic way.
Learning means using your memory,
remembering what was taught last class,
then putting new learning on top of that,
all the while putting the learning you have done to use through practice.
This approach works with the transition,
and the learning and exercise is less specific to a given task.
I would especially recommend learning something like dance,
something that involves muscle skills and physical exercise.
So when you combine that with a constant need to remember the steps you learned, for example,
to use those to perform the dance now,
you're really maximizing the experience.
Procedural memory is exercising and getting a good workout,
episodic memory is working, working memory is working.
Heck, you're getting exercise, which is always good.
So if you perhaps take the time to even go further,
you could learn the history behind dance,
then you're even enhancing your semantic memory as well.
So really, it's a fantastic all-round memory workout,
cross-training for the mind, if you will,
and it's social too.
Dancing your way into old age?
Isn't that a great image?
All right, so let's sum up.
The subject of memory and aging is a far more lively subject than was once believed.
First of all, some of our memory systems continue to function quite effectively into normal old age,
and what appear to be problems with procedural memory were actually problems with motor function.
And we now know, not from studies of memory, but just from physiology,
that even motor functions can be maintained by exercise into old age
far more than was realized even a few generations ago.
Second, while originally it looked like there was some dramatic effects of aging on some memory systems,
especially episodic memory, a lot of those original dramatic effects turned out to be due to time of day effects.
And when you factor those out, yes, you still see a decrement,
but you see a much smaller decline.
It's not nearly as big as what we once thought it was.
And of course, third, should we even really think about that as a decrement in memory,
or is it more reflective of a general change in our cognitive approach to the world?
One that, yes, may have some negatives, but also has some positives.
Cognitive transition, not cognitive decline.
So the conclusion seems to be that if we find ways of embracing the positives
and working on the negatives simultaneously, then we can have the best of all worlds.
Oh, and if you do sometimes repeat the same story, or if someone does that to you,
that's not really so bad either.
