Hello, and welcome, everyone. This is Active Inference, guest stream 77.1. We're here
with Gareth Stubbs, going to be discussing the police hunch. So, Gareth, thank you very
much for joining. Looking forward to your presentation and the discussion we'll have.
Thank you so much for having me, Daniel, and it's an absolute pleasure to be on the stream,
one that I've watched many times, and it's a privilege to be able to talk through the
paper. I'm hoping to give you a little bit of background as to why I wrote the paper,
where I've come from, a little bit of history, talk through the paper itself, and then hopefully
take some interesting questions, if there's anybody watching, or from Daniel himself,
who's always got some very insightful questions to ask. So, if you're all right, Daniel, am I okay to
start and get going? Yeah, okay. So, a little bit of background. So, I'm a relatively new
academic. I was a police officer for 18 years in the UK. I was in a Northern English force,
and during my career, I did a wide range of stuff from like frontline emergency response,
blue lights, to community policing, which is building relationships with the community,
gathering intelligence, and then working on long term problem solving. Through to working in
national strategy, I worked for the College of Policing, and more latterly, the home office,
the inspectorate. And the inspectorate was an organisation where we would inspect police officers
and make sure that the standards of policing and how they recorded and monitored and all that was
up to a particular level. And for the last five years of my policing career, I was studying a
part-time PhD on the side, and you would think, with me having written this paper, it would be a
police decision making or similar, and it wasn't. I actually studied using two theories, which were
representative bureaucracy and social embeddedness, and it was actually about how
new police recruits navigated the police recruitment process via the use of their
social networks. It sounds complicated and convoluted, and it was essentially spent a lot of time
trying to figure out how people gained advantage or disadvantage through their current social networks
whilst trying to get into the police, with the hope of figuring out why our recruitment process
was so discriminatory. And I've been working on publishing from that PhD, I've only just finished
actually, over the last maybe two, three years, whereupon I went out to the Middle East to teach
police officers now. There's two people that I want to discuss during this stream, the first being
two different groups of people, the first one being Professor Friston, who was just amazing
when I contacted him, and the other being two very well known criminologists called Ken Pease
and Jason Roche. And this entire lane or path of study came out of a discussion with them,
because I was talking about very strange decision making that you make while in service.
So you make decisions that other people look at and say, oh, that's a very strange decision,
why did that police officer make that decision? But when you speak to the officer, they're often
able to relate quite a complicated series of past experiences that have led to the decision
that they've made. And it was Ken Pease, who's, again, a very well known criminologist who said
to me, look, you need to read about the Bayesian brain. He said, what you're describing is how
the Bayesian brain works. So he set me on this kind of down the rabbit hole journey, if you like,
and did a lot of reading of the foundational papers around the Bayesian brain, which I found
very complicated because I didn't have a background in mathematics or neuroscience or cognitive
science. So it was kind of like jumping in the deep end. But he recommended a really good
book called Super Forecasters by Tetlock. Some of you may have heard of it, some of you may not
have heard about it, but it's essentially the human art of prediction, like how intuition is made
in the Bayesian brain. And I found the book revelatory because when I look back at my police
experience, I could see the development of my Bayesian brain as time went on and how my decision
making changed. And this was like kind of mixed because we all have our backgrounds and our history.
But when I was at the home office in London, and we were looking at the way that police forces were
organized and governed and all that sort of thing, we could see that there was a general
tendency towards this kind of promotion of the generalist. So a lot of your senior managers
seem to have been able to like bounce around the organization. They've done lots of different
things. Some have been detectives, some have been uniforms, some have been in corporates,
some have been firearms. You had all these different kind of disciplines, if you like.
You ended up with a lot of senior leaders who were jack of all trades and essentially
masters of none. And this was in direct contrast to a lot of the research that looked at teams
of specialists, people with specialist knowledge that have built up very, very solid, what you
could call like Bayesian building blocks when it comes to specialist decision making. And then
when you put them together, the matching of all these specialisms then resulted in higher
performance of external private companies. So we were trying to think about how this might
look in policing. And it was only when I wrote a read super forecasting solid blocks of prediction
that I started to understand how the brain may work. Now, of course, if you at any point go into
YouTube and you type in the Bayesian brain, you're going to get Professor Friston in some way.
So that was my first introduction. And this was probably about two years ago. And I absolutely
devoured all of his podcasts. I mean, everything that I could find. And that kind of linked in a
lot with the LLM development. Obviously, we have the side by side active inference seem to be like
picking up steam like crazy. And then we have the LLMs and the AI research picking up steam.
And then you could see how the two were starting to like twist and merge. And there were some really
good podcasts from Machine Learning Street Talk and Curt Jaimungles podcast theory of everything.
Well, we're talking really long form like two and a half, three hour discussions on this stuff.
And I was just absolutely immersed. And I started to think about how this has never been used in
practice like in policing, you know, like, a lot of the time we go to these training sessions,
you'd have some experienced practitioners talking to you about how they made decisions.
We'd have decision making models and me with my relatively new academic brain was immediately
going straight to Google scholar and saying, okay, what's the empirical basis for these
decision making models? I know everyone's using them. But do we know if they work? Do we know if
they speed up our decision making? Are they better with those who've got better Bayesian
building blocks? Are they not better? So when you start to look at these questions, you realize that
there's almost no research to support police decision making models. And the best stuff
that I found on that is in Andy Clark book, and the experience machine as a full chapter
on looking at police decision making. Anyway, I'm getting slightly distracted. How did I actually
come to the paper? So there was one experience in my service. And I'm going to tell the story
because it's in the paper. If that's all right, Daniel, is that okay? Okay. So I was a
newly promoted sergeant. And that's like a first line supervisor in the police. I had a team of
about 15 police officers. And I was probably about 27, 28 years old. And I was out with one of those
police officers who was new. And he was trying to build his confidence. So I said to him, look,
Jamie, I said, we're going to go to all the bad stuff tonight. So when the nasty incidents come
in, we're going to go and I'm going to see if I can work with you on building your confidence in
these sort of like, you know, these, these high risk situations. And he was all up for it.
And then domestic violence incident came in and the male offender was still inside the
house. And we knew that they've been violent shoes because the person who rang it in was a
neighbor. And the neighbor had said that she was severely injured and bleeding. So because there
was a chance that it could get rough, and we might need to make an arrest straightaway,
I thought this would be good for Jamie to go to. And he was a Taser officer. And I don't know how,
how like, experienced you guys are. So I'll just let you know, but police officers in
England, we don't carry guns like, and there's probably about five or 6% of police officers
that carry guns at the most. And a lot of them are only sent to incidents that may involve firearms.
So the vast majority of incidents we go to, we have a baton, she's like a stick, and a spray.
And they're the, they're the two bits that we've got to deal with it. Now Jamie had just got his
Taser, and he was trying to build his confidence. And so we turned up, there was a very injured
lady on the sidewalk, she was pulling clumps out of her hair, she'd been clearly
punched a great deal of face was an absolute mess. And she told us that he was still inside the
male offender. And obviously, he would be violent towards us as police officers. Now that if you
read the paper, this may come across as if it was a like a kind of a one off incident. It wasn't,
you go to things like this all the time on a busy Friday or Saturday night, I could go to the two
or three of these maybe. So this was very, very normal, nothing out of the ordinary. And I said
to Jamie, okay, well, let's go on. We'll wait for some backup because he might be violent,
this guy and you know, we'll go in and we'll see what we can do. He's obviously going to need to
be arrested because of the damage that he'd done to the lady. And she said, no, I've got my one year
old upstairs and he's in bed. And the minute that she said that, like, we can't wait for backup,
we have to go in because there's a chance that the child could be injured. So obviously that
changed our decision making. And as we're working up the front door up to the front door, the door
opens and this big muscley guy comes to the front door. And the thing that got me at that time,
and again, I just have to stress like I got these with the very, very normal incidents,
like we'd go to these all the time, there's something about this incident where I felt
like my heart hit my stomach, big adrenaline dump, all of the prickles on my arm stood up,
like my hair stood up, power reaction, and up the back of my neck. And I remember looking at
Jamie, Jamie didn't feel this and I spoke to him afterwards. It was really strange because
there was two of us presented with the same incoming sensory stimuli. I had a very different
bodily reaction. And we talked about it afterwards. I mean, at the time, I would like to say I was
eight or nine years of experience, Jamie was like coming up to two. So there was a big buildup of
abasing priors in me for some reason. Anyway, let's cut long story short. We ended up fighting with
the male. He was very violent towards us, really, really bad incident. And when we finally got him
in handcuffs, as we got to the front door, we noticed that he dropped a knife and he'd had
the knife when I pulled him out of the doorway. Now, this is like one of those moments that you
have in a policing career where your mortality punches you in the face, you know, because
had we gone inside or had we engaged him in a very different way, there's a chance that
both of us would not have come away from the incident. And sometimes that like hits you and
it hit us both then. And Jamie got very upset. I remember it very distinctly. We walked into the
kitchen, we had to go and check that the young lad was okay. And he was. And obviously, we got the
injured party back into the house. But I remember doing like an immediate reflection afterwards
and saying to Jamie, like, I have never had this severity of bodily reaction like that
that came on so quickly. And I've used the word salience to describe it in the paper.
But there was something that was distinctly different. And I don't know what it was. But
obviously, whatever signals I was receiving, be it from the lady on the curb or from the
male's behavior as we approached door, there was something in me that told me intraceptively. So
it was an internal feeling that then triggered my cognitive processes to approach the incident
differently. Anyway, that incident, obviously he went to court, he went to jail actually.
So the incident itself, we managed to safeguard the lady in the sun, which is always a good outcome.
But for me, it really stuck with me for a couple of reasons. The first was that the bodily reaction
that was so different was something that Jamie didn't receive at all. So there was no difference in
him. He saw nothing of the evidence that I saw. And when I say saw, this is obviously, and again,
covering the paper, there's so much information that you're taking into these incidents. And it's
in such a temporal window that such a tight temporal window that your ability to be able to
affect the environment that you're in is very, very highly constrained. Because you're only going to
be at that incident, maybe for minutes, if you're lucky, an hour or over, depending on how busy
the radio is. So you can't do what you would call any longitudinal niche, niche construction,
your ability to mold or shape your environment when you turn up as a police officer is limited
solely to the time that you're there. And because you don't know any of the people there,
there's something going on in the police officer's brain. And again, this is discussed in the paper
that is very different to a normal work environment. So I'm just going to, I'll try my best to give
you an example. So if you work on a till and customer services, you have a very predictable
way of living your day out. And of course, the unpredictability comes from the customers.
But there's often a set of like procedures or protocols that you follow that enable you to
deal with those people in a particular way. And that allows you to predict your work and hopefully
comfortably do that. Now, when you're a police officer, you have the law. And this was interesting
actually, Daniel, because when we first had a chat about this, I think you put me in touch with
somebody who was talking about the law as an agent of active inference, which is proper
interesting stuff. And if we get time, like later on, it might be worth a discussion. But
the officers are working within the law. So you've got bounds, if you like, you have boundaries that
you work within. And there's particular actions you can take. But everything is so highly
unpredictable. I'm not working with a till and working directly with people. It's often in a
very, very emotionally charged environment, because that's why police get called in the
first place. You don't know any of the people that you're dealing with, and they're not coming to you
asking for the same service. So it's not like you're going up to a shop and saying, I want to buy
this again and again and again, which is the same thing that you'd get as a cashier. When we turn
up, a lot of the time, people don't even want police there. So you come in as like a kind of alien,
if you like, and there's often something that again, it's like high emotions, everything's
going a little bit crazy. The decision making of those people is normally totally out of the norm.
You're trying to bring everything back within the norm. So if you like that the officer is like
an agent of our status, we're trying to bring back home your status to the environment and get there.
But it's so messy, and so difficult, that you often end up making decisions that other people
may look at and say, Oh, why have they done that? It's such a strange decision. But if you've been,
and I suppose in the paper when I go through it, if you've been in that particular situation a
number of times before, and you have a good set of Bayesian building blocks that allow you to make
but improve decision making as a result of that experience, you may end up with improved outcomes.
And I'm not going to say that you will, but you may. And it's a solid theory to back up
good experience led decision making. And there's lots of things that you can look at. And hopefully
the paper towards the end might be able to just talk about some of those and I can take the viewers
through them. So that's the kind of background. The salience of this particular incident is the
one that the paper is based on. It was so different to me during my police career that I needed
something that explained it. This theory explains it in a lovely way. It's so nice. And obviously the
kind of absorption of Carl Friston's work over time and the reading of the books. I mean,
that's inference book by Thomas Pye. I know that you're doing a series on it, a reading group on it.
It's brilliant. I would say it's a little bit hard going. Don't pick it up as your first book.
Do some listening to the podcast first, try and get your head around how it all works,
and then pick up the book and go through it. It gets a little bit heavy towards the end.
The experience machines are really good introduction. That's another good one. Andy Clark
talks about Active Inference Book. It's not an active inference book. It gives you a much wider
view on the cognitive neuroscience and how the active inference stuff is brought in.
But I really enjoyed that. And then obviously, when I'd had this idea and I'd written most of
the paper, I think I was at maybe, you know, six and a half, seven thousand words. I took the
lead and I emailed Mr. Friston. And I just emailed Professor Friston with a massive
chunk of humble pie and said, Professor, lovely to meet you. I feel like I know you because I've
watched you a million times online. This is what I've written. What do you think? And then
to my surprise, he sent me back another 800 words or so with a very heavy endorsement.
I was a little bit in shock. It's one of those moments where I was looking at my computer and
I was like, is that an email from? Oh my goodness. And then I opened the manuscript and I was like,
wow, okay, this is amazing. And then obviously a little bit more dialogue and we chose to
submit, but needless to say, and I mentioned this earlier in the podcast because I don't have a
background in maths or neuroscience. I'm fairly sure that those holes were evident in that first
draft. And Mr. Friston did an absolutely amazing job of plugging them. So I guess that's the story
behind the research, Daniel. Did that make sense? Yes, you good with that? Yeah, thank you.
Okay. Have you got any questions so far or do you want me to just wait through the paper quickly?
Yeah, let's look through the paper. Okay, cool. I'll just go to share screen then.
Okay.
Okay, is that? Yep, looks like. Okay, perfect. So I don't want to read the paper only because I think
everybody will dive boredom, but I will skip through the sections and explain to you my thinking.
So I go very gently into setting the scene, talk a little bit about how police officers are often
flung into what you would call vital high-stakes situations. And this is elaborated on a little
bit further, but it's that temporal nature of the decision making, which I think causes very
specific grooves in the police officer's brain. And I'm using the word groove because I think it's
a really good analogy that kind of like explains the brain. It's not that we can't step out of the
groove, but they help us make decisions. And I suppose that's in line with heuristics. It's
actually in line with like hemispheric theory, like all sorts of like, and I talk about this later,
like system one, system two thinking. This is all quite well-established, good psychological
research. It all kind of melds together. It gives you a good little background. So I talk about a
little bit of the history with regards to the hunch and what the hunch is. It's been described
using a number of different terms. So we've got suspicion in here. This was done on research that
was conducted when it comes to things like stop and search. And stop and search is such a
contentious area of policing. So high impact when it comes to things like community tension,
community confidence, trust, safety, legitimacy, a lot of it is linked with the use or the abuse
of stop and search. So there's been quite a lot of study that's looked at the decision to stop
and the decision to search, how those decisions are created and often through ethnographies,
where academics have gone out with police officers and watched officers conduct their
stops and their searches and how they've then asked after that's been done like,
how did you make that decision? How have you come to that decision to stop and search that person?
What was going on inside your brain? And I've then introduced the domestic violence incident,
which I've already discussed, so I'm not going to go through that. But I've just talked about this
bit here where it says this scenario creates fundamental question. How does an officer's
body generate these hunches, these internal alarm bells, and what role do they play in
navigating the experience of being a police officer? Now they're not restricted to police
officers and I talk about this here, especially when it comes to things like medicine and public
service based professions, armed forces, firefighting, etc. There's an excellent article and if I could
remember it, I would share it. But it was about a group of firefighters that went in there in the
midst of like, you know, fighting this crazy big fire and all of a sudden the supervisor just says,
right, get out, get out, get out. And he grabs all his team and he pulls them out and literally
within seconds the floor collapses. Now, obviously there's going to be no super particular salient
detail that's made him do that. It's going to be a gathering of details which are going on
often unconsciously in the midst of the fire. Even him, I imagine, can't process in a way that's
rational and deterministic. He can't say this led to this and then this led to this and then this
led to this. It just, this overwhelming feeling came to him as a firefighter and he said, no,
come out, come out quick. And as they came out, the floor collapsed. Now that's an example of the
hunch, but the hunch within a firefighting circumstance. It's the same thing. It's like a
kind of overpowering feeling of intuition. So I talk a little bit about this here and we talk
about it being a little bit wider than stopping a vehicle. There is a discussion here of
almost like the spectrum of what a hunch can be like. How does intuition present itself?
There is some research coming very shortly from somebody called Emily Quinn at Cambridge.
She's just done a PhD in something called the copper's nose, which again is the police hunch.
I didn't know about this until after I'd written it, but I know that she's done a data collection.
I know that she's much more hot on the terminology and the neuroscience and the cognitive science
behind this. And I know that her research is about to land. So just for the listeners,
it's definitely coming. That's going to be a treat when it lands. But a hunch or a copper's
nose when you're trying to find vehicles that may be up to no good, for instance,
I'd been in cars with people who are very experienced police officers and say something
like, I want to stop that car. I don't like the look of it. Now I'm trying to learn and
my immediate question would be like, well, what do you mean you don't like the look of it? What is
it about that car that's promoting this feeling of unease? And even the most experienced police
officers, they can't answer that question. They'll say something like, oh, well, maybe it's the manner
of driving, you know, but if it was the manner of driving, and I might have picked up on it,
there's something else, there's something that's, that's triggering. And I imagine their heuristics
and their heuristics that have built up over time. Again, it'll be Bayesian. There'll be tiny signs,
tiny inputs, sensory inputs about a particular vehicle and the way that it is behaving that
over time have led to the building up of this, this intuition. Now, that is a very, very small
slice of what is intuition, a very, very big slice of what is intuition might come in the
detective world. So if you're working on a murder case, it could be that you have a very
particular feeling about one of the suspects, and that feeling may build up over time. Now, again,
very, very difficult to explain. Why do you, why do you have a feeling that that suspect did or did
not do it? Why, why is it coming? And again, those detectives, and I know I've worked with them,
they can't explain it. There's something that's, that's building up for them and they can feel
the hunch. The hunch isn't something that's visceral. It doesn't come into the pile of erection,
kind of like, you know, like response to threat or response to stimulus that's severe. It's very,
very slow creeping. And it leads to like this. It's almost like intrusive thoughts, you know,
like they're very, very slow. They come in without their unbidden. There's no like kind of, I'm not,
very, very, I'm not happy with this. You know, this is not good. You know, it's uninvited.
So the hunch can manifest itself in lots of different ways from the kind of, I want to stop
that car. I don't like look of it to something that generates over weeks or months. And again,
it's very difficult to discern like, where does that sailings come from? We don't know. We don't
know. And that's one of the things that I think that should be looked at. And I discussed this at
the end when we talk about where the research could go. So again, I take them through the incident
which I've just discussed. And we talk a little bit about the background of intuition research.
And then we talk about rational decision making and intuition. There's a meta study there
from Wang, Wang et al. in 2017. He's talking about constructs and think they are separate.
They've run up on the dual cognitive system, system one, system two again, emotional thinking,
what you would call emotional thinking and rational thinking if you were being a Philistine like me.
So, yes. And then I very, very, tentatively, and I have specifically used that word,
I'll just highlight it there tentatively. With this prior discussion in mind,
the author posits a definition of a hunch for the following discussion, which is an often
unbidden, salient intuition experienced by a police officer that subsequently influences their
actions. Now, when I say influences their actions, I don't mean that it specifically
sends them in a particular direction. That direction can be anywhere. But it's the fact
that it causes some sort of change in direction or causes you to consider a change in direction
that then, so in other words, it's instrumental. It's not something that just pops up and it
can be dismissed. It does something. Now, there was some pushback a little bit on the definition.
So words were added as we went in and through from the reviewers who were amazing on the article.
They were so cool, gave lots of different editions or possible editions and talked about this.
And we ended up with this, this inclusion of the word salience to kind of
generate to describe a hunch, you know, like what, well, it's the salience of the hunch.
It's not like a normal hypothesis. Our brain is constantly generating hypotheses all the time.
But there's something about this particular hypothesis when it pops up.
Wham, it hits you. Okay. Well, what does that hit feel like? Where is it come from?
And why is it different to your normal train of thought? What is it that's made it pop out?
And that then leads to the maths. Now, some of the narrative, probably half ish,
that this is mine, some of its calls. And Professor Friston went into a lot more detail than me.
The equation that I put forward for surprise was tripled in length.
So he went into a lot more. This was the Bayesian brain bits. We introduced the Bayesian brain.
If you like the older research. And then we bring in the newer research data, for instance,
free energy principle. And then Professor Friston added the detail in the equations here.
And also the figures, which have come in, which are the background, if you like,
for these equations. How do these equations work? And what do they say?
But what's the gist? So if I was to describe this.
Surprising bounds or the level of surprise that somebody operates within.
A police officer is going to be very, very sensitive
to boundaries of surprise. This is the hypothesis, essentially because,
and I talk about this in the next section, which is about cultural niche construction,
because they have very little control over their environments and they have very little
knowledge of the people within them. I think that their brain will generate hunches
in a much more sensitive fashion within those constraints. So essentially,
and through the gathering of experience, very temporarily informed, if you like,
work environment. If I go to a domestic, and I walk into a domestic incident,
and the male and female are shouting and throwing things at each other, I have,
I have no discretion. I have to take action immediately because there's harm that can
take place at any point to either of the parties. So I have to take what is a very active role in
that environment immediately. And therefore, I'm constantly training my brain, I think, personally,
as a police officer, this is what I think goes on, to take action and to take action decisively
in order to reach desired outcomes. Now, in most people's daily business, they have lots of time
to make these decisions. And as a police officer, you just don't. And that generates
grooves. I think it generates grooves in the police officer's brain, and it leads to something
which has come out in the ethnographic literature around policing called pragmatism.
Now, it's described as a tendency to do over a tendency to think. So a police officer will often
tend, I think, towards jumping into some sort of very active role in the environment,
sometimes too quickly, way too quickly. But I think that too quickly, and I'm going to use
air quotes there, is Bayesian. I think that your brain is trained to intervene quickly
in many, many cases, and it sets up grooves. And those grooves are very easy to fall into.
And that presents risk. So I'll give you an example. If I'm going to be controversial here,
but this is where I think the research will be really cool. If, for instance, there is a drug
problem within a particular neighborhood, and that neighborhood is high in ethnic minority,
and it could be ethnic minority from anywhere. So in the UK, Albanian, for instance,
or it could be black in London, or it could be Afro-Caribbean. There's lots of different
ethnicities. But if there is a community which is heavy in a particular ethnicity,
and as a police officer, you are constantly interacting in what will be
highly temporal niche situations, normally violence-related, with that community,
that's going to influence the way that that officer thinks and reacts in other, maybe less
temporally influenced situations. So I'll give you a physical example. If I am going to
gang-related violence a lot, and I'm dealing with victims that have been injured as a result of
gang-related violence, if I do a stop and search in that same area, and I have been to all these
previous incidents, there's going to be a building up of influence and experience in me, which is
then going to change the way that I behave when I stop that car. And you will see this in the
research, this comes out in a lot of the way that police officers are perceived when they're dealing
with ethnic minorities, the way that police officers act, they're not the same when it comes to
majority population interactions. But I do think, and again, I'm pushing this theory way out from
beyond my paper here, I do think that we can probably find some evidence of why that may be the
case, and maybe prove empirically that the more incidents that you go to that could be highly
temporally influenced, that may involve particular ethnic minorities, could then change the way that
you as a police officer operate on a much more wider scale with members of that ethnicity. Now,
I don't think a lot of that's conscious, and I know because I've worked with police officers,
I mean, I met one racist police officer in my entire service of 18 years. So I know people say
other police officers, police, police are racist, you know, I don't think it's as simple as that.
I think it's way more complicated. I think that we have to really understand why police officers
make the decisions they do over time for us to properly unpick this problem. I don't think it's
something that we can turn the page on. And it's going to be years of good research, some of which
is alluded to in Andy Clark's book. So anyway, I'm going a little bit wide here, but all of this
influences that conversation that I've just had. I'm not going to go into the detail,
but that's the bit that is there. And we have this wonderful addition from him,
which gives you the background to the theory from Professor Friston.
Now, this is the section that if I had the choice, I would have put a lot more
words into. And this is the hundreds of niche construction stuff, and you'll probably be able
to tell that from how I've been talking about it today. But low surprise, longitudinal relationships
probably make up the vast amount of our interpersonal relationships that we all experience on a
day-to-day basis, all of us in general in the world, unless you're in somewhere that's very,
very volatile. Mostly they're going to be low surprise, longitudinal relationships. So you
are going to have more opportunity to mould the environment over time. So that's the active bit
of the influence. So you've got this ability to interact with the environment, the environment
then interacts with you, and you end up with this constantly forward and back in between you and
the environment. The problem is, of course, again, with police officers, the ability to
longitudinally change or influence an environment is just not there. You have, I have an hour at
most of the incident, and then I'm getting sent to another. And that may then cause, I think,
this pragmatic leaning to do rather than think. So that's the kind of what I'm getting to in
this last part here before moving into the discussion. So there's a couple of questions
that I've come up here. I've mentioned the pragmatism here from Loftus. This is from
the cultural literature. So what cognitive signals were generated by initial attendants that
contributed to the hunch generation? When the Bayesian brain processes these signals,
what is produced empirically during the process of active inference? What was the officer's
qualia? So how does the hunch present into consciousness? Massively complicated. And I've
even put it in the paper. We don't want to get into the consciousness debate because it's
absolutely fascinating, but it's just incredibly complicated. So there are some things here that
make that person aware. And this refers to that salience, which is in the definition.
How were those qualia interpreted? So when the hairs on my arm stood up, how did I see
the hairs on my arm standing up? So obviously, you're going to receive the signal, but how
do you interpret it and then turn that signal into action? These are questions that haven't
really been answered yet in this particular area. And then this last one, which I think,
it looks like an afterthought because it's one sentence, but it's not one sentence,
it's actually really important. How did the officer justify this hunch in later court proceedings?
And I have written hundreds, probably thousands of police statements over the years. And I know
that reading back those statements, they will read very rationally. They will read super rationally.
So my ability to rationalize my decision making, post decision making is way better than my ability
to interpret a hunch rationally. And there's a big disconnect there. So you end up with a lot of
obviously hindsight bias. If you stopped a car and you found some heroin, well, you stopped the
car because you think that there was drugs on the car. But as mentioned earlier, in the
article, sometimes that hunch is nonspecific. It's raised through experience. That's
very, very different, really different. And I don't think that officers have got the skills
to interpret the hunches well enough to make well-reasoned decisions. I think that they rely
upon intuition much more than they say they do. And I'm not, well, I know because I've been one
and I've been around them. I know how these things work. So I just don't think that it's been
researched well. And then as we get towards the end, we move into the, again, the theory
support from that figure. And we posit a series of areas for future research.
So we've got here longitudinal study on hunch development. So this is tracking the development
of hunches in police officers as their career develops. I think this is super interesting
because when I talked about going up to that door in the domestic and Jamie not feeling
anything and me having the most salient feeling I've ever had, there's something going on there.
So when does that start to happen? When do police intuitions become so noticeable and
powerful that people can see them and be able to act upon them or be able to notice them and
suppress them? Because even that is an interesting area. So if you are getting a hunch and you think
that hunch may be informed through past discriminations, then surely you need to be able to suppress
it. You shouldn't be acting upon it. So if you think, for instance, that there's an element
of discrimination in stopping a vehicle, you need to be able to notice that and stop that before it
happens. And it could be unbidden. And again, this is in the definition. So you haven't invited the
hunch. It just comes, but you may know that there's not enough there for you to make that stop.
There's not enough evidence. So something's going on and you need to be able to see that and stop
that happening. Comparative analysis with a little profession. So this is looking at the
generation of hunches, for instance, in the medical environment, neurobiological correlates.
So this was to look at neurobiological processes associated with hunch formation,
the use of brain and body imaging techniques. This is probably way above my pay grade,
but it will be super useful. And there is some precedent for it in very, very primitive studies
in the 70s and 80s that look at things like heart rate and blood pressure over the tour of
duty of a police officer. But it'd be brilliant to see that advance. Much more advanced wearables,
even looking at good scanning equipment, how are these hunches generated? It might even be one
for the future, but we thought we'd discuss it. The impact of training on hunch accuracy,
this is something that came from Professor Kempese. He was talking about training scars.
Have you heard of training scars, Daniel? No. So training scars are where
you constantly train in a particular way. Your grooves become very, very pronounced
in the way that you approach similar incidents because you train so much. And then when an
incident presents itself, your brain kicks you into those grooves, even though the grooves may
be inappropriate. So they can lead to, so for instance, taking a shot because that's a shot
you would have taken in training, despite the fact that that shot was non-justified. Or another one
where there's not enough threat in the training scenarios. So because of that, you act in a much
more slow and considered way when you need to act much more quickly. Both of those will be
considered training scars. And again, so overtraining may suppress good hunch
intuition or development. That's an idea. I'm not saying it's there, it's just an idea.
So diversity, and we'll discuss this quite a bit today. Insighting to potentially gendered
hunches. I mean, I'm super interested in that. Look, this plays out. When you look at the stats
of things like stopping vehicles, it is different. It's different from a gender basis. There's
something going on. No one's looking at it. I think this needs looking at. Operationalization
of hunches in policing. So when, and I'm currently planning a study that looks at this now, so using
both qualitative and quantitative methods, investigating the factors that contribute to
the activation and follow through of hunches. But to do that, you have to be aware that a
hunch is happening. And that's a that's the one of the things that we're trying to get our heads
around like, how do we, how do we make officers aware enough that intuition is kicking in? And
then when that intuition is kicking in, how do we help them describe it and also help describe
their decision making off the back of it? Because I think, again, if we go back to that pragmatism
side, I think the hunch kicks in the police officer makes the decision, but there's very
little rational consideration of the connection between the hunch and the action. So that's
something that I think we can look at. Comparative analysis of policing models, and I'll give you
a really quick and dirty example of this. So in the US, obviously, it's a coercive policing model.
In the UK, it's a consensual policing model. Both of those will change the way that hunches
are generated. They will. So have you heard of the touching the tail light on police vehicles? So
in the US, when a cop touches, stops a car, as the police officer walks towards the car to speak
to the driver, they touch the tail light. Now, there's lots of reasons for this. The first is that
you leave your fingerprint and DNA on the tail light. Okay. But if you think about what that's
doing in the officer's brain, the immediate consideration when he gets out of that car is,
I could die. And I need to leave evidence on this vehicle in front of me. Now,
I have stopped thousands of vehicles in my police career, and I have never once thought that.
And because I've never once thought it, I can hypothesize that the generation of hunches will
be way different in terms of sensitivity to an American police officer's generation of hunches.
Not least because the threat is so mitigated in the UK, the chances of me coming up against
firearm is almost nil. I have never seen a gun. I've never fired one till about six months ago.
So like 18 years of service, and I've never carried and I've never seen a gun in a real life
police environment, that's going to change the way that I police. And I do think that there'll be a
different operationalization of hunches as a result. And that's something that will be a fascinating
study. And then this one here, this impact of technological support, how does the use of technology
change hunch development? So for instance, and this is going to sound really weird, but
let's just say a police officer is trained to record when a hunch is received. And it could
be as simple as a tap on the wrist for a wearable or something similar. And that could then help
us correlate the types of incidents that police officers are at when they receive hunches. They
don't have to explain them. It's just like, where are you most likely to get them? Where
does your intuition manifest? And then we could look backwards at how it manifested and what it
did. And then the last one, which is the public perception and trust. Possible to investigate
how public perception and trust in law enforcement are influenced by officers reliance on hunches.
So I'll give you a quick example of this. If you rely on hunches to do stop searches,
and that means that you do more stop searches, that may affect community trust within that
that particular community where you conduct in the stop searches, that then becomes reciprocal.
So you rely on intuition to do stop searches rather than rational thought. That leads to a
rise in stop searches, leads to a rise in arrests, and also probably a rise in much more like
a friction based interactions with members of the public. Long term, that's going to lead to a
breakdown in relationships and possibly issues with legitimacy. So how the public perceive
the legitimacy of police actions. So that's just an example of where we could go on the big scale.
This last one's a very macro, like kind of level study. And some of these up here are much more
personally based. And Daniel, I think that's about it.
Thank you. Thanks for overviewing it. I have some questions and there's some great
questions in the live chat. So. Okay, that sounds good.
Wow. Many places to jump in. There's the fundamental tension with the
possibly arbitrary or hard to explain yet intuitive and honed nature of the hunch.
And about how the hunch has such a rich before, during, and after. There's kind of, there must
be something like hearing the code called on the radio. Yeah. And that setting a stage like,
I'm going to a comedy, I'm going to a horror movie, or it's this code and that's all that is
being passed through the blanket is just what code it is. And that's equivalent to like saying,
what is your prior? What do you prepare yourself for, given that it's just this number or that
number? And what are the costs and the sensitivities to like false positives and false negatives?
So there's a lot of stages to investigate, like looking forward to the hunch and then
looking back on it, where certain kinds of rhetoric or certain kinds of thinking are
privileged or supported by legal proceedings and saying something like, well,
I just didn't think it was that way in the moment, could be the most honest statement,
yet it might be seen as like almost malpractice.
Okay. Awesome questions from the live chat. Yes, exactly right. Okay. All right. Here we go. I'll
just read them basically in order they come in. All right. So Susan asks, does hunch lead to
epistemic foraging or pragmatic foraging? So let's just unpack that in the expected free energy,
decision making, functional, different policies are evaluated in terms of their epistemic value,
like expected information gain and pragmatic value, which is aligning observations
with your preferences. So how does that raising of the hunch then get pushed one way or another
into seeking more information epistemically or directly moving to take pragmatic action?
So I think that was a very nice way of summing up a lot of the discussion that where I talked
about the lean towards pragmatism, the desire for control for a police officer when they first get
there is like, it's almost primal. And I know that that's a big word to use. But they will, I think,
tend to lean incredibly strongly into the pragmatic and then move into the epistemic.
So, and if you think about this, this mirrors the court process, like if I turn up to an incident
and there's threat within the incident, the first thing that I want to do is, and I know the word
is awful because of the connotations it brings, but neutralise the threat. I want the threat gone,
because while the threat is there, my intuition is going nuts. I mean, it overrides everything.
I'll give you a very quick practical example. If I'm in an incident where I believe that the
male party in domestic violence is going to assault me or assault the victim while I'm there,
that my brain does not want to allow any epistemic foraging. No, there's a safety override and the
safety override is essentially make sure that this male is not going to assault you or assault the
other person before we start asking questions. And that safety override is often the thing that
people will look at and say, and this is what I meant when I talked about the difference between
jurisdictions. So, I would say that the safety override in the US is much more powerful than it
is in the UK because of the threat that's there, because of the availability of firearms. So,
you're probably going to find where there's more firearms, the link towards pragmatic foraging is
way higher, way, way higher. And then once that's done, neutralized, whatever word you want to use,
then that's when the longer form questions and the much more calm information gathering takes
place. So, really good question. There's definitely a lean towards pragmatic over epistemic,
but epistemic will happen and it just may come after the pragmatic. So, there could be a kind of
hierarchy, a hierarchy if you like affordances because of the situation that presents. Does
that make sense? Yeah, like to give a kind of a non-policing example, it's like you dropped an
object on the floor. If it was very surely just a soft carpet, you might feel around blindly and
epistemic foraging would have like a low risk. But if you strongly believed that there was like
other sharp objects on the floor, you would be way more skeptical with just kind of reaching
into dangerous locations. Daniel, can you answer my questions because that was way better than I
just did. Okay, next one. We'll each give a shot. Susan asks, how are police trained to avoid group
think i.e. not just follow the ones with improper force over motivations? So, you're talking about
individual cognition in that moment, but yet in that dyad encounter, there was like a collective
intelligence component and a difference in hunches. So, how does the group training and operating come
into play? Yeah, this is really interesting because there's nothing about the way that your
brain behaves under pressure in any of the police training. Nothing. So, and I suppose, and this is
a massive criticism and I used to talk about this a lot because I was involved in the design of what's
called the PQF in the UK, which is the Education Qualification Framework. And it was a very,
very controversial project for me to be involved in, but it was about raising the initial level
of education to a degree level, bachelor's level for police officers. And one of the major drives
is obviously to blunt to some extent the lean towards pragmatism and offer some priors for
the making of police decisions that are better than those based just in practice. But this is a move
away from what you would call like a kind of master apprentice model, which is the, and it's
experience based epistemic model now of police learning into something that's much more a priori,
which is your more traditional, educative professionalized model. So, are they taught to
ignore group thing? I'd probably say, well, there was no discussion of group things during my training,
but I have to think back, I mean, my training was 23, 24 years ago, and I'm sure that things have
progressed. Will it be good informed, solidly evident stuff? Probably not. And I think in some
cases, I think there may be some really good academics who will be out there working with
particular forces, and they will be given this sort of training. But I think it's a more general
approach. I don't think it's there. And I think it's a massive gap. So really good question.
All right. Yeah, very interesting. It's a team sport, team art slash science. And so,
it has to be at least considered how do officers share their hunches? They just raise their hand
and say, I have a hunch. But that might be throwing a wrench into things in the moment.
So, how do the right communication surface, and then you have the radio, and you have the
local communication, you have these different avenues of message passing, but not all messages
lead to resolution of the situation. So, Daniel, that's a really good comment. And we're just
submitted a paper, which is on the use of decision making models in detective world.
And we were talking about this, like, I was only on a murder inquiry for a year of my service. So,
but I saw the way that the murder inquiries worked. And it is way more rational. And they
invite hunches. So, like, you're seeing your investigating officers will say, look, have any
of you got any feelings about this? Please try and explain them, you know, how or the other one
where you just run an interview with one of the suspects. And one of the first questions that
would come out isn't what did the suspect say? It's, what do you think? How did it make you feel?
You know, so there's a real space within the detective world for the discussion and sharing
of hunches. Now, if I pick that same instance up and you drop it into uniform, because it's so
temporarily enforced, that you won't get chance a lot of the time to share your hunches. Like,
so if I have a bad feeling about somebody at an incident, and this is that lean towards
pragmatism again, I will want to make sure that I'm safe before I go anywhere. I won't share
with the officer next to me, I have a bad feeling about that person. I want to take pragmatic action
to go and try and deal with that bad feeling. So again, this leans back into that other question
that we've just discussed. I would say that so the sharing of hunches and the passing of messages
probably much more available within the long decision making processes within detective work
and very poor within the incredibly short, temporarily influenced decision making of
uniform. Does that make sense? Yeah, it also makes me think about active inference and
statistics are providing like a science of uncertainty and decision making amidst uncertainty.
And yet in many different domains, ranging from policing to law, science, there's kind of
bespoke ways of dealing with uncertainties. And different settings even within the given
field like different cases are going to have different treatments of uncertainties. And so
there's now this dance or a fusion to bring together those different treatments of uncertainty.
I'm really curious how you see active inference and extended cognition in light of
even though I'm not very familiar with the details, the growth of policing technologies
and surveillance technologies and the different paths that a given officer or department might have
in front of them in terms of how they incorporate technology into their whole apparatus.
So there's definitely going to be a really, really big shift here.
So when I left two or three years ago, there were discussions three years ago about things like
the integration of active heads up displays. Okay, so when I'm at an incident, if I've got facial
recognition, and it's running in the background, and it's passing me information that I don't have
and didn't have, how will that affect my decision making? And that is, and I'm going to be really
honest, really scary, because really scary and really beneficial. So I'll give you a quick example.
I turned up at an incident again, I'm going to keep using the domestic incident because it's
simple and we as police officers go to them all the time. Okay, so it's a, and I keep calling
myself a police officer. I'm not a police officer anymore, I'm full-time academic, but you know,
one time. So anyway, if I turn up at an incident and I have a set of glasses and my body cam on,
my body cams running at all times. So I know that there's some element of surveillance of my
behavior. And I know that whenever you look back at this incident, my decision making is going to be
scrutinized. Okay, so when it goes into the court system, my behavior will definitely be on show.
And I know that as a result, obviously, I have to behave within the rules and the bounds and all
that sort of thing. Now, there's a propensity, and I'm sure you know this, of police officers to do
what's called informal working practices, where they essentially step outside the strict rules and
laws and they try and take pragmatic decisions. So an example might be if I stop somebody speeding,
I might want to give them a warning, I might not want to give them a ticket. But speeding is
technically a strict liability offense, so I should have to give them a ticket. And instead,
I operate and I use discretion, I decide not to do it, I give words of advice and that person drives
off. Okay. With things like your heads up display, if I'm walking towards that car, and I'm wearing
glasses that is giving me full history, full driving history, including infraction, speeding,
tickets, et cetera, just by looking at the number plate. And then when I get up to that
driver's side window and the window comes down and my facial recognition tells me that this
person has got previous for X, Y, and Z, a soul, et cetera. Is that going to change my decision
making 100% because what has the police officer got to deal with now? They have what's in front of
them. And then they do that epistemic foraging. The extended cognition that would come from
lifetime information during decision making is crazy. And I'll tell you right now, we'll be doing
it before we understand whether it is a good thing to do or not. Because that's what police do,
they will jump in probably. In fact, I'd be surprised if people weren't testing this stuff now.
And the other thing I think, I mean, I went straight to wearable stuff there, but there's
other stuff that might help. So if I'm thinking from an interceptive perspective, there's a really
good study called Emotional Survival for Law Enforcement Officers. It was a police psychologist
that wrote it. And he put heart rate monitors on police officers. And he showed that when you go
into what's called a Code 1 incident in the UK, which is an emergency incident, the blue lights
are on, you know, like you were talking about the code, the pattern of the information and the
bodily reactions to it. If I'm going to an emergency incident, when I first start, you're
incredibly aware, interceptively, of what's going on. So you can feel your heart, your
breath quickens, your periphery narrows, all of the normal stress reactions kick in.
Okay. Because you know that when you land there, there's probably going to be conflict of some
sort and you're going to have to deal with it. Now, what the study showed was that
very, very experienced police officers, so we're talking like 15 years, 20 years plus,
when they were going to the emergency incidents, they would say that those bodily reactions were
not happening. But the monitors would say that they were. And this is super interesting.
Because it may mean, you could say that the police officer has got more control over their
interception, or you could say the exact opposite. So they have dulled their interception over time
through exposure, continued exposure. And we don't know about the effects on hunches,
or the effects on general decision making in those different lengths of service, if you like.
Now, if we go back to the extended stuff, imagine having a wearable that tells you this
lifetime. That would be super interesting. Like it, I mean, again, I'm like, you know,
maybe five years in the future here, but we're not a million miles away. There are well-being
wearables that are ongoing now. I don't think they're being used for this purpose.
Could they change decision making? Definitely. In good and bad ways, hey,
I know this just needs a lot more research, this bit that you're discussing, loads more research.
It just needs some proper, proper good looking at, because it could be immensely beneficial.
I can just see a million ways where it could also be quite damaging.
Wow. Yeah, the awareness of the hunch. And then there's one setting where the hunch is not
aroused, which may be like a burnout situation. Yeah, exactly. And then yet also on the other
side of, let's just say, like a stage performer, they still might get the physiological arousal,
but they actually expect it. And so they don't attend to it because this whole thing with
active is not paying attention to what we expect. And so they have a deeper experience layer that
contextualized the hunch. And yet that might obscure that hunch from being communicated,
like to a younger colleague, and yet communicated where and how the experienced professor or
lawyer or officer feels in a situation is that ineffable experience transfer. And then I totally
see these different paths with the wearables, one path where the boots on the ground are just
reduced to an actuator in a decision making system that they're not even a part of.
Because it tells them, here's what you want to do to this car.
Don't epistemically forage, just fulfill what the order is. Exactly. And then there's the
epistemic engagement mode. And we can imagine like the family doctor asking somebody questions
rather than like looking at their digital health record. And there's kind of, there's a charming
and an open-endedness to that. And yet in high reliability situations, people are going to be
put into which lane are we going to take this doctor's office? Are we going to use digital
health records? Or are we going to have slower, potentially noisier encounters just because
people self-report that they like that more than the other way? Yes. Yeah. And just as you got me
thinking that there's some really good studies that look at things like cancer diagnosis. And so
you know, somebody comes in with a bad ankle and a doctor says, yeah, you need to go for this test
and this test and this test. And they're unable to rationalize that. It's the same thing, but there's
a much more. So if you look at a doctor's purpose, they're still going to be pragmatically based.
They're going to be trying to solve whatever problem is facing them. But their relevance
realization has got so skilled over the years. And this is some of the stuff that you were just
talking about there, where there's lots of signals coming in that are just very, very
efficiently dealt with subconsciously. And it may be about making that person aware of what
that subconscious is doing in order to properly understand it. And this is what I was talking
about with the hunch generation stuff. Because police officers don't often, they don't interrogate
the journey that led them to make the decision, they make the decision and then they rationalize
it backwards. I think there's so much we could do here. There's so much potential because, and again,
this is for improved decision making. This isn't like, so we're looking at improved outcomes here.
We want to make policing better. How do we make it better? Well, I would say that increasing
self-awareness about decision making is absolutely fundamental. You can't go anywhere. This is just
like perfect, you know, and the whole framework of active inference and the Bayesian brain,
it just lends itself to this so well, way better than the other theories that I'd explored. And
some of which are in the article, like, you know, like the schema, the script, et cetera. But I
love Bramsted's work on niche construction in it. That's something I think that I would like to look
at a little bit more, I think, because as time goes on, sorry, my brain just went there towards
the end. I don't know why. Is there anything else on your question wise? Have we got some more?
Yeah. Yeah. Okay, let's keep going with questions. Jeff asks,
I don't know the book, but what do you think of the general question?
I don't, but I have. So I work in a security and defense academy. So I'm surrounded by
military scholars. That's a really good question. And I will go and ask it for Jeff.
Cool. Okay. Dave asks,
Oh,
that's a really good question. And I have to be honest, I mean, I've read some stuff
on hallucinations, and I've listened to podcasts from machine learning street talk as well as some
good discussions around it. I mean, they're anomalies, aren't they? But
and I suppose you're going to have a set of rules within the LLM that still allows them to be
displayed in the same way that you're going to have a set of rules within the body that allows
the hunches to come to the fore. I don't know is the answer to that. And I know that we don't
properly understand hallucinations yet. But I would, I mean, obviously, we've got no consciousness
in in the deep learning machines point of contention, but most people would say there's no
consciousness there. Whereas the hunch, the hunch is ability to rise through the consciousness.
So the quality of the hunch is the bit that makes it salient. And I think that that salience
will be lacking in any element of LLM deep learning based work, if that makes sense. Does
that make sense, Daniel? Yeah, I think another complimentary way that I thought of that question
is the hallucinations, let's just say in image output, you say represents this, and it makes a
full resolution image that is non factually based. And so people sometimes refer to it as a hallucination.
So whereas the outputs of that are in terms of observations that are just factually ungrounded,
the hunch, it's not like it's a, it's not a visual phenomena. It's not like there's a visual,
a new visual overlay or a sensory prediction. It's something slower that is kind of like
an upwelling of something that is salient, because as you pointed to, it's slower, it's
interceptive, it's affective. It's not modifying like what we see, smell here in the way where
when people talk about hallucinations as outputs of machine learning models, they're usually
talking about that. I think you might do that though, Daniel. That sounds really weird, but
I think it may to some extent do that. So and I'm just thinking about how that might be the case.
So if I'm at an incident, I'll give you another very quick example. So we went to conduct a
mandatory section in which is a horrible incident and I hate them, but it's essentially taking
somebody into full-time mental health care. He was a serious schizophrenic with, he was a danger
to others. And we went to basically take him into custody so that he could go to the hospital
because he wasn't, he wasn't refusing to take his medication or short for his appointments,
and it was carrying the community, et cetera, and he had to attack somebody. And I was in that room
for probably one minute and I was telling the doctors to get out because I knew what was coming.
And if somebody had, and this is what you say, well, it changes the way that you see,
well, it does because it changes your relevance realisation is that as the intuition kicks in
and becomes stronger, then your focus changes visually. So you're going to be filtering out
much more of the side if you like and focusing in on what would be considered the threat,
whatever the threat may be. And in this case, I mean, he was holding a knife down the side of
a sofa and he was about to attack us. And for some reason, something about that incident, again,
highly salient feeling, it then changed the way that I saw, it changed the way that I interacted,
communicated, changed the way that I dealt with my externals, and I suppose you could call them
variables. So I wanted all the people out of the way, because that would then give me greater,
that would give me less to think about when the conflict actually happened. So I would probably
say, there's a little, there's a parallel there, I think that it can affect the senses. And I imagine
no, I quite like it. It's an interesting thing to think about.
I saw in the paper, you cited the quantum reference frames and Chris Fields' work,
so that just makes me think walking down a street, one reference frame is just like,
oh, there's people milling about. And then another reference frame, whether this is paranoid or not,
is like, their information to circle me, or somebody is shaking a little bit in their hand,
and it's like, oh, maybe they have essential tremor. Maybe they're nervous. Maybe they're
about to do this. And so that doesn't change the, the photons hitting the retina.
That's right. It changes our framing. And that is what is actionable.
And a more cognitively informed law and legal system could have a more
agreed. Yes, you're right. Yes, you're exactly right. Yeah. Yes. Very good. I told you, you're
way better at this, Daniel. You wrap up my words and it just comes out in a much simpler way. Very
good. Let's, we're cruising together. Well, where are you going to go in your continuing directions
here? Like, what are you going to do with this now that you have the frontier's paper?
Okay, so there's a couple of things that I want to do. I want to
test whether current decision making models in policing that are used widely in many different
countries are useful for the processing and understanding of police hunches,
because I think that they are accountability models and not decision making models. So that's
something that I want to look at. But I suppose the more relevant study will be research in the
quality of the hunch. So within different settings, especially within uniform, I'm very
interested in it because of its, its contact with legitimacy as a whole, like how police
are perceived. I want to know how uniformed officers receive, understand, process, and then act upon
hunches. And the study that I have in mind is, this is going to sound really weird.
I want to do like a kind of personalized dictophone, like a narrative account. So essentially,
when a police officer in any corner of the world makes a decision on the basis of a hunch,
that is then narrated into this kind of like repository. And we use that repository as a
qualitative evidence base to research how the hunch is processing and then acted upon.
That's what I'm thinking. So I'm currently in the process of getting funding. And I'm hoping that
I can secure it. And if I can, I'd like to run it as a, this is going to sound really strange,
but a voluntary, worldwide study. So I don't care where you're a police officer. I want you to take
part. And we look at how you are receiving on a daily basis, your minor hunches from I want to
stop that car through to those like kind of heart hitting your stomach, pile or reaction,
high threat hunches that totally change the way that you see the incident in front of you.
So that's the, that's the next step, I think. That makes me think of Aeroid, which is a repository
of alternate states of consciousness, mostly based upon substances. So yeah, that's another,
but it's a voluntary self-report. And that sounds very cool and voluntary.
I'm hoping, I'm hoping that's the plan. But I'm hoping that once I get the funding,
that that will be a green light. And obviously in the meantime, I mean, it's been so cool talking
to you, Daniel. And I know that the community is quite tight in around the Active Infants Institute.
So if anybody has been listening or if anybody listens to this in the meantime, if you've got
any cool ideas or you want to ask me any questions, but just email me. I love to talk about this stuff
in general. And the discussion, I know that we mentioned it right at the beginning, but even
the discussion where we talked about the law, I've got, I've got a theory that I've spoken to a
professor about. I'll just throw this out there just to finish off. I think that people may call the
police when the surprising bounds are breached. And they want the police to be an agent of return.
So essentially, the police become an agent of our stasis to return to home your stasis for
that person. Now, what that gives us, and it's something that we don't have, is a general theory
of police contact. And it allows us to see how different communities may call the police based
on their different surprising bounds. So for instance, in high chaos communities, their
sensitivity to surprise is going to be much higher than those that are in, sorry, much lower than
those that are in very, very structured gated communities, for instance. And this, this could
lead us to some really interesting research. But it's something that is very much in the
background of my brain and something that I'm, I'm thinking about a lot, reading about a lot,
and hoping that maybe over time, I can start to develop it. Awesome. Thank you, Gareth, for
connecting these critical areas and bringing active in. And it's just exciting to hear where it's
going. Oh, thank you, Daniel. Thank you for your time. And thank you to everyone who's actually
managed to listen to me for, to drone along for this long piece. It's been a pleasure to have you.
Oh, there's great comments in the live chat. So thank you. Talk to you next time. Okay. Thank you
very much. Bye bye.
