Hello and welcome. It is July 12, 2024. We are in Actinth MathArtStream number four today joined by Kirby Erner. Kirby, please begin.
Okay. Thank you for having me, everyone. There's been a little bit of email traffic leading up to this and I've been attending to this channel and I wanted to just point viewers who see this later too that this is episode four and they're already on a journey and it has to do with visualizing the fourth dimension and applying art towards this challenge.
And it's kind of a puzzle piece that Daniel knows that I know for sure. I don't know if everyone knows but there is kind of, I feel in the hiker metaphor that you've climbed pretty high now and here's an overview of view of like a neighboring or adjacent space where 40 is also important fourth dimension, etc.
Now, I know there's some Wittgenstein knowledge around here so Operation Duck Rabbit is an allusion to the kind of Gestalt Shift you need and I just drew this. It's very poorly drawn. I have a doofy style of drawing. I'm influenced by Mad Magazine, I think.
And the rabbit looks kind of sad. You can see his kind of wiggly mouth. That's just trying to do feathers on the back of the duck's head. I was trying to like compromise there. So it's both a duck and a rabbit and this is one of the easy ones, right? There's a lot of these that flip at you.
Like this one, it's easy to go back and forth between the duck and the rabbit but some of them, you just can't do it. People try to help you. They coach you. Well, look at it like this and it doesn't help, right? You can't see the old lady or whatever they're trying to.
So that is a challenge and it's part of what it means to kind of ease into some new field. You have to develop the Gestalt's associated therewith.
So the outline of what I plan to do real quick, duck rabbit, kind of drawing from my Wittgenstein background. I had Rory who's into pragmatism as one of my thesis advisors. I did have to write a thesis even though I was just an undergrad at the time and defend it and blah, blah.
But I wrote on the later Wittgenstein, right? There's two Wittgenstines for those who aren't familiar. He's got sort of an early philosophy and a later philosophy.
So on that note of how things evolve, how we don't end up where we start necessarily, this picture shows what I'd call Euclidean geometry going forward in time.
And it kind of forks when they realize, oh, the fifth postulate, we could mess with that so we can have non-Euclidean geometry in that sense.
And relativity kind of comes in around there. I'm talking about Einstein. Euclidean continues.
And I'm forking off another namespace as I call it. Cinergeti is kind of more off of Einstein stuff than off what I call extended Euclideanism, which is ND Hilbert space fourth dimension as another spatial dimension, not time.
There's a difference. So there's three namespaces here. I'm drawing a triangle. I'm saying these exist and come and go.
So namespaces is like a shop talk, a context, or as Wittgenstein would say, a form of life, a grammar, like chess versus checkers.
They come with a whole different world, not just the games, but the tournaments, how it is, and then look more at some of the Bucky stuff.
What is it? Now let's start with the language game, since y'all are math fluent, don't feel bad about just starting with some notation.
In this culture, let's say these are like Mongols and Amalayas or something. Let's say we unearthed this archaeology. This existed at one point.
And instead of negative numbers and positive numbers, they decided to add another tuple. So the negatives, they've got a one to the right.
Now this may look bad. It's like, well, no, if it's on the right, then the tuple should be the rightmost tuple and blah, blah.
So you could flip it, whatever. Don't overthink it.
And then the same culture, when they want to get to a plane or a flat space, they do it like this with three fences.
You could call them reference lines, what we call vectors or rays or whatever.
And you can see how if you have a dot in this part of it between A and B, just using vector addition, right?
You only need so much A and so much B to get there.
So a combination, a linear combination of A and B basis vectors is sufficient to get any point in this part of the y.
This is just a flat y. There's no perspective implied here. There's no 90 degree angles. It's just a y flat on the plane.
But I'm showing how you have kind of a zero for everybody here in the third place because there is no C component of resonance of this triangle region.
Then we go to the quad version of it where we divide space into four quadrants.
Again, we add another coordinate for the new vector.
And by the way, there is a good example of using a y on a surface.
And that's the Jodie Foster, very large array.
I say Jodie Foster because she's in a movie where she talks to aliens through this or something like that.
But there's a y. So there's a way of thinking about the...
So there's a culture that does this and at what you would call or we would call the third dimension, we're already looking like this now.
We're going to address all the points in... I'd call it Euclidean space. It's the same space XYZ is about.
But we're using tuples. We're using four tuples instead of three tuples.
And we don't need negative numbers here because we've dealt with that issue in a different way.
It's still got all the same properties, however, of vector addition, linear combination.
This spans XYZ space. You could say everybody gets a four number address unique.
And so this is my cue when I get to the books is to jump to a slightly different track.
So fuller synergetics.
What I just showed you, the quadrate coordinates have all come out since synergetics.
They're not in this book synergetics.
And in fact, people felt maybe it's a weakness of Fuller's critique of XYZ and cubic orthodoxy that he didn't have an alternative really to propose.
And quadrates I think he would have been excited about, but he didn't live to see them.
So I just wanted to say that.
Now, where should we put Fuller historically?
Historically, like going back recently, he noticed I'm segueing on the books.
We got the postage stamp.
He's kind of in a way he's an academic, but he's also very much a cold warrior.
I think we can paint him that way.
Without much apology, he was military industrial complex in a way.
He worked with the military on shelter stuff.
And here I've found something buried in the archives where he's recommending someone to be in contact with Ho Chi Minh.
Somebody, some journalist, some British journalist, but he's saying, oh, you should send him to Vietnam, whatever.
So I don't know, you know, I'm not the super expert on this, but I do know that he worked very closely.
Pretty much his whole life with this gentleman, Abel White, who I talked about.
And Abel White knew this guy who's one of the CIA guys.
And there's Ezra Pound.
And these two corresponded a lot because back at Yale, when this guy ran a literary magazine called Orlando, he was always being in touch with Ezra Pound, going over Italy, met him and stuff.
So there's starting to be a literary flavor to what I'm talking about.
And also, why was Bucky a darling of the Pentagon?
Well, because of this is a modern version of what they got into the due line, the early, the early warning system about, you know, monitoring way up north around the Arctic circles to sense what kind of activities might be coming over the horizon from the other side of the Earth.
Meaning missiles, jets, who knows, right?
So, or what these are called weather stations as well, because they're useful for civilian purposes.
So you can say Fuller had this.
In fact, here's I have from from the trend tab lists, a recent posting I gave where I found an actual photograph of when one of his domes was in the garden of the Pentagon.
Like if the center surrounded by the five wings or whatever you call them in that garden, they did even put this dome there at some point.
Now, probably why I bring that up is because when I get to Coxeter and University of Toronto, I want to talk about our relationship between Coxeter and Fuller.
And I want to mention the Pentagon's support of the Bucky patent on the dome and how this led to some consternation and conflicts in a way.
I'm not going to spend a lot of time on that, but so here we are back in 1928 and Fuller's got this four D symbol kind of weird look in the teardrop shape.
Daniel's seen other versions or colored versions recently in the archives.
And this is way back from 28.
And he's throwing his hat in the ring, basically, as another one who's into this four D as a meme.
And four D, there's a lot of ferment at the early 1900s.
Now here we're talking 28, so we're quarter into quarter into it, but there's still a lot of thought and talk about what the fourth dimension means.
What it's about.
Where is it going with, you know, it's not that kind of drive.
Let's put it that way.
And a good way to pick up that story is to go back and read this book, The Fourth Dimension Non Euclidean Geometry and Modern Art by Linda Del Rimpel Henderson.
She does a really good job of tracing the multiple strands, the multiple schools of thought.
Now, I'd say there was kind of a shakeout over the course of the 1900s.
And they didn't all survive, let's say, but Fuller had a strong sense of branding.
He was into self promotion.
He didn't want to delegate how to advertise himself.
He thought that was the most important thing.
So he kept tight control over his own publicity.
Escher is going to come into the story, but this is the space Fuller was most interested in.
In terms of spear packing, what we call this CCP or FCC, or what he called IVM, isotropic vector matrix, which sounds kind of pretentious and long.
And so that's why people have a problem with Fuller is because he wrote everything almost, it's all in prose.
It's not looking, it doesn't look tightly mathematical.
It looks like somebody writing a lot of loquacious verbiage that's maybe not very high quality.
That's kind of what a lot of people's impression is.
But I decided now, let's really see what's here.
But you can see he's uncomfortable.
He's like that whiny kid or that rebellious kid in early elementary school when the teacher draws a dot on the chalkboard and says,
this is a point, but that's not really a point because point has no dimension.
And you can see this is really a pile of chalk.
So there's really the point you can't really see it.
And, you know, the kid raises their hand and it's like, so if I can't really see it, how do I know it's there or whatever they get into some stupid argument with the teacher, right?
And Fuller is like the guy who continues that argument, even into his 70s and 80s.
And he doesn't publish synergics until like 75 with the help of that Applewhite.
But he's like, he doesn't like this infinitely in planes, right?
And there's this guy, Carl Manger, I found the logical, not a logical positive, Vienna circle guy.
And he wrote this essay back when Einstein was treated more like a philosopher.
In those days, Einstein was looked up to and it's like, this is going to be a philosopher.
We're going to study Einstein and philosophy departments.
And that never really happened.
He's kind of in the physics department.
Philosophy took a different tack.
So you see in the title here, it's Albert Einstein, philosopher, scientist.
That's kind of like calling the Dalai Lama a scientist, which some people do, but it sounds weird, right?
So Geometry of Lumps, Carl Manger in this essay is saying Euclid's assumptions about points, lines and planes has this twofold idealization.
First, we don't talk about the extension of the dots or the thickness of the boards.
And also they all have to be infinite, or at least if they start to be long, I have to, you know what I mean, right?
So he's into infinity, which is fine.
And he's into infinity of smallness.
It's like with the infinite plane comes infinitely thin.
It's like one over infinity.
They're both there.
If you don't want that, what if you want a geometry of lumps?
And also here's pushback from Darcy Thompson writing in 1918 to Whitehead.
And he's having trouble with three dimensional.
And why are we saying three dimensional again for space?
Who came up with that?
And he has an alternative.
I would think it might be four dimensional coordinates.
We'll see about that.
And so Geometry of Lumps in Fuller, this is quoting from Synergetics, is very much lumpy.
He's like size is always special case.
But if you're talking about the eternal thing, it's metaphysical, whatever it's not special case.
It's timeless.
It's sub frequency means it only had shape.
You had frequency, you get size, you get energy involvement.
But if you're just talking about the shape of a thing, it's all about its angles.
And a tetrahedron is really simpler than a cube.
And it's been too overlooked.
He's kind of coming to Western civilization and saying, I see you went with the cube as your most important shape.
You got these platonics here on the table.
I like the cube.
But what about the tetrahedron here?
It's simpler.
It's got fewer vertices, all these things.
Why didn't you go with the tetrahedron?
What's your reason?
And, you know, that starts a discussion, I think that Fuller is triggering.
And so if I were to teach this for in high school to jump to the beginning of this show, I won't go through the whole thing.
I'm not going to plot through any of my shows from start to end.
Here, I would usually give some autobiography as well as biography about Fuller.
And then I would jump to the books and that's my cue.
Let's go to some other place.
Let's just talk a little bit of history.
How would I introduce Fuller today as an historical figure?
How would I do that?
I've shown you sort of connections to Abelwhite and Ezra Pound as kind of tenuous.
The Ezra Pound is a clue.
It's kind of a poet.
Fuller wanted to be seen as a poet.
You can find where he says that.
Then he plays a little language game, but you're not allowed to call yourself a poet.
Only other people can call you a poet.
So he's like, he cites e-comings and all this.
It's like, please, please, I'm a poet.
But, you know, it was kind of his revenge because he got expelled from Harvard a couple of times.
But by the end of his life, he delivered the Charles Eliot Norton lecture.
And that's kind of a poetic position at Harvard.
Anyway, anyway.
So when I tell the story here on the lower left, that's Margaret Fuller.
And that's his great aunt.
And she's a contemporary of Ada Byron.
And I like to link the two, not that they ever met or anything,
but they were rethinking women who are a totally scholar.
I feel bad for Ada sometimes, but her dad was Lord Byron.
And they didn't want her to know until she was like 21.
And they take her into this room and they pull back this curtain.
And there's a portrait, and this is your father.
And she's like, whatever, teenager.
It makes a good movie.
Anyway, continue it.
There's Margaret Fuller.
See, she was an American Transcendentalist.
So you've got Emerson here.
This is a time when Harvard is turning from Unitarian to Transcendentalist.
You could put it that way.
With influence from Kant through Coleridge and people like that.
So it's a drift in American philosophy to become what we call Transcendentalist.
Nietzsche really admired Emerson.
Nietzsche lives later in time.
He's looking back.
And okay, so here's me.
I've thrown myself in on much older than that now.
That's my high school yearbook picture.
And this gentleman is Sam Lanahan.
And he turns out to be the grandson of Zelda and F. Scott Fitzgerald.
But he was really into tensegrity and stuff.
The buck he was into and actually went as a personal escort or sort of gopher,
chaperone, somebody to hang with when they went to the Philippines that time
as a guest of the Marcos family to Manila.
Fuller is flying around the world a lot by the time he's this age in this picture.
And the coincidence there, an interesting coincidence,
is I would have been a high school student in Manila right about that same time.
But I wasn't really tracking bucky then.
I hadn't gone to Princeton yet and therefore I hadn't read my Wittgenstein yet
and I didn't really get into the bucky stuff until after that anyway.
But I just wanted to give a little bit of my history and then comes that same slide
of Apooyte again.
And here we've got bucky with Ezra Pound towards the end of his life.
And if you know about Ezra Pound and his story,
he really felt he'd taken a wrong turn a few times because he ended up in prison, right?
He was put in a mental hospital for 11 years for the stuff he was saying on Italian radio
during World War II.
And he's like, well, if I'd been America, you would let me say it because I would have been protected.
But because I'm in Italy, a lot of people wanted him shot, right?
It was a very controversial time.
So I'm just taking you back to an older time that probably you don't know about,
forgotten about, whatever.
But Ezra Pound was very supportive of James Joyce,
this guy in the middle, Hugh Canary, he's a James Joyce scholar,
and kind of Fuller's crowd in a way.
Hugh kind of wrote a biography of Fuller.
So I'm trying to put Fuller in a literary circle instead of a science physics circle,
even though he totally admired Einstein, really looked up to Einstein,
want to get to that relationship in a minute.
And here we have Applewhite and Fuller in a famous picture on the right,
the Swab, Applewhite, and that's Donald Coxer in the middle.
I don't have his picture labeled or anything.
And this is Jeffrey Hinton on the left,
considered the father of machine learning by some,
the guy who quit Google not so long ago to warn us of the dangers of AI.
Both of these guys are from the University of Toronto in Canada.
Canada plays a really strong role in development of machine learning,
et cetera, artificial intelligence.
Sometimes I play up.
In fact, right now I'll play up kind of the tension then between this sort of imperialist American
minister Fuller, who has a patent on the geodesic dome and MC Escher's son,
who's immigrated to Canada and is thinking he wants to get into the dome business.
Now, where do I get the story?
It's from a published book by Siobhan Roberts called The King of Infinite Space,
and it's about Donald Coxeter.
He's also written a more recent bio of John Conway.
But in that Coxeter book, she talks about how Coxeter was living, angry.
When he found out that MC Escher's son was being frustrated about getting into the ray dome business,
in other words, building those domes across the Arctic Circle,
like smart young engineer maybe wants to get into that.
Oh, but the Pentagon buys all its bucky domes from bucky.
All those geodesic domes, there's a patent on that.
And Coxeter's like, how do you patent the geometry of nature?
You know, this stuff occurs naturally.
Geodesic domes, you can find them everywhere in nature.
And here's some American ego guy in the Pentagon who thinks he owns geodesic domes,
and he's not going to let MC Escher.
So, Coxeter develops a view of Fuller that he might not like Fuller.
And I'm saying this relationship evolves over time.
By the time Coxeter sees the Montreal Pavilion in 1967, he feels better about bucky.
It's like this really is beautiful architecture and this is a message of world peace and all this kind of stuff.
And their relationship continues to evolve.
But I'll never say it was very comfortable.
But I also want to say for the record that let me get to this important slide.
I'm going forward now through all this.
See, the content of Synergetics, just to alert you to that, is very geometric.
So, I'm calling it a philosophical work in the humanities.
I'm circling all that kind of stuff, as you've seen.
But then when we actually start looking at the pictures, at the figures, it's all very geometric, right?
And just what it's about is it's saying, I'd really like this tetrahedron embedded inside a cube to be my unit of volume.
I'd really like that.
But this is never going to happen because the cube we're embedded in is second root of two on the edge.
So, obviously, the whole volume of this cube is second root of two to the third power.
That's the volume of the cube.
And there's a well-known theorem that the tetrahedron inscribed in a cube is a third the volume of that cube, right?
That's just general proof to knowledge and geometry.
So, if you're ever going to have that tetrahedron be volume one, the cube has to have volume three.
And it clearly doesn't because the edges are second root of two and second root of two to the third power is second root of two to the third power.
It's some crazy irrational numbers.
So, what are you talking about, Mr. Buckingford?
Well, he's saying, I'm going to change the meaning of third and second power.
It's a growing tetrahedron that grows one eight twenty seven sixty four over here.
And so, when you raise something to the third power, picture a growing tetrahedron at that point.
And so, I'm going to grow my tetrahedron, this one inside here using this alternative model.
And therefore, my cube is going to have a different volume.
It's not going to be, we're no longer going to use the right angle to determine what we mean by third power.
And so, here you see a quote where he's saying school people all think of length, breadth and height as these three separate things.
Like, oh, I can imagine height without widths.
Oh, there's widths, no height.
Okay, swap them.
Okay, now there's height.
You know, what's the difference?
You really imagine them separately and floor is saying, no, let's not do that.
Let's just have one space to rule them all and let's have the tetrahedron be its icon and not the cube.
And it has four faces, very four, very pronounced four.
You can get three out of it by drawing z's along the edges and stuff.
One, two, three, you get a z.
Two z's make a tetrahedron.
There's your three dimensional intuition, but really, instead of going with the cube people, let's just start over, start fresh.
And have our tetrahedron be 40.
So when you come to synergetics, it's kind of like you're in search of the fourth dimension, but you're thinking 3d plus one, where's the fourth?
And in this world, you say, here's all four.
This is a four dimensional space, but you just can't keep your other three.
You're trading your car in for another car.
You're one, two, three, whatever, that's gone.
It's all 40.
It's all tetrahedron all the way down.
Everything's a tetrahedron, right?
That doesn't bring time into it.
We've got to have rotation.
We've got to have change.
But kind of an aesthetic sense.
When you do that, when your tetrahedron's unit volume, you're octahedron with the same edge length as volume four.
You're space filling rhombic donut and you're in this volume six.
Now that's with the long diagonal of each face.
The diamond faces, 12 of them.
They have long and short diagonals, crisscross, long diagonal, same as the edge of the tetrahedron volume six.
Now these ratios are all there in XYZ.
We're not changing the math.
These ratios are there, but they're not teased out because our unit volume is the cube.
And the cube does not play well with others compared to tetrahedron.
And there is the cube volume three.
So we have a different meaning of powering.
We have an alternative.
It's very alien.
So I call this Martian math sometimes when I teach it to kids.
So you just have a Martian saying, you never learned this in school, right?
But check it out.
So now that the tetrahedron is volume one, we can section it up to fractional tetrahedron.
There's one called the A module.
And then there's another one called the B module that sits on top of the A module.
And those two together, if you take the left and right A and add a left or right B,
you can make what's called the mite, which is a space spilling tetrahedron.
And you may have heard that tetrahedron don't fill space.
Well, that's true of the regular tetrahedron, but the various irregular tetrahedron do fill space.
And this is where Fuller overlaps with, I would say, everyday conventional math.
On the left side is a page out of a math journal, Journal of Pominentorial Theory.
And this is about, these are the plain nets of tetrahedron that do in fact fill space.
And along the bottom there are the names they would have if we were in the namespace of synergetics.
And the edges all match because edges don't tell you, I mean, you can expand it.
The shape is all that really matters here.
Okay, so the last thing back to the Quadrate coordinates is how do we support this intuition that space is four-dimensional with something like the XYZ coordinates.
So imagine you're in high school.
I'm talking to you and you've just learned a lot about XYZ.
I show you this jack.
You say, yeah, that's what we've been learning about the XYZ coordinate system.
Looks like a jack.
It's got the positive and negative of each of those three number lines, blah, blah.
And what we're using now over on the right is the Caltrop.
Instead, in a way, you see it's more economical.
The Scott Fewer spokes, after all, right?
I mean, everyone wants to say three-dimensional is the simplest world.
But when you look at the apparatus that comes with the XYZ, it's not as simple as the Caltrop.
So, you know, let's at least question it.
Let's take it out and check it out.
Let's go further.
So the thing is we can build the XYZ coordinates from the Quadrates.
It's not an either or a thing.
And that's the important aspect of all of this is that synergetics does not negate the old normal way of thinking.
XYZ is here to stay.
We're always going to have that.
I'd call it the Mahayana of math, the Hilbert space math, Euclidean math, the E that I talked about back in the beginning here.
So where are we in my talk, Quadrates?
I have Quadrates implemented in Python.
So students can download them and play with them interactively.
What that looks like using today's technology is something called Jupyter notebooks.
So here's like the source code for Quadrates.
And you have also source code for Tetraedrons, right?
I can express the vertices of Tetraedrons using Quadrate coordinates if I like.
Or I can convert back to XYZ doesn't matter.
Either way, I have lengths like distances and those are the same between XYZ and IBM coordinates.
But I changed how I compute volume because as you saw, my third powering is no longer your third powering.
When I say your, I mean XYZ people, you XYZ people, you use a cube to say third powering and you always say three cubes.
You don't stop to think that that could have been a Tetraedron at some point in history.
It's too late now.
Let's say synergetics will never be popular because we've already made our choice.
Let's put it that way.
But had we gone this route, what would it have been like?
What would the math have been like?
That's an interesting question to ask.
And so we changed the way we compute volume.
I'll show you quickly.
I take a well-known formula from history and one that's not known at all.
This guy named Piero della Francesca in the 1400s.
Just give me the six lengths of a Tetraedron and I'll give you back the volume through this complicated computation I'll do.
Just give me the lengths.
I'll give you the volume.
Same deal from Cayley Manger.
That's our same Manger.
This uses a determinant.
And same deal from Gerald DeJean, except nobody knows about this one and he's lost his derivation.
But I used it for years.
So I have these three different ways of taking the six edges of a Tetraedron and returning the volume in what are called Tetra volumes.
So we're no longer using unit cubes when we talk about what is the volume of X or Y or shape A and shape B.
We're talking about the Tetra volumes thereof.
So this slide deck is all about quadrates.
And they're used.
So this I'll leave it this picture and see if there's questions at this point.
So here.
Here we are using quadrate coordinates in the isotropic vector matrix, which has kind of a scaffolding role just like XYZ does.
And I'm saying two times two times five equals 20.
What do I mean by that?
I just take the tips of those three vectors two times two times five and close the lid.
I just, you know, add the fourth base and say that volume is equal to 20 of those little unit Tetraedrons.
Now you'll notice this whole scaffolding is not solely made of unit Tetraedrons.
It's a combination of Tetraedrons and octahedrons.
So I patented as the octet truss.
Again, the Imperial American patenting the geometry of nature, how dare he.
But what he was trying to show was, hey, I'm being pretty effective here.
My life to helping people.
And wow, I'm getting all these patents.
Wow, look at me.
I'm pretty cool.
So there's his side of it there too.
As to why he was so always trying to take credit for his thoughts because he was trying to prove a point, which is if you commit your life the way he did to serving all humanity.
And that's why he was different as a cold warrior.
He never really took the side of either the Russians or the Americans.
He's like, let me show you both how you can improve things.
And so, you know, that's a positive futurism.
He was a positive futurist.
And those are in high demand.
So to get real sophisticated, because you guys are math people, if you take a determinant, you just take the quadrace of four points in space.
So remember quadrace.
I don't think it's a Hilbert space because there's no right angles to the coordinates.
There's four tuples.
You lie them side down.
You lie them down the four coordinates, the four positions of any tetrahedron.
These are the four vertices of any tetrahedron.
Compute this determinant.
Take one fourth of that and you get your IBM volume, your tetrahedral volume of that state.
And interestingly, and I demonstrate this in Python for my high school audience.
If you pick any four spheres in a closest packed beer ocean, the IBM, pick any four spheres at random, connect them with the six edges and ask for the tetrahedron volume.
You always get a whole number.
Interesting.
And this slide I'm showing out.
Once you understand about quadrace, you can input the corners of what we call the A module shown in this picture.
There's the B module as quadrace, like the vertices are entered as quadrace.
And then we feed it to the formula I just showed you.
It constructs that determinant and computes the volume.
But the volume comes out what?
One twenty fourth because our unit of volume again is a tetrahedron.
You got to live in a world where the cube of unit edges does not have a rational volume.
Oh my God.
Oh my God.
So my view is, as a liberal Wittgenstein kind of guy, both these worlds coexist, namespaces coexist.
It's not a big deal that floors over here on the side with his subculture, evolving this whole different way of thinking and talking.
They use as a lot of the same words.
Because in the end, we all want to use the same words.
You'll find philosophers who say things like, if you don't mean what I mean by gravity B, then you should be saying schmavity, right?
We get to use the real word, right?
But what I'm saying in my slides here is we all want to use the word vector.
So what I have this little acronym is like everyone wants to rule the world.
None of us want to deny ourselves access to these key words.
And the way we solve that in Python is we create what are called namespaces.
They solved it in Java as well.
But it's a way to create sandboxes where we all get to use the same words, but we don't have to mean the same thing.
There's no one namespace to rule them all.
We didn't need that.
We don't have it.
Okay.
That ends my talk.
So in a way, y'all can ask anything.
I got the Cheshire cat in there.
The thing about dimensions is when we say they don't exist independently of each other, that's kind of the critique going back to that slide.
We're saying you can't have heights without depth.
Like, can you?
I mean, the book Flatland has been very, very, very influential and we convince ourselves that we can be two-dimensional in that.
But what is that really like?
Aren't you looking down?
If you're looking down on a square, you're in space.
You're looking down on a piece of paper.
So forget that.
You can't actually collapse what I call res extensa into two dimensions experientially.
This is what Fuller is saying.
Once.
And if you start from there, how does it get to be three and not four?
And so for it's an odd to feel that somebody would debate you that when you say space is three-dimensional, what we're used to is take that for granted.
We learned that in elementary school.
And now you have adults coming in the room and saying, well, we're going to say four-dimensional because we like to touch region more than the cube.
It's like, well, that's weird.
I'm not used to that.
But I would say, therefore, make it seem like an Asian thing.
I use a Sanskrit here, dependent origination.
All the dimensions are there at once.
You can't have one without the others.
There's no height without breadth.
Anyway, that's kind of the rhetoric you want to sample.
And what I'm saying is you don't have to give up on any of these.
You can always switch between them.
None of them are going anywhere.
Which is right?
Which camp am I in?
Do I have to be a champion of one or the other?
It's no.
I'd use machine learning.
I love the 3D stuff.
I teach that stuff.
So these are the three namespaces I'm talking about.
And just to recap the relationships.
Fuller really admired Einstein and wanted to write a book about Einstein.
Call it Nine Chases of the Moon.
And this is early.
Before the atomic bombs is before Oppenheimer.
And Einstein, everyone's endeared with this Einstein guy, including Fuller,
but it doesn't have the ominousness yet.
And Fuller writes kind of a lighthearted book called Nine Chases of the Moon,
which got Arthur C. Clark's attention at some point.
And they say to Fuller, look, you're nobody.
What are you writing about Einstein?
You've got to be a genius to write about Einstein.
There's about five people in the world who are allowed to write about Einstein.
Who do you think you are?
So Fuller took the, not to be so easily discouraged,
he sent his manuscript to Einstein.
And he got a call and he gets to go to Einstein.
And there's this play about Bucky Fuller.
It's a monologue play.
One actor does the whole thing with the scene where he's ushered in
and he gets to sit down with Einstein.
It's like Fuller is starstruck.
And Einstein is like, young man, you surprised me.
I never thought there'd be anything like practical or interesting to say about my work.
You know, in the everyday world.
But here you've shown blah, blah, and you have my blessing.
So Fuller got to be on the list of people who could write those kind of books.
It's not very technical.
It's, you know, Nine Chases of the Moon.
He admitted later he was drinking a lot of time when he wrote that.
But it's a really pretty interesting book.
So the relationship between Coxeter and Einstein.
I'm saying, given three people here, let's get to the relationships.
Coxeter is at pains in this quote to say, my way of doing 4D, extended Euclideanism,
is not the same as Einstein's.
Let's not confuse them.
And I don't think enough is done to help Coxeter make this point.
A lot of people would not identify extended Euclideanism with Coxeter in particular.
I mainly do that because University of Toronto,
but also because Fuller dedicates his synergetics to Coxeter.
So I've used that in my shot talk to use the name Coxeter is to stand for Gilbert space,
Euclidean extended Euclidean, any number of dimensions, whatever, ND geometry.
And he's saying this is not the same as what Einstein is doing with Minkowski space stuff like that.
So he's eager to make the distinction.
And what I'm saying is once you take him at his word that those two are different,
then you've realized that 4D can appear in these two whole different namespaces
and mean completely different things.
And that can be very confusing to a layperson if they've not encountered the doctrine of namespaces.
Now, thankfully, they're learning Python in droves.
It's getting easier for people to tease apart the fact that when I say vector or God or something,
it may not be in the same namespace as we're used to.
And then so once I've got room for two, it's easier to wedge in Fuller and say,
yeah, but he published late.
People didn't learn about him.
And so that's why he's very obscure.
And so you came to our very elite school in the Silicon Forest where we do teach this stuff.
We kind of make fun of other people who don't, right?
This is my bookshelves as current.
So I just took these pictures recently.
You can see I've got a little bit of category theory there with Chang's book.
You know, I'm studying that language because I kind of want to know how this can be translated into category theory.
The so-called beast modules, B-E-A-S-T, those are just tetrahedral wedges.
I've already shown you the A and the B. This is the S.
The S nestles between the octahedron of volume four and it's contained the icosahedron.
And their 24 S modules added to that icosahedron gives you the octahedron.
Again, this nesting relationship is not new with Bucky.
Bucky is basically saying, don't just throw the polyhedron out on a table unrelated to each other.
Their full didactic value comes from converging them into some kind of nest.
And a lot of people have that insight.
It's not enough to have polyhedra. You want to see how they relate to each other.
So we do that. We have this concentric hierarchy of polyhedra.
So there's the S modules in terms of a plane net.
Again, this is directly from Synergetics.
But when we compute the volume of it, we're not using standard XYZ math.
We're using what I showed you earlier. So there's the links.
And when I get out the volume, it's going to fit in our volumes table.
And we can express that volume.
The volume in the tetra volumes of the S module is five to the negative fifth over two.
So we have a very five based, very interesting.
There's the S module 3D printed by up.
That's S and then edges expanded by five.
So volume up to the third power.
So the beast modules is where we are.
And here's our volumes table overall, right?
So the tetraegrin is one and I'm using very high precision, not just floating points.
And I'm using actual algebraic expressions out on the right.
So our icosahedron is valued differently.
All the volumes have a different value, but there's a constant ratio between them called the Synergetics constant.
So when you go from the XYZ world to the IBM world,
all the changes is somehow the model of third powering.
And then all your volumes shift, but by a constant value.
So it's really very, very simple.
This is not tough stuff.
That's partly why it can fly in and say high school level.
But there might be a way to introduce category theory, let these modules,
these wedges morph into each other.
The A turns into the B.
These A, B, and T, by the way, all have the same volume, one over 24.
And then there's the E and the S.
Those are the four of five modules, tetraegrin wedges that we study.
Once we've absorbed a little paradigm of unit volume, tetraegrin, concentric hierarchy, like that,
then we break the tetraegrin into pieces, shatter some other stuff.
And we get these vocabulary of five basic wedges.
And I kind of showed you how two of them, the A and the B, can be used to make the mites,
which is one of the space-filling tetrahedra, known to conventional XYZ math world,
but by a different name.
Well, it's a lot about nomenclature.
Who dares to call the A module an A module?
And can we call it something else if we're not interested in getting fuller's names?
And in further circulation, we must stop use of A to mean this A module and so forth.
Thank you, Kirby.
Yep.
Shanna or Dean, go for it first.
Dean, go first.
You want me to go?
Okay, yeah, Kirby, just thank you so much for that incredible talk.
Yeah, we could start some categorical, synergetical, you know, bankings.
I had a question.
If you go back to the geometry of lumps slide.
Sure.
Where that was.
Just have to make the right slide that.
Yeah.
I'm almost there.
That one.
Let's see.
More with a systematic character of prime thinkability.
Where's that one?
This one.
Yeah, we have the actual like 1071.00, the kind of fuller slide.
Fuller slide, got it.
Okay.
This one.
Yeah, it says geometry of lumps in the first.
Okay, I got you.
Prime thinkability.
No, you're right on.
Totally good memory.
Very cool.
All right.
No, I know that's not it.
Let's just go one by one.
I can tell you ask it without the thing.
Yeah.
Cool.
Since you're like, you know, fuller expert, I want to ask,
the systematic realization slide where he says all imaging
derives from experience.
So since we're sitting here talking about math art fronts,
I want to know what you think that, what do you think that is?
What you think he's doing with that?
Could you have an image without an experience?
Because he's adding frequency to what he calls the,
you know, mathematical, undemonstrable something.
So just wondering what you, what's your take on all imaging
derives from experience?
Well,
I think if we took away what you couldn't get from experience,
like we can extrapolate from experience.
We like, people say I can experience a perfect circle and then you close
your mind or close your eyes and say, I'm doing it right now.
I'm now picturing a perfect circle.
And it's like, there's no one really there to contradict you
or there's no peer review in that sense.
I'm thinking he means public.
He means we all get our private authority from shared public space.
So if you think you see something that's totally non experiential,
how are you going to communicate it?
And at some point it becomes experiential.
It's like our experience in math is very strong, right?
It's not like we don't feel and sense, right?
So that's experiential too.
So when I say experiential, it's not about discounting other than visualization,
which he associates, by the way, with Euler.
He associates the spatial visual imaginary.
You could call that Eulerian and just for fun to try that on.
And then the visceral, like when you just tactile feel,
like your emotions, you can almost say that he associates with Gibbs,
tactile, vectorial energy flows of that kind of being on a roller coaster.
Visceral sense.
Anyway, just extrapolating.
It's a language, partly why it's two volumes.
And there's also a synergetics dictionary for volumes,
all done with help from Avaloy who would collate everything Bucky said,
because he did have, I would say, kind of unmoored meanings for his words,
not just frequency, not just what you're reading here,
but when he talks about radiation and gravity,
it's like you say, wait a minute, this is your own private language, isn't it?
And in a way, yeah, in a way it is.
That's partly it.
Yeah, Daniel.
Yeah, on that quote, just a few possible active inference connections,
all imaging derives from experience.
So that's kind of like the projective consciousness
or the screen type visualizations that we've been discussing.
And then also the next line, I think points towards cognitive modeling,
because it's saying, you can abstract, you can abstract to negative dimensions,
zero, one, two, three, you can think slash do anything.
However, that experience will be a cognitive systematic situation.
So that's kind of an embodied or a historical approach to math operations,
which is like, yes, a mathematician can imagine an infinitesimal
as the basis of continuity in a line, they can,
and they're not wrong within that namespace world.
However, that is happening on the organism's cognitive interface.
I think because of my Wittgenstein background, again, later Wittgenstein,
it's not required for a term to be meaningful for it to have a reference
so that it actually points to something.
So you can have a language that's chock full of meaning.
And yet it doesn't really point to anything.
And I take my analogy of driving a car.
The steering wheel is as much part of the language game as the signage,
the striped lines, everything about the road.
In fact, where language begins and everything else ends, there is no line.
So it's all just, you know, language, you could say the whole car, everything.
And that's kind of an operational deal of language.
And in that sense, I don't say, well, you know, really the job is to line up
your words with the essence of things.
You know, that's kind of the Western metaphysics is if we dig down deep enough,
we'll find the essence of the word logic or the essence of the word dimension.
And it's our job to find that.
And in the Wittgenstein sense, no, it's our job to create language games
that hold together until they don't, right?
It's like name spaces come and go like sand castles on the beach, right?
It's like, it's not necessary to decide which one is quote true, right?
They're forms of life.
So that's why I'm thinking when I talk about these branches and different uses
of the word dimension and so on, I'm saying, you know, there's friendships here.
Coxeter and Bucky ended up being friends.
Einstein and Bucky admired each other.
I'm sure Coxeter admired Einstein.
There's nothing to keep us as human beings from jumping around between these,
but it's a little difficult to do because of the required gestalt shifts
when you jump from say XYZ apparatus into IVM coordinates
and go from three tuples to four tuples is going to be jarring, right?
But then after a while it gets smooth, right?
I think it helps understand XYZ to jump into quadrace, for example.
I don't see them as, I don't see one as hurting the other.
I see them as two APIs to the same means.
And what I didn't show just real quick is once we are using quadrace,
we can get whole number coordinates for all the spheres and closest packing.
So I start with a nuclear ball.
I do a layer of 12 around it, a layer of 42 around that,
another layer of 92, another layer of 162.
As I grow this outward, creating the CCP,
I can just use 12 permutations of my original basis vectors.
In other words, once you start with a quadrace,
take two of one, one of any other two and none of a third or fourth
and do all 12 permutations of that and you now have the hops you need
to the neighboring spheres around the sphere you're in, the 12 around one.
And linear combinations of those directions, therefore on the right you see
all whole number integer, positive integer addressing for CCP space,
whereas in XYZ we don't have it, it's not that nice.
So there are practical uses for this.
I would say graphic arts people really need to know about the concentric hierarchy.
Adding quadrace, for example, if you just add triples of quadrace,
you get the opposite tetrahedron, right?
You get the inverse intersected dual, the tetrahedron's dual of itself.
You can get the cubes vertices from the quadrace
because you've got the dual tetrahedron.
So those two together make a cube.
Same octetron rhombic data.
In other words, this diagram on the right says it all.
A through Z, all those points can be reached with very simple sums of the quadrace.
And I feel like when we jump into the swimming pool, we come out smarter
and we're better able to understand XYZ as well.
Thank you, Kirby. Dean and Jim.
Well, thanks, Daniel.
I have a question for you around.
It's a bit of a fork from some of the stuff that you have in the slides here.
I'm wondering around the learning aspect of four-dimensional awareness
and understanding and acknowledgement.
There are a lot of relationships out there.
I'm sure I have a relationship with the fish swimming around in the lake in front of my cabin right now,
but I don't necessarily acknowledge that until I bump into them or whatever.
And I think in a lot of learning centers on what we choose to acknowledge
and what we just ignore or it's put in the background, right?
So this isn't a, we're all related.
We're all one kind of thing.
Of course we are, but the learning is in what matters in that particular situation or context
in which we're trying to expand or maybe contract our model, right?
So my question is around the idea that the synergetics forks off of relativity
or still in that relationship forward dimension
and less Bucky the savior and more Bucky the man
by not taking a math or art, i.e. a Cold War side as relationship,
was Bucky a bit of a turd-disturber?
What was that? A turd-disturber?
Yeah, I'm trying to be, I'm trying to be polite, Kirby.
I think he was a maverick and he did stir the pot and he was controversial
and he caused a lot of, still to this day, all kinds of controversy swirling around fuller.
I think the only way to explain why something as straightforward and interesting as I just went through
is so esoteric and unknown has to be more than just, oh, I'm going to ignore it.
I think no, I'm going to actively suppress it.
I'm not saying you, I'm just saying Fuller felt this himself that he was going to be forgotten in a hurry
and I think it was partly because of that way he played the Cold War.
He was not taking sides and that doesn't make you popular even today, right?
So he had enemies, detractors.
And like Kenneth Snelson, if you're into the lore, you know, about that rival where he just real quick,
I think people need to deal with my story more and I've got, you know, I've got, this could seem self-serving,
but I get more into where I put myself in the picture here.
Kaufman, Rorty, stuff like that, bits into Bucky stuff.
I'm saying I was Kenneth Snelson's first webmaster.
I was also the Buckmaster Fuller's first webmaster.
So like here we are in the next generation.
If you want to write about another book about synergetics, you should talk to me, right?
Because there's all these books coming out still where they don't even mention the beast modules.
And my feeling is the boomers skipped Bucky.
Like they went to his lectures and they applauded and, oh, nice pat on the head, you're a good guy.
You want the world to be a better place, but we're not going to pay any attention to the mathematics.
And I'm one of the boomers, but I'm telling downline generations.
I think my fellow boomers made a mistake.
This was worth keeping.
And I think my downliners get that.
So this art by Casey House is not by me, but we're going to have a good culture.
Cultural renaissance as people recover the damage done by the boomers.
So can I just do a quick follow up?
Of course, you're looking at things as math art and we are not picking sides.
Should we anticipate that there are going to be a whole bunch of people out there who are going to bounce on this and hate?
No.
No, I don't think I think we're past that now.
That might have been true at one point, but I don't think we're in that time.
I think this stuff will smoothly gain traction.
But in general, though, I do think art isn't neutral.
In other words, propagandists on all sides use the tools of art to persuade art as a tool of persuasion, as well as just isn't this pretty.
So, you know, I pay attention to that.
But I think Fuller's stuff right now is in good shape.
Like we're not worried, right?
Maybe at one point.
But this stuff, you know, I get to teach this.
I'm online a lot.
People love it.
It's like I'm not having much push back.
So if that answers it all, like I'm not encountering any vicious anger.
Myself.
As I push forward.
Seems like the coast is clear.
Come on in the water is fine.
And we need more math talent or art talent.
Like Casey House here.
I can't do anything quite this pretty.
My animations.
It's not like it's just me, but like I sense a lack of good computer graphics still around a lot of this stuff.
So I'm recruiting.
I'm just trying to make sure that I'm in good shape mode.
Hey, if you're listening and you want to help bring your art skills over here and help us, that kind of thing.
Keep our 4D alive in this lineage, right?
I love all of these.
They're all good.
I didn't put S ahead for any reason.
I wasn't trying to mean anything.
Just trying to make room here.
And I'm not saying these are the only branches or anything like that.
Just saying here's a triangle we can make.
You can forget about synergetics.
It's not important if you want to take, there'll be enough people.
So if you don't want to jump on the boat, don't feel coerced is another message while I have the floor.
Thank you.
Again, it's not either or I'm a teacher of ordinary XYZ math a lot, right?
As a calculus teacher.
So quickly, like I grew up in Portland, Oregon, my dad's an urban planner.
But he always wants to work overseas, not in the highly developed first world, so to speak.
He's trained as a PhD planner at the University of Chicago, wants to work overseas and quote developing countries.
So even though we were settling down in Portland, Oregon for a cushy middle class lifestyle, when the call came, how'd you like to work in Libya?
He's like, yeah, that's what I'm for.
Let's go.
Now that turned out to be cushy anyway, because the family gets to live in Italy and Rome.
So I grew up in Rome through eighth grade, go to high school in the Philippines, go to Princeton East Coast for a while.
And now I'm back in Portland, Oregon.
So I'm kind of expat.
And my dad was freelance.
So sometimes he worked for the US government and sometimes not.
He was on the payroll of the Egyptians when they lived in Cairo for years.
So after I left the family ship, as I say, they were in the Philippines, I go to Princeton, they keep moving around.
So my parents live in Cairo for many years.
They end up in Bhutan in the Himalayas.
And I go stay with them there for many years.
So I have an interesting bio.
I play that card like I want people to use my like we use Bucky's life.
Bucky knew a lot of people.
He was very gregarious.
And he didn't mind writing letters to whoever.
So a new book about Bucky called Inventor of the Future by Alec Navalou Lee.
I see we're about at time here.
So let me just end.
It's a really good bio.
And Alec is kind of a skeptic.
He's not an acolyte.
He's not doing hagiography for Bucky.
This book is a skeptical look at Bucky.
And I think that's fine.
What it really shows, though, is how you can use this life as a guidebook to the 20th century.
And a lot of intellectual history will unfold.
So I guess what I'm saying is I thank the mathematicians for looking in on what we're doing.
But a lot of what I'm doing here is prepping kids in American history.
Right. They need to know transcendentalists, how it goes towards Bucky and, you know, all this stuff's literature.
Whether you get it in math class or not.
But I'd like you to get it in math class.
And I'd like math class to use Python.
Because I don't think we should be teaching math without a computer.
But that's just me.
I have a whole other stick on that.
Thank you, Kirby.
Jim, last question.
Thanks, Kirby, for the talk.
And I want to ask you a question.
So if tetrahedron is the basis unit for our 4D system,
then what do you think the 5D system will be?
Or even higher dimension?
That's a great question.
In Fuller's own synergetics, and this is partly why I say he branches off Einstein more than off of Coxeter
or off of extended Euclideanism,
is Fuller immediately turns to talk of time.
When he considers fifth dimension, sixth dimension,
he does want the word dimension to continue to do work in his synergetics.
And he's got lots of passages using that word.
At one point, though, there's a passage where he says,
this word dimension I'm paraphrasing is just too slippery.
I'm not going to use it anymore.
I'm going to use the word power.
And then he starts doing stuff with power right after that.
And that's a very interesting passage.
But he has what I call New Year's resolutions in his writing where he resolves pounds of table.
I'm never going to say polyhedron again.
It's going to be polyvertexion from now on.
Yeah, right.
New Year's resolution.
But your question is, tell me again if the tetrahedron is the basis.
Yeah, what would be the fifth dimension?
For you guys, let me say you guys in a, I don't mean to box you in,
but as Hilbert space extended Euclideans,
because this is a path you're on.
After this talk, your talks will continue on that path, I think.
What's a 4D tesseract?
In other words, what's a tetrahedron in 4D?
I do the same thing I do with a cube, right?
I draw a smaller one inside a bigger one and connect the corners.
And what do I call that?
If a tesseract is a 4D cube, what do I call a 4D tetrahedron?
And why XYZ people isn't that tetrahedron important to you?
In other words, you really into that tesseract.
Why not the tetrahedron and its 4D version?
What does it look like?
Why don't you talk about that more?
Because the tetrahedron is clearly simpler than the cube.
You're way too into the cube.
That's, you know, coming from an alien way out their view.
Thank you, Kirby, Dean, Jim, Shanna.
Been fun.
All right.
I hope you guys all stay in touch and we keep working on this.
We need help.
Thank you.
Thanks, Kirby.
Till Math Art 5.
Thank you.
Thank you.
