as about half of the audience was made up of experts in the field.
And so I know that not all of my audience is maybe suited for this talk,
but I wanted to make sure and start including stuff like this on the channel
because it really fits into my long term philosophy of where I want this channel to go.
So hopefully you'll watch as much of the talk as you want to
and we'll see you in one of the other videos soon.
Thanks for having me give a talk.
Okay.
So like she said, I'm going to be talking about vertex operator algebras,
maybe the definitions and the notion of VOAs at the first half
and then some results involving permutation vertex operator algebras,
permutation orbifolds at the end.
As we'll see like permutation orbifolds are kind of a natural thing to look at
for any class of vertex operator algebras.
So here's a little bit of background.
So some motivation for vertex algebras came from construction of affinely algebras,
you know, by Lepofkin-Wilson, Frankel-Caxx, the moonshine module and the monster.
So that was a great book by Frankel-Lepofkin-Worman
and the two-dimensional conformal field theory and physics.
And so axiomatization of vertex operators in physics literature
led to the definition of a vertex algebra by Borchards around 1988,
which earned him the Fields Medal years later
for, like I said, proving the moonshine conjecture.
So we can view vertex algebras as some generalization of a Lie algebra,
although there's going to be a little bit of a joke about that later
and also kind of a simultaneous generalization of a commutative associative algebra.
Could like have some analytic notion as the sowing of Riemann spheres
and then also we could have some sort of geometric notion
in terms of this meromorphic part of two-dimensional conformal field theory.
Okay, so let's start simple so that maybe like we don't lose it anyone at all
in the first couple of slides.
So we'll first start talking about associative algebras
and we'll use our field to be just the complex numbers.
So an associative C algebra is a ring which also has the structure of a vector space.
So maybe a standard example that you would teach students
in an introductory linear algebra class, but you wouldn't call it an associative algebra
would be end-by-end matrices with complex entries or real entries,
really whatever field you want.
This is obviously not commutative.
We could look at polynomials in indeterminate x and coefficients in C.
So this would be an example of a commutative associative algebra.
Maybe this infinite polynomial ring.
So we've got infinitely many variables x naught, x1, x2, so on and so forth.
So this is actually a really good model as we'll see for a commutative vertex algebra later.
And so like I said, this is commutative.
Maybe we could look at the group algebra.
So fix some group and then we could look at the group algebra over C.
And so obviously the commutativity of this depends on the commutativity of the group.
And then you could also maybe look at the path algebra of a quiver.
I don't know a ton about quivers, but obviously the commutativity of that will
depend on whatever quiver you're working with.
And then next, often you want to attach a certain map to an associative algebra
known as a derivation.
And so let's say we've got a linear map B from an algebra to itself.
It's called a derivation if it satisfies this thing that looks a lot like
the product rule from calculus one.
And so since it looks like the product rule from calculus one, like a standard
example of a derivation would be just taking the derivative of polynomials
with coefficients in C.
Or maybe a better example for our purposes later would be this derivation
defined on our infinite variable polynomial ring, which takes xi to xi
plus one.
So it would take like x1 to x2, x5 to x6, and so on and so forth.
And as you can see, like we can just extend that.
So it's a derivation.
So it's defined by this property and then extended.
So it's a derivation.
So it has this sort of action on this quadratic term.
And then maybe another nice example that you could give to students in like a
linear algebra class would be if you fix an n by n matrix, you could define a
derivation out of that matrix as like the commutator with that matrix.
So we've got ax minus xa.
Okay.
So next moving on from associative algebras, we should look at the notion of a
linear algebra.
So it's a vector space over a field.
Again, we'll take xi together with a binary operation, which we usually denote
by this bracket and it satisfies, you know, some rules, but maybe the most important
are that if you bracket any element with itself, you get zero.
So this is like some sort of alternating condition.
And then we have this condition down here, which is called the Jacobi identity.
And it has to do with the lack of associativity of this algebra.
So it's like measuring how far away from being associated if it is.
So what are some examples of we algebra?
Well, a standard one from a multivariable calculus class would be a three
dimensional real vectors with the cross product.
So checking that Jacobi identity is a nice homework problem or maybe n by n
matrices with commutator.
So that would be nice linear algebra problem.
Or you could look at the set of derivations of this Laurent polynomial ring.
So this has a special name called the wit algebra.
And as, you know, a lot of you guys are probably familiar with the central
extension of this is quite important for VOAs.
Okay.
So here's the idea of a vertex algebra before we get to the careful definition.
So we can think of it as a vector space together with infinitely many multiplications
indexed by the integers.
So the negative products between vectors generalize the multiplication found
in commutative associative algebras, whereas the non-negative products
between the vectors generalize Lie brackets.
So I think of it with like this picture.
Oh yeah.
And one more thing, there's a derivation that links these products.
So I like to think of it with this picture, which isn't perfect, but it kind of
like gives you the right idea.
And so down here, we've got a sub minus one B.
Let's say A and B are two elements from the vertex algebra.
So this is like as close to being a commutative associative product as you
can get within the algebra.
And then a zero B is almost a Lie bracket structure.
And in fact, you can easily mod out by something so that you actually do get
a commutative associative product and a Lie bracket product, but we won't
really talk about that.
And then as you move up in this direction, you just generalize the Lie
bracket more.
So like A sub one B is generalized Lie bracket and this is more generalized.
And as you move down, you're generalizing this commutative associative product.
And then we've got this derivation, which you could call D or T.
Sometimes it's called the translation operator, which takes you sort of
between these levels.
So it's not true that if you apply T to this guy right here, you get this guy
right here, but it's just kind of a general picture.
Okay.
So now we'll look at a definition for a vertex algebra and we'll start with
the parts.
So a vertex algebra is a vector space together with a special vector, which
is called the vacuum, which we'll denote by this bolded one.
And then we have a linear map, which is called the vertex operator going
from V to the space of formal Laurent series with coefficients and the
endomorphisms of V.
So this V sub N is an endomorphism of V.
But really what we want to think about is this V sub N attacking another
vector is the ints product between V and that other vector.
So we're thinking about it as a linear map instead of a multiplication, but
you know, algebraically, those are the same idea.
Okay.
And then we also have this linear map, which like I said before is the
derivative operator or like the translation operator and that takes V to
V minus two one.
So that would be like the negative second product of V with the vacuum.
And then we have some axioms that this structure needs to satisfy.
So if you plug this vacuum vector into the vertex operator, you get just the
identity on the vector space.
So this is equivalent to saying that the negative first multiplication is the
identity operator, but then all other products involving this vacuum are just
zero.
And then next we have this axiom called the creation axiom, which says that
if you attack the vacuum with the negative first multiplication of V, you
re-achieve V.
And then if you attack the vacuum with a non-negative mode of V, you get zero.
So it's like raising you past sort of the vacuum level.
And so, you know, that's if and only if this same statement involving vertex
operators.
So notice we've got this vertex operator hitting the vacuum.
And so the constant term of this vertex operator is the minus first
multiplication.
So that gives us the vector.
And then after that, you have like a formal power series.
You don't have any negative powers of the anymore.
Okay.
Then next we've got this thing called the truncation axiom, which says that
there is a natural number attached to any two vectors so that if you multiply
them at a level above that natural number, you get zero.
And so again, there's an equivalent formulation of that in terms of the
vertex operators, which we could also write down.
And then that number also plays the role for this thing called locality or
weak commutativity.
So over here, this is saying that these vertex operators do not commute,
but they commute up to multiplying by this power of z minus w.
And then one last thing, the translation operator and the vertex operator interact
as follows.
So their commutator is just the derivative of the vertex operator.
Okay.
So I asked Richard Borchard to make a video about the history of vertex
algorithms for my YouTube channel.
And he said yes, and it got 17,000 views, which might be more people
knowing about vertex algorithms than ever did in the past.
And in that video, he said a lot of misconceptions, which will go against
things that I said on the last couple of slides.
But I found it interesting that he said these misconceptions.
Oh, and by the way, he has a YouTube channel too, where he posts like
algebraic geometry and lead groups and stuff like that.
Anyway, the whole weird thing.
Okay.
So this is straight from him when he made this video.
So vertex algebras are not defined as vector spaces over a field,
but instead as modules.
I think he probably means that vertex algebras are modules of some rings
with additional structure.
And so I think I don't remember the name for it at this moment, but I
think this kind of object is studied, but more recently, it's called
something slightly different.
It's not called a vertex algebra.
It's called like an integral something of a vertex algebra.
I don't remember the exact wording, but originally he didn't require them
to be vector spaces.
And then second is that vertex algebras were not motivated by two-dimensional
conformal field theory or the monster.
And direct contradiction to my first slide.
These applications were quickly noticed by others and his original
motivation was the Lee algebra of the leach lattice.
And then finally, vertex algebras are not generalizations of Lee
algebras, again, contradicting something that I said earlier, but instead
generalizations of commutative rings where there are poles in the multiplication.
So I think, you know, most people would consider vertex algebras as some
sort of generalization of a Lee algebra.
So I find this like third one quite interesting that he won't, but that's
kind of neither here nor there.
Okay, so let's look at a simple example.
So this is, like I said, maybe the simplest example of a vertex algebra.
It is a commutative vertex algebra.
So let's consider a polynomial algebra that's pretty similar to one we
looked at before.
We have infinitely many variables, but now we'll index them by negative
integers just to put it more in line with the notation that we used before.
And then we've got this map T, which is a derivation and it satisfies the rule
if it hits this monomial x minus n, we get n and then x, well, that should
be minus n minus one.
So there's a little bit of a typo there.
And then we can extend this as a derivation, like I said, and we can
define the minus n minus first product between two polynomials like this.
So we apply the derivation in times to the first polynomial and then we
do normal polynomial multiplication with the second polynomial.
And then we have a pretty simple example here.
So if we take the negative second multiplication of this quadratic term
with any polynomial, it like shakes out to be this object right here.
So notice we like subtracted one from this, making it x to minus two.
And then we subtracted one from this, making it x to minus three, like one
at a time.
And then all non-negative products are zero.
So that's one property of like a commutative vertex algebra that the
non-negative products will always be zero.
Okay, so next we'll look at maybe the simplest non-commutative example,
which would maybe be the Heisenberg vertex algebra, which is the algebra
of one free boson.
So we'll look at like a classic construction for this algebra first.
So let's consider a one dimensional vector space with basis vector alpha.
We'll call it like this fancy H and we'll view it as an Abelian Lie algebra.
So the bracket is trivial and then we form the associated affine Lie algebra.
So we'll call it H hat.
So it'll be H tensored with Laurent polynomials and then plus this central
element, which I didn't notice that this K is a central element, but I'll
just say it in words.
And then the bracket between elements in H hat is given as follows.
So alpha m and alpha n will give you m, this chronicle delta m plus n,
zero K, where that's like our central vector.
So this is zero if m plus n is zero and sorry, it's one if m plus n is zero
and it's zero otherwise.
And here we're noting that alpha r is really alpha tensor t to the r just to
make the notation a little simpler.
Okay, then next we take a one dimensional representation of like the non
negative part of that.
So that would be all of the polynomials.
So not the Laurent polynomials, but just the polynomials and then this
central term.
And so we'll have this alpha n act on this vector, which we'll call one.
So it looks like the vacuum vector.
We'll let that be zero for all n bigger than or equal to zero and we'll
have K act as just the number one really can act as any complex number.
You really want it to be a nonzero complex number.
Otherwise you're just back at the commuter of algebra on the last slide.
And the next will form this induced module.
So, I mean, this we're kind of getting into fancy stuff here.
So you take the universal enveloping algebra that should be a hat.
I'm missing a hat there of h hat and you tensor it over this universal
enveloping algebra with our one dimensional representation.
So this has the structure of a vertex algebra where it's generated by a
single vector alpha and the vertex operator of that single vector alpha
will denote by alpha of Z, which is the sum over all integers of alpha and
Z to the minus n minus one.
So there we've got our vertex operator attached to the generator of our
vertex algebra.
And so maybe like the classic correct way to construct it, but
how do you like actually think about it intuitively?
I mean, maybe I'm a simpleton or whatever.
So I need to think about things like this, but I think probably everyone
has like their own little trick for thinking about things intuitively.
So the too long didn't read construction of the free boson is that it is
linearly just this polynomial ring and infinitely many variables, those
variables being alpha minus one, alpha minus two, so on and so forth.
And then the action goes like this.
So alpha minus n on a vector is just left multiplication by alpha minus n.
Nice.
And then alpha n on a vector is this partial differentiation by alpha, sorry,
by, yeah, that should be an alpha minus n there.
So it's partial derivative by alpha minus n with this extra multiple of
n out front and then alpha zero acts as zero.
So I've got a little example down here, which is super simple.
So notice if we have V, so it comes from the Heisenberg algebra.
So that means linearly it's from this polynomial space.
We'll just take this quadratic term.
If we multiply by the negative second multiplication with alpha, well, we
can just kind of put it in the right order like that.
The commutation relations say that we can commute these things.
If we multiply by alpha, or sorry, if we multiply by the positive third
multiplication with alpha, well, that does a partial derivative with respect
to alpha sub minus three.
So that's going to give us this.
It'll kill this term right here.
Okay, good.
So a big gap left out here is what about the associated versions of the operations?
Like what if we combine some vectors and then want to take one of these
multiplications?
Well, it turns out that those can be constructed via the vertex operators.
So if you take u and v in any vertex algebra and n is a non-negative
integer, then the vertex operator attached to u minus n minus one v is this
one over n factorial.
And this is called the normally ordered product of the formal derivative of
the vertex operator attached to u with v.
And then I just have down here defined what this normally ordered product is.
If you guys haven't seen this before.
So it essentially takes the positive part and the negative part of the first term
splits it into pieces and then arranges it around b like this.
And then again, if we have n bigger than or equal to zero, then y u n v z.
So in other words, the vertex operator attached to u n v is given by this
like commutator thing.
So notice we've got this sum from k equals zero to n.
We've got these binomial coefficients and then this commutator of the case
product with a, sorry, that should be u and v, u and v.
And like I maybe want to point out here that these two equations really give us
some motivation for those non-negative products being generalizations of the
Lie algebra because we've got these brackets here.
You know, and as we move up to a larger and larger n, we've got this sum of more
and more of these brackets.
And then here for these negative products, we have this normally ordered product
with derivatives attached.
So that's kind of as close to being as a commutative associative algebra as you
can get.
Okay, so now we could look at a bigger calculation and I don't know like
if anyone does these calculations more than a couple of times, but you know,
I find it useful to see one of these.
So notice if we take this vector here, so this is alpha minus three alpha minus
one one and we take the negative second multiplication of that with alpha minus
four, then that means we need to take the coefficient of z to the one power
because that's what will be attached to this negative second multiplication
and the vertex operator of the vertex operator of that times like alpha minus
four.
So that involves doing this normally ordered product.
And then you end up extracting all of the correct coefficients and you end up
with these three terms.
So here I've highlighted the beginning and the end.
So I want to point out here that this minus three minus one minus four together
with this two minus one equals nine.
And so somehow these numbers here are related to this number nine, which we
see here and this four plus four plus one, which we see in this term and then
this four plus three plus two, which we see in this term.
So there's some sort of nice appropriate grading that is happening with respect
to these vectors as well as these products between the vectors.
Okay.
So now we're about to turn a quarter maybe I should have slide that things are
about to get out of hand and we'll go a little bit.
So now we'll talk about sources for more vertex algebra.
So we looked at commutative vertex algebra and we looked at the free
boson.
Those are really good ones to get a handle on.
Now we'll talk about some others.
So other things like in the same category as the Heisenberg vertex
algebra or the vertex algebra of one free boson are these things called free
field VOAs, free field vertex operator algebra.
So like I said, the Heisenberg VOA is one of them.
Then we have the free fermion algebra, the beta gamma system and then some
plectic fermion.
So those are all really good examples of simple to understand vertex
algebras.
They are like fairly close to being polynomial rings.
Then we have vertex operator algebra associated with the least super algebras.
So you can take a least super algebra G.
You can find some universal vertex algebra associated to it.
And it has a unique simple quotient.
So we'll denote that by the upper K and L lower K, the universal and the
simple quotient.
We have VOAs associated to the viro-sauro algebra.
So you can start with the viro-sauro algebra, construct universal vertex
algebra associated to that viro-sauro algebra at central charge C.
And then you can take the simple quotient.
So we'll denote that by the viro and L viro.
We have them associated to an integral lattice.
So you can take an integral lattice, do a bunch of fancy stuff to it and
create this lattice vertex algebra VL.
Now, if L is a root lattice of type ADE, then this VL is isomorphic to this
L1G, in other words, this affine vertex algebra up here.
So that's an important result.
A lot of times, if you're looking at the level one simple affine VOA, you'll
look at it in terms of its lattice construction.
Okay.
Some other more exotic sources of VOAs are orbifolds.
So that's the set of fixed points under some automorphism.
So some invariant subalgebra permutation orbifold.
So these are a special class of orbifolds.
So if we take a subgroup of the permutation group and it's acting on
some infold tensor product of VOA, then we could say that that is a
permutation orbifold.
And then finally, you know, they're hot right now, but it takes a lot to
get them these W algebras.
So you start with a least superalgebra and a nilpotent.
You find an SL2 triple associated to that nilpotent.
We'll call it EH and F.
You can decompose that, you know, with the adjoint action of the H, so
like the carton element, then you form some free field VOA associated to
that decomposition and then you like construct this big VOA CGF out of
the affine VOA and this free field part.
And then you have this vertex algebra homomorphism, which I'll call D and
then this W upper K.
GF is the homology of the related complex from this last step here.
And so this is the universal W algebra at level K associated to the
least superalgebra G and the nilpotent F.
So you've got a lot of moving parts there.
And then if we take this K and put it in the subscript, that that's how
we denote the simple quotient.
Okay.
So now let's look at sort of our outline for the rest of the talk.
So when we're talking about permutation, or befolds.
So we'll talk about H3.
So that would be the rank 3 Heisenberg and its invariance under the symmetric
group F3.
And we'll do that.
This is like sort of building towards a project that I'm doing with some
students who I think are here for the next couple of minutes.
They have a class at 130 this summer.
And then we'll also talk about sorry, that should be a two right there.
I don't know where the quality control is here.
So we'll talk about the two fold tensor product of the universal
affine the algebra.
SL2 and it's two permutation or befold and then we'll look at the
case when the level is one and it's three permutation or befold that
will have a nice connection to this W23 algebra, which is the W algebra
attached to SL3 with the principle.
Next we'll look at the two permutation or befolds and the three
permutation or befolds of the Vera soro algebra and that'll have some nice
connections to this universal even spin W algebra with two parameters.
Okay, so now this is like sort of a repeat from the previous slide,
but we can look at it real quickly.
So the rank one Heisenberg algebra will write it a little bit
differently here.
So it's generated by this one vector.
We have its vertex operators given like it was before.
And then we have these commutation relations like we described before
and I want to point out that there's this equivalent notion of operator
product expansion and these commutation relations like are the same as
this operator product expansion, which I won't define or explain why
that's the case at all.
Okay, and then we'll set this H3 equal to the three-fold tensor product
of this rank one Heisenberg with itself.
So we've got three commuting copies of this rank one Heisenberg and
obviously S3 acts on this just by permuting these guys.
So depending on what permutation you have.
So we'll start by diagonalizing the action of one, two, three and that
allows us to push our action of S3 onto H2 from H3.
So it's really like a dihedral group action, which makes this case
like slightly different than all of the other permutation cases for
this Heisenberg setup.
And then we get these sort of starting invariant fields.
So we'll call them this Omega 2 AB and this Omega 3 ABC.
So as you can see under the action of maybe one, two, three and one,
two, that transposition and that three cycle, these two are fixed.
So one, two is going to switch beta one and beta two and one,
two, three will multiply beta one by a third root of unity and beta
two by the square of that third root of unity.
So we're good to go there and then we get something similar here
for this cubic term.
And then by Andy Winshaw, who like sort of popularized or did a lot
of stuff with these invariant theory arguments and VOAs, we only
require these quadratic generators.
So this Omega 2 0 0 up to 0 8.
So that means we don't need any derivatives right here and we just
need 0 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th derivative there.
And then we can get rid of Omega 2 0 6 and Omega 2 0 8 just by
doing like a straightforward calculation that writes it in
terms of like other elements in the orbital better of lower weight.
And so through this process, we can reduce the cubic generating set
to this like Omega 3 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 2, you know, through a similar
process to what went on over here.
So there are these kind of starting base case relations, you know,
like these, I mean, they're just like some heinous equations and
then we can apply some sort of inductive argument to move it all
down with more like general relations.
So like these right here.
Okay.
So all in all, we can reduce the cubic generating set to this and
the quadratic generating set as we did on the previous slide, leaving
us with generators of weight one, two, three, four, five, six, six.
And so that means that this rank three Heisenberg that is invariant
under this S3 action is isomorphic to a rank one and this algebra,
which we'll call W, which is a type two, three, four, five, six, six.
And I think like recently we have found some other algebras of this
type two, three, four, five, six, six of the right central charge.
So it's possible that like pretty quickly we could have some sort of
isomorphism between this algebra, which we're calling W here and
something a little bit more interesting or not more interesting,
but something interesting that's been constructed some other way.
Okay.
And then just to sort of give a shout out to the project that I'll do
with my students, which is really just going to be an extension of this
to rank four Heisenberg, which I think might be actually a little bit
easier because four is equal to two times two and two is a smaller
prime than three.
So I think you can do a lot of like Z two or before done themselves
to look at permutation orbitals of this rank for Heisenberg algebra.
And there's a lot of like little sub projects that we could do here
because S four has more subgroups than S three.
Anyway, this is a game that we're going to play with the students this
summer, which I think will be fun and they'll learn a lot about working
together and being stuck on math problems and the like, which is really important.
Um, we can also have some results about the characters.
So via invariant theory, something similar to the Mullen series or Mullen
theorem from classical invariant theory, we can calculate the character
for this S three orbifold.
So it has these three parts and there are some nice modular invariant
properties of this character given as follows.
So notice we have these like integrals involving the character instead
of sums, which you might have usually.
Okay.
So now I've talked about three or fold in previous talks, but now this
is the first time I've talked about this S two orbifold of this two fold
tensor product of the universal level K SL two algebra.
So this is brand new.
Uh, I think I'm going to make a YouTube chalk talk about it, but I haven't
done that yet.
So we want to consider two commuting copies of the universal VOA associated
to the level K, which is not equal to two.
Um, that's the critical level of SL two.
So we'll denote the generating vectors by H one E one F one H two E two F two.
And so we've got non-trivial OPE given by the following.
And you can think about this in terms of commutation relations too.
If you're psyched, um, so we'll take a general, the same general strategy
that we did before, it's just the calculations are quite a bit more
difficult because we have this parameter K in the mix.
So we diagonalize the action.
So we've got this level two K SL two, which is given by H E and F.
And then we've got this alpha X and Y, which are negated under the generator
for S two.
So that gives us a nice generating set for the orbifold that we can
initially take.
So this S two orbifold will be initially generated by these three fixed
vectors over here, which have the diagonal sub VOA, which is of level two K.
And then apart from that, we have these quadratic generators made
up of the guys that are negated.
So I won't sketch the proof or look at any of the calculations, uh, but we
can reduce this to generators, uh, of the following forms.
So this is one, one, one, six generators of weight two and three generators
of weight three.
And so this is the diagonal SL two.
And then we have these and these coming from the quadratic generators.
And this is only true when K is not equal to eight.
When K is equal to eight, you would get a zero and a denominator
of the lowest weight decoupling relation.
If K is equal to eight, you have to include like a couple of generators
of weight four.
I don't know why K is equal to eight.
I don't know if that's important for anything.
It just happened.
Eight didn't seem to be important for any reason.
Okay.
And then since our generators end at weight three, that means
that there are no singular vectors at weight three, two, or one.
Then the S two permutation orbital of the simple quotients is also
of this type, right?
You can only get rid of some of these generators if we have null vectors
in, you know, the parent algebras.
And that's what we'll look at, you know, right now.
Okay.
So now moving on to the simple quotients.
So instead of taking the twofold tensor product of the universal level K
algebra, we're taking the twofold tensor product of the simple quotients
and doing the permutation orbital of that.
And again, just looking at what's going on in the universal case and
playing around with the null vectors at appropriate level.
We can get the following kind of extra results.
A couple of which are nice and one of which just allows us to get rid
of a couple of vectors.
So if you take the level one, tensor it with itself and do that S two
overfold, you get this simple level two SL two, tensored with this central
charge half simple verisoro.
So that's pretty nice.
If you do the level half case, you get this maybe twofold tensor product
with the beta gamma system, but then orb unfolded by the dihedral group D
four.
So this is like a rank two beta gamma system and then the D four
overfold of that.
So that's interesting like coincidental isomorphism.
And then finally, if you take the minus four thirds level, you can just
get rid of the weight three generators and that's because the minus four
thirds level, you get null vectors at weight three.
Okay.
And so if you move on to the S three orb unfolds, things get a bit more
complicated.
And so we only looked at the case when we have level one and so we could use
some previous results and also the lattice construction.
So like I said, we're the simple level one VOA for SL two, the three-fold
tensor product of that.
So that can be embedded inside of a lattice VOA.
So we've got this like lattice VOA with the alpha one, alpha two and alpha
three, where alpha I, alpha I is two is going to be isomorphic to this
three-fold tensor product.
And then by a previous result involving this lattice VOA, you can decompose
it into the following modules for SL two and modules for the Vera sorrow
given like this.
So this would be like a level three module for them for SL two.
And then this would be, you know, some modules for Vera sorrow.
And then we could collapse those into just this Vera module M and then M prime.
So just collapsing all of those guys.
So it's a little bit simpler.
And so again, these guys showed that the Z three orb unfold was the
simple quotient of W two three with central charge six fifth.
And then from that, we have that the S three orb fold, which is like the Z two
or both of the Z three or the fold will be the Z two or the fold of this W
algebra.
But this W algebra was studied by Andy Linshaw and students Ali, and it
was determined to be of type two, six, eight, 10, 12.
The universal one is at least you can get rid of some of those vectors in this
simple quotient.
I believe you can get rid of the vector 12 in this simple quotient.
Okay.
And then putting that together with the previous result involving the
decomposition of the lattice VOA, we have that the LS three.
So this was like rank three lattice, which is like a diagonal lattice.
All the SL two copies.
So this is like a level three SL two together with this Z two orb a fold of
that W algebra and then direct some with a couple of modules for each.
And then we have a highest weight vector calculated for the modules for each
as described over here.
So it's the orbit sum of this Z tilde vector where this Z tilde is given
like this.
Then finally you get the type in the end for this orb a fold, which is one, one
one and then two, three, six, eight, 10.
Okay.
So now we can move on to permutation orb a fold of your sorrow algebra.
So we'll consider the universal Vera sorrow vertex algebra with central
charge C and so that's generated by conformal vector omega and then generally
you would write LZ if you want to write it as a field for the vertex
operator associated to omega and these component operators are given by
these L ends and they're like a little bit with respect to the grading.
So we've got this Z to the minus and minus two.
So all that pretty standard.
And then we have these standard commutation relations for these operators
and that's equivalent to having the OPE for the field.
And then we could consider like we did before in the Heisenberg case, the
infold tensor product of these universal Vera sorrow algebras with themselves.
And so this is generated by N conformal vectors, which will denote by omega one
up to omega n.
So let's look at the rank two case first.
So we have a total Vera sorrow here of omega one plus omega two.
So it's the sum of the two diagonal conformal vectors and then apart from
that we've got these quadratic operators in the original field.
So we'll call this W M plus four.
So this is going to be L one minus two minus M and L one minus two one
and then the same thing with L two.
And then we'll denote the fields as L Z and W upper K Z.
And together with Anton and Chris Sadowski, we found this S two
overfold of this algebra.
I think it just like recently appeared in Journal of Algebra and so and we
didn't have any make any corrections in the joke was that because it was
like a YouTube fan that was the reader that's neither here nor there.
So it's strongly generated by this Vera Sorrow vector and then W four,
W six and W eight.
So it's type two, four, six, eight, which is important to notice
because those are all just even numbers.
And so that could be attached to some fairly recent result of Linshaw
and Kanad, which we'll see in just a little bit and then at this strange
central charge of 128 over 47.
You've got to include something else.
Okay.
So like I alluded to, there's a fairly recent result of Andy Linshaw
and Shashank Kanad and they rigorously constructed this universal even
spin to parameter W algebra with parameters C and lambda.
It's type W two, four, six, eight, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And they give a strategy in their paper for proving coincidental
isomorphisms between these types of even spin vertex algebra.
And it all has to do with calculating this lambda and looking at
intersections on this lambda curve.
So this lambda is like a curve depending on C.
So anyway, you can get all of the information you need from the third
product of the weight for vector with itself.
So in that universal algebra, so which I'll denote by this like W
infinity, that's from their universal algebra, the third product of this
W four vector with itself is given by this like monstrosity.
But then in our orbital, we can calculate it as follows.
But then after setting up appropriate equations and then re
you know, multiplying by constant as needed, we can find these overlapping
points for central charges giving these coincidental isomorphisms.
So the simple quotient S two orbital is isomorphic to this V two
orbital of this W K algebra, sorry, this W algebra for S O two
and with the principle no potent for the following central
charges and levels.
And then we also have like some more results.
Involving these paraphernalia on algebra.
So and then I think there's one more result, but I didn't include a slide
for it where it is related to a S L in algebra.
Okay, so here are some other interesting cases of the simple quotient.
Just kind of real quickly.
So the minus twenty two over five case is always going to be interesting
because that's the sort of simplest central charge for the pherosaur.
So in that case, you actually get the minus forty four over five pherosaur
after looking at the orbital fold minus sixty eight over seven is also
going to be interesting because that's like the next lowest weight null
vector occurs at this central charge.
Well, that is tied with this like central charge of a half.
So we get two results related to that and then these kind of other results
that are also like sort of random and happen because we have a null vectors
at the appropriate weight for these given central charges.
And then here are some theorems that were presented as conjectures.
I think our last time I gave this talk, but now they're theorems.
So this was these are both in the Journal of Algebra paper.
So for generic C, the V three orbital to this three fold tensor product
of the universal Vero soro is of this type.
So we've got two, four, five, three, sixes, seven, three, eight, three,
nine and two tens.
And then we worked out a couple of simple quotients.
So in the case that we have the central charge minus twenty two over five,
a lot simplifies.
We just get two, five, six, nine for the Z three orbital and the fact
that we just get two, five, six, nine for the Z three orbital meant
that it was possible to figure out the S three orbital in that case
because we could just take the Z two orbital on top of this and it's a type
two, six and in process is us working out the S three orbital
generic central charge instead of just minus twenty two over five.
And there is an isomorphism between this S three orbital at C equals
minus twenty two five and some nice affine W algebra that I mean is obviously
also of level two, six.
And I think that's all I have.
And I have the I decided that this is the vertex algebra mascot.
It's the normally ordered platypus.
So thanks for having me again.
