So this lecture is part of an online algebraic geometry course, giving an introduction to
schemes. This lecture will be discussing when maps of sheaves are injective or surjective
or exact and so on. So last lecture, when we were given a pre-sheaf F, we constructed
an etal space of F, which was a map from, which was a space A mapping to our base space
X that F is a sheaf over. And you remember we did this by first constructing the fibres
of A by taking a direct limit and then gluing these fibres together. So we're first going
to start by looking at a couple of examples of what this etal space looks like. So you
remember this map being etal means it's a local homeomorphism in the sense that each point of A
has a neighborhood that's homeomorphic to a set in X. So let's first of all look at the example
where we take X to be the reals and we take X to be the sheaf of smooth functions.
So F of U is just smooth functions
on U. And the fibre at zero is just, you can just think of it as being germs of smooth functions
at the point zero. So if we draw a graph of a smooth function, it might look something like this.
So we have a smooth function defined in a neighborhood of zero.
And we might have another smooth function that say looks like this. But if these two smooth
functions are the same in some neighborhood of zero, then they count as the same point of the
fibre. So the points of the fibre are sort of germs of smooth functions where you can only
see the smooth function very, very close to zero in some sense. And the point is this example,
this, the space A in this case is not house dwarf.
So you sort of might think, well, it's locally a homeomorphic to the reals. So it's just a one
dimensional real manifold. Well, it isn't some sense. The problem is it's a non house dwarf real
manifold. So let's see two points at zero that don't have this joint open subset. So the first
point at zero, I'm going to take to be the fibre of zero. So f is just equal zero. The second
point at zero, I'm going to take to be the following function. It's going to come down like
that. It's going to be zero there. And then it's going to have a bump here. It's going to be zero
there and then a bump there and zero there and a bump there and zero there and so on. So this is g.
And you notice that f and g are different points in the fibre at zero because there's no open
neighbourhood where they're the same. These bumps go on forever. But any open neighbourhood of g
is given by taking some neighbourhood of naught. And the open neighbourhood of g might sort of
consist of the image of this bit of g. And similarly, an open neighbourhood of f might
consist of you take a small open neighbourhood of zero and any function is zero and that open
neighbourhood is in the image of f. But now you see any open neighbourhood of g and any open
neighbourhood of f have a point in common because you can find some small patch near the origin
where both f and g are identically zero in an open set. And that will give you a point in the
same open neighbourhood. So these etal spaces can be a bit weird because they can sometimes be none
house dwarf. Notice that if g is the sheaf of analytic functions,
then g is in fact house dwarf. You can do that as an easy exercise. You see you can't get this
phenomenon because if a function is analytic, it can't have an infinite chain of zeros
approaching zero unless it is actually zero. So somehow the question of whether this pre-sheaf
is house dwarf or not house dwarf is rather like whether your functions have a sort of
notion of analytic and analytic continuation. If you look at smooth or continuous functions and
the sheaves you get are not house dwarf. If you look at analytic functions or regular functions
in algebraic geometry, then the sheaves you get often are house dwarf. So from any pre-sheaf
we can get the etal space and from the etal space we can get a sheaf of sections.
So this gives a way of going from a pre-sheaf to an associated sheaf and I'm just going to list
some properties of this construction. I'm not going to bother proving most of them. You can take
these as exercises. So first of all this is indeed a sheaf and it's universal. If we have a map f
goes to g where this is a pre-sheaf and this is a sheaf, then it factors through the map
from f plus to g. So there's unique morphism of sheaves making this commute. So this is a sort
of universal way. It's the best possible way of constructing a sheaf out of f that any other way
of constructing a sheaf out of f you sort of start with f plus and then embed it into this other
sheaf. So also you can check if f is already a sheaf, then the map from f to f plus is an isomorphism.
So if you try and turn a sheaf into a sheaf you get back the sheaf you started with not very
surprisingly. Also if a goes to x is already etal and f is equal to the sheaf of sections,
then the etal space
of f is isomorphic to a. So in other words what we find is that sheaves are more or less the same.
So sheaves over x are sort of equivalent to etal spaces,
a mapping to x.
So incidentally the reason for the name sheaf is you can think of the etal space a as being the
union of the fibers or stalks. So in sheaf theory when you talk about the fiber of a map
from a to x you quite often call that the stalk of a map from a to x and a sheaf in agriculture means
you get a lot of stalks of corn or something and bundle them all up. So if you think of these as being
sheaves of corn bundled together you can sort of think of the etal space a as being a bit
like that except that doesn't give a very good picture of the topology of a but never mind. So
a sheaf when viewed as an etal space kind of looks like a lot of stalks all stuck together.
And in particular if f goes to g is a homomorphism
or sheaves then it is an isomorphism
if and only if it's an isomorphism
of the corresponding etal spaces
which is the same as saying it's an isomorphism
of all stalks.
And this follows easily from the comments we made on the previous sheet that
if it's an isomorphism of etal spaces the corresponding map of etal spaces is an isomorphism
and as we said we can just reconstruct f and g from these etal spaces and if the etal spaces
are isomorphic then that shows that f and g are isomorphic.
Well we want to define
better first give another example. So let's have an example of constructing the
sheaf of a pre-sheaf. So let's take f to be the constant pre-sheaf
where we just put f of any open set u is equal to some set a so this is going to be a fixed
abelian group and we saw earlier that this is usually not a sheaf.
Well so we want to work out what is the etal space of this
can't spell etal so the etal space of this well what's the fiber at each point
well the fiber at each point is kind of trivial to work out because f of u is just a
so when we take a direct limit the fiber at each point is just a
and if you work out the topology on the fiber you can see the etal space is just
x times a mapping to x so here a has the discrete topology
and now we take a section u and want to know what is f of u well f of u is just the sections
of this map here so we want functions from x times a such that if you do that then that
you get the identity and you can see this is just continuous maps
from u to a now since a is the discrete topology this means that f of u equals a
if u is connected
and i don't want to get into arguments about whether or not the empty set is connected so
let's just say it's connected and non-empty a good case for saying the empty set is not connected but
anyway and f of the empty set is just the zero and if u has more than one component
then for instance if u has two open components
then f of u will be a times a sorry this is f plus of
sorry this is the sheaf f plus that we can construct from the pre-sheaf f
so if u has two open components then the sheaf f plus will be a product of two copies of a
and in general if u is a union of open components then f plus of u will be a product of copies of
a and you can get more complicated exams where u where the components of u aren't open in which case
slightly more complicated things happen but i'm not going to worry about those
now we now want to define whether or not a homomorphism of sheaves of abelian groups
is exact or injective or whatever so we say this is exact
if it is exact on the fibres
similarly um f to g is injective
or surjective
if it's if it is on the fibres
so this is the definition of a map of sheaves being injective or surjective
um in case you're worried about whether or not this is the right definition
we've got a category of sheaves of abelian groups and in the category we say something
a map from a to b is onto if for any two maps from b to c these are the same if the
chorus if the composed maps from a to c are the same so this gives a definition from map a to b in
a any object in a category to be an epimorphism and this definition is in fact equivalent to
one defined using category theory and similarly for injective ones um you may wonder um so this
this just says that maps of sheaves are injective or surjective if the corresponding maps of etal
spaces are injective or surjective and you may wonder why don't we just define sheaves to be
etal spaces in fact you can do this if you want i think it was sometimes done in the early days
of sheaf theory the problem is it doesn't really work when you do more general cases of sheaves
over a category instead of sheaves over a topological space um so the definition we gave
of sheaves as being um a map from open sets to abelian groups is the one that generalizes better
um so let's um finish let's let's do a couple of examples of uh exact sequences of sheaves
so first of all we have a skyscraper sheaf
so a skyscraper sheaf is defined like as follows we pick a point p in x we pick an abelian group
a and we put f of u equals a if p is in um u and f of p is not if p is not in u
and let's try and draw the etal space
of f so here's uh the base space x and the fiber at any point other than p
is going to be zero so so uh we just get um the sky the the etal space has has a zero point here
but above the point p you can see the fiber is a and you can now see what looks like a skyscraper
because it looks like a sort of tall building just sticking up with with everything empty around it
and now we'll see an example of the skyscraper sheaf uh if we take um
so this is the skyscraper sheaf of a so let's put f so this is the
no sorry this is the etal space of f so this is the skyscraper sheaf f um and now we're going to
let g be the sheaf of smooth functions on the reels and we're going to define a map from g to g
which is just multiplication by x where x is pointing the reels and at all points x not equal zero
you can see the corresponding map on fibers is an isomorphism so this map is an isomorphism except
at zero and at zero turns out we get the skyscraper sheaf here
so if we look at the fibers over each point if we look at a point x not equal zero
here the fiber looks like nought goes to it's going to be some big space of all germs of
functions at nought so we get it looking like this um where this is an isomorphism
because multiplication by x is an isomorphism if x is equal to zero then we don't get this we get
if we've got a a function at zero then we can write it uniquely as a constant that the constant
value of the function at zero plus x times another smooth function so x equals zero
um that the fiber looks like all germs of functions at zero but this time
the fiber is actually the real numbers so we get the skyscraper sheaf corresponding to the point
x equals zero and a being the real numbers so that's a non-trivial example of an exact sequence of
sheaves um incidentally um if you take any vector bundle over a space then you can obviously form
the sheaf of all sections of the vector bundle so for instance this um sheaf g is the sheaf of
sections of a smooth one-dimensional vector bundle now you see if you work with vector bundles you
have a bit of a problem because you can't really take quotients of vector bundles in a nice way
here we've got two vector bundles but the quotient of the two vector bundles is really a sheaf that
isn't a vector bundle I mean there's no way to get a vector bundle whose sections are not everywhere
except zero where they're where they're the reals so um sheaves can be thought of as a sort of
generalization of vector bundles that allow you to take quotients and so we'll finish with an example
that um you probably came across in complex analysis so for this example I'm going to look at the
following exact sequence nought goes to 2 pi i z goes to holomorphic functions goes to non-zero
holomorphic functions so here these are all going to be functions
over complex these are all going to be functions over open sets of the complex number so this
stands for the constant sheaf of the group 2 pi i times z and this is the sheaf of holomorphic
functions and this is going to be when I say none zero holomorphic functions I mean functions such
that f of x is not equal to zero for all x so I don't just mean functions that aren't zero
identically everywhere I mean the function's not allowed to be zero everywhere and this
map here is just going to be the exponential map and now we know that x of 2 pi i times any
integer zero so um the map from here to here and from here to here is indeed well defined
and now this is an exact sequence of sheaves
and the reason is that it's exact on fibers because if you take a point in some fiber here
it's represented locally by a little by the whole holomorphic function near that point
and if you've got a holomorphic function that's none zero then you can't always take its logarithm
but you can take its logarithm in the neighborhood of a point so the map from here to here is indeed
onto on every fiber however it's not exact on sections of open sets for example
suppose I take u to be the complex numbers minus the origin and I take the function in here
to be the function x now if it's the image of something here then we would have to have a function
um f such that x of f is equal to x at all points so we would need a global
form of logarithm of f but as you know from complex analysis we cannot define the logarithm
of x as a holomorphic function for all non-zero complex numbers because when we go around the
origin we get this extra factor of 2 pi i turning up so this is an exact sequence of sheaves but
it's not exact on some if you take global set the global sections of this over open sets are not
necessarily exact they might be exact for example if you if you take um u to be the whole of the
complex numbers then the global sections are exact the problem is whether or not this set u
has um non-trivial loops in it um okay next lecture we will be continuing discussion of sheaves
