How do we describe our prevailing economic system? It's quite interesting this because
one of the facets particularly of British political debate is this kind of eye-rolling
anti-intellectualism, I suppose, that if you try and describe the system in which we live,
how it works, how it operates, you get this particularly within the British media who don't
particularly like talking about ideas, which I would say helps protect the status quo.
If you talk about this word beginning with N, neoliberalism, the eye-rolling starts.
Oh, what is neoliberalism? It's not a thing. This is just some pretentious set of jargon
that you devious leftists have come up with. So, given that nonsense, I'm particularly delighted
to be joined by the incredible George Monbiot, who is one of our finest living journalists,
and he's written this brilliant book with Peter Hutchison, who will talk about this.
They've never met. This is brilliant. It's a book called The Secret History of Neoliberalism
and How It Came to Control Your Life. Hello, George. How are you doing?
Hello. Yeah, great. I'm lovely to talk to you.
That's very lovely to talk to you always. Firstly, yeah, I'm just quite amused by the fact
you've never met. Can you just explain? People might be listening. You've written a book with
someone you've never met. It's fun. That's a fun idea. I like it.
So, Peter is a filmmaker. He lives in California, as a lot of filmmakers do. I don't fly.
So, the whole collaboration has been done remotely. It started off with him approaching me saying,
could we make a film together about neoliberalism? Because this is something I've been writing about
for, well, lots and lots of years, and trying to document, trying to pin down, trying to show
exactly what the great majority of people have been missing and how we've been so thoroughly
stitched up and also what we can do about it. And he said, look, this will make a great film.
He made films like Rookquiem for the American Dream with Noam Chomsky, for instance, and
it's a film in that sort of mold. And so, we agreed to do that. And we did all that remotely,
where he got a remote camera operator in Britain to film me, and he directed down the line.
And then he said, look, this will make a great book. We should do this together.
And so, we just went ahead on the same principles. And it's been really amazing
collaborating with a filmmaker, because what you've got there is a very, very tight editor with a
very strong visual sense. And so, he really, he sort of gave the book its structure and its
thrust, a lot of its pace, I think. And it's turned into a very short and terse and size book,
whose aim really is to be understood by anyone. We're keeping it really simple,
trying to just write it almost as if we were making a film. And with his influence and his sort
of driving force behind this, I think we've succeeded in that and created something which is
really readable and takes this extremely important subject to potentially a wider
audience. I mean, there must have been a hundred books published on neoliberalism and some really
great books, but most of them are this thick and very difficult to get through. So, we're
trying to do the opposite. I think more than succeeded. It really is a riveting read. Look
very, very pacey. It is like a film. And I think you're right. I think a lot of people,
they're interested maybe in the idea of neoliberalism, but they probably find it a bit
intimidating, particularly if they see a dense tone. But this really explains it very, very
effectively indeed. So, just what the hell is neoliberalism? Because, you know, we've been,
you've been in this game longer than I have, but you know the eye-rolling I'm talking about,
you talk about neoliberalism. And you say, you know, in the Soviet Union, if the idea,
if you couldn't describe the ideology that ruled us, and I suppose it benefits them to pretend
there is no ideology, it's just what works. This is just a dynamic system. So, what is
neoliberalism? It's much of a dominant ideology in our society as communism was in the Soviet
Union. And as you say, it's just crazy that most people either aren't aware of it at all,
or are incapable of defining it, or as you say, just dismiss it. If there's no such thing,
you're just making this up. This is a boo word. This is a conspiracy fiction, whatever. And they'll
throw anything they want at you to try to prevent people from getting to grips with,
with what we're seeing here. And neoliberalism is an ideology whose name was given to it by
the original ideologues, people like Friedrich Hayek and Ludwig von Mises, and others who
originally met in 1938, to help capitalism solve its greatest problem. Capitalism's greatest problem,
which it is always seeking to solve, is called democracy. And capitalism was getting along
just fine before most adults led the vote. And when most adults led the vote, they started
using it to say, well, you know, we don't want to be exploited. We don't want our labor captured
and all the value pulled out of it and given to someone else. We don't want to be treated as
modern serfs. We don't want our rivers polluted. We don't want our air polluted. We want to live
in decent housing. In fact, we'd like publicly funded services as well. In fact, we'd also like a
welfare state and economic safety net, all these things which are inimical to raw capitalism.
And ever since then, capitalism has been trying to fix this problem. And it wasn't
particularly good at it. But neoliberalism has given it the solution. And it's now become extremely
good at fixing this problem and indeed at surviving and expanding even within the
nominally democratic era. I mean, before talking about today, because you look through the history
of how this develops. And I really, I find it fascinating back in, if we go back to the aftermath
of World War II, when if you believed in what is now the central tennis of neoliberalism,
it was a bleak moment. And it seemed as though laissez-faire capitalism was buried, you know,
the experience of the Great Depression and then a genocide or war which tens of millions
killed. And you couldn't really separate the two because fascism really exploited the despair
that emerged, of course, because of the collapse, the effects of that system. And they met in a
sleepy Swiss town on Pelerin to organize these economists. But I mean, at the time, they felt
defeated. They were like, we're lost. And it's quite interesting what happens then because
Milton Friedman says, the way you get changes through a crisis, but it depends on the ideas
lying around. So they kind of, they had a don't mourn organized approach, didn't they really?
But they didn't have collective power. As we would appeal to, they had very rich people who could
bank from what's exactly right. Even so, there's a lot to learn from this movement and how it
operated. There's a lot of strategy which we on the left can pick up and use quite effectively.
And, you know, we have to understand how they organized, how they got together. So to begin
with, they start to formulate an ideology, a coherent ideology, one which we can reasonably
argue with, but, you know, it had the virtue of coherence and clarity. And effectively, as
Haya Con von Mises conceived it, any form of collectivism would lead inevitably towards
totalitarianism. It was one great slippery slump fallacy of that, if you're saying that,
if you have a welfare state, if you have publicly funded services, you will end up with Stalin or
Hitler. It's a historical inevitability that that's the way it's going to go. So we have to sweep
the enabling state and all other impediments to capital out of the way to prevent us from ending
up with totalitarianism. I mean, it was a hopefully staggeringly mistaken argument.
But the sort of theoretical justification that they created was that there is a natural order
of human life. There are the worthy people and there are the unworthy people. And the worthy
people deserve what they get and the unworthy people deserve what they get as well. And what
they get is distributed to them by this godlike force of the invisible hand of the market. It's
a very Calvinist approach, effectively. It's basically Calvinism done by Eglomis. And this
godlike force of the invisible hand, if all impediments are stripped away, we'll point to
those who have the grunts of the invisible hand and we'll point to those who do not. And we can
tell who the worthy are because they're going to be rich and we can tell who the unworthy are
because they're going to be poor. And anything which inhibits the discovery of that natural order,
such as taxation and redistribution, such as regulation, such as trade unions,
such as protesters, such as, as we later discovered with them, political choice itself,
inhibits the progress of humankind because that progress depends upon inequality. It depends upon
the discovery of the natural order. It depends upon some people being as rich as they can ever
become and other people remaining poor. And yet, at the heart of it, because it has to try to sell
itself to the public, there's this massive contradiction which says that if some people
are allowed to become tremendously rich, their wealth will trickle down and then everyone will
become tremendously rich. And you say, now hang on a moment, I thought we were meant to have a
distinction here between the very rich who deserve it and the very poor who don't. But it's just the
first of a series of intensive contradictions within neoliberalism. Now, many people at the time
saw this not just as a highly irrational and contradictory ideology, but also as an obscene
one, one which was destined to return us to the worst excesses of capitalism slash feudalism slash
erontia economy. And so, while the books sell quite well, because a lot of powerful interest
got behind them and extracted by reader's digest in Hayek's case, put out to every worker at General
Motors by the management, for example, the ideas remain very unpopular, except with one
particular class of people who were the richest people on earth. And it was literally the richest
people and corporations on earth got together and poured billions into this project and created
what has been described as a neoliberal interdimensional, a global network of think tanks
in particular, which are the 18th dogs of neoliberalism, these dark money lobby groups such as the
Tufton Street junctings, academic institutions, such as in Chicago, Virginia, and many other places,
tame journalists, tame government officials, and tame politicians. And by pouring money into this
and by firing some very clever people to sell these outrageous ideas and to make them sound like
common sense, they began to develop momentum. But even so, they knew they were in it for the long
game. And as Milton Friedman, who you mentioned, said, you know, we waited. And when the time came,
we were ready. And we could step right in.
I mean, I really like firstly, the way that discussion of how
neoliberalism helps rationalize and justify inequalities, whenever I wrote Charles the
demonization working class a long time ago, 12 years ago, whatever, or 13 years ago, I said,
demonization is the ideological backbone of an unequal society, because you have to
inequality is so perverse, if you think about it long enough, but if you say this is just
desserts, they're at the bottom because they're lazy, they're at the top because they work hard.
And in terms of just that neoliberal international, those think tanks and all the rest,
I think it's really fascinating. One thing I'm really interested in is you talk about,
I guess, what it does to us. And, you know, often defenders of these ideas will often try and
talk about human nature, and other than the fact we're social animals, who depend on cooperation
innately, you know, I don't think that's there's much biological mileage in that we're infinitely
malleable. But, but we can be changed, there's no question. And Margaret Thatcher famously said
in 1981, economics are the method, the object is to change the heart and soul. So I'm just
interested in what neoliberalism, what you talk about how what it's done to us, as people, and
how this is not kind of an innate human nature thing, which is. So, so, so at the start of
neoliberal ideology is this Hobbesian idea that we are fundamentally selfish and greedy.
But they twist this to say, that's a good thing. We should mobilise this selfishness and greed.
And by mobilising it, the rich get richer, and that trickles down and enriches everyone.
So that the undeserving poor, oh, hang on a moment, they get some money too. Oh, well, never mind
all of them. So, but the idea is that, you know, we are, we are the sort of homo economicus,
self maximising creature, which is entirely motivated by transactional considerations,
by instrumental drivers. But actually, all the evidence across social psychology,
across neuroscience, across anthropology, and several other disciplines shows us that that's
simply not true. We all have some selfishness and greed in this, absolutely. But those are not
primary values. Those are not the dominant values for the great majority of people, the dominant
values are empathy, altruism, family feeling, community feeling, the wish for a better world,
not just for yourself, but also for other people. And yet we've been instilled in this notion
that we are these greedy, selfish, really quite unpleasant creatures. And that's reinforced by
the fact that those who come to dominate us, particularly in the neoliberal, you tend to be
greedy, selfish, really quite unpleasant creatures. I need to put it crudely, we are a society of
altruists, governed by psychopaths. And so that's one of the forces which sort of greatly misleads us
about who we are and where we stand. But another one is as you alluded to, and talking about your
brilliant book, Chaps, is this finger of blame. So just as a rich are told by neoliberalism,
you are rich because you're brilliant, regardless of whether you inherited your money, you stole
your money, regardless of your advantages of education, of class, of race, or whatever
that you start off with, you know, you might start in your 100 meter race at 90 meters,
90 meters down the track. But it's still all down to you that you've become so rich is this
self attribution fallacy is at the heart of neoliberalism. But just as a rich are congratulated
for their wealth, the poor are blamed for their poverty. And if you're poor, it's because you're
unenterprising, it's because you're feckless. If your kid is fat, it's not because corporations
are pushing junk food and the school is sold off, it's playing fields, it's because you're a bad
parent. You're constantly sort of urged to internalize this notion of blame. And structural
failure, systemic failure, these things are simply denied. They're simply airbrushed out
of the picture. It's all about the individual. And another of Thatcher's famous quotes, of course,
was that people talk about society, there is no such thing. There are men and women and their
families, which kind of was a manifesto. That's how she wanted it. The whole thrust of neoliberalism
and the way by which capitalism defeats democracy is to atomize in rule, is to tell us you're not
citizens, you're consumers. And if you want change, just sit at home and buy a better brand of biscuits,
which, of course, as we know, changes decisively nothing.
Back in 2008, there was the grand financial crash. And we still live in the shadow of that
financial crash. And I think a lot of people at the time, not even just on the left, I mean,
the left was very fragmented. I think this is actually maybe partly answers the point with
the Milton Friedman point about when you have a crisis, what it depends on the ideas lying around
and I suppose balance of forces. But nonetheless, a lot of people at the time thought, wow, well,
this is it for neoliberalism. There's not going to recover from this. Look at it.
We can see what's happened with untrammeled free markets, greed, markets out of control.
It's caused a catastrophe. It hasn't quite panned out, perhaps, as some of us might have hoped,
from that rubble. And in fact, what we saw instead, Britain and elsewhere, was a doubling down on
austerity rollback of the state. So a crisis of the private sector became a crisis of the public
sector. It was state spending, which had caused the mess, not the markets out of control.
What the hell is going on there? How have we ended up just in constant crisis in this economic
system? And I'll be honest, George, looking at it still here. Yeah, no, it is. And it keeps failing.
I mean, look at Liz Truss. She was the uber neoliberal. She just did it by the book. Here's
what neoliberalism tells us will create tremendous wealth and success and prosperity. And we all
saw the instant results. You know, it took one day for her mini budget to completely collapse and
bring down many things with it and cause even greater suffering to the people of this country.
So it keeps on failing and failing spectacularly, but it keeps on walking. It is the zombie doctrine.
So why? Why is this? And I think it's because neoliberalism is something that we don't have.
And that's something is a story, a particular kind of story. So it's our contention that
political and religious change across millennia has always been accompanied by a particular
narrative structure, which enables and empowers that change to happen. And there are many basic
plots. Well, some people say there's just a few and some people say there's a lot. But anyway,
one of them is always this basic plot, which is what I call the restoration story,
which goes like this. Disorder reflects the land caused by powerful and nefarious people working
against the interests of humanity. But the hero or heroes will confront that disorder
against the odds overthrow those powerful and nefarious forces and restore harmony to the
lalent. And that's the story Marx tells. It's a story that Keynes tells. It was a story that
Marxism flashes told. And it's a story which perhaps for the first time ever quite consciously
and deliberately, the neoliberals told, we understood the power of that narrative structure.
And of course, you can slot into that narrative structure, whatever you want. So Keynes would
say, you know, the powerful and nefarious forces were unsammled capitalists. And the hero of the
story was the enabling state backed by the middle and working classes. And the neoliberals turned
that exactly the other way around. The villain is the enabling state. And the hero is the
entrepreneur fighting for freedom against this totalizing elective state, which is the great
demon that has caused so much disorder. But the neoliberals, you know, they were very clever in
saying, this is how the human mind works. This is what attracts us. This is what tells us who we are
and where we stand, where we're going and what we're going to find when we get there. It is a
story. And the story overrides everything. It doesn't matter how much data you've got. It
doesn't matter how good your arguments are. It doesn't matter how consistent and rational they are.
They can be completely inconsistent and rational and frankly bonkers, as some of the neoliberal
tracks like Hayek's later book, The Constitution of Liberty are. But if there's a simple and
coherent story that stitches it all together, that is what counts. Now, you know, when
after the Great Depression, Hayek sat down and wrote what is in effect a restoration story
through his general theory and further writings. And he did it sort of instinctively, or so it
seems to me. But of course, he did understand narrative. He was connected with a lot of writers
and he did it very well. And then when Keynesianism ran into trouble in the late 1970s, the
neoliberals had been quite consciously and deliberately polishing this restoration story
of their own. And as Friedman said, they could step straight in and tell that story. This is
what's gone wrong. Here is where you stand. This is what we're going to do to get you out of it
and get you to this promised land. And then when neoliberalism collapsed in 2008, we stepped forward
with nothing. We had no new story. We had lots of brilliant ideas, lots of fantastic policies,
lots of amazing schemes for doing this and for doing that and the rest of it. But we
hadn't brought them together into a coherent narrative structure. And so people couldn't
really hear what we were saying. It's a bit like trying to make a tapestry without a loom.
You've got lots of amazing coloured threads. But where's the picture? Where is that a great big
hanging where people can say, oh yeah, there's me in the picture. I can see myself there as part of
this criminal. Unless you pull it all together into a coherent story, you can't reach across to people
and you can't say, here is the answer. Before I ask, just in terms of, I like to always end on an
optimistic note, given the world of which living, we've got ample material there, haven't we?
It is just before I just lean into the bleakness first. At the moment, you can see and you talk
about these right-wing authoritarian movements. We can look at the likes of the Bolsonaro's,
obviously defeated, fortunately, but Bolsonaro is a moe, lives on. The Modi's, obviously there's
entirely plausible Trump could become president. And to be honest, if you'd sped 10 years ago
about the prospects of civil war in the United States, people think you're pretty wacky, but you
can't rule out. The threat to democracy, however caveated US democracy happens to be right now,
is real. And we can see across Europe the rise of, we've got Orban in Hungary, we've got all sorts
of very unpleasant. You might look at this and think the likes are going out. How do you link
these movements to neoliberalism? And are these morbid symptoms? How do you kind of analyse them?
So one thing neoliberalism does is to create state failure. It's failure by design. The state is not
supposed to work. I mean, the state is very powerful under neoliberalism because what makes it different
from laissez-faire economics or classical liberalism, as it's sometimes called, is that it uses the
state as a battering room deliberately to push democracy out of the way, to push trade unions,
protesters, political choice, the administrative state out of the way through this often extreme
force. And then it leaves us, as Tony Judd pointed out in his last book, Il Faire's The Land,
just with this authoritarian core, which, and all the state then has to offer us,
is the demand for obedience and punishment if we step out of line. And so as neoliberalism
captures parties across the political spectrum, which unfortunately we've also seen here in
the UK for 45 years, and boy is it continuing, we end with A, a state which is unable to solve our
problems and B, a lack of political choice, which is kind of ironic because neoliberalism is supposed
to be all about choice, but as Margaret Thatcher kept saying, there is no alternative. You've
got a full and free choice and there is no alternative. And we end up with a complete
disillusionment with politics as usual. And then that creates an opening for the Orban's and the
Trump's and the Netanyahu's and the Modi's and these other killer clowns, who then move into
that vacuum and say, we stand apart from politics, we're the anti-politics people. We're not immersed
in all that elite chatter going on above your heads. We are genuinely connected to you and they
prove that connection by speaking in very simplistic and direct terms. And so they present themselves
as the solution to the crises which have been caused by neoliberalism. But of course as soon as
they get in, they massively ramp up all of those crises, the crises of corruption, of nepotism,
of the sale of state assets, of the complete failure to meet the needs of the poor, of the
massively escalating inequality, which always follows in their wake.
Depressing, but there is always hope. You've been speaking about what you described here,
again, as private sufficiency, public luxury for a long time. So in terms of you, and you know,
this is important too because we can't obviously not, given I'm talking to you about the climate
emergency as well and the obvious existential threat to humanity and a profit-driven system
which prioritises profit over the futures of our last species, bigger problem. But how do you see
that way forward? How do you sketch out this hopeful alternative to what we see there which is,
as we discussed, right wing authoritarian movements which exploit the phase of neoliberalism and then
double down on the very problems which they exploited? So most of the time, I think to most
people, despair seems like the rational option. This is the obvious thing to do in a situation
like this is to despair. Where's the hope? How can we possibly get out of this horrendous mess?
But I think despair is the irrational response to this because despair is what people feel
when they wrongly conceive society as a simple system. Now, one of the greatest failings of
our education is that we are never, a great majority of people are never taught the principles of
complex systems. Everything important to us is a complex system, the human brain, the human body,
human society, the financial system, the economic system, every ecosystem, the atmosphere, the oceans,
ice caps, the rest of it, they're all complex systems. And complex systems have very particular
ways of operating. And they have these emergent adaptive characteristics and they have tipping
points and they can very rapidly flip from one equilibrium state to another. And society is
no different from those other complex systems. Society has two equilibrium states. One is called
impossible and the other is called inevitable. And from the perspective of anything you want to
see happen, it's always impossible. Votes for women, you have to be kidding. Independence for India,
you're off your rocker. Civil rights, an end to apartheid, equal marriage legislation,
sexual liberation, all of these things. But when you're pressing for them, it just seems
impossible. You've got this massive brick wall in front of you, it can't happen. And then it happens
and everyone says, well, that was inevitable, wasn't it? Yeah. And what's happened in this case,
in these cases, is that there's been a tipping point. Now, the marriage equality legislation,
I think it's a very good example of how that change happens. Because it starts as it always
starts. And I think it was brilliantly done, really fantastic campaigning. It was very hard,
it took a very long time. And started in a position where it was regarded as an absolutely
horrific idea. You know, this is going to be the end of civilization, as we know, everyone was
against it. All the religious organizations, nearly all the politicians, all the newspapers,
the whole lot. And you start as you must always start by preaching to the choir. All my life,
I've been told, don't preach to the choir. Sorry, but what else are we ever going to preach to?
You preach some choir, but you make it a little bit bigger every time. You just expand the size
of the choir. It's about concentric circles. And you push it, and you push it, and push it.
Until eventually, you hit that tipping point, which some research suggests is about 25% of people.
This whole sort of Oxford Union approach that, you know, you win an argument and you change
things by persuading the person in the opposite corner. It's just complete nonsense. It's never
worked that way. That is not how political change has ever happened. But because people think that's
how political change happens, they think it can never happen. I will never persuade my grumpy
neighbor who reads a daily mail. No, sorry, you don't have to. Persuasion is massively
overeated as a political force. You persuade the choir, and you mobilize them, and you equip them,
and they persuade a few people around them, and they persuade a few more until you reach that
25% or so of society. And then suddenly, two things happen. One, the dynamics of the complex
system kick in, and you can push it towards the sort of tipping point between those equilibrium
states. But two, because we are the uber social mammal, and our whiskers are always twitching to
see which way the social wind is blowing, we don't want to be left behind. And so you'll suddenly
then have this flip, where it's not that everybody becomes the campaigner for your cause, it's just
the opposition just drops away, because people don't want to feel that they're out of line with
the times. And so what you then find is people who you know adamantly opposed to it say, well,
of course, I've always supported marriage equality. After the war, everyone becomes a member of the
resistance, right? And so you'll see these sort of sudden flips from what seemed to be an impossible
situation to what then looks like an inevitable change. And we can trigger those, we can console
those tippings by telling a powerful restoration story that incorporates our values.
And it's very powerfully done in this book. And that's exactly what this book does. It reaches
people who I think find this whole subject quite intimidating. It's written very beautifully,
lots of clarity, but so much information, very educational, including for people who I think
maybe read lots about neoliberalism. And it's really, even though it's often talking about
very bleak things, it's full of the optimism for the reasons you talk about. It has a very
practical way forward. And that's what we do need to talk about. So make sure you get a copy of
The Invisible Doctrine, The Secret History of Neoliberalism and How It Came to Control Your
Life by George Monbiot and Peter Hutchison, who is over in California. But they've both done a
brilliant job, even though they've never met at weaving together this wonderful story. So do
share this video, make sure everyone hear George's voice, obviously, press like, subscribe, hit the
leave your comments, love to read your comments. But George, thank you so much,
as ever, for your brilliant clarity and wisdom. Well, thanks, Owen, then thank you so much for
everything you do.
