The neoliberal shift wasn't actually about shrinking the state.
What it was about was about crushing collective power.
The physical assertion of the power of the state,
that was the literal beating up of miners,
the use of the police to put them in their place.
But there was this ideological shift as well,
which was you are not a worker, you are not a citizen,
you are a consumer.
This toxic individualism that has become so pervasive
within our society has allowed our political class
to basically get away with murder.
We need to be presenting the idea of socialism,
not as a project of protection,
but as a project of collective empowerment.
Grace Blakely, hello.
Hi. How's it going?
Good thanks, how are you?
Very well. Very glad to have you here in the Polish Institute.
Lovely to be here.
Yes, great to have you here.
We're talking because of this weighty tone,
vulture capitalism, corporate crimes,
backdoor bailouts and the death of freedom,
a lot of substance which we're going to get into.
I'm glad you think so.
Did you enjoy it?
I did. Good.
But first, for those who don't know who you are,
how would you like to introduce yourself?
So I'm Grace Blakely.
I am a writer.
I write about political economy.
This is my latest book.
I've also got a very well and all good bookstores.
I'm also a staff writer for Tribune Magazine.
And I do bits and pieces in the media.
Nice. Okay.
In that subheading there, Death of Freedom,
I think that's the bit that stands out to me most
and is sort of recurrent throughout, right,
this loss of freedom or a lack of it under capitalism.
So can you start us off there?
Why is it that we're not free in our capitalist system?
I'm really glad that that kind of came through
as the central message of the book
because that is really where I wanted to start.
I think we are fed this line that we live
in this free market democratic system, right?
And that that's what capitalism is.
Capitalism means free markets and democracy.
And the kind of incursion of the state into the economy
limits freedom and creates this problem of big government.
And that results in this kind of dichotomized politics
that we have at the moment,
where it's basically just a debate
between some people saying, we need more market,
less government and other people saying,
we need like more government, less market.
And I just think that that kind of divide
is so just sterile and unhelpful.
And this really came through, I think,
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
So I started writing this book,
which just come out of the 2019 election defeat
and went straight into everything
that was going on around COVID.
And I started being asked like on mainstream TV questions
like, oh, well, the government's spending loads of money.
This is basically Corbanism.
This is what you wanted.
You've got what you campaigned for.
And I started to realize that people had,
there was just this amazing,
astonishing misunderstanding
as to what capitalism actually is
and what socialism is.
People thought that capitalism meant free markets
and the state not doing anything,
despite the fact that actually existing capitalism everywhere
has a very, very active role for the state.
That spending that was taking place during COVID,
it was basically the government funneling money
into massive corporations to landlords
into the financial system.
And somehow we're led to believe that that is socialism,
that the government propping up big business is socialism.
So I kind of wanted to cut through that divide
and say like, you know, this state versus market thing,
it doesn't really work.
It rests on this distinction between politics and economics.
It doesn't really stand up in practice.
You know, most of the time the state is acting
to defend the interests of big business
and big businesses working within the state
and alongside the state to do what it wants to do.
So how can we understand what like a kind of progressive
liberatory politics actually means in that context?
And for me, this always comes back to the dirty word, Marxism.
I think, you know, there's so much misunderstanding
as to what that means as well.
And I kind of start the book by looking at these two quotes.
One is from Marx, which is about him saying, you know,
the worker is treated as a kind of a bee under capitalism
where they just kind of follow orders
and kind of buzz around the hive.
Whereas actually they're architects.
They learn to kind of create,
they kind of yearn to create worlds in their head
and bring those into being with their hands.
And I contrast that with the kind of the quote from this free market,
the kind of darling of the neoliberals, Hayek,
who basically says, freedom of thought
is only of relevance to a small minority.
And it's him and actually even Keynes
and most of the big thinkers that we hold up in our political debate,
they basically all believe,
whether they're on the center left or the center right,
that the vast majority of people
should not be given the power to govern themselves
because they're too stupid or they're too impulsive
or they don't understand the stakes of the decisions that they're making.
Whereas for me, the fundamental insight of Marxism
is that the only way we get to liberation,
the only way we get to a fair and just society
is when people take power,
when they take power within their workplaces and their communities
over political life as a whole,
because politicians aren't going to listen to you if you don't demand it.
You know, corporations certainly aren't going to behave themselves
if you don't like force them to.
It's really up to us to actually begin to kind of build the society
that we want from the ground up.
A risk of asking an absurdly broad question,
but seeing as you just said it there about this kind of mischaracterization
of what Marxism means,
what does Marxism mean to you?
I know you spoke about it a little bit there,
but maybe could you try and put some truth to that sort of ism,
if you like, that style of thought, that method of political analysis?
Yeah, totally.
So as a kind of way of understanding capitalism,
it's, as you say, a kind of mode of analysis
that begins by looking at the way that we produce things as a society.
So rather than say, looking at the prevailing ideas within a society
and saying history is driven forward by these great battles
between different groups of ideologies or different sets of ideas,
Marxism says most of what happens within our society
is shaped by the conditions in which things are produced.
And the insight about capitalism is a social system
that rests upon the fact that some people own all the things
that we need to produce things,
and there's this big class of people who cannot survive
other than by selling their labour power for a living.
So just as an example, you know, there's a difference between capitalism,
this social system based on the production of commodities,
class-based system based on the production of commodities,
and feudalism, which is the system that revolves around land,
where you have an aristocracy that's in charge.
And again, this is about how things are produced,
like the political dynamics of feudalism come back
to the fact that a small class owns all the land
and the peasants have to work it to get what they need to subsist.
In the same way, the insight of Marxism is that it's this class-divided society
oriented around the production of commodities,
which is sold for profit,
and that that is undertaken through this class division,
this social division of labour,
where basically working people,
the people who are forced to sell their labour power,
are exploited by the ones who own things,
because they own the stuff that everyone else needs
just to be able to live.
And it's from that that you then begin to understand
the dynamics that I highlight in the book.
Because, you know, the other way of looking at capitalism
is, as I've said, that it's a system based on, you know,
private property and free markets, basically.
And then you have these ideas that only human freedom
can be protected by free markets,
and free markets are the only systems that lead to kind of democracy
and respect for human rights and all those different sorts of things.
That's the kind of lie that we're told about the way capitalism works.
But if you start from this perspective of seeing capitalism
as this system that's basically on class domination,
then things start to make a little bit more sense,
because we don't actually have free markets.
You know, there's lots of examples in this book
where I show that most of the major industries
within the world's economy are dominated by one or two firms
that are deeply corrupt and, like, in the pockets of politicians
and vice versa.
So I start with the example of Boeing, right,
which has been in the news recently for the doors blowing off its planes
at, you know, about 13,000 feet in the air.
This comes on the back of these crashes that took place several years ago now,
where over 350 people died in two separate crashes
where Boeing planes just nose-dived out of the air.
I won't give you all the gory details,
but suffice to say, people are Boeing knew about the flaws in this plane
before it was put on the market.
They deleted references to the system
that caused the problem in the pilot manual.
They didn't tell anyone what was going on.
These concerns weren't raised when the planes did crash.
They tried to blame the pilots.
The FAA, the regulator, basically did nothing.
And throughout all of this, the American state
was channeling billions of dollars' worth of tax cuts
and subsidies into Boeing.
And I think what that shows is that this argument that, you know,
let's say this problem with Boeing, right,
it shows that the market doesn't work
and we need to hand more power to the government.
Well, actually, the government was just as involved with this
as the executives at Boeing.
And it's because capitalism is this system
where everything is oriented around making sure
that the people who are in control of the production process
basically get what they want, right?
And so the only way to push back against that
isn't to say, let's give more power to politicians,
because, you know, half the time they're in the pockets of these guys,
is actually to say, how do we pull power down?
So how could workers within Boeing
have organized to resist both their exploitation
and the kind of corruption of this company?
And there's another example in the book
I look out of the Lucas Plan, where workers in an aerospace
company in the UK did just that.
They kind of organized to try and take control of the firm.
The audio recordings between the pilots union and Boeing
are extraordinary to listen to.
Yes.
OK, I was going to ask you about planned economies, which
are typically associated with communism.
But seeing as you mentioned feudalism,
I just want to at risk of taking this on a tangent already,
but why not?
We had Janice Verifakis in here a couple of months ago
talking about techno feudalism, right?
And this idea that actually we're past capitalism now,
and what our modern economic model actually far more closely
resembles feudalism than a lot of people would like to believe,
that these sort of cloud capital, these huge companies,
these huge corporations are actually, in a way,
modern feudal lords.
What do you make of that argument?
I don't know if you read the book and I appreciate it.
Yeah, I have.
I really like Janice.
I interviewed him for his book launch, actually,
a couple of months ago.
And I agree with a lot of his analysis,
but I think we come at it from different perspectives.
Because whilst a lot of the stuff that he writes about
in terms of the detail and the analysis as to what's
happening with the economy, I totally agree with.
I just think that that is part of capitalism.
And you see a lot of this stuff in progressive economics,
where you get critiques of the way that the economy works
from people who say, well, this isn't real capitalism.
They say, for example, the dominance of finance
means actually that you've got these monopolistic banks
sucking rents out of the economy,
as though they are the modern examples of feudal lords.
Or you've got too much concentrated corporate power.
That means we don't have free markets, so it's not capitalism.
And again, I come back to this point
that capitalism does not mean free markets.
Those two things are not the same.
Markets are an important part of the way
that capitalism functions.
They're a very important ideological part
of the way capitalism functions.
You have to believe that you're competing
against other people in this market for your labor.
Otherwise, the system loses legitimacy.
But the actual functioning of production
in the capitalist system centers far more
on stuff that happens within massive monopolistic
corporations than it does on the interactions that
take place in the market.
And this isn't a new thing.
In the book I go back to just like the example
of the East India Company, where
this was like this massive joint venture
between some wealthy and powerful people who
gained the right to create this big corporate entity
and the British state in pursuit of imperial power.
And that's another part of the book, which is that this nexus
of power that we see at the level of the domestic economy,
the kind of fusion of state and corporate power,
is often projected over the whole world economy
in the form of imperial power.
And yeah, this was a big part of the development
of British capitalism, the East India Company.
Adam Smith called it a strange absurdity.
He said it was a state in the disguise of a merchant.
And all the kind of original theorists of capitalism
were like, this doesn't really make sense.
This doesn't fit within the way that we think about capitalism.
But it was companies like the East India Company
and the AIC itself were central to the development
of the capitalist system across the world.
So there isn't this clean distinction
between corporate power and kind of free market capitalism.
Those two things go hand in hand.
The Anarchy by William Dalrymple is a really interesting study
on the East India Company.
He's great.
I've forgotten the name of it now,
but there's a method of system analysis,
which basically says if you want to understand
the intention of a system, you don't look at how it was designed.
You just look at the outcomes.
And so if you look at capitalism and you say,
well, modern capitalism is defined by financialization,
by the extraction of economic rent,
then it actually doesn't particularly matter
if that was never the intention.
If that's what it is now,
then actually that's one of the defining characteristics of it.
Yeah, no, completely.
And I think you can start by looking at the outcomes,
of course, and that is important.
And saying that capitalism kind of isn't working
in the way it's supposed to.
It kind of harkens back to people who are like,
oh, well, the like state socialism practice in the USSR
isn't real state socialism.
And yeah, I mean, I think that that was state socialism
and it's different to democratic socialism,
which is what I'm arguing for.
But it's kind of a bit of a,
it's kind of a non-argument, isn't it really?
It's like capitalism could be this nice, lovely,
fluffy, wonderful thing,
but it's just not working
because it's being kind of corrupted by people at the top.
And often this actually veers into like
anti-Semitic conspiracy theories, right?
Because people say, oh, capitalism is this lovely system,
but it's being corrupted by kind of evil financiers
or, you know, weird kind of lizard people or whatever.
I'm not up to date with all the latest conspiracy theories.
Not up to date, not up to date.
I think that one's still floating around.
There's some great YouTube videos
where like there's like a glitch or something
of like a royal and people like that was him shaped.
He's just taken from his lizard form into the human world.
I'm glad you mentioned the USSR, right?
Because you would typically associate planned economies
with those communist authoritarian states.
But you argue in the book, right,
that actually capitalist economies
are quite closely resembled right, a planned economy.
So who's doing the planning?
How does it work?
Talk us through it.
That is great.
That was nearly an exact quote from my book
when I say something like,
what's important isn't the presence or absence of planning.
It's who's doing the planning?
How is it being undertaken and in whose interests?
And I think that's really important because, yeah,
so, you know, just for clarity,
I'm not saying that there's no difference
between a state socialist and a capitalist economy.
Obviously there is.
But I suppose what I'm arguing is that there is this scale
along which you can chart most modern economies.
You can place most modern economies on the scale
between kind of pure anarchy and pure centralized control.
But actually the important thing to note
as well is that that scale has maybe at least two axes, right?
One of them concerns state planning and centralized control
and the other one concerns corporate planning
and centralized control.
So you could have, you know,
private corporate planning and state centralized control.
So like the USSR, obviously,
there was like an immense amount of centralized control
by the state over the economy.
Bear in mind that that centralized planning
was never total and it never can be.
You know, you never have a purely planned economy.
You never have a purely anarchic economy.
It's very important to remember
economies are always these kind of complex systems.
They never, and this is kind of again,
an insight from systems theory,
which Hayek, the famous neoliberal economist,
really liked.
The reason that he said that centralized planning
would always kind of create all these unintended consequences
because you can't ever completely control
a system as complex as an economy,
as complex as a society.
At the same time, those systems never collapse
into complete anarchy.
There's always some order.
There's always some stability that emerges
within those systems.
So economies operate in this, on the spectrum
between anarchy and centralized coordination and control.
And you see this today if you look at, for example,
like Chinese state capitalism.
The Chinese economy is a capitalist economy.
It's oriented around the production of commodities
for sale and for profit.
And that is an incredibly centralized economy
where you have both the states
and extremely powerful corporations
that have an immense amount of control
over people's daily lives.
At the same time, the state in the US is also,
in some ways, fairly similar
because you have an immense amount of corporate control
over people's daily lives.
You have some of the largest and most powerful corporations
on the planet that are centered in the US.
They have, a lot of them have kind of
monopolistic control over their markets.
They have what's called kind of monopsony power
in the labor market, which means that they're able
to kind of control the market for labor.
They have immense lobbying power.
They kind of shape what happens within the state
at both the kind of federal level and a more local level.
They have kind of this immense ecological power
to shape the future of our relationship with the climate.
And they have the power to avoid and evade tax,
to promulgate laws, to break the law with impunity.
There's this massive issue of kind of corporate impunity
where you have basically corporations allowed
to break the law without any sanction whatsoever.
And all of this power is exercised, as I said,
with very little accountability
because these institutions have so much power within the state.
So, you know, we like to think of the divide, as I've said,
within our politics as one between kind of, you know,
centrally planned socialist economies on the one hand,
like we had in the USSR,
and then these lovely free market democratic
capitalist economies on the other hand,
and the US is supposed to be an exemplar of that.
But actually, if you take the kind of big superpowers
that we've seen in the world economy
over the last kind of hundred years,
the USSR, the US, and China,
all of them share in common this immense centralisation
of power at the centre among this core of, you know,
state apparatchiks, heads of major companies,
heads of major financial institutions.
And all of them share this problem.
Or, you know, if you're an elite, this positive element,
which is that the vast majority of people
have no real control over what happens in their daily lives.
They feel as though they have no power.
Now, of course, what I argue in the book is that we do have power.
If we are able to organise and resist the power
that has exerted upon society by these institutions,
then we can begin to change things.
But the world in which we live
is one in which we're told,
you, as an isolated individual, have no power up against this system
that is basically kind of all-encompassing.
Even as you're told, oh, you do have the power
to kind of decide what you want to consume
and decide who you want to vote for.
And, you know, you're in this, like, free market system
where you're completely free to make those micro-decisions
on a daily basis.
And yet the whole structure of the society in which you live
has already been decided by someone else.
And as a voter, as a consumer,
you have very little influence
over how those decisions are made.
I really want to drill into that feeling of powerlessness.
I think it's so relevant, you know, that...
call it capitalist realism,
call it a feeling of powerlessness, I don't know,
an omwi and apathy that essentially are an ability
to imagine an alternative.
Even though, as you write and as others have written as well,
there are alternatives.
There are, at risk of sounding like,
slightly sincere at earnest, like joyful alternatives, right,
where people can find self-expression,
self-realisation, self-actualisation.
But it's almost one of the defining characteristics
of the system, right, is its ability to drum out, reduce,
minimalise any idea or possibility of conceiving
of something alternative than what we currently have.
Yeah, and I think this problem actually comes down
to something that's shifted with the transition
towards neoliberalism.
So I argue in the book, right, the neoliberals,
the shift that we had in the 1980s with Thatcher, with Reagan,
this idea that we needed kind of privatisation,
free markets, a shrinking of the state,
none of those, like the shrinking of the state
didn't actually happen.
Those were all kind of ideological justifications
for what was actually just a massive reassertion
of the power of a big business, a finance, et cetera,
and a crushing of the power of working people,
particularly the labour movement.
But you had these narratives that were like,
we need privatisation, we need deregulation,
and that's going to deliver free markets,
and promote personal freedom and autonomy, basically.
In fact, what we've seen is, in many ways,
a kind of expansion of the power of the state,
and an expansion of corporate power alongside that.
Often we see kind of state power wielded
through the private sector as well.
I use some examples in the book, like G4S,
McKinsey, these kind of like quasi-public institutions
that are often charged with just astonishing corruption
or mismanagement or fraud or whatever.
And they just get away with it, sorry?
Macquarie's probably a pretty good example.
Yeah, exactly.
And they just get away with it because they're just so close
to these public institutions.
So the neoliberal shift wasn't actually
about shrinking the state.
What it was about was about crushing collective power.
And you see this with the first moves
that politicians like Bertrand Reagan undertake
when they come into power.
It was crush the labour movement.
And there was a discourse that surrounded this as well.
There was the physical assertion of the power of the state.
That was the literal beating up of miners,
the use of the police to put them in their place.
But there was this ideological shift as well,
which was you are not a worker, you are not a citizen,
you are a consumer, you are an entrepreneur of the self.
And a lot of neoliberal policies were designed to push this.
It was like, we will allow you to buy your own house.
We will privatise your pension.
You will be able to take out loads of debt.
Your life will become this balance sheet
of assets and liabilities and it's up to you to manage that.
If you manage it well, you will do well and you will succeed.
If you manage it badly, you will fail
and that will be entirely your own fault.
And even things like the privatisation of education.
Education becomes an investment in your human capital
and it's up to you to undertake that investment
and to make the best of it.
So you see this ideological decimation
of the collective consciousness
that was really the foundation of the post-war consensus.
And it's replacement with this rampant toxic individualism.
And I actually think that a lot of the problems
that we have in our society today,
whether it's like the crazy stuff that you see
on social media, whether it's this sense of powerlessness,
whether it's even like low pay as a result
of people not being able to organise,
they all come back to this question of individualism.
And you hear this, particularly among young people,
there's a sense that when things go wrong,
it's your own fault.
You have no one to blame but yourself.
And I think this is really like damaging people's mental health.
There's this sense of like deep and profound shame
at not being able to compete in the same way
as maybe those around you.
I think this feeds the rise of the far right.
I think young men who feel that they are unable
to kind of portray the kind of alpha characteristics
that are associated with like elite men,
get this sense of like resentment and anger
that they then kind of take out on the system as a whole.
And this again comes down to this idea
of like competitive individualism.
It is up to you to compete and do well.
And if you can't do that,
then you're a loser and a failure.
And all of this comes back to this shift
that was at the heart of neoliberalism,
which is that there's no such thing as society,
which is what Thatcher said,
it's all just a collection of isolated individuals
competing against each other.
And I mean, to illustrate what this means
for our sense of our own power within the system.
Think about like 50, 60 years ago,
if you as a worker were dissatisfied with your pay,
or you went home and you couldn't put food on the table,
you would have gone into your workplace,
chatted with your coworkers,
chatted with your union rep and said,
look, are you in the same position as me?
Cause I can't afford to feed my kids.
And they would have been like, yeah, you're right.
Okay, well, we need to do something about this.
We need to go and strike and organize
because our boss is exploiting us.
Today, if you can't put food on the table,
what do you do?
You blame yourself.
You maybe go out and get a personal loan,
a very high interest rate.
Some people become depressed
because they're like, I can't afford to feed my family.
I'm a loser.
There's no sense of your, you know, collective power
or indeed the way in which you are being exploited
because of your position within the system.
It's all, it's my fault, right?
Or sometimes it's their fault, right?
It's scroungers or immigrants or whatever.
It's like some problem over there.
And that I think is really what is preventing us
from being able to resist.
Because if people did have this greater sense
of like collective agency, then, you know,
we would have stronger unions.
People would be organizing in their workplaces
to demand higher wages.
We would have tenants unions, right?
People wouldn't be so easy to exploit
within the private rented sector.
And we do have those, but they would be stronger.
People would be pouring out onto the streets saying,
you know, we cannot afford to heat our homes.
This is a failure of our political class.
But instead, it's I'm a failure.
I have to use a food bank, right?
This like toxic individualism
that has become so pervasive within our society
has allowed our political class
to basically get away with murder.
Because instead of blaming them,
we all blame ourselves or we blame each other.
And that is I think the most profound ideological shift
that we've seen under neoliberalism.
I'm so glad you mentioned that
in the context of mental health.
Because I think one of the most damaging instances
of this sort of toxic individualism
and sort of high perseverance of the individual
is in sort of wellness, right?
It's like rather than engaging with a systemic analysis
of like, why do I feel anxious and depressed?
Maybe it's because I don't have secure housing.
Maybe it's because I'm low paid.
Maybe it's because I'm burdened with personal debt.
And instead it's work on yourself, set boundaries.
Do you actually maybe need to cut some people out of your life?
Like, what are you talking about?
Can you talk a little bit more about the role
that financial institutions played
in that sort of expansion of neoliberalism,
particularly in that sort of thatcherite 80s Britain?
Yeah, totally.
Yeah, I think that example of mental health
is really good, right?
And I want to say, you wouldn't see this
when it comes to people's physical health, right?
You wouldn't be like, oh, you know,
it's your fault that you've got lung cancer
because, I don't know, you're not looking after yourself.
You're not taking your daily turmeric or whatever.
But actually you do now see that, right?
It's like instances of illnesses that result
from social issues like air pollution
or not having adequate diet or whatever,
increasingly are being blamed on individual people.
So you're seeing this become more and more pervasive
in every area of society.
And there's obviously an ideological dimension here
as we've just discussed.
But again, coming back to this idea of what is Marxism,
we trace back things that happen in the realm of ideas
to things that happen in the realm of production,
in the economy or in politics or whatever.
We don't just say, oh, suddenly everyone changed their minds
or there was a really powerful ideological movement
that made everyone change their minds.
Those things are important
and these movements are spearheaded
by powerful groups of people who make these arguments
in the public sphere.
I wouldn't be out here talking to you
if I didn't think ideas were important.
But I do also think that a lot of the big shifts
that we see can be traced back
to what happens in politics and economics, basically.
And in the 80s, you did see this big shift towards
the creation of the kind of individual investor entrepreneur,
the mini capitalist, basically.
And that was a very self-conscious shift
that was functional both politically
and to the kind of economic transition
that we saw during the 80s.
So the reason it was functional politically
is what we've already heard, right?
If you replace a sense of collective agency
among people who are part of the working class
with this individualized sense of agency
that's like, I own my house, I have my own pension,
I care more about what the stock market is doing
than the average wage share of national income
because my pension's invested in that.
I care about what's going on in the housing market.
And I know that basically the more freedom we give the banks,
the better my pension will do
and the better my house will do.
So that political shift is great for the conservative party
and ultimately forces the Labour Party
to kind of adapt and shift its position
to accommodate neoliberalism as well.
And you get this neoliberal consensus
among all the major political parties.
But there is, as you mentioned,
this kind of economic underpinning to it as well.
And yeah, those shifts become functional
to basically the financialization of the economy as well.
I don't want to kind of get too into the nitty-gritty of this,
but things like pensions privatization, right?
It adds to this massive pool of capital
that can be played around with by the financial sector
by these huge asset managers
that we now have, institutions like BlackRock, for example,
which I write about in the book.
It's this institution that controls
other people's money, basically,
and is invested in most companies,
most large companies in the world,
just because it has indices that track
what goes on in the stock market.
And you have basically, as a result of that investment power,
the head of BlackRock is able to write
to the corporations that BlackRock has invested in,
which is basically every large corporation on earth
and say, we think you should do this,
we think you should do that, right?
That is not the way that a free market is supposed to function.
A free market is supposed to be lots of little individual people
putting their money into a pot,
and then the money goes to the most profitable firms
because that's how the market works.
It's not like these huge behemoths
that are basically able to direct and plan
what happens within markets.
That's kind of contrary to how we're told
capitalism is supposed to work.
So that kind of shift towards financialization
was really facilitated by, yeah,
things like pension privatization.
And obviously, the long boom of the 1990s,
which had, I mean, it's just,
it's difficult to begin to kind of categorize the shift
that that moved towards the kind of
home-owning democracy had on our politics
and our economics, right?
If you think about that, like the long 1990s
from the end of the first housing market crash
and kind of like the early 1990s,
when house prices just skyrocketed
because you had the complete unleashing
of the power of finance, everyone could get a mortgage.
It seemed like there was just this endless pool of money
that was circulating around the world economy.
People did buy their houses often on the cheap,
through right to buy.
You suddenly created this class of asset owners
who were much more identified with house prices
and the performance of the stock market
than they were anything else.
You had just this, you know,
astonishing wave of globalization as well
that happened throughout the global economy.
And there was this like incredible optimism
that was among the kind of the capitalist class
at this point that Gordon Brown said,
we've ended boom and bust.
There were all these economists saying,
we're gonna liberate the poor world.
You know, the former communist countries
are gonna become, you know, these free market utopias.
But like up to 2007,
just the kind of millenarian like optimism
of those who were supporting this
like neoliberal financialized shift was,
it was hard to argue against, right?
Even for those on the left,
there was the sense that, yeah, you know, fine,
capitalism's kind of won.
Like what can we really do other than like-
And history.
Exactly, yeah.
And then you get the financial crisis
and you realize that all of that was just based on
not only a kind of lie, a political lie,
but also just deeply unsustainable economics.
And a politics which has really just like torn apart
the fabric of our society.
And we're living with the result of that now.
We're living with the result of the kind of the arrogance
of the ideologues of capital during their heyday.
And yet, because they were so successful
in like shattering our sense of collective agency
and our ability to imagine a different world,
we haven't moved beyond that.
And it's just kind of like people fiddling around the edges
being like, how do we get back to before the financial crisis
without the acknowledgement that there is no going back?
So to get beyond that then,
and I'm struck again by our use of the word sort of power,
right, in relation to this sort of untrammeled
financialization and in the face of that,
you know, these ginormous corporations,
these ginormous financial institutions,
we have individualized sort of atomized, fractured people
in our society.
So how effective is something like trade union organization?
How effective is something like an expanding
sort of collective consciousness in combating
and dealing with those forces?
Because, I don't know, I look at Port Talbot, right?
Thousands of job losses for the steel workers there.
And it connects to what we're talking about, right?
Because it's not just a job loss.
It is literally like the community,
the sense of sort of collective pride place,
yeah, sense of home almost,
and that collapsing has deep, deep ramifications.
So in a sentence, sort of how effective is trade union
organization or similar mechanisms
in confronting these incredibly powerful institutions?
I think the problem that we have with organizing today
is that even collective institutions have been,
you know, paralyzed by this sense of individualism.
They've kind of been infected by individualism.
So if you go back to, I write in, again, in the book
about the example of the Lukas plan.
So, you know, contrast what happened at Boeing,
or, you know, indeed what happened at Port Talbot
with the example of the workers
at Lukas Aerospace in the 1970s.
Their plan, well, their company was kind of under threat
from rising competition from abroad.
They appealed to the then labor government
saying, we want you to nationalize us.
And Tony Bend and their minister for trade and industry
replied and said, we can't do that right now.
You guys need to come up with a plan
as to how you can save this firm yourself.
And Ben was, again, one of these big believers
in democratic socialism.
And so the workers were like, right, okay, what do we do?
And the union representatives basically surveyed
all of the workers at Lukas Aerospace
and said, what do you think we should do?
How could we transform the operation
of this largely weapons manufacturer, basically?
And the workers came back and they said,
we need to transform this institution
into a worker owned, democratically run organization
that produces socially useful commodities,
not weapons, basically.
And they put together this document called the Lukas Plan,
which was just probably one of the most radical documents
in Britain's economic history.
It comprised ideas that had been put forward
by workers from throughout Lukas Aerospace
to use the tools and the skills
that were then available to them
to transition from the production of weapons
to things like kidney dialysis machines, wind turbines,
things that would be useful for society.
And at the same time, these workers had said,
this is how we'll manage ourselves.
This will be the ownership structure of the organization.
This is the way that we'll transition
to this new way of working.
It was this incredible business plan, basically,
that totally undermined the spirit of capitalism,
which is that the owners own the firm,
the managers manage the firm on their behalf
and the workers do as they're told.
And this is all based on the idea
that entrepreneurs and workers and managers
are these really clever people
who just know how an organization should work
and are really good at telling people what to do.
And workers at Lukas Aerospace were like,
no, we know exactly how this firm should be run.
We know what we should be doing.
We're perfectly capable of managing ourselves.
And that's why it was so much more threatening
to the established order
than even the idea of nationalization.
There's loads of companies
that were nationalized at the time.
This was something else entirely.
It threatened this idea
that people need to be managed and controlled.
And I think that is actually the most threatening thing
that the most threatening thing that we can believe
in a capitalist economy.
It's that we don't need to be managed and controlled,
that we have the power to govern ourselves, basically.
And there are a load of really amazing examples
of people doing exactly that in the book.
One of the ones that's closest to my heart,
you know, we mentioned Port Talbot,
there's this little town in North Wales
called Blyneifestiniog,
which is one of these kind of left behind areas.
It's a former slate mining community.
And instead of kind of, you know,
allowing themselves to be consigned to this idea
of like a left behind neighborhood,
the people in this town got together.
A few people started and they basically said,
we're going to start a community enterprise
to create jobs in the local area
and give people a fighting chance.
And as soon as people saw a couple of people do this,
they were like, why can't we set up a community enterprise?
Why can't we set up a community owned energy company
that will provide us with cheap energy
instead of, you know, paying tons of money
to these, you know, privatized utility companies
when there's hydroelectric power that's being, you know,
monopolized by this corporation
that's extracting all the wealth from this community.
We could actually just generate our own power ourselves.
And suddenly you had all of these community enterprises
springing up, just this incredible ethos of self-help.
There was some support through something called
the community's first program by the Welsh government.
But largely speaking, this was people just being like,
we don't have to accept things being this way.
We see a similar sort of thing in Preston, for example,
where you have the community wealth building agenda,
the council is supporting the creation of cooperatives,
democratic, local banking, all these different things.
The participatory budgeting movement
that's spread around the world where, you know,
residents are given the power
to determine how their municipal budget is spent.
The evidence is just so, so clear
that when people start to believe that they have the power
to be able to govern themselves,
to be able to make decisions about their communities,
about their workplaces,
they take that power and they wield it in service
of the collective, of their community,
of, you know, the people around them.
They basically use it to build socialism.
And the biggest thing standing in the way
of our getting from here to there
is just this pervasive and widespread belief
that I am on my own, there's nothing I can do.
The powers that are united against me are too strong
and, you know, no one else wants to work
with me to change things.
Which is actually why I believe, you know,
I'm not saying that all these small individual examples
of the resistance to capitalism or neoliberalism
are going to be enough to shift the nature
of the whole system.
What I am saying is the biggest thing
standing between us and progressive change
is basically individualism.
And these examples of people working together
to resist their exploitation, to build better communities,
they just shatter individualism.
You go to these communities and people do not share
this like individualistic, competitive mindset.
They have, you know, their own personal dreams
and aspirations and wants and a secure sense
of their own self, but they also view their identity
as tied to what happens to the people around them.
I'm really struck by these examples
of what a better future possibly looks like
within the context of what you said earlier
about our political paradigm,
that there is essentially basically a binary, right,
about the size of the state and the size of welfare.
So how do you see that better future sitting within
something that kind of, I guess you could call
technocratic governance, the sort of the managerialism
of Prime Minister Sunak or likely a Prime Minister Stammer?
Yeah, I mean, it just means democratizing everything.
Like just demanding more power being handed down to
whether that's, you know, local communities,
whether it's, you know, devolution and decentralization
whether it's demanding workers are able to take power
within their organizations, you know,
the removal of the massive restrictions
that have been placed on our rights
to do things like protest and assemble and speak out
against, you know, the horrors that are being committed
by our government here and all over the world.
It really requires like a reinvigoration
at the political level when we're thinking about politics,
a reinvigoration of the idea of democracy, basically.
Now we live in a country where the kind of liberal
democratic revolution of the kind that, you know,
we saw during the 1800s, that hasn't even been completed.
We've still got a monarchy.
We've still got an unelected chamber in the House of Lords.
We still have a private corporation that runs,
you know, the heart of our financial sector,
the City of London Corporation,
which is a private corporation in the guise
of a public local authority.
So we have all these hangovers from the feudal era,
the undermined democratic processes.
And on top of that, we have these neoliberal shifts
that have aimed to insulate even more areas of the state
from democratic accountability.
So, you know, we have like the Bank of England
being made independent, i.e.,
not subject to democratic scrutiny,
which means that its decisions are much more likely
to be influenced by the, you know, financial sector
that has the air of bank officials
than they are the preferences of ordinary people.
You have just the outsourcing of huge swathes
of public services to private corporations
that, you know, you cannot really control.
You cannot really hold accountable.
They're supposed to be held accountable by the government,
but the people who write the contracts
according to which these services are procured
also consult for the firms that are bidding
for those contracts.
It's this kind of revolving door of corporate power
that connects like public sector institutions
with private sector outsourcing organizations.
There's no real democratic accountability there.
You've seen a massive centralization of power.
You know, when Thatcher came to power,
she smashed the GLC.
The guy who was instrumental in putting together
the Lucas Plan after he was fired from Lucas
for union organizing went to work for the GLC,
the Greater London Corporation,
which was then kind of sponsoring
these ideas around how you could make
democratic planning a reality,
how you could start to bring the ideas
that we saw at Lucas Aerospace to the public sector.
Thatcher crushed the GLC precisely because
it was doing some of that interesting experimentation.
We're seeing, again, this kind of revival
of that type of movement around democratic planning
in places like Preston.
And that's why places like Preston
is seen as so threatening to the State of Squire.
It's why we haven't seen what should be like...
I spoke to a conservative the other day
who said that community wealth building
should be a conservative policy.
It should be handing power back to communities,
but they can't accept the idea that that would happen
because it runs contrary to this spirit of hierarchy
that is really what underpins capitalism.
So, yeah, that shift towards community power
and towards worker power and people power
is so deeply threatening to the status quo.
And it really requires us to just like,
yes, kind of combat this mindset of individualism
and also just like resist.
It becomes so hard to think about
constructive ways of resisting in the system that we have.
All we can do is we kind of go online
and we may be like fire off an angry tweet
every now and again because we look at the system
and it seems so broken.
But actually, if you're able to kind of get offline
and get into spaces where people are organizing with tenants
to like prevent rogue landlords,
organizing with migrants to support them
to fight for their rights,
just protesting on the street, getting out
and making your voice heard to the political class.
All of these forms of resistance are,
yes, they're reactive, but they're also constructive
because you start to build these bonds
and these subjectivities that allow us to think beyond
this like toxic individualism and hierarchy
that makes up our current system.
That's really interesting because my inclination is
to compare us with the two main possible
political vehicles for government in this country
as technocratic organizations,
particularly under Labour and the Kids at the moment.
We're just hearing you then talking about street politics,
participatory street politics.
And I'm admittedly, I'm thinking about this now.
So I don't know if you'll stand up to particularly much
scrutiny, but in light of the shenanigans
that are going on in Parliament right now,
I mean, there may well be a different speaker
of House of Commons by the time this is,
so let's park that for the time being.
But the Labour Party's position on Gaza,
and I'm not trying to talk about Gaza,
I want to talk about street politics here,
it's changed, it's moved, it's gone from the permission
of Israel to impose collective punishment on Gaza
to calling for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire.
And I think you, I want to think,
I want to think that the fact that hundreds of thousands
of people have turned out on the streets of London
weekend after weekend,
has made some kind of difference to that.
Maybe I'm being naive.
I think it's more to do with the fact
that the American state's position is slightly marginally
shifting as a result of the utter chaos
that's going to be unleashed as a result of this conflict
and that Britain basically follows tail between its legs,
everything that happened.
We have effectively no independent foreign policy,
we just kind of follow mindlessly what's going on
in the US, but having said that,
part of the reason that the situation is becoming
so untenable over there and over here
is because people are refusing, as you say,
to just accept the mainstream narrative
as to what's going on.
I know so many people,
and I think this is a widespread feeling
when it comes to particularly what's going on
at the moment in Gaza.
You go online and you see just the raw footage
that's being posted of people's limbs being blown off
by weapons that are being sold to the Israeli state
by our government.
And then you look at the news
and it's just the same propaganda
that's being repeated over and over again,
barely any mention of the actual state of affairs
on the ground in Palestine.
Very rarely do you see a Palestinian voice
out there kind of advocating for their people.
Even when we had the ruling in the ICJ,
that was barely covered on the day
that we heard evidence against Israel.
And I think that creates this sense of unreality.
I've heard so many people say,
it feels like I'm going insane
because you see what is happening
and then you go to institutions
that you kind of think that you should broadly trust
to tell you the truth
and you see things are one-sided or ignored
or just like kind of skewed.
And then you start to think,
well, where else is this happening?
And it's not obviously just happening
in Gaza at the moment.
Like last year and for a long time now,
we've been seeing basically a genocide
that's been happening in Ethiopia and Tigray.
No reporting on that
because it doesn't meet the foreign policy objectives
of the British state for people to know about that.
Same thing is happening in Sudan
or in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
There are all these conflicts
that we just don't hear about
and instead we hear constantly endless coverage
about what's going on in Ukraine
because it meets the foreign policy objectives
of the British state for people to know
that Russia is doing objectively horrible things.
But there are lots of other governments around the world
that are doing objectively horrible things,
including our own.
Many governments being funded by the British government,
being provided arms by the British government
that are also doing horrible things.
And yet we hear nothing about that
because it doesn't meet the foreign policy objectives
of the British state.
And I think this really comes down to a question of like,
I don't think that the presenters on the BBC
are like deliberately skewing the output
that they put out there.
What I do think is that how is the news agenda formed?
Like how is the news reported?
It's reported based on what happens in the papers, right?
There's always a paper review.
What determines what goes in the papers?
Well, these are literally owned by like oligarchs
and like massive corporations
that just exist to promote their own interests.
Or it is determined by what politicians say.
So politicians in many ways kind of shape the news agenda.
I remember talking to a presenter not that long ago
who was like, well, if you want this item
to be on the news agenda,
then you need to get Kya Starma to say something about it
because otherwise we can't report on it.
It's not news, like that wouldn't be kind of objective.
So when you have this, you know,
narrowing of the political agenda
among the two biggest political parties,
the news follows and it creates this air of unreality
because you're like,
why aren't we hearing about some of the biggest,
like most important issues?
If you want to move away from, you know,
questions around conflict,
why aren't we hearing about the fact much more frequently
that like last year was, you know,
potentially the warmest year on record,
maybe we're starting to see breaching the Paris agreements
about 1.5 degrees above pre-industrial levels.
Like these massive matter of issues
that literally determine whether or not people live or die,
that determine the future of humanity,
we don't see them being covered
because of this just like insulation
like of our political class
from democratic accountability.
And the way that we have seen that begin to shift
is when people get out onto the streets.
You know, when you do have a protest that is big enough,
we saw this, I remember actually,
I think it was during the 2019 election campaign,
suddenly climate became an issue.
Like it almost kind of, it didn't come out of nowhere,
but it felt like it came out of nowhere
because these people were pouring onto the streets
and saying, we demand action on this, right?
And, you know, I think it is interesting seeing
how public opinion and the news agenda can begin to shift
when you do actually get people organizing
to demand a different way of doing politics.
It's really interesting to hear you say that
because the sort of the way the British political media
has covered the environment recently
is basically in the context of whether or not
labor is gonna spend 28 billion pounds of capitalization
on it rather.
And it becomes kind of a Westminster political story
about to what extent labor is going to borrow to invest,
which can be a high-minded one
if it's had in the right way, I don't think it is,
rather than is the price of the future ecological viability
of the planet 28 billion pounds.
Yeah.
And the people who use job is that it will say,
well, it's not my job to report on that.
That's up to climate scientists or whatever.
And it's like, well, what is the point in the news
if it's literally just telling us like the shenanigans
and the gossip of these just like closed-minded,
half of them are corrupt politicians
that are like swanning around Westminster being like,
well, you know, I am completely in control
of this democracy and everyone else
will do what I tell them to do.
Like, it's just, this is why it's actually so good
to have such a growing and vibrant alternative media
in this country because I do think, you know,
that juxtaposition I was talking about
between what you see online and what you see in the news
is pushing people away from those mainstream sources
and actually encouraging people to get their analysis
and the depth of the analysis that they want.
Places like here, for example.
And the Vara attribute where I work.
Absolutely, yeah, very much so.
Last question for you and I'll try and leave it
on a slightly more optimistic note.
Yeah.
You write in the book,
since that political debate has failed to break out
of a sterile dichotomy, those on the left argue
for higher public spending funded by taxes on the rich,
those on the right argue for cuts to public spending in tax.
When we accede to the idea that politics is a battle
between the state and the market,
we play into the hands of the right.
So what should the left be presenting as an argument
or as a belief system to try and transcend that dichotomy?
I think after that, talk about how we need
to be presenting the idea of socialism,
not as a project of protection,
but as a project of collective empowerment.
So it's not about going to people and saying,
you know, businesses have been mean,
so hand more power to me, a politician,
and I'm going to save you.
Or indeed, politicians have been mean,
hand more power to me, another politician,
and I'll do things differently, right?
It's about demanding that the people who are in charge
actually respect the people that they're supposed
to govern enough to give them the power
to shape the conditions of their lives.
And what does that mean in practice?
It means just halting this extraordinary assault
on the labor movement,
which by the way, the Labor Party is now considering
rowing back on the one little tiny thing it has left,
which is these promises on workers' rights,
which are barely even enough to begin with.
So like really just demanding the end of the assault
on workers' rights and like a strong assertion
of the right to unionize and collective bargaining
and all these sorts of different sorts of things.
That is a key pillar of democracy.
It is about demanding an end
to the astonishingly draconian rules against protest.
We've seen environmentalists being jailed
for trying to bring attention to the fact
that we are destroying the planet.
And we know that the Conservative government
has pushed loads of, they talk about free speech, right?
And like freedom of assembly and all these democratic rights,
and they're just constantly riding roughshod
over just like the most basic democratic principles.
It is about supporting community organizing,
about decentralization and allowing local people
to take power within their local communities.
And it is about also why does spread democratization
of the public sector or our politics?
That means that when we have to think about
how we run our public services,
rather than saying we're going to outsource running
of our health system and social care system
to capita, a giant multinational corporation
that is literally skimming money out of the pockets
of taxpayers and sucking up into those of shareholders.
Why couldn't we have a democratically run
public health care system or public services system?
There's a really interesting example
at the end of the book about Chile.
When Salvador Aende came to power,
and obviously he was just like, you know,
destroyed by the United States
for pushing this model of democratic socialism.
He said he didn't want to go for Soviet style centralization,
nor did he want to go for kind of for capitalism.
And instead he pushed this model
of democratic socialism,
which was extraordinarily popular.
And one pillar of that was how can we organize health care
based on existing community networks
and allowing like workers and patients
and people within that system a voice
as to how they were being treated, right?
There's a completely different model.
It's just, it requires like a complete rethink
as to how we imagine the relationship
between government and governed.
You know, an ideal liberal political philosophy,
government is supposed to be a representation
of our collective power.
It's supposed to be the mechanism
through which we all govern ourselves.
You know, the liberal theorists were like,
we were in the state of nature
and everyone was attacking each other.
So we all came together and decided to form a state.
That's obviously not what happened.
But like arguably the true realization
of the liberal dream is when government
can actually become a mechanism
through which we are all able to govern ourselves collectively
where we come together to make decisions
about the future of our society amongst ourselves
rather than electing people who tell us what to do.
Grace Blakely has been an utter pleasure.
Thank you so much for your time.
Vulture capitalism in all good bookshops.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
