a lot of landlords see themselves as good people. They are participating in an immensely harmful
economic system. We've got to make it embarrassing to be a landlord again. We've got to
rediscover a sense of shame and a sense of direct participation in the harm that we see around us
today. They seem to think that they're entitled to respect and I just feel that like the law is on
their side, economics is on their side, the politicians are on their side, the courts are on
their side. The idea that we shouldn't mock them and humiliate them and make them feel ashamed is
laughable. Britain's wealth is rooted in landlordism and that's a dangerous place to be in.
Nick Banno, hi, welcome to Politics Show. Thanks so much for having me, great to be here.
Yeah, well thank you for coming. How would you like to introduce yourself?
I am a housing lawyer specialising in legal aid housing work. I've also got a bit of a background
in more street politics kind of things and have an interest in a Marxist understanding of
political economy. Is that the impetus behind this book? Yeah, I just felt like a lot of the
writing we were seeing about housing used some Marxist concepts a bit loosely and I wanted to
get really under the hood of the housing crisis and see how it works from a kind of particularly
Marxist perspective. I could ask you a really, really broad question. In broad terms, what do you
mean by that? By a Marxist perspective. Yeah. Well, classical economists, neoclassical economists
see the role of economics as the allocation of scarce resources and Marx opens capital by saying
we live in a world that has so much stuff in it. There is so many commodities in the world.
How is it that everyone is poor? So he starts from a place of abundance and he tries to work out
what the forces are in the world that make us live lives of misery and struggle in a world
that produces so much and this takes a vaguely similar approach to housing and it says not
only is there so much housing in Britain but there's an awful lot of housing wealth and how is
it that when there's all this money and all these homes, we live in cities that are packed with
gunnels with homes? How is it that all of us living in housing poverty and in very, very bad
conditions? Is that why you've just written for The Guardian about how we don't need more supply?
Yeah, it really touched a nerve that the supply issue is really kind of a throwaway line in the
book. I just have this quick justification of why I'm not talking about supply but I feel that
supply has dominated the discourse for so long that people found it really surprising. A lot of
people found it quite upsetting and shocking that you challenged the accepted wisdom that you kind
of put the property developers to proof that there is this massive shortage because that's not
really what the stats bear out if we look at Britain in historical terms or if we look at the UK
in comparative international terms. But I mean, you know, the short I suppose that accepted
wisdom is because you would think that with more supply that would I suppose liquidate
the market and make the housing stock more affordable? Isn't that not true?
Well, that's the thinking. I think it's difficult to find a great deal of evidence for that.
If it does work like that, then the amount of surplus you'd need to build to have any meaningful
impact on price would be staggering. And given that the planet is dying and given that there are
other ways of doing it, given that we can regulate a housing market out of crisis, then it seems to me
dangerous to obsess ourselves with the idea of supply, to build a vast surplus when we don't
need to, when we can just tweak a few legal and economic levers and get ourselves out of it that
way. Talk to me about regulating the prices down. Yeah, so in most countries and most sensible
places around the world, landlords don't have a complete free reign to work out what they can
extract from tenants without physically killing them. In most places around the world, there's
some sort of cap or break or regulation that governs the way in which rental markets work.
And of course, historically, that was the case here too, but it was completely destroyed
in the late 80s and early 90s. So we're quite unusual in not having any form of rent regulation.
And one of the things that lots of us are campaigning for is to restore it
with the hope that that would restore ourselves to something like a pre-crisis state of affairs.
Because this landmark policy is going to be introduced in Scotland. Yes.
But the accepted wisdom of that down here is that that actually drives up prices.
I don't know if that's the accepted wisdom. I think it's said a lot. I think it's said an awful
lot. And I think it's true that rent controls can be done badly, but that's not a conceptual
problem with rent controls. If it were the case that rent controls were generally bad,
then they would have been abolished in every country in Europe when, of course,
they tend to be present in most European countries where there are problems with
implementing rent controls. They can be fixed. We can make things better.
But the idea that a particular policy is leading to problems and therefore
we just need to let the free market run rampant in Scottish housing is bizarre to me.
I mean, so in layman's terms, feel free to talk to me like an idiot.
If you're going to set a period of time in which rents cannot rise, is that not going to give way
to landlords just pushing up the prices to start with?
It might. But then, of course, that's a short-term pain for a much longer-term
public benefit. And I also think that all of these scarce stories we hear about rent controls
generally paint a picture of a world that's a lot better than the one we're currently living in,
like a lot of these these these healthscapes I would take over the present housing crisis
that so many people are suffering through. Right. What about, I mean, is there not a possibility
as well that, I mean, over the last couple of years, obviously, you know, well, after COVID,
we've seen a sharp rise, a ridiculous rise in rents, particularly in London, in Manchester,
and even actually suburban towns. But is there not a chance that rents are going to come down
by themselves? Well, the class of landlords is not known for being generous and unself-interested.
They're, of course, assisted by letting agents whose only job it is to tell them, look,
this is what we think the market will tolerate. This is what you can get out of this property.
So it would be surprising if landlords acted against their own self-interest by saying,
I'm going to undercut and go below the market rent. So there's a chain then that's driving
rents at the moment? There are structural forces at work. I think when a landlord buys a rental
property, baked into that sale price is the idea that the rent will keep on rising. That's what
makes it valuable to them. So when a landlord says, I'm not going to put the rent up in line with
the market, I'm going to keep it low, that signals or contributes to the idea that it wasn't worth
the purchase price in the first place. It signals or contributes to the idea that the next landlord
who wants to buy it is not making a very good investment because, in fact, the rent it's currently
generating is lower. So there's a structural impetus on landlords to raise the rent. It
justifies the purchase price of their product. It's not just mean people saying, we want to
drive people further into poverty. So going back to what you were talking about before then,
you were talking about how supply is not driving house prices. I mean, is it landlords?
What is the root cause? What is driving? The market's argument is that rents in cities are
what he calls monopoly prices. So it's the highest price that will be tolerated under
given social circumstances without physically driving the class of tenants out of existence.
And what landlords have been doing over the past few decades is realizing and developing their
economic power. And what seems to be happening at the moment is landlords are realizing that
they can just say, do you know what? There is a fee for viewing. And they say it and it becomes
true. It's not that there's suddenly a massive structural adjustment in the number of people
or the number of homes. It's landlords demonstrating the economic power they have over us. They make
a demand, they see if we meet it. And when we do, they say, that is the reality now.
But is that happening all over then?
It's certainly happening in London.
They're charging for viewing or am I sorry, did I just misinterpret that?
I've heard rumors about charging for viewings. I've heard rumors about bidding wars. I've heard
rumors about listed rents not being natural rent you pay. And of course, the more landlords
cotton onto this, the worse the problem becomes. Right. So we're creating a, we're creating our
entomies actually by giving into them. We don't really have a choice. We're not being generous
here. I mean, we really do need places to live. And if this is the demand that landlords make
of us, we don't really have a choice but to say, well, that's what I'll have to do.
Can you talk to me about state backed rent rising? So when you have these short life
tendencies, which dominate the private rented sector, where you have absolutely no security,
landlords are free to demand whatever rent they want. And when the state says,
this is the housing benefit. And by the way, I'm putting housing benefits up.
What the landlords can do is just generate that state spending into additional income for themselves.
They can raise the rents in line with housing benefit rises when there is no cap, when there is
no break. So you have this system where even the best intentioned policies of the state,
which are aims to kind of reduce poverty and to make people's lives easier, are just converted
into higher state spending on landlords, which of course is a massive problem for the tax bill.
And a massive benefit for landlords. So the taxpayer is subsidising landlords.
So the tune of billions of pounds, and it's a number that keeps coming up.
Makes me feel really good that. Yeah, well, you must be a landlord.
No, I mean, just I'm paying twice. Well, exactly. Yeah, exactly. It's the state that's paying.
It's obviously tenants that are paying and it's employers that are paying because obviously
wages in this country have to be sensationally high just so that people can meet their housing costs.
But also with housing benefit, a landlord doesn't have to take a tenant that is on housing benefit.
They can say that certain properties are exempt for some reason.
Well, in principle, they do because it tends to be unlawfully discriminatory to refuse to
take housing benefit tenants. But that tends to take brave and dogged tenants bringing legal
challenges. It's not very good at filtering through into the reality of the world. And we know that
it happens. You know that it happens a lot. But what you do have is the sort of base layer of
housing provision in Britain is met by housing benefit. That's the state kind of underwriting
the bottom of the housing market and everything else is built on top of that.
So as and when housing benefit rises and the lowest rents meet to rise to match those,
the higher up rents rise with it and it's a tide that seems to be lifting all ships.
So housing benefit is driving higher rents? In part, and obviously I'm not saying the state is
bad and the state should cut housing benefit, of course it shouldn't. But I do think it's
interesting to think about the way in which the state is tearing its hair out saying,
what are we going to do about the housing crisis? Well, at the same time,
just having this open checkbook and saying for us landlords can demand what they want and we
will just continue to pay. But what's the simple resolution to that then? Because I mean, when
you talk about supply or, you know, supply not being the answer, if there was a supply of homes
that were owned by the council, is that not a resolution to the housing benefit crisis?
Absolutely. And of course, housing benefit, housing, council tenants are rent capped,
housing tenants are rent controlled, same with social housing providers. If we did that in the
private rented sector, of course, state spending on housing would massively go down. You know,
I'm particularly concerned about the housing that's provided to homeless households, which are often
charged nightly, which are charged utterly exorbitant rates and many, many of them are in
buildings that the council had once built as council housing. So the state's paid for it once
and now it's continuing to pay for it over and over again in the form of private rents.
So this goes back to Margaret Thatcher? A lot of it does. It goes back to Margaret Thatcher and
to Tony Blair, because of course, while it's right to point out that Thatcher dismantled rent
controls, what kept the landlords in check for most of the 20th century was that they were scared
that whenever the Tories were generous to landlords, labor would come and turn it round again. And
when you have a long term investment like land, that tended to keep the landlords at bay a bit.
So when Tony Blair said rent controls are never coming back, I'm keeping what Thatcher has,
that signals to the landlords, you go wild, you go crazy. So what sort of signal is Keir Starmer
sending to landlords at the moment then? If you know, if we take the premise that perhaps he's
well, he's utilizing a bit of Blair? Well, I think he's being curiously quiet. And I think what's
interesting is that he, I mean, he's been outflanked on the Renters Rights Bill. I don't think it's a
policy he himself would have come up with. And he can't do very much better than the bill that
the Tories originally put forward. So he's not saying very much about housing. But what he is,
is nothing extraordinary, nothing remarkable compared to what any other politician is saying.
The Renters Reform Bill, I mean, it has dominated the new cycle, partly because it's
the only policy that is actually being put forward by the Conservatives at the moment.
And a lot of those, the original ideas have been watered down, and they have been relaxed.
But there is one little bit in there about Section 21, I find really interesting. And I was just
wondering, like, what's your interpretation of abolishing Section 21? When I saw the bill,
I thought it was surprisingly good. I think when the Tories were kind of forced into making this
pledge in the 2019 election manifesto, I think they thought it was quite a technical, fluffy,
family-friendly policy. I don't think they quite realized that Section 21 is one of the key
kind of cornerstones of the Thatcherite housing settlement. As I explained a minute ago, it's
what allows landlords to demand a higher rent whenever housing benefit goes up. So when you
abolish Section 21 and introduce that little bit more security, it becomes that much easier
with tenants to say, actually, I'm not paying this higher rent, you're going to have to go
through a legal process to raise it. So it should, it could have the effect of dampening
the kind of runaway pace of rent rises that we're used to seeing.
I think if it is abolished, it'll take some time to bed in because, of course,
it's been abolished in Scotland. And Scotland is still, Scottish tenants are finding their power
and Scottish landlords are realizing the loss of theirs. But those kind of
behavioral changes can take years, if not decades, to bed in.
Well, also, I mean, you know, there's a theoretical loss of power that could be
experienced by the landlord. But, you know, we've just, we've just spoken about housing benefit a
moment ago, and we said that, you know, even though they are landlords, don't take tenants
that, you know, have housing benefits, even though that they are legally required to. So,
I mean, will it actually, you know, will it give power back to tenants, do you think,
in actual practice? Because how many young people, especially in today's market, have the time
or the know-how to take a landlord to court?
Yeah. And of course, that's going to be the challenge that the housing movement faces.
It's going to be re-skilling a generation of renters as to their rights. But I do think it's
going to be crucial in terms of the number of people who don't complain to their landlords
about housing conditions because of section 21. It suddenly gives them a much safer environment
to do that, to say, you know, I pay you money for this service, you've got to fix the boiler,
you've got to fix the damp.
That's really interesting about not complaining, because it's true, isn't it? Most tenants don't
don't speak up because they are worried that they're going to be evicted.
I mean, I think it's true for all of us. I think we've all experienced it. And I think one of the
really weird and amazing things about the housing market here is that if your landlord comes round
and says, oh, there's a bit of a damp problem, I'm going to do something about that,
you genuinely don't know whether that's the landlord behaving themselves or the landlord
gearing up to evict you. So even if you have a nice landlord, you live under such a looming threat
that it wreaks havoc with people's sense of stability and their mental health and their
capacity to build their lives. It's a horrible situation.
Landlords don't really do too well with being told that they have to, you know,
with more regulations being slapped on them. I mean, a couple of years ago, we were talking about,
actually might have been last year, we were talking about energy efficiency and how all
properties now had to be energy efficient. You know, you couldn't have a single glazing or a
roof that allowed heat to evaporate. How did that increased regulation go down?
Well, yeah, it wasn't popular. And it's really interesting because I think a few years ago,
it would have been seen as something of a fringe issue. But with the massive rise in energy bills,
the energy performance of people's homes is life changing financial decisions.
And it's only fair that landlords should, the ones who benefit from the housing crisis,
should be the ones who ensure that tenants aren't losing money, not only by paying their rent,
but by paying extortionate energy bills for leaky flats and poor energy performance.
But of course, if you add on these costs to landlords, costs that many would argue are actually
just, you know, basic provisions that make somewhere livable, landlords apparently decide
that they don't want to rent their homes out anymore. So what's the solution to that?
Well, this is, I mean, I sort of take them at their word. And this is exactly what happened in
the previous century, that where it became unprofitable to be a landlord, they sold up.
And that was generally seemed to be a good thing, because it means more owner occupiers.
It means more ability for local authorities to buy properties and repurpose them or redevelop
them as council tenancies. And it just means people like more people living in better forms of
tenure than the private rented sector, which is by far the worst.
Do you think that councils would want to repurchase private property?
We know that they did. We know that they spent a lot of the 70s and 80s doing exactly that.
Of course, things are a bit different now. But I mean, local politicians fall over themselves to
promise more social housing. And if they were having to, if landlords were having to sell up
at bargain basement prices, it's a good opportunity for local authorities.
There's quite an interesting Lib Dem policy that came out a couple of months ago. That's
something that you don't hear very often, but that they wanted to devolve planning permission.
So they wanted to give local areas more opportunity to decide what is in their local area.
Do you think that councils would be able to purchase private property and make it into
social housing if local people were able to decide what those properties were going to be used for?
I mean, to be fair, in the last century, the way it worked was massive amounts of government
grants and public and public money. If the government was interested in doing that, then
I think they would probably have to fund it or at least change the way in which local authorities
can access public loans. But we know it can be done if there's a political will for it,
because it happened 50 years ago. Do you think that there is a political will for it or will
there be understarm? I know you said that he hasn't spoken much about housing, but can you imagine it
would be quite high up the agenda? I really hope that things will start to change. I really hope
that we start to remember the old wisdom that we had throughout the 20th century in terms of what's
called municipalisation, buying property of distressed landlords. I don't know if it will happen,
but what I think is hopeful is that we're now starting to remember, to have these conversations
again about how grubby and harmful the business of landlordism is, about how we have it within our
grasp to take property away from them and repurpose it if we really want to. It encourages me that
this is suddenly a hot topic. This is something we're beginning to talk about again.
I know you'll probably ask this all the time, but for the sake of the tape, can you explain to me
what you mean by the grubby business of landlords? I think a lot of landlords see themselves as good
people, and I'm sure they probably are, but they are participating in an immensely harmful
economic system. They are profiting from an immensely harmful system, and the way I think of
it is it's a bit like people who use their phones while they're driving. Everyone seems to think
they have some particular and unique excuse, but when you think about it statistically at a social
level, we know that it's immensely dangerous, and anyone who is a landlord is not just profiting
they're profiting three times. They're getting the rental income, they're getting their mortgage
paid off, and they're getting capital gains. Even those landlords who think, well, I could be
charging more, they're doing extraordinarily well, and they're doing extraordinarily well
to everybody else's loss. It's really interesting, that phone analogy. Do you think landlords are
all landlording? Is it rooted in individualism? It is here, and that's a weird thing about Britain,
is that almost all of our landlords are just individual people. I think, again,
the old wisdom is worth discovering here, because throughout the 20th century, the landlord was
this figure of scorn, this really hated, reviled character, and there was a massive and deliberate
social change under Thatcher and Under Blair to reinvent the landlord instead of being this kind
of often violent, always unpalatable character, to be this sort of state-sanctioned, petty investor
and acceptable topic for the dinner table. And I think if we want to be serious about
reversing the housing crisis, we've got to make it embarrassing to be a landlord again. We've
got to rediscover a sense of shame and a sense of direct participation in the harm that we see
around us today. I've heard jokes before that landlords used to be hung out of windows.
I don't like... Not physically, sorry, by their feet, just to be clear.
Yeah, well, more often it was landlords doing the violence. I'm not a fan of kind of chauvinist
language around landlords. I think it can lead to some nasty things. I do think
I do think they ought to be embarrassed. I do think they ought to be ridiculed. It really
fascinates me that whenever there is sort of a protest or a direct action about a landlord,
they seem to think that they're entitled to respect. And I just feel that the law is on their
side, economics is on their side, the politicians are on their side, the courts are on their side.
The idea that we shouldn't mock them and humiliate them and make them feel ashamed is laughable.
Why do you think all of those... Well, all of those that you've just listed,
why are they on the side of landlords? Well, we're in a dangerous situation where
the argument of the book is that the housing market more broadly is rooted in profitable
landlordism. What generates the vast house prices is the idea that if you're selling your house,
you have to sell it to someone who may or may not be a landlord. So anyone buying it would have to
at least compete with a landlord who's able to command these extravagant rents. So the
rented sector is intimately tied in to the housing market more broadly. The government really,
really, really can't have the housing market failed because it's destroyed a system of pensions,
it's destroyed a system of social care, it's presided over a system of wage restraint,
and house prices for an awful lot of people are the only kind of stability they have,
the only kind of economic well-being they have. So a direct attack on landlordism is a much
broader attack on the housing economy more broadly. So it's dangerous territory to be in.
And I think if you don't want to be cynical about it and simply say, oh, well,
the MPs are all landlords and they're all in each other's pockets, if you want to be more
generous than the interpretation is, they know that Britain's wealth is rooted in landlordism,
and that's a dangerous place to be in. But that's really interesting because then as the number of
renters grow every single year, you've created a two-tier society there. You've got an asset
class who are able to, what you're talking about, you know, social care, adult social care,
they're going to be able to fund that, they're going to have a pension in that, then you're going
to have an entire cohort of people who physically can't do it. Is that not going to be more expensive
for the state in the long term? Not only can they not do it, but of course they're paying for the
social care of their landlords and then property owners. It is something of a zero-sum game and
it's right that the bigger this phenomenon of landlordism becomes, the more people the state
is going to have to look after. The irony being, of course, they dismantled that system in the
first place and replaced it with one of property rights and it's coming back to bite them.
That feels like the state has gotten larger then.
The housing benefit bill certainly got larger. What the state is doing with its money seems to
be a lot less. It seems like so much money is just averted straight from taxes to
other people's mortgages, not the people's pockets.
When we look at councils and the number of councils that are going bankrupt at the moment,
how much of that do you think is linked to the increased pressures that they're facing with
housing? Well, the councils themselves are being incredibly honest about that and saying we can't
afford to house our homeless populations, we can't afford to meet the temporary accommodation costs we
have, and we can't afford to replenish our social housing stocks. Housing and social care is obviously
one of the biggest items of local authority spending. It blows my mind that if we wanted to,
we could just sort that out with rent controls and we choose not to. We choose to let local
authorities go bust instead. I just want to go back to a bit of the theory that you've got in
the book. You talk about Karl Marx and Adam Smith and you link them and you say that both of them
would not like the current housing system that we have. Can you tell me why?
Well, Marx and Smith both argued and it's traditionally been true on the right that
landlordism is not a good thing. It's not a profitable economic activity. It's a pure drag
on social production. It's taking away wealth that was created by other people.
That was a wisdom that held true for a very long time and I think we've mentioned in the 1970s,
this kind of very relaxed attitude towards the collapse of the private rented sector.
And it's us who are living in this really weird political moment where the right supports landlords.
You would think that the right would be interested in lower state spending and you would think that
they would be interested in lower wage bills and successful businesses. Instead, they seem to
be very interested in property development, fine, but that seems to be intimately tied
up with landlordism as well. So they find themselves coming out to bat for landlords
in the name of property development, but that carries with it the idea that the state should
carry on spending all this money on housing benefit, diverting all of his tax and these wages
to the already wealthy. To make a crass argument off the back of that, you could say I didn't think
that the right liked benefits grounders. There you go. Exactly. Which is what you're essentially
saying that they are. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yes, the entire housing benefit bill
that goes to the private sector is your right, a form of benefits grounding.
It's extraordinary. We touched on Margaret Thatcher earlier. Can you tell me how important
right to buy was in creating some of the issues that we have now? Yeah, I think it's really sad.
I think if I happen to be running a nice local authority and I wanted to build council housing,
I probably wouldn't bother because we saw this week the news that this beautiful,
a war-winning scheme in Norwich, an awful lot of it has been sold off under the right to buy within
three years of its life. And what is the earthly point of investing massive amount of public resources
in a social generational good if it's going to disappear and be repurposed as a sort of private
gain within years of its existence? And you have this idea that the state's already paid full of
this stuff once. It's built it. It's built it as a social good. And it's now paying for it again
in the form of repurposed right to buy flats, being re-letters, private, often temporary
accommodation at extortionate rates. So what do you do about that? Do you get rid of right to buy?
Would you have never done the scheme in the first place? I don't think abolishing right to buy
should be remotely controversial. I don't think it's controversial in Scotland where it's already
happened. It's a real, like, fringe demand to keep right to buy in place, or at least it should be.
You know, you should be embarrassed to stand up and say, I think public assets should be sold off
in perpetuity and that the state pay for them over and over again in the form of rents.
You see, you don't hear it from that side of it too often because it's normally a very
emotive argument, you know, that a man has a right to own his own home. And it's always
sold as a sort of like, you know, it's actually sort of as a bit of a fairytale actually.
What should we change sort of like our whole relationship with how we view houses and how
we view ownership? Well, I think the idea of selling off right to buy for emotional reasons is a
nice idea if you can afford it. But I mean, both parties keep telling us that there isn't a magic
money tree. They can't afford to keep right to buy in place. Can we talk a little bit about the
legislation in Europe? I love talking about legislation. Well, do you know, actually,
they like hearing about legislation and talking about the sort of things that sort of regulations
in Europe or legislation that you would be in favour of implementing here? Yeah, again, it's
worth pointing out just how weird Britain is. I mean, you go to almost any city in Europe.
They have more or less some form of rent control. Some are weaker, some are stronger. The rent
controls that exist in Ireland aren't particularly strong. The rent controls that exist in Germany
are much stronger. But we're in this very, very weird place where we don't have any limit on how
much landlords can try to extract from tenants. So I'm not, for the time being, I'm not hugely
fussed about what we steal, what we borrow and what we implement here, as long as we do something,
we can improve it in the future. But take any system you want and bring it here or restore
the one that we had here that works so well for the best part of the 20th century.
What would be your, if you had one pick, one bit of legislation that you could implement tomorrow
that even ported in from Europe, what would it be? Well, it has to be some form of rent control.
It is a broad social good. It makes people's lives less miserable. It makes people's lives
more affordable. The only people that doesn't benefit is landlords. And I think we can all
agree that's that we're comfortable with that. Would you get rid of landlording if you could?
You know, it's not a case of abolishing it. You can't pass the Landlord Abolition Act 2024,
but what you can do... I don't think you're thinking big enough.
The point is that the state works in more discreet ways, but it can abolish landlords and
it does abolish landlords. And that was the really interesting point about the 70s was that
landlords weren't just declining and they weren't just dwindling, but the scale at which they were
dwindling was accelerating. And that was to do with state policy. That was to do with high
interest rates and rent controls, which meant that it was just simply a bad idea to be a landlord.
You couldn't make any money doing it. So you de-incentivise it as an economic activity.
Smith would disagree that it is an economic activity, but however you do it, the state
through its policies can generate a system in which landlordism fails. And I think that would
be a good thing. I know you touched upon it earlier, but do you think there is a way to be
an ethical landlord? No. I think... Under current circumstances, it's not possible.
Even if you're letting below the market rent, you're still charging some of the
highest rental prices in Europe. You could effectively treat yourself as a local authority
and grant a legally secure tenancy. But the point I mentioned a moment ago that even the
landlord who comes trying to fix the mold, the tenant doesn't necessarily know. The tenant would
have to take them at their word. And when the landlord has the absolute right to evict you for
any reason or none, they can paint themselves as generously as they'd like. But ultimately,
they have immense power over the tenant and they could choose to wield it or not. And that's not
a healthy situation to be in. How do we get back to the 70s style of landlording that you're in
favour of without increasing supply? Well, I think that the 70s style of landlording was
very bad. I mean, they were awful landlords, but the point was that they were much fewer often.
Far, far fewer people were being subjected to the harm of the private rented sector. It's not
difficult to replicate the system of laws that was in place in the 1970s. And of course, when you
depress land values, you make it much, much easier for local authorities to build social housing.
The biggest barrier they face at the moment, as well as the looming right to buy threat,
is how do we get hold of land and how do we build on it? Because at the moment,
they're competing with Barrett homes, they're competing with
the people who are destroying elephant and castle lendlies. And local authorities just
don't have the purchasing power. Whereas if you make that kind of speculative price-increasing
redevelopment unprofitable, suddenly the local authorities the biggest player in town.
I mean, a lot of those big housing companies that you just spoke about there,
a lot of the time, if you speak to anyone who works high up there,
they actually say their work is very unprofitable. They say that their margins are very slim.
And I'm sure that's true. I'm sure that's true. And it shows just how easy it would be to drive
them out of business if we wanted to. Looking ahead, I mean, there's been a sharp increase in
the number of millennials who are renting. But millennials are also expected to be, well,
well, they will be part of the asset class quite soon, actually. Can you imagine that
those millennials, do you think that they would have been turned off of landlording
from their own experience? Or do you think that, I don't know, maybe the human condition doesn't
there? I take your point. I think that depends an awful lot on the mood music that we create.
As a society, I think the way part of the way in which landlordism was made acceptable was by these
TV programs that were just endlessly on in the 2000s about about playing the property game
and how gentle they made it look, how acceptable they made it look. And if we rediscover a sense
of refulsion, if we replace those with TV programs about just how horrible it feels when you don't
know if the landlord is going to kick you out or fix the mold for your own benefit, I would hope
that people take that sense of shame on board and choose not to. But fundamentally,
I wouldn't like there to be a situation in which it's the choice of that generation. I would prefer
to create the conditions in which it isn't profitable for them to be landlords, in which it
makes no sense for them to be landlords, and that they should sell up either to someone who's going
to live in the house themselves or to someone who's going to do something more socially productive
with it, like repurpose it as social housing. It's become quite popular again. It's not just
those early 2000s programs, but it's popular again on social media. Yeah, I think it never
really went away. And some of them, they're just really bleak to watch. I think the original
dream of these programs was that you looked around your dream home and everyone felt good about it,
but now the host says, oh, what are you going to do with it? And they say, I'll just put a coat of
paint on it and let it out. And the fact that you can go on TV and say that without,
without feeling an enormous sense of shame is a very unhealthy sign.
Yeah. I mean, even on, I mean, I think I was watching something on TikTok just the other day.
It was a girl who must have been about 28. She was explaining how you could make a home into an HMO.
Yeah. Yeah. It's revolting. And when we had what was called the Rackman scandal in this country,
this scandal of violent thuggery in the private rented sector, there was a kind of moment of
national shame around the idea of landlordism. And one of the biggest landlords at the time
was the church, which sold off an awful lot of its stock because it didn't like the aesthetic of
being a landlord. So again, these are all things that we have done in the past. It's well within
our grasp to do it again. People should be ashamed to make TikToks and say, this is how you make an
HMO. Through shame. The church sold it off through shame. Well, it was embarrassing. It was, it was
also unprofitable. But for a variety of factors, the church, yet massively decreased its private,
private landlord practice. How realistic is that ambition going to be in, well, either of our,
well, near lifetimes? I think, I think it really is up to us. I think your right to point out that
the millennial experience is very different. And the generation below us is very different. And I
think there is a culmination of a sense of unfairness and rage. Because what the economic
purpose that our generation has served is to take all of our income and pass it on to already wealthy,
older people. And at a certain point, that the anger at that situation begins to dominate at a
certain point, the foolishness of that situation begins to dominate. And I don't think it's out
of the realm of possibility that, you know, as people who are in their 30s become, you know,
the ones who are running the Labour Party and important in government, the common sense,
there's a sudden outbreak of common sense. And everyone says, this is a stupid system.
It's plagued me my entire life. I will not have it plagued the next generation.
So you're hopeful for it? Yeah. And I think the renters unions are being so good at the moment.
I think housing campaigns are being so good at the moment, and capturing that nascent
resistance, that sense of this is wrong, and purposing it towards landlords. So I think
the energy is there, and the will is there, all we need to do is sort of consolidate it,
make sure it's pointed at the right people. And yeah, I would be very surprised if we come back
here in five years time, and we say, well, we've just kept the system of landlordism going. We've
done nothing to address it. I mean, even the Conservative Party is passing a renters reform
bill. Well, there's even quite a strong Conservative group as well. I think it's priced out. It's
called, isn't it? Yeah. They're not, they're not fans of me, and I'm not a fan of them.
Oh, no. Why? Is it the Marxism? It's the Marxism. It's the, I mean, what, what they do is they kind
of confect this debate about Yimbees and Yimbees. They say it's all to do with supply. And if you
are not a property development type, then you want to make the housing crisis worse. And it's
very effective with discourse. It's very effective at backing people into a corner and saying, well,
I'm a good guy. So I must be a Yimbe. And I just think this is a false argument to have.
They won over a lot of politicians. They won over a lot of influential people. But I think what I
would encourage your viewers to do is to question their logic, question their rhetoric, question
their data, and say, can you really convince me that there's a supply problem? Or do we solve the
housing crisis by the methods that were successful in the 20th century through regulation, through
rent controls, and through making landlords is a less profitable activity.
But I mean, is there any hope of anyone in the Conservative Party introducing more legislation,
more regulation? You know, it's historically true that Conservatives haven't like landlords,
as you pointed out, I don't think it's beyond the realm of possibility that Tories will say,
that's enough state spending on landlords now. Let's try and unwind it.
That's the sell. I can see that. Yeah, I think that and wage bills. But of course,
landlordism is so wrapped up with home ownership that at the moment, the bigger concern in their
mind is keeping home ownership going. And they seem to be willing to spend enormous amounts of
public money in the form of housing benefits to make sure that the home ownership system remains
in place. Thank you very much for coming in. It's been a real pleasure.
