Wall Street and Big Tech and the City of London together own your identity.
You have to pay to use your own identity.
If we are going to defeat them, and if we're going to turn this into a viable society,
the global society, we must forget about taxing, we must think in old Marxist terms,
how do we take their capital away from them?
This is not a viable system, it's a system we live in.
We are stampeding towards oblivion.
Janis Varivakis, hello, how are you?
Very well.
Good.
I'm very happy to be here.
Very happy to have you here.
Before we get into the subject matter today, your book, Technofutilism,
I'd invite you to tell the audience who you are, what you do, in your own words.
Well, I used to be an academic that no one knew anything about because I was
cocooned in my university office writing esoteric texts that maximum 20 people around
the world cared for, and I didn't mind, until I started feeling in the early 2000s that the world
is heading towards another 1929 discontinuity, let's put it mildly, and at that moment I thought that
I don't have the right, the moral right to carry on playing around with my mathematical
models of game theory, and I started writing fiery articles and books, including the Global
Minotaur, which became quite a significant text, even if I'm saying so myself, regardless of 2008.
It was a time when I was also shifting from Australia to my home country, Greece, which was
always going to be ground zero of the European great financial crisis, and at some point
having opened my mouth once too often and written too many articles about it, a young man who was
leading the Greek opposition at the time, this is now 2010, 11, 12, 13, at some point invited me
to become the finance minister if he were to win, which I did, and so from obscure mathematical
texts I was elevated to becoming the finance minister of the most bankrupt state in Europe,
the world, that lasted five, six months because we had a pact, the prime minister and myself,
that we would never accept another bailout loan under conditions of crashing 80% of the population,
he decided that he wanted to surrender, I decided I'm not going to surrender, and that's it, I resigned,
and then created my own party, going from small victory to grand failure, writing books all the
time as therapy, so that's why. Okay, perfect, let's indulge them in another hour of therapy,
talking about this book, we're going to get into the concepts in it, we're going to go into it in
detail, but top line for people who are just here to begin with, what's it about, why is it important,
why should people read it? We all feel in our bones that this crisis is never ending, it is
metamorphosizing, taking different, you know, from a crisis of deflation, falling prices and
falling wages, it went to a crisis of the cost of living crisis, of inflation, we know that there's
something dismally wrong with the world, that you know capitalism was always a system that produced
crisis, and new funding forms of poverty and depravity, but what has been happening over the last
15 years, excuse me, is unique, we haven't experienced that since the 1770s, 1780s, this
so universal sense of angst that everybody shares, including of course about the climate,
and my view is that the reason why we're experiencing this is not that capitalism is going through
another one of its normal crisis, but rather we are at a turning point, very much like the 1770s,
1780s, when there was a great transformation, as Karl Polanyi put it, from feudalism to capitalism,
and the feudalism power sprang out of the land, anybody who owned land, the land of Gentry,
had power, and it was all sorts of power packed in one, political power, economic power,
cultural power, if you were the aristocracy or part of it, you had it, and you couldn't
distinguish between political and economic power, and the wealth came out of rent, the rents that
the aristocrats of the land of Gentry charged, vassals and peasants and so on, and then there is
this great shift from land to machinery to capital, and from rent to profit through the
commodification of land, the commodification of labor, even though peasants worked very hard,
their labor was not a commodity, they couldn't quit, didn't receive a wage, it was no labor market,
similarly for land, there was no market for land, you either had it or you didn't have it,
and then everything was commodified, so that was capitalism, it starts here in this country
and in Amsterdam around the end of the 18th century, and it continues to this day.
Now, I mentioned before that it was in the 2000s that I was feeling that some major crisis was
coming, and 2008, the city of London, Wall Street, so on, in my estimation, created a rupture in
capitalism, it wasn't anything like, not even like 1929, it was even more substantial than that,
and for a number of years I was trying to think about what on earth is happening,
and I came to the very controversial conclusion, which is this book, that in the same way that
we shifted from feudalism to capitalism, we are now shifting, without realizing it, to a new form
of feudalism, a very advanced, almost science fiction form of feudalism, this is why I call it
techno feudalism, but essentially, we have a new land, which is the cloud, and we have a new landed
gentry, you can call them cloud delists, or the techno feudal lords, the lords of the cloud,
like Jeff Bezos, just one example of Zuckerberg, and power is shifting from the owners of machinery,
of standard machines, even industrial robots, even advanced machinery, to the owners of this
network of machines that creates this digital version of land, and just one last point to explain
to our audience what I mean by that, when you enter Amazon.com, or Alibaba, or one of those
digital platforms, people think that they enter a marketplace, they do not enter a marketplace,
they enter a digital fiefdom, because come to think of it, even though you buy yourself,
it's all mediated by an algorithm that belongs to one person, who doesn't produce anything,
except for this landscape. And how does Bezos make his billions? If you produce a book, or, you know,
a bicycle, or anything that you sell through Amazon.com, he keeps 40%, that's a rent. Suddenly,
we've gone from profits to rents, but this time, it's not rents that you charge for the use, or the
leasing of land, but the leasing of the clouds, so I call them cloud rents. And the more I thought
about that, the more I convinced myself that this is a great transformation, which is hugely important,
not theoretically, but for me, the idea of the liberal individual gone. You can no longer be
a genuine liberal, or even a libertarian, if I'm right. Social democracy gone, because what was
social democracy? It was a kind of mediation between industrial capital and organized liberal
gone, because industrial capital now is being exploited by those people. They get 40% of whatever
it is that they produce, and no one is going to negotiate with Jeff Bezos. No government can make
any group of workers sit down with Jeff Bezos, or they can't make Jeff Bezos sit down with any
group of workers and carry out a social democratic bargain, or new deal, or whatever.
And also, if you look at the clash between the United States and China, why is this happening?
Taiwan is not the reason. Taiwan was always a problem. National security is not the reason.
My view is that what you have is two kinds, two cloud fiefdoms clashing. The American one,
based on Silicon Valley and Wall Street, and the Chinese one. Europe is non-existent,
because we don't have a cloud. So anyway, that's the whole story, really.
And we'll drill down their details in the book.
Perfect. And we'll get into those details over the course of this conversation. Before we do get
on to that subject matter, I'd like to loiter around this point about the end of capitalism,
about what's killing capitalism, and whether or not you mentioned 2008, 2009. Is it fair to say
whether actually capital is the force that's causing capitalism to come to an end at the moment?
That's a great irony. I'm a Marxist, I'm a left-winger, full disclosure folks.
And I remain a Marxist. And I think that this is a Marxist analysis.
I mean, there's even an appendix with a Marxist political economy take for
nerds. If you're a nerd Marxist and you want to look at what is the actual political,
Marxist political economy behind this book, there's an appendix. You don't have to read it,
but it's there for you to tell people that you read it.
Yeah, of course.
So I'm saying this because we of the left always imagined that we were brought to this earth
by chance and nature and whatever, in order to overthrow capitalism. That capitalism will be
overthrown by the organized left, by the organized labor unions. Didn't happen, we failed. We are
dismal abysmal failures. No doubt about that, right? All of us. Yep.
So what did the trick? Capital. Capital went through a historic mutation
from a produced means of production. Because if you think about a fishing rod, a steam engine,
an industrial robot, it's something we have produced in order to produce all this stuff.
It's a produced means of production. But cloud capital is a produced means of behavior modification.
That's very different. So effectively, you've taken the, if you remember Mad Men, the wonderful
television series and Don Draper, right? So you automate Don Draper. You turn him into Alexa.
And he does much more than simply put ideas into your mind as to what you want. Firstly,
it trains you to train it, to train you to train it, to input into your mind preferences.
And at the same time, the moment you have that preference for something,
that need for some good, it sells it to you by passing all markets.
In that sense, capital has over the capitalism.
So talk about this Amazon Alexa example a little bit more, because this cloud capital
idea is what underpins techno feudalism, right? How does it differ from traditional capital?
You covered it just a little bit. And also, how does it turn us, the user, if you like,
into the serfs of feudalism past?
Advertisers have always been in the business of indoctrinating us, right? Of putting ideas,
of manufacturing desires in our soul. This is the major transformation, transition
from early capitalism to more advanced monopoly capitalism after the Second World War.
In the 19th century, the capitalism that Adam Smith was talking about was all about producing
bread and, you know, ale and meat and carriages and horse manure and stuff, things that people
needed through a market-based mechanism for distributing productive resources.
And using the price mechanism in order to equilibrate demand and supply and all that.
That's before the war. After the war, you've got the big conglomerates in the United States,
primarily, that emerged from the war economy. They have this huge, immense productive capacity.
They can produce a lot more washing machines that American families wanted. So they had to find
markets outside. And they needed to manufacture desires in our soul for the things that they
could produce, because they could produce a lot more than what we needed. So they had to convince
us that we needed more than we needed. And that's von Draper. That's advertising, right?
But that was human beings. It was a new profession, the purpose of which was to convince you to buy
stuff. One way street. Don Draper comes up with an idea, wonderful poster on the motorway. You sit,
you say, I want that, then you go and buy it. Okay. Still a very significant change back in the 50s,
60s, 70s and so on. Today, what you have is Alexa sitting on your desk or Siri on your phone
or Google Assistant, all those contraptions, which present themselves as your slaves. So you say, you
know, set the alarm clock for 1035, order milk, tell me a story, play music, stream a video,
all those things. So it's great. I mean, I'm addicted to all those machines, right? I'm not a
Luddite or a neo Luddite by any stage of the imagination. But that's not what Alexa is.
Alexa is an interface with cloud capital belonging to one man or to a few men, usually men.
And what you do is you give it information about yourself. So you train it so that it knows you.
And then it starts giving you recommendations about books to read, pieces of music to listen to,
films to watch, which are spore on. I don't know about you, but when Spotify recommends music,
it's usually music I like. When Amazon recommends books, it's always books I want to read. It knows
me, right? Which is very impressive. And we are impressionable people. So when Alexa recommends
something to me day after in day out that I want, at some point, when she recommends something else,
I will want it or I will at least buy it. And it will always be quite close, not exactly what I
would have selected without her, her of it, but quite close, right? So this is a two way street.
This is an infinite regress. I tell it things so that you can tell me things so I can tell
things and therefore it acquires a great deal of power over my thinking and my preferences
and my desires and my aspirations even. And the most important thing here is that it is the same
software, the same mechanism, not just software, warehousing and all that, that can actually send
it to me directly by passing any capitalist. The capitalist then becomes a vessel to that.
So this is what is so different to Don Draper. Don Draper could not sell you anything
himself. He could convince you to go into the shops and buy it. And one final thing.
There isn't why this cloud capital in my book and in my mind is very different to very advanced
pieces of technology like rockets or industrial robots, which are also very advanced contraptions.
But the great difference is that capital until now required waged labor to be created.
So from the steam engines to the industrial robots today, there were workers, there are workers,
in factories, together with machines and other robots and other pieces of produced means of
production that actually build the stuff. So you need a capitalist who employs labor, machinery,
buildings, electricity, technology and so on to produce the capital, not Amazon.com,
not cloud capital. Most of cloud capital is produced by me and you because you know that very well
that why can't we compete with Elon Musk's former Twitter ex, even if you and I were great coders
and produced such a network, such a piece of software for short form debating, which is much
better than Twitter, even if we did. Who would join it? Yeah, all our followers are on Twitter.
Ex, I can't say it. So the capital of ex is us and all our tweets. Amazon.com, every time you
buy something or you like something or you upload a review of some book or some product,
you're adding to the capital stock. So we are creating the, you know, a large part of cloud
capital. So cloud capital is a new form of capital because of the way it reproduces itself.
It can reproduce itself using self labor by people who don't even know themselves. So that's why I
call them called us cloud serves because we do all this work. Even if we don't do anything,
just we have our phone on us and we're walking around London, Google Maps knows where we are
and that enriches its capacity. It's cloud capital for telling people where it's congested,
where they shouldn't go, whether, you know, this shop is a popular one or less popular one.
So capital that produces and that produces itself, that is a major discontinuity in the
development of our technologies and the socioeconomic system we live in.
We'll talk about this point in more detail in a moment, I think, because it's interesting that
Shoshana Zuboff in surveillance capitalism, she argues that those inputs, those behavioral
or activities that the companies then monetize, that it forms part of a new capitalist system,
it doesn't go as far as saying feudalism, but maybe we can talk about that in a moment.
But I just wanted to pick you up on, you referred to Alexa as she instead of it.
And I wonder, maybe you do, maybe you don't, maybe this question goes nowhere, what role
sort of the anthropomorphizing these technologies have of turning them into people,
of turning Alexa into a woman, of turning Syria where you can tell Syria to be, whoever you want
to be, but I wonder if you, whether you think that's significant or perhaps you don't, I don't know.
Of course it is significant. The greater the capacity of the machines to present themselves
as humans, the greater the power of this infinite regress where we're training to train us,
to train it, to train us and so on and so forth. Now you mentioned Zuboff and, you know,
an important book, Surveillance Capitalism, from which I've learned and which I think is an important
part of the story, but doesn't go far enough because it continues to treat those corporations
as monopoly capitalists. Now Henry Ford, Thomas Edison were monopoly capitalists.
They had created network companies. I mean Thomas Edison was the Elon Musk of his era.
Think about it. In the early years, the first decade, 1903, 1904,
he actually electrocuted a hapless elephant at Coney Island in order to demonstrate
that the electricity, the alternative current that he used which belonged to Westinghouse,
which was coming out of a Westinghouse powerhouse, was lethal because he was selling a direct
current which would not have killed the elephant or a human being. So concentrated power, huge
egos, new fungal technologies. This is all new and the capacity of those people, especially Henry
Ford, to monopolize markets through technological advancement and to create desires into people's
minds, desires they didn't know they had. This is not new. It's there. Of course, Big Tech has
turbocharged it and it is true that they have such direct access through Alexa and Siri and so on
and our phones really, our tablets, to us that that monopoly power, the capacity to monopolize
a market is now much greater than it was before the Second World War. However, where I go
further is that I'm making the point that Amazon.com and thousands of such companies now
all over the world, in Indonesia, in Malaysia, especially in Africa, this shift from the market
to digital platforms, these digital platforms are not markets and the, I mean, Ford, how did he
make his money? Selling cars. He made the cars and sold them to you. Now the owners of these platforms
of the cloud do not make anything. They are go-betweens. They are essentially renters
and you might say, well, why don't we call it an entire capitalism? Well, we could. In the same way
we could call capitalism industrial feudalism. It wouldn't be wrong, but it wouldn't allow our
minds to concentrate on the fact that here is a great transformation to another social system which
relies on rents, not on monopoly profits. That's the great difference with Ford, the great difference
with Hilton, the great difference with McDonald's. All those people actually produced goods and
services that they monopolized and convinced you you really needed them. Basis and the rest
do not produce anything. They are creating a new kind of rent which sucks the economic energy
out of the capital sector which is now becoming a vessel to their own cloud-based empire.
I think that's a different story. Let's talk about those technological advancements then.
Specifically, which ones you think were integral to cloud capital first emerging and also
where they came from? Where are they based? Where do these technological advancements start?
They start with the development of algorithms that could actually improve themselves.
When I was a student ages ago, algorithms were dumb. They were like recipes. You take this
ingredient, that ingredient, you mix them together, then if this happens then you do that, if the
other happens then you do something else. That's how programs learned how to produce good statistics,
solve mathematical problems, create Excel. These were dumb algorithms.
The moment you have reinforced learning in algorithms, so you have algorithms that do not have
set objectives. They have a variety of objectives that the algorithm can select from. It's a little
like telling a chef, prepare a dish of meat lasagna. But the same thing, if in the process
you realize that the quality of the meat is not what it should be, you can change your objective.
And then going beyond that, algorithms that could monitor their own efficiency and could
change, alter their own functioning in order to become more efficient. That's the beginning of
artificial intelligence. And of course now with generative learning and large language models,
at some point, this Hegelian dialectical idea, quantitative changes led to qualitative changes
in the same way that when you lose your hair, which hair must you lose before you declare bold?
There's no answer to that. But there is a point when at some point people say, oh, you're bolder,
right? Speaking from experience. Similarly, at some point, I can't pinpoint precisely when
the development of algorithms and their capacity to improve themselves and learn from themselves
and alter their own substance. At some point, this was a singularity. Not that they became
sentient. They never did. And I don't believe they ever will. But okay, this is science fiction.
At some point, they managed to acquire this capacity to do that which Cloud Capital does
in my book. And I think what's important as well, and you point out in the book,
is that the consequences that technical feudalism isn't actually inevitable
as a result of those technological advancements, that the political and social conditions
were absolutely crucial. Yes. So what are those social and political conditions?
Two. The first one was the privatization of the internet. Because internet one, the first
internet that came out of the military industrial complex in the United States, the Pentagon,
when they brought in research scientists from the universities and all sorts of enthusiasts,
coders, to contribute to the creation of the original internet, it was a commons.
It had nothing to do with capitalism. So to this day, when you read a website, you use this
HTTP ancient language, computer language, right? But that's somebody created that,
which allows us to read websites. That person didn't get a penny for it. It was a contribution
to the commons, to the internet commons. Similarly, with the various ancient technologies
still used to send and receive emails, SMTP and so on, you may have seen those. Those were all
protocols created by enthusiasts who were rewarded in a variety of ways, but not monetized.
So the first internet, I remember it, I was using the internet before it was called the internet,
it was called Janet. Do you know that? Joint academic network before it was called the internet,
at least in this country, it was called Janet. What were you using it for?
Well, initially, to exchange data with other academic researchers. And emails were called
batch files, because you would create a little batch of messages and put them into a file. And
that file would then be readable in America by some colleague there. But it was a commons. It
was like the commons before the enclosures. So we had a new enclosures with Big Tech after 2001.
And the most important development there is that they owned and privatized your identity. You cannot
prove who you are on the internet today. You've got subcontractor identity from large corporations.
So a bank knows who you are, right? So it can vouch on the internet through codes that it shares
with Google or Apple, because how does Apple know that it's you? It asks you to input your data from
your credit card or your debit card, so they take it from the bank. So Wall Street and Big Tech
and the City of London together own your identity. You have to pay to use your own identity.
That's the privatization of not just the commons, but of yourself, of the individual.
To this day, there's no way you can say it's me. Here's proof that it's me. The state could have
done that. The state could have certified who you are and given you a long number, which is you
and a pin number to certify that, but the state doesn't do that. It leaves it to the private
sector, to the concomitants. So that's one. The second development, which created techno feudalism,
that spawned huge quantities and qualities of cloud capital, was the response by our governments
and central banks to the 2008 crisis, because after April 2009, I don't know if you do remember
that there was this meeting here in London presided over by Gordon Brown of the G7,
essentially decided to refloat finance, to bail out the bankers worldwide, and they printed
together over 13 years, $35 trillion, and they gave you the finances. At the same time, the
practice of austerity here in Britain, in Greece, across the European Union, in the United States,
austerity for the many, and socialism for the financiers. Now, why is this connected to cloud
capital? Because when you create all this amount, huge quantity of money, which circulates,
sloshes around the circuits of finance, but people are there, have no money because of austerity,
and they can't buy anything. Industrialists, the captains of industry and so on,
take Volkswagen for instance, right, or General Motors, they look at the little people and say,
as if they can afford to buy something like Google and Tesla. We're not going to invest in it.
We're not going to mass produce goods that these people won't be able to buy,
but they have all this money because the central banks have printed it and given it to the
financiers. The financiers want to give it to these industrialists, so the industrialists think
Apple has $200 billion, $200 billion of savings. Now, why do they want money from the central bank
if they have savings? They don't, but the central bank picks up the phone and says,
I'm going to give it to you for free. So, Apple says, all right, give it to them, and you know what
they do? They go to the stock exchange and buy Apple shares. The share price goes up,
their bonuses are linked to the share price, they're taking more money.
Mr. Cook and the rest, Steve Jobs before, the only ones who took this money and invested it
were the ones who invested in cloud capital, the Jeff Bezos and so on. There is no doubt that
all the money that has gone into creating the optic fiber cables criss-crossing the oceans,
the server farms, the algorithms, the AI and so on,
nine out of ten dollars or pounds spent on that came from the huge quantities of money
printed by the central banks, by the states. So, the awful response by our governments
to the 2008 disaster was part and parcel of what created the UMPH, the funding for the cloud
capital that now is taking over the world. It's interesting, actually, we had Mariano
Mazzucato in here recently talking about the state's role, I'm sure you know the book,
The Entrepreneurial State, right, and the state's role often in being the first mover for a lot
of this stuff, socializing the risk, accepting the risk of, let's say, creating the technology we
needed to put a man on the moon. But then, at the end, it's the private company who reaps the
rewards, it's the private company who takes the profits and the risk is socialized, the
profits are privatized. I wonder what you're reading on the states in quotes, not the United
States, I mean, a nation state's role is in establishing technofutilism and whether or not
you view that relationship between the likes of a musk, a Bezos, as a parasitic one, that they are
sort of benefiting from the investment that a state has made in the past.
Look, Mariano's thesis is absolutely correct. For decades, the military industrial complex,
the state has been central in investing and guiding the investing and having, you know,
good civil servants. I'll use a term of abuse or phrase that neoliberals use to abuse the state,
picking winners and decided that they're going to build the internet. The internet was not,
didn't spontaneously emerge. It was a decision of some people in the Pentagon to create the
internet for military purposes, but nevertheless, it did not come out of the marketplace.
And then the state comes in and invests. Every technology in your iPhone or your Samsung phone
or whatever was invented as a result of some government grant, which was directed in that Wi-Fi
came out of the CSIRO in Australia. What did the Australian government get for that? Zero,
because it was offered to the commons. Same with GPS. GPS was given for free. They could have
charged for it, but they gave it away for free. And then these companies that privatize the cloud,
privatize the internet, that's the Mariano Mazzucato story, then also privatize the returns
and use it in order to exert more power. And to deplete the capacity of the state to continue
doing that, which is like an idiot who sits on a branch of a tree and starts sowing the branch,
that I think is more or less the Mariano Mazzucato story. It's a good one, and I agree with that.
But as part of the same story comes my story, because by effectively emptying the state of content,
of, you know, deprofessionalizing the state, shifting everything to the private sector,
subcontracting everything to those conglomerates, the state created a much greater crisis in 2008
that would have happened had the state not done this. And then the private sector that was supposed
to know better, that's the neoliberal story, right, that the market knows best, collapsed under the
weight of its own stupidity and criminality. That was the case in 2008. And a hapless,
vacuous state, a state that doesn't have the expertise that it once had. This is the problem
we have today, you know. The state does not, why do you think the HS2 is not going to be built?
Because the state doesn't have any civil servants who know how to plan the construction of a major
project anymore. They've subcontracted everything. But still, they are responsible for saving capitalism
for itself in 2008, 2009, under Gordon Branson. So what do they do? They do the only thing they
know how to do, which is to print huge quantities of money and give it to the same people who
destroyed, nearly destroyed capitalism in 2008. And then what do they do? They give it away,
most people, most companies like Volkswagen and Ford and so on, go and buy back their own shares,
except for some really smart people like Zuckerberg, Bezos, Musk and so on, who take the money,
and they are the only ones who invest. And I wouldn't call them parasites, you know.
I mean, I dislike all of them. But the person I consider a little must be an evil genius.
The emphasis on the genius, though, he's absolutely, spectacularly smart in the way that
SpaceX. He beat NASA on its own game. He actually created spaceships that can actually land
on their bottom, right, without being destroyed. You know, that's not to be scoffed at. So these people
created capital goods, what I call cloud capital, which is wonderful that we have it. I mean, I'm
all in favor of artificial intelligence. You know, when I spent the summer translating this book
using depot, and of course, working on top of it, I loved it. You know, I'm addicted to my phone
and to Google and to all those things. No, Facebook, I hate them, but that's my problem.
I use Twitter all the time, even though it's like, who put it that way? I can't remember.
You said it magnificently. It's like taking everything that's written on the walls of
mail toilets all over the world and putting it online. But nevertheless, you know, when I want
to publicize my book, I use Twitter when I want to have a political fight with somebody,
have it over Twitter. I'm not saying that they are useless. I'm not saying that they are parasitical.
What I'm saying is that the form of capital, which is creating a new socioeconomic order,
which is not viable, and it's not the fault of the machinery. It is not the fault of the technologies.
It is who owns them. But that is a Marxist critique of capitalism to begin with. The problem is not
the machine. The problem is who owns the machines and who doesn't have access to them unless they
provide free labor or very cheap labor in the case of capitalism, free labor in the case of
techno feudalism. Let's talk about that order a little bit more then. We've named the individuals
that sort of the cloud lists the people that could be said to form our new ruling class.
Let's talk, could you talk a little bit more, I should say, about how their rise and their supremacy
then places people like you and me as serfs in that system, how that dynamic works?
The moment they can create a cloud thief, which attracts us, because let's face it,
if I want to buy a book quickly, which I can't find on bookshop.co.uk, I'll go to Amazon
especially if I need to read something quickly and get it on Kindle. I go to the page, the relevant
page, if I'm writing an op-ed for the newspaper, I do it. So they create a cloud thief, which you
really need and want to be on. Once you're on it, you are helping without realizing it, reproduce
its capital stock, the capital stock that gives it power over you. So you are a serf without knowing
it, a voluntary serf, but of course the worst slavery is the one that people volunteer for.
Jeff Bezos then can use the attractiveness of this cloud thief essentially to siphon off the
capitalist sector, most of the profits, because when you chance 40% rent for anything sold on
your cloud thief, then essentially you decimate the profit basis of the capitalist. So the capitalist,
the standard capitalist, the old-fashioned capitalist, becomes a vessel to the cloud
capitalist or cloud-alist, I'll call them cloud-alists for short. We are cloud serfs to them.
In the Amazon warehouse, the people who work there as precarious, they don't have any rights
really, they're precarious labor, nomad land. Watch the movie if you haven't, you see what I mean.
They have electronic devices strapped to the wrist, which monitor their every move, tell them
which part of the warehouse to go to next, what box to pick up. So they are cloud trolls.
I mean, if you've seen the wonderful movie Modern Times by Charlie Chaplin, what he depicts there
is now full-on through the cloud, because it's the same cloud capital that connects
Alexa on your desktop, your laptop which creates cloud capital or recreates the cloud capital
of Amazon.com, the software that drives proletarians or precariously employed workers in the warehouse,
the drivers who are delivering the stuff. This is all a new form of
mutant capital, which I call cloud capital, which also puts the lid on the profitability
of the capitalist class, which means that because these people never pay tax,
that states will always be impoverished, states will then have to increase VAT,
which is the most regressive tax. So, you know, it's the plot thickens. It becomes a completely
different kind of system. One could call it rentier capital capitalism or platform capitalism,
but I insist on shifting away from the word capitalism, because it will help us concentrate
our mind on what the gigantic transformation is, the equivalent of moving from feudalism to
capitalism. Do you think we'll ever be able to tax them effectively? No. Why? Well, because they're
too smart and they have better accountants than the government has, and they can shift from one
country to another. And it is impossible to create the state power, or recreate the state power,
against their own cloudless power, to defeat them legally in terms of accounting, in terms of how
they managed to push their profits from one jurisdiction to the other until it lands in
some jurisdiction where no corporate tax is being levied. If we're going to defeat them,
and if we're going to turn this into a viable society, the global society, we must forget
about taxing them. We must think in old Marxist terms, how do we take their cloud capital away
from them? And how do we socialize it? So it's easier to imagine the end of the private property
of cloud capital than it is to imagine the proper taxation of cloud rents. Well, go on to that in a
moment. We'll talk about viable alternatives. What a more progressive, call it a utopia future,
whatever you like, looks like. However, is there, do you find it compelling to suggest,
I sit here in this conversation with you and I go, Janice, you know what? I don't want anything to
do with this. I'm getting rid of my phone. I'm getting rid of my laptop and I'm going to go and
live in a cabin in the woods and grow my own vegetables. Forget about it. See you later. I
don't want to engage. How do you answer that criticism? How do you try and compel people to
not go, God, this is the power, the wealth of the forces we're up against is so significant
that I just don't have the appetite to try and combat it? There aren't enough good and huts for
all of us to do that. And I don't believe you will do it. You may claim, you may feel desperate
and you may think that this is a lost cause and you may say that, oh, I'm going to do that,
but you're not going to do it. Even if you do it, you know, two months later, you'll come back,
you will crawl back into London using your phone again. So, you know, an escape to a
eucolic past that never really existed is not the solution. Is it possible though to opt out?
Maybe not in the way I've just described, but you know, you talked earlier about the way these
companies co-opt or identities. Is it possible for us to opt out of that process? Is it possible
for us to steal back what belongs to us? It's like saying, is it possible for somebody who comes from
rags to end up with riches? The answer is yes, but only if it's one person or a handful of persons.
A handful of persons could rise from rags to riches. They can go from being, you know,
Amazon warehouse workers to being cloudless. No doubt. No doubt. There is this degree of
social mobility, but it is impossible for society to escape as a society from techno feudalism.
You mentioned at the beginning the geopolitics or the conflict Cold War,
whatever you like, between the United States and China, and that it's wrong to understand that conflict
as a sort of traditional geopolitical game, but instead as a conflict between two
superpower cloud fiefs. So, please, can you talk about that a little bit more? And I guess I'd
ask you, glibly, as well, who's winning that war? Okay. Before I answer the second part, let me
explain what I mean. The rise of China is an American story in the same way that the creation
of the European Union is an American project. We Europeans like to think that we had a fantastic
idea to end the war in Europe. We had that idea, but the EU would never have been great without
Americans planning and executing the plan for the creation of the EU. Similarly, the rise of
China, okay, thanks to being played an important role by opening up, but what happened essentially
was this. There was a dark deal, I call it in the book, between the United States
ruling class and the Chinese Communist Party.
Industry would shift from the United States manufacturing to China.
China would be the Chinese capitalists would be exporting to the United States.
They would be getting paid in dollars that the United States would have to print
because the United States was a deficit country, remains a deficit country,
but that deficit would be sustainable. Why? Because all the profits, the dollar profits,
or the vast majority of the dollar profits of the Chinese capitalist would go to Wall Street
and be invested in real estate, in shares, in derivatives, and in bonds. In other words,
a large part of the Chinese profits from selling to the United States would be financing the American
government. That's a synergy. They are accomplices. The Chinese Communist Party and the American
rentier capitalist are partners. So why are they now moving apart and threatening the world with
Armageddon with a new Cold War that may end up into a thermonuclear war? That question was in my
mind for a very long time and I didn't have an answer to it until I noticed WeChat.
WeChat is an application that belongs to Tencent, a conglomerate, a big tech
megalith in China. I realized that the West doesn't have anything like that. Imagine
if there was an app, and by the way, that's what Elon Musk wants to do when he calls an
everything app. That's WeChat. Imagine there is an app that allows you to send messages,
watch TikTok-like videos, watch movies, listen to music, everything that's Spotify,
Netflix, Instagram, WhatsApp, Signal, and so on do. Everything in one app plus
free payments. You don't have that now here. You need to download the application of Lloyds Bank,
of Barclays Bank, of Bank of America, and so on. They charge you an arm and a leg to make payments
or they charge proprietors, shops, shopkeepers, an arm and a leg, Apple Pay. They charge huge rents
for making these transactions. WeChat, free payments and you can have any WeChat app.
All you need is a bank account somewhere in China, in one. So suddenly, this amazing deal
that the United States had with China, but also with the European Union, a little aside,
when the euro came out, everybody was saying, oh, this is great because we Europeans will be able
to compete with the dollar, the exorbitant privilege of the dollar, the supremacy of the dollar is
going to be challenged by the euro. That never happened and never will happen. Why? Because
if you're a German industrialist, if you, you know, Mercedes Benz or a Dutch industrialist,
you don't want the euro to usurp the power of the dollar because your money, most of your
profits come from selling to the Americans. Now the Americans are a deficit country. The only
reason why you sell to them is because they have the state deficit, which they cover with dollars,
and the only reason why you accept dollars is because of the exorbitant privilege of the dollar.
So you don't want the euro to undermine the power of the dollar as a European capitalist.
The greatest strength of the American dollar is foreign capitalists, not the CIA, not the American
military, not Biden, none of these people. It is a foreign capitalist who freaks out at the thought
that the dollar will lose its authority and power. That applies to the Chinese
capitalists who do not want to see the one, the Chinese currency, overtake the American one.
But the Chinese, because they have, due to the power of the Chinese Communist Party,
fused their big tech with their big banks, something that's not happening in the United States,
Wall Street will never allow Silicon Valley to go anywhere near the payment system.
So they are at loggerheads, Big Tech and Silicon Valley, sorry, Silicon Valley and Wall Street.
In China, they refuse the one thing. That's why you have a WeChat. Add to that the central bank
digital currency, which allows you and me, the foreigners as well, to have a digital wallet
in China with three transactions, in one, of course. Suddenly, the predominance of the dollar
comes into question. The Trump administration started the Cold War by freezing Huawei out.
In my estimation, it's because of that. Nothing to do with Huawei posing a national security
threat or anything like that. And then you have the war in Ukraine. And the confiscation of $400
billion, owned by the Russian Central Bank, by the West, primarily the United States.
I'm not going to start a conversation about whether they should have done that or not.
All I'm saying is that if you are a Saudi Arabian prince, an Indonesian oligarch,
and of course a Russian, but even a Ukrainian oligarch, you never know what happens after the war.
And you see that these Americans have no qualms confiscating your money, hundreds of billions
of dollars. Then you think twice before you put all your money in dollars. So this superhighway
of payments, of free payments that the Chinese have created, which they didn't even want to use
themselves because they want the American dollar because their capitalist profits come from the
American. Suddenly, it sees a lot of traffic. And Wall Street, they are shitting their pants.
Excuse my French. It's welcome because they think, oh my God, here we have an alternative to the
dollar system. I think this is what's underpinning the New Cold War. When Biden announced that
essentially what he told the Chinese in the fall of 2021 was, we will prevent you from becoming
in a technological advanced country. When you ban the sale of advanced chips, chips to a country
like China, you're saying you will stay technologically backwards. Well, that's a declaration of war.
A technological war, but economic war. So they start decoupling themselves and they start
putting more emphasis on this alternative payment system. So it's a clash of two cloud fiefs,
two cloud techno feudalisms, a clash between two payment systems, both of them digital,
both of them living on the cloud. One dollar denominated, the other one denominated. And where
is Britain? Where is the European Union? Nowhere. We are utterly insignificant.
It's a reassuring place to be, isn't it? So I don't mind being insignificant. It's just that,
you know, our politicians have not gotten onto that. What's actually happening? Yeah, they keep
thinking up and making Britain great again, the European Union that is going to become a
significant force if we integrate more and we have more countries in the Balkans and Ukraine and so
rubbish. We are nobodies. It is China on the one hand with the coalescence of the bricks around it
and the United States on the other hand. That's a very unstable world to live in and doesn't
augur very well for the European continent, including Britain. Could you talk a little bit about
how cryptocurrency fits into that network? Because I assume on the one hand this possibly
democratised, direct, discreet system for financial transactions essentially threatens
the stability and the supremacy of those two payment systems you just mentioned, though.
I think that crypto is overblown. It's macroeconomically and sociologically insignificant.
It is technically fascinating when the algorithm for Bitcoin came out
by Nakamoto or somebody called Nakamoto in 2008. I spent quite a few months studying it.
I was fascinated by the technology and why the magazine interviewed me back then.
What did I think of it? And I said it's a fantastic solution to a problem we have not discovered yet.
It's not money and it can never be money. And I explained in the book why it can never be money.
It can be a speculative asset, which is what it is. I mean nobody uses Bitcoin to buy stuff.
And it would be crazy to use it to buy stuff if you think about it because imagine that I mean
to begin with Bitcoin has a fixed supply. It has to have a fixed supply in order to have value.
But at the moment, lots of people use it to buy things.
And more people come in, demand for Bitcoin increases. So its dollar value or pound value rises.
At some point, when it exceeds a certain point, if it starts working as a function, as a currency,
then people are better off using pounds again and keeping holding their Bitcoin.
So there is a plateau. There is an inbuilt
ceiling, which does not prevent Bitcoin or any other cryptocurrency from functioning
like a means of exchange. So then it becomes a speculative thing. And then you have an oligarchy
of those early adopters who are sitting on very valuable piles, stashes of Bitcoins.
So I don't find it interesting. I find the blockchain technology very interesting.
And in my previous book, Another Now, which was a political science fiction novel,
where I imagine Another Now, how could things have developed today in a socialist world
after 2008? How would things work? Blockchain is part of the deal. But it is not a way out
of capitalism or techno-fidelism. It is a technology that we will use once we are free
of the yoke of capital. You addressed the book to your father, who hoped that a capitalist order
would be replaced by a socialist utopia for the benefit of society. And one of the striking
things, well, I wanted to ask you, I was about to ask you, you're almost interviewing yourself,
about Another Now, because obviously it was one of the things in socialism, right?
There are very few blueprints out there about what the future society could look like, and that is
provided in Another Now. You have described it, you have just literally described it as science
fiction. So I don't know how valid it is as a comparison to techno-fidelism and as an alternative.
But you mentioned democratised company and democratised money. And I wonder if you do
think those are viable alternatives to the reality that you're describing in this book.
They are the only viable models, because What We Have Now is not viable. It's real,
but it's not sustainable. The economic crisis we are facing, and which we will continue to face,
have to do with the fact that value is created in a tiny sector of the economy, which is shrinking,
the capitalist sector of the economy. That's where value is produced by wage labor, but that is
shrinking. We have an increasing domain of free labor, of cloud service, of cloud capital,
of the platforms, which are parasitic to a shrinking capitalist base. So our crisis,
financial crisis, economic crisis, cost of living crisis are going to be getting worse and worse
and worse, just like the climate crisis. So this is not a viable system. It's a system we live in,
but we are stampeding towards oblivion, both socially and environmentally.
So the reason why I wrote Another Now, by the way, science fiction is not about any fairy
stuff. Science fiction is not about the future. Science fiction is an innovative way of writing
about the past and the present. That's why I always loved science fiction. So as a socialist
and a politician, I always have to answer the guy in the pub or the last in the pub who says to me,
okay, mate, if you don't like the way things are, how should they be? And that's a difficult question,
and I didn't have an answer to that. That's why I sat down and I wrote that novel, which was about,
you know, if our revolution occupied Wall Street and so on had succeeded in 2008, what could life
be like now, given the technologies we have and, you know, the fallen nature of humanity
that is a given, right? We are imperfect beings. So I tried to imagine what would corporate law
be like. So I advocate the idea of one worker, one employee, one share, one vote,
which if you think about it, it's such an easy idea in the same way you have one vote
when you go to the polling stations, you have one vote as a worker, and you cannot buy votes,
you cannot lease votes, you cannot rent them, in the same way you can't in the political system.
So imagine that. Suddenly, without revolution, without having, you know, without storming
Backingham Palace or the Winter Palace or whatever, suddenly you have totally democratized
the world of work, and you have done away with the stock exchanges because if you can't sell and
buy shares, then it was a point of the stock exchange. And if you have the central bank,
the Bank of England, let's say, or the European Central Bank, giving each one of us
a free digital wallet with a pin number where we can park our money, then what's the point
of having an account with Lloyds? Barclays. You don't even need to be authoritarian and
ban them. They will just shrivel and die, unless they can provide you with services
that they are not providing you now. I mean, the only reason why you now have an account
with a private banker is because it's the only way of using your money. So another now was all
about being practical in a science fiction type of way in answering the question, how could things
be functioning today? Do you think we can get that? Well, I don't think I'm going to live to see it,
if that's what you're asking. Mind you, I'm getting old anyway, so that doesn't matter.
So this is the bad news. The bad news is that I'm not optimistic. But I think that to be optimistic
today, you have to be a real fool given that there's no empirical evidence pointing to good
outcomes. But then again, imagine this being the 1770s. And I mentioned the 1770s because that was
the time when Adam Smith was writing his Wealth of Nations, which spearheaded, spearheaded, introduced
the world to the great transformation of the time from feudalism to capitalism. If I'm right that
today we're living in the same moment of transformation from capitalism to taking feudalism,
I think the 1770s is a good point in time to compare ourselves with. So imagine this was the
1770s and I was advocating a world without slavery. And you were interviewing me and you said,
do you think this is going to happen? I probably would say to you, no. I can't imagine, you know,
there had been no human society without slavery beforehand. So how could the human mind in the
1770s imagine a world where slavery was universally condemned and bound? So on the one hand,
totally pessimistic. On the other hand, absolutely hopeful. Good.
Mr. Farkees, thank you so much for coming in. I really appreciate it. Thank you very much.
