Lecture 16 – An Introduction to Bond Markets
What do a wedding ring and a U.S. Treasury bond have in common?
The Oxford English Dictionary tells us that the word bond means an agreement with legal
force.
In the context of finance, a bond is a certificate issued by a government or a public company
promising to repay borrowed money at a fixed rate of interest at a specified time.
But the Oxford English Dictionary also tells us that the root of the word bond is the middle
English word band, one meaning of which is a plain ring for the finger, such as a gold
wedding ring.
So, a wedding ring and a Treasury bond are both promises.
In its entire history, the United States has never broken its Treasury bond promises.
It has never defaulted on a bond.
It has always kept its promises to pay.
The same cannot be said for the promises made by those who exchange rings.
But during the summer of 2011, bond markets held their breath, waiting to see if Congress
would pass legislation that raised the debt ceiling in the United States.
If the legislation were not passed, there was a serious danger that for the first time
in its history, the U.S. would fail to keep a promise to pay someone to whom it owed funds.
Why are bond markets important?
Bond markets are important because they provide an efficient way for savers to channel funds
to corporations and government entities that choose to implement projects that require
funding beyond the levels permitted by current revenues.
Larger corporations issue bonds to finance the building of new physical facilities, the
development of new product lines, and the implementation of new technologies.
Governments borrow for many reasons.
They borrow when they wish to build new roads and to spread the cost of those roads over
many years.
They borrow in recessions when tax revenues have fallen in order not to lower expenditures
and thereby deepen the recession.
They borrow to finance wars.
And not all government borrowing is bad.
Use it simply makes sense for a government to use future tax revenues to undertake projects
or provide services in advance.
It makes sense to not make people wait for those goods or for those services.
Whether it's a good idea for a government to borrow or not depends on the value of the
projects that they execute with the funds that they have received through borrowing.
And the value of having those goods and services now rather than waiting for them after they
have the appropriate tax revenues.
In this lecture, I will introduce the bond market.
I will explain the various types of government and non-government debt obligations that we
typically lump together under the term bonds.
And I will also investigate how the government has supplied bonds to the marketplace over
its history.
We begin with an introduction to the market for U.S. Treasury securities and in particular
with the market for Treasury bills, notes, and bonds.
Three technical terms.
So right off the bat, we want to know what bonds, bills, and notes are.
If we look at the market report pages of the Wall Street Journal, we will see a bond market
overview that reports the prices and yields on Treasury bills, notes, and bonds.
The example that you're looking at was taken from the electronic version of the Wall Street
Journal on November 18, 2010.
What we see there is a whole host of so-called treasuries.
One-month bills, three-month bills, six-month bills, one-year notes, two-year notes, and
so forth, the seven-year notes.
And finally, 10-year notes and 30-year bonds.
And also in that report, we see information about price changes, which are measured in
30 seconds, and yields.
I'm not going to dive too deeply into the meaning of the price changes and the yields
that comes at a later lecture.
But for now, I want to explain all these different Treasury securities to you.
I'm motivated by what the vendors at Wrigley Field cry out.
You can't tell the players without a scorecard.
The first step to understanding the bond market that was pictured is to define bills, notes,
and bonds.
US Treasury bills are short-term debt instruments of the US Treasury.
A US Treasury bill, which is informally called a T-bill, is the promise of the United States
Treasury to pay the face value of the bill at maturity.
Why would the Treasury ever borrow on short-term for the very simple reason that it borrows
in anticipation of income and other tax revenues?
While the US Treasury will sell Treasury bills in any multiple of $100, we will typically
assume that the face value of a Treasury bill is $1,000.
And that's for simplicity.
A Treasury bill makes only one promised payment.
It pays its face value at the maturity date.
And thus, as we've seen earlier from the lecture on present value, it makes sense to understand
that the Treasury bills that we see always sell at a discount.
That is, the market price of a Treasury bill is always less than its $1,000 face value.
The return to the purchaser to the person who is lending money to the federal government
is thus the difference between what the purchaser pays to buy the Treasury bill and the face
value of the Treasury bill that they will receive later.
The US Treasury currently offers T bills with maturities of four weeks, 13 weeks, 26 weeks,
and 52 weeks.
Although, as we will see later, those Treasury bills are sold from Peter to Paul many times
before they're finally mature and are finally paid off.
What about US Treasury notes?
These are medium term debt instruments of the US Treasury.
A Treasury note is the promise of the US Treasury to pay the bearer the face value of the note
at maturity and also to pay coupon payments every six months.
The note is thus defined by its face value.
The size of the coupon payments that occur intermediate to the final payment at the time
of maturity and, of course, by the date of the maturity itself.
Again, the US Treasury will sell notes in any multiple of $100, but we will assume a standard
face value of $1,000 to keep ideas simple.
When the Treasury issues new notes, it typically sets the coupon rate to be close to the current
interest rate, but upon issuance of the note, the Treasury locks in the coupon rate for
the life of the note, so the coupons are always of the same dollar size.
And as time passes, the coupon rate can turn out to be bigger than or less than the market
prevailing market rate of interest.
For reasons I will shortly explain, the market price of a Treasury note can be either larger
than or smaller than its face value.
In common parlance, the note can sell at a premium when its price is higher than its
face value or at a discount when its price is lower than its face value.
The Treasury currently offers notes with maturities of 2, 3, 5, 7 or 10 years.
Now we go to US Treasury bonds.
These are the long-term debt instruments of the US Treasury.
Treasury bonds are like Treasury notes in all respects except one.
They make coupon payments every six months.
They can sell at a premium or a discount.
They can be purchased from the US Treasury in multiples of 100, but the US Treasury currently
offers bonds with a maturity of 30 years.
Government bills, notes and bonds are all considered to be less risky than stocks.
And from the last lecture, we understand that most individuals dislike risk.
But why do we think the Treasury's bills, notes and bonds are less risky than stocks?
There are several reasons, but the most important reason is that bills, notes and bonds specify
in advance the payments that the bearer is entitled to receive.
The payments that the government will make.
A stock does not promise to pay a particular dividend in advance.
A stock does not guarantee a value on the date that you wish to sell it.
The Treasury sells additional securities and they're quite interesting and we're going
to focus on two of them.
The first is called STRIPS, and I'll talk about STRIPS on at least two occasions in
this course.
Well, of course, as you might have guessed, STRIPS is an acronym for Separate Trading
of Registered Interest and Principle of Securities.
What a mouthful.
The reason the acronym makes sense is that STRIPS are the result of stripping the coupon
payments from a Treasury bond or note and using those coupon payments to create another
government debt obligation that makes a single payment on its maturity date.
Thus, STRIPS are zero coupon securities.
The only time an investor receives a payment if he owns a STRIPS is at the time of maturity.
So here's an example and it explains what's going on.
Suppose a two-year Treasury note.
The note promises four coupon payments plus a final payment.
The payments will occur in 6, 12, 18, and 24 months.
STRIPS separate these four payments into four zero coupon securities.
The first security is payable in 6 months, the second security is payable in 12 months,
the third in 18 months, and the fourth in 24 months.
STRIPS are popular with investors who want to receive a known payment on one specific
future date.
So what STRIPS do, in effect, is replicate the payment stream of a Treasury bill but
four longer horizons.
Who likes STRIPS?
Here's an example.
A financial institution that has a future obligation to pay a known amount of funds might purchase
and hold STRIPS with a maturity equal to or close to the date at which that obligation
must be paid.
Think about how good that is.
At the point that financial institution purchased the STRIPS, they would know that its value
will grow to the size of the future payment they have to make.
STRIPS are not issued or sold directly to investors.
STRIPS can be purchased and held only through financial institutions and government securities,
brokers, and dealers.
As we'll see later, STRIPS are an early and fairly simple example of something we call
a financial derivative.
While many of you think these days that STRIPS is a dirty economic word, we'll talk about
them later in which we cover STRIPS again and think about why they aren't such a dirty
word.
Here's one more example of another kind of security offered by the U.S. Treasury to individuals
and a corporation.
It's called TIPPS.
It rhymes with STRIPS, but it's very, very different.
TIPPS are Treasury Inflation Protected Securities.
You want to know about these.
The principle of a TIPPS increases with inflation and decreases with deflation as measured by
the Consumer Price Index.
When a TIPPS bond matures, the owner is paid an adjusted principle or the original principle
whichever is greater.
Since 2004, a non-protected bond had an average yield of about 2% greater than the yield on
TIPPS.
What do I mean by that?
Since 2004, if we have TIPPS and a bond that does not include inflation protection and
those are of the same maturity, the yield, the percentage that the government has to
pay to get people to buy the non-protected bond has been on average 2% higher than the
yield on the TIPPS bond, which does give inflation protection.
And that indicates very, very clearly that those who buy government Treasury securities
value the inflation protection that TIPPS provide.
Securities have been offered by the U.S. Treasury since 1997.
As of June 2009, TIPPS securities represented 8% of the $6.6 trillion public Treasury debt.
The U.S. government supplies debt securities to the marketplace when the federal government
operates at a deficit.
By that I mean when the federal government spends more than its tax revenues.
The government operates at a deficit when its revenues are less than its expenditures.
And think about this, the deficit is a flow.
Its units are dollars per year or per quarter depending upon how you wish to measure them.
The national debt is the accumulation of deficits, it is a stock rather than a flow.
If we liken the government deficit to the amount of water spilling over a dam, then the debt
is the amount of water that is collected in the pool under the dam.
The deficit always has time associated with its measure.
The deficit is a trillion dollars a year or 500 billion dollars a year.
The debt never has a unit of time, it may have a date associated with it, but we would
say the national debt is so many trillions of dollars on a date.
When the federal government runs a deficit, the national debt does increase.
When the federal government runs a surplus, that is, tax revenues are greater than expenditure,
the national debt decreases.
Every year, and this is very, very important, the government must pay interest on the national
debt and the interest it pays on the national debt is a current expenditure of government.
That means in a very, very real sense that higher debt means higher interest expenses
which means other things equal, higher deficits unless taxes are raised.
So deficits kind of feed on themselves because they imply higher interest payments.
If a government ever had a debt so large that the interest on the debt exceeded its total
tax revenues, that's your bottom dollar that that government would certainly fail.
In fact, many economists believe that governments would fail at even lower levels of debt than
that.
We won't get into that today.
Whether the levels of the debt and the deficit are too large or not is a question that has
to be answered in the context of the size of the economy.
So as we often do, let's look at some data.
The chart that you are looking at now is the U.S. federal deficit as a fraction of gross
domestic product.
What do we see?
Well, the dramatic thing is that the federal deficits were largest.
That is the red ink was the greatest during the time of World War II.
But frighteningly, we also see that our deficits in 2009 were uncomfortably close to that level.
We also see that if we divide this period of 1939 to 2009 into two halves, that aside
from World War II, the deficit kind of averaged zero in the first half of the period.
But averaged something negative in the second half.
That is what bothers those individuals who are very concerned about changing the laws
of the land and government commitment to spending to lower the deficits currently.
On average, we've had deficits in the second half of this long period.
Notice the one exception here.
That exception where in 1999 to about 2001 that we had surpluses, those were due to Clinton's
tax increases.
Now, large deficits imply large new Treasury security issues.
The next chart that you'll see shows the water in the pool, if you like, the federal debt.
But it shows it as a fraction of gross domestic product in order to control for the size of
the economy.
When we looked at that graph, we see that the national debt as a share of gross domestic
product has never been higher than it was in World War II when it was greater than our
gross domestic product.
Now, in recent years, it's varied between 40 and 50 percent of our gross domestic product,
although many people think that is too large.
In summary, the U.S. debt reached its larger fraction of GDP 110 percent at the end of
World War II.
It fell continually until it reached a low of about 25 percent of GDP in 1975.
It then began to increase because deficits were persistently negative until it hit a
peak of about 50 percent in 1995.
It then fell after the Clinton tax increase until it reached a low, relative low, local
low of 32 percent in about 2001.
Finally, it began to increase again with the Bush tax cuts and to increase rapidly with
the large deficits associated with the Great Recession.
The national debt held by the public is the supply of government securities, which must
be willingly held by private citizens not only in the United States, but in the rest
of the world.
Now, there are other important bond markets, and these are bond markets where other entities
than the fiscal authorities of the United States are able to borrow.
For example, corporations and state and local governments also use bond markets to borrow
funds.
We can see from the Wall Street Journal online edition a table entitled Market Depth, and
it describes the corporate bond market.
Among the top, we see the kinds of issues.
On a particular day, November 19, 2010, 5,518 different bonds traded.
Of those, 3,964 were considered investment grade, very high quality, with the borrowers
very likely to repay.
1,346 of those bonds were considered high-yield bonds.
They used to be called junk bonds, but now they're called high-yield bonds.
Some of those bonds were of a particular kind that can be converted to stocks at the option
of the borrower, and those are called convertibles.
We see some statistics about those, and I really don't care about those statistics today.
But the dollar volume is huge, $14 billion for all issues.
So, economists would say the market is very deep, 5,500 different bond issues traded on
that day with a total value of over $14 billion.
The market was mixed on November 19, 2010 in the sense that about half the traded issues
saw their prices increase, while half saw their prices decrease.
The yields on the best investment grade corporate bonds are higher than the yields of government
bonds of the same maturity.
Why?
Well, because market participants believe that there's a greater risk that a corporation
will not be able to keep its promises, then there is that the U.S. government will not
be able to keep its promises.
Other government entities also borrow funds in the bond market.
State and local governments and various government entities such as the toll road authorities
and water and sewer systems issue bonds in order to finance construction of public facilities.
And of course, this makes sense.
You don't want people to wait for clean water until the tax revenues increase.
It makes sense to borrow the funds, build the water facilities, and then pay down the
bonds through fees from the users of the water system.
Many savers, especially those with high incomes, like very much to hold municipal bonds, that
is, city bonds, because of the preferred tax treatment they receive for interest payments
made by those bonds.
Bond markets are important markets where corporations, the federal government, state and local governments,
and other public entities compete with one another for scarce funds provided by savers.
Savers lend funds to these borrowers in anticipation of receiving interest payments that come in
the form of either coupons or capital gains or some combination of the two.
Bond markets determine the nation's interest rates.
They determine whether borrowing is expensive or inexpensive.
Because they determine the nation's interest rates, bond markets determine which investment
projects are going to be funded, are going to be viable, and which investment projects
will stay on the shelf because they're not viable.
Bond markets determine how much you will pay to borrow funds, to buy a house, or a car.
As we end this lecture, let me refocus for a moment on events that unfolded during the
summer of 2011.
As we observed from the timelines, both the federal deficit and the national debt had
been rising as a share of gross domestic product during the Great Recession and the
fragile recovery which followed.
Of course they did.
The fact that there was a recession meant the tax revenues had fallen, and Congress
and the executive branch were not willing to cut expenditures proportionately.
It is a matter of law that the U.S. Congress must authorize any increase in the so-called
debt ceiling, the maximum legal size of the national debt.
During the summer of 2011, the national debt ceiling approached its previously authorized
ceiling of $14,294 billion, authorized by Congress on February 12, 2010.
A national debate raged on whether or not to raise the debt ceiling.
Republicans were willing to raise the debt ceiling only if Congress agreed to large
permanent cuts in federal spending.
Congress would agree to spending cuts but only if they were accompanied by policy changes
that would raise new revenues.
As the date when the national debt would exceed its authorized maximum approached, the entire
nation wondered whether Congress would authorize an increase or whether for the first time
in its history the United States would default on its promises to pay.
In the next lecture, we will zero in and see exactly how bond markets determine interest
rates and we will think about what a U.S. government default would imply for interest
rates.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
