Lecture 10 Financial Intermediaries
Many people, and perhaps you're one of them, believe that it is very smart to cut out the
middleman. They argue, wouldn't it be great to swap houses with someone and avoid those
pesky real estate fees, which can eat up between 5 and 10 percent of property value.
All of us, I know I have, have heard advertising pitches telling us to shop at a warehouse store
and cut out the middleman. Many of us believe that middlemen, such as real estate agents,
absorb our hard earning money without producing anything. In this lecture, we will look at
the role of financial middlemen and think about whether or not they play an important role
in a modern economy. But, don't be too quick to agree that it's smart to cut out the middleman.
Imagine, just for example, how much time it would take you to manage your own portfolio of stocks
if there were no mutual funds. You wouldn't be able to buy a little bit of a lot of shares
because the minimum purchase is one share. Conemplate the stress you would feel as you,
at the early times when your portfolio was small, had to choose the one or two or three
different stocks that you could afford to purchase. Imagine how difficult it would be
to arrange to borrow funds to purchase a home without the services of a bank or a thrift
institution, a savings loan. Okay, maybe Uncle Joe would lend you the funds. I should have
such an Uncle Joe. But sooner or later, and maybe sooner than you're ready for it,
Uncle Joe would want the money he lent you back, certainly when he needed retirement.
And then what would you do? Imagine how difficult it would be for you to provide for your family
in the event of your death if you didn't have access to an insurance company and the insurance
policies that they offer. What might you do? Well, perhaps you'd make some sort of an agreement
with extended family members to care for one another's immediate family in the event of a calamity.
That's certainly what happened in my father's time. But if you think about it, that agreement
would be essentially the formation of a primitive insurance company. In today's lecture, we'll
take a close look at an important group of middlemen, financial intermediaries. Financial
intermediaries are firms, including banks, that channel funds from savers to investors,
and from savers to other decision makers who have decided to spend more than their current
income permits. Now, my talk today is not about the wisdom of spending beyond your means or when
it is wise to spend beyond your means and when it is not. I'm going to assume that those
decisions to borrow are rational, well-founded, and right for the decision makers who make them.
Later on, we can talk about when borrowing is wise and when it is not.
Okay, so we are talking about people who borrow and other people who lend. Some financial
transactions are going to occur directly without the intervention of a financial firm.
Remember Joe and Jan from the previous lecture? Joe would like to borrow $1,000 to repair his car.
He's willing to pay, say, 6% and to repay principal and interest in one year.
Jan has decided to save for her daughter's college education and she's willing to lend $1,000 for one year at 6% interest.
Joe and Jan, if they know each other, have the opportunity to make a mutually beneficial transaction.
Joe will be better off. He gets the money to repair his car. Jan will be better off.
She will be earning some interest that helps her better pay for her daughter's tuition.
In the transaction between them, Joe will receive $1,000 now and he will give his IOU.
And that IOU will promise to pay $1,060 in one year.
Jan will give $1,000 now, give it to Joe in cash, say, and she will receive that promise or a note from Joe.
And both are better off.
Ah, but here's the rub. How did Joe and Jan find each other?
And how comfortable will Jan be trusting Joe? After all, she's taking a risk.
For example, Joe's bad luck could continue.
His car might require additional repairs or other things might happen.
And the result could be that Joe might not be able to repay.
And then Jan might not have enough to pay her daughter's tuition.
Most financial transactions involve a financial intermediary such as a commercial bank, thrift institution, investment bank, or some other.
Now, I want to take a look at a picture that will help us understand what these middlemen do.
We have a lender and a borrower and their handshake sends cash from the lender to the borrower.
And what travels in the reverse direction is the borrower's promise to pay, which I call the borrower's IOU.
Contrast that with the flow diagram, which is meant to show what happens when borrower and lender use the services of a financial intermediary.
Okay, lender sends cash, not to borrower, but to the financial intermediary.
And we'll see how that works when we become more specific in a minute.
It's the financial intermediary who takes the cash they have received and then provides it to the borrower.
Pretty simple.
What's a little more subtle is the reverse transaction.
The borrower, just like Joe, provides his promise to pay his IOU, not to Jan, but to the financial intermediary, the bank, or the thrift institution.
And the financial intermediary, the middleman, does not simply pass it on to Jan or some other lender.
What is passed on is the financial intermediary's own IOU.
What the lender gets in exchange is the financial intermediary's promise to repay.
It follows, then, that we can view financial intermediaries as repackaging the IOUs of its borrowers.
And many lenders prefer exchanging their cash for repackaged IOUs than exchanging their cash for the IOUs of specific borrowers.
But why?
Lenders prefer to hold a diversified portfolio of IOUs because they dislike risk and do not want to put all of their eggs or, for that matter, all of their dollars into one basket.
An example will help.
So suppose that there are 1,000 lenders who each wish to lend $1,000 and there are 1,000 borrowers who each wish to borrow $1,000.
I know those are made-up numbers, but they help illustrate the point.
With direct finance and the use of no middleman, best we could do is to have the borrowers and the lenders pair up.
I don't know how they find each other, but suppose they do.
Well, if, say, 5% of the borrowers experience bad luck and cannot repay, then 5% of those 1,000 lenders lose interest in their entire principle.
So there are 5% of those people who are greatly harmed.
On the other hand, with indirect finance, there is never any pairing of borrower and lender.
Each borrower holds an IOU issued by the financial intermediary.
That IOU is, in turn, backed by the whole portfolio of borrower IOUs.
Why is that important?
Because the financial intermediary will charge borrowers a high enough interest rate to allow for the expected number of defaults,
individual lenders will all be paid in full by the intermediary.
Alone to the intermediary by someone like Jan is less risky because, in effect, each lender holds a diversified portfolio of IOUs.
Evidence of that is the lenders do not even know who is benefiting from the fact that they provided funds.
They don't know the name of the person who ultimately got them.
Now, we all know that diversification is valuable.
What we may not have realized before is that financial intermediaries provide diversification,
not only in the case of mutual funds, but also in the case of borrowing and lenders.
Here's another example of repackaging, which I consider to be very important.
In fact, I think you're going to find this one absolutely fascinating.
Borrowers and lenders have different time horizons.
What do I mean?
Well, the borrower may want to borrow for a certain number of years,
and the lender may want to lend for a different number of years.
So suppose, again, that there are 1,000 lenders who each want to lend 1,000 for one year.
But to keep things simple, suppose there are also 1,000 borrowers, each of whom wants to borrow $1,000.
Just like before, right?
Now, here's the rub.
Suppose that the borrowers want to borrow for two years while the lenders want to lend for only one.
Stylized example, right?
I mean, clearly borrowers might want to borrow for five years, ten years, 30 years,
and lenders might want to lend for one year, two year, three years.
But we'll just make it that the lenders want to lend for one and the borrowers want to borrow for two.
Direct finance breaks down entirely now.
There is just no mutually beneficial transaction that can be made from any, between any borrower-lender pair.
Pick any one of the 1,000 borrowers, any one of the 1,000 lenders, put them together and say,
make a deal, they can't make a deal.
They do not have mutually advantageous basis for making a deal.
Aha!
Enter the middleman because indirect finance can bring those borrowers and lenders together.
It's almost like magic.
What would they do?
Well, the financial intermediary can lend funds for two years and borrow funds for one, provided that after one year,
it just goes out and replaces those old lenders who want their funds back with new lenders.
In short, at the time that they give the funds to the borrower, they don't even know who will provide the funds for the second year.
The financial intermediary, in this case, finds a sequence of one-year lenders who collectively provide the funds desired by the multi-year borrower.
Some financial firms specialize in this kind of maturity intermediation, and they bear some risks when they do.
There are not many lenders who want to lend for 30 years, a few insurance companies, but that's about it.
Lenders may be more willing to lend if they know that they can quickly and without loss reconvert the IOUs that they have to cash.
Wait a minute.
What does that mean?
Well, I'm talking about a third sort of repackaging here, and it involves a new idea called liquidity.
A financial asset is said to be liquid if it can rapidly be converted to cash with no loss of value.
Lenders value liquidity because liquid funds are available to the lender if some rainy day scenario occurs.
Jan would be even more willing to lend if she knew that she could trade that IOU in for cash if her own auto requires a repair, for example.
So if she thought somehow that the Joe IOU that she held could be converted to cash, say, in six months, she would be more comforted and more willing to lend.
Financial intermediaries create liquidity.
That is, they offer lenders IOUs that are more liquid than the IOUs that the borrowers exchange for the cash they receive.
Whoa, that's a mindful.
Let's think about that for a moment.
Financial intermediaries offer the lenders an asset with the promise that it's convertible to cash.
But those financial intermediaries don't receive that kind of asset from the people to whom they lend fronts.
Now, how do financial intermediaries create liquidity?
Well, they do so by holding some cash in reserve.
The intermediary does not know in advance which lender will want to reconvert to cash.
But it probably can make a very shrewd guess about how much cash will be desired by the lenders as a group.
And by holding sufficient reserves for the group, each and every lender can rationally behave as if all of them could convert their IOUs to cash, even though it will turn out that few will actually do so.
This is just an amazing cooperative outcome that we can all think, for example, of our bank deposits as fully liquid.
Okay, one more service that financial intermediaries offer their customers is specialization in the evaluation of borrowers and their projects.
And better assessment of the riskiness of any borrower than could be made by an individual lender.
Just imagine for a minute that 1,000 pairings, those 1,000 borrowers and lenders, put Fred together with Fredo.
How will Fred know enough about Fredo to know whether he is likely to be repaid?
Banks specialize in assessing the creditworthiness of lenders.
A financial intermediary evaluates many loan applications and develops specialized processes for evaluating them and monitoring them.
A financial intermediary employs specialized legal skills that are used to design and enforce borrowing contracts.
This is very, very important in a later lecture. We'll look at those contracts.
And government provides oversight of financial intermediaries, and in some cases, special assistance to them which further protects individuals who lend them funds.
That government assistance is not available to people who go it alone, who engage in direct finance.
Commercial banks are financial intermediaries that also provide their customers with transaction services.
Your deposits can be used to pay bills.
And many customers prefer to hold their liquid funds as bank deposits because it's easy to pay them out by writing checks or today by authorizing electronic transfers.
Now, we will zero in on that particular intermediary, the commercial bank, in a future lecture.
A comparison of different financial intermediaries shows how each specializes in the provision of intermediation services.
I've talked up till now about the various repackaging services that intermediaries offer, but I haven't differentiated between the actual types of financial firms.
And now I would like to do so so that you can appreciate how each different kind of financial middleman plays its role in the financial world.
Let's start with commercial banks. What do they do?
Well, commercial banks accept deposits from households and from businesses, and each of those depositors, the firms and the households, treat those deposits as transaction balances that they can spend at any time.
Liquidity.
Banks typically hold about 10% of those deposits in the form of cash and use that cash when depositors wish to reconvert their deposits back to cash.
But commercial banks use the balance of their funds to make business and consumer loans and earn a profit.
So in terms of those repackaging services that I talked about, commercial banks create liquidity, provide diversification to their customers, and are specialists in assessing credit worthiness.
And as I mentioned already, assessing credit worthiness is extremely important.
You wouldn't imagine for a moment bumping into a stranger and loaning that stranger funds. You would have no idea of the difference between a scam and a good business opportunity.
Drift institutions are slightly different from commercial banks, and they include savings banks and credit unions.
Savings and loan associations, when I was young, were also thrift institutions that were very different from and very important, especially in mortgage lending.
But as time and law evolved, savings and loans have become less important, and commercial banks also make mortgage loans.
But what do these thrift institutions do? Well, they accept depositors' deposits. That is, depositors give them funds.
And typically those depositors are people who are willing to defer the use of their funds for some period.
And what do they get in return? Well, a higher interest rate, typically, than they could get from their bank if their deposits were checkable, if they were transactions balances.
Okay, so now we have these thrifts receiving funds from depositors and paying interest for them. How do they use the funds?
Well, thrifts typically use the funds to make consumer loans and, importantly, mortgage loans. They are the backbone and have been through history in the mortgage lending business.
With respect to the repackaging services I've been talking about, what do thrift institutions do?
Well, they are specialists at intermediating maturities. They also create diversification because the people who deposit to them are not linked up or paired with any particular mortgage borrower.
And they, too, assess the creditworthiness of borrowers, especially mortgage borrowers.
Now, we all know about one thrift institution, and we learn again about it in most Christmas seasons, the Bailey Building and Loan.
The Bailey Building and Loan was George Bailey's family business, and it is the one that's under threat from banker potter and is likely to experience a run.
And we ought to think about that run for a minute because it includes an important and important lesson.
Any depository institution that borrows short from its customers and lends long always is fragile if all of the depositors coordinate their activities and ask for their money at the same time.
I can remember the line in the movie when George Bailey says upon having one of his depositors demand his entire balance at the Bailey Building and Loan.
But Fred, your money isn't here. It's out working to build houses. We use it to build Georgia's houses and Ralph's house.
This is another case where we coordinate our activity by using the services of a thrift institution or a financial intermediary in general.
And if we suddenly change the nature of this coordination, we cause problems for these institutions.
So what do these thrift institutions do then? As I've already said, their most important repackaging function is to repackage so as to provide intermediation of maturities.
They lend long and borrow short.
All of us know about mutual funds. That's probably the financial institution that we know the best and value the most.
What do mutual funds do? Well, they receive funds from those who would like to buy shares.
And which shares? Well, every mutual fund has to create a prospectus saying what their investment strategy is and saying the kind of shares that the fund will buy.
Those shares, therefore, are sold along with the mutual fund's promise to use the funds obtained by investors, financial investors, to pursue specific financial objectives.
The managers of those mutual funds use the funds they receive from their financial investors to construct a portfolio of assets that they believe will achieve the promised objectives.
Now, clearly, mutual funds provide very, very important services to their customers. Diversification and asset management.
Remember from the beginning how difficult it would be, especially when you were first starting out to say for retirement, to know what few shares you should purchase.
Given the existence of mutual funds, you don't have to make that decision. You can invest a few dollars, maybe as little as $100, and you can, in effect, own a little bit of hundreds and maybe thousands of different corporations.
This is a tremendously valuable service that we have long understood and that probably we value the best. But my point today is that other financial intermediaries, other financial middlemen, offer very, very valuable services too.
Let's take a look at one more financial intermediary, the money market mutual fund. What do they do and what sort of services do they offer? Well, money market mutual funds receive funds from those who buy shares.
But unlike a typical mutual fund, this fund, the money market mutual fund, promises to purchase only assets that are themselves highly liquid, treasury bills, very short term corporate loan instruments and the like.
If left untouched, if the mutual, money market mutual fund made no additional transactions, all of its assets would naturally reconvert to cash within a short period of time, certainly within a year, maybe as little as 90 days.
So, what that money market mutual fund has done is to use the funds provided them by their customers to construct a portfolio of very short term debt instruments.
Money market mutual funds create liquidity, but they also provide diversification and they allow customers to receive some interest on funds that they consider to be pretty liquid.
A very interesting story is how money market mutual funds were first created. They were born out of an attempt to work around a government regulation, but that story will come on a different day.
The last financial intermediary that I'd like to talk to you about is insurance companies. What do they do? Well, receive funds from policy holders and provide them with promises to pay in certain contingencies.
So, for example, if you were to die, a death benefit would be paid to your family.
So, these firms use funds to pay claims to policy holders and what do they do with those funds? They make long maturity investments that earn profits to support future claims and cash redemptions.
Insurance companies provide policy holders the opportunity to hedge risk by paying a relatively small premium on a regular schedule in exchange for the right to be repaid if some calamity occurs.
Financial intermediaries, banks, thrifts, mutual funds and insurance companies exist because they provide valuable services to their customers and customers value the service of financial intermediaries.
Imagine again how much time it would take you to manage your own portfolio of stocks. Imagine again how better off you are if a deposit at a bank or a thrift institution can be reconverted to cash.
And imagine again how much comfort you feel if you can make small payments and in a cooperative way with many others like you receive in return the opportunity to provide for your family in the event of a calamity.
All of those are valuable services and all of those are the reasons that financial firms exist.
So, as I leave you, please reconsider. Should we cut out the middleman or are they too valuable? Thank you.
