In today's lecture, we are going to talk about the most important financial institution
in the United States.
This institution is entrusted to maintain and protect the wealth of the United States.
This institution is in charge of guarding the value of the U.S. dollar.
This institution has strong regulatory control over commercial banks and other financial firms.
Every developed nation in the world has one of these institutions.
So what is this powerful institution?
The first answer that will come to mind to many when we talk about the wealth of the
United States is Fort Knox, the U.S. gold repository.
But Fort Knox, while formidable in appearance, is nowhere near as important as the institution
about which I will speak today.
In fact, the role of Fort Knox today is like the role of our strategic petroleum reserve.
I think I've mentioned that before.
It's a secure storehouse of a valuable resource.
It's nothing more.
The institution I have in mind appears far less formidable than Fort Knox, but it is
far more important to our national wealth.
It is far more important to our national welfare.
It is far more powerful, and it is far more essential to our financial system.
The institution I have in mind is the Federal Reserve.
The building that might be considered the home of the Federal Reserve, although the
Fed, as we call it, has many branches and many buildings, is the Martin Building in
Washington, D.C., which houses the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve.
The Board of Governors comprises the individuals who control the United States Federal Reserve,
the central bank of the United States.
In today's lecture, I will look at central banks and explain why they are the most important
financial institutions in the world.
Ironically, central banks do not offer banking services to private citizens like you or like
me, or like the business where you work.
Instead, they provide banking services to commercial banks, and that's why the Federal
Reserve is sometimes referred to as the Bankers Bank.
And as I mentioned, they also enforce some of the laws that regulate commercial banks
and other financial firms.
But the real source of the power of the U.S. Federal Reserve and of central banks throughout
the world is that they are entrusted with the ability to control an economy's interest
rates, and they are entrusted with the responsibility to fight inflation and recessions.
While the U.S. Federal Reserve is widely considered to be the most powerful among the central
banks, in part because people all over the world hold dollars as part of their financial
strategies, other central banks are also very important.
The Bank of England was founded in 1694 to act as the government's banker and debt manager.
It is the oldest central bank that we will consider in this lecture series.
The central bank of Sweden, founded in 1668, is generally considered to be the oldest.
Also of great importance is a very young central bank, the European Central Bank.
The European Central Bank was created by the Treaty of Amsterdam, overseeing monetary policy
in the Euro area.
Leaders of the European Economic Community reached agreement on a currency union in which
union member nations would adopt a common currency, and they reached that agreement with the Maastricht
Treaty in February of 1992.
The Euro, as you may remember, was launched in 1999, and Euro paper currency and coins
began to circulate in 2002.
The European Central Bank is located in Frankfurt, Germany, and the sculpture pictured in front
of the European Central Bank is the actual logo of the Euro.
Finally, let's take a brief look at a central bank that is increasingly important in the
21st century and will be even more important as time passes.
The picture is of the People's Bank of China and the building that houses that bank in
Beijing, about which we will learn much more in future lectures.
Let me offer you a brief history of the United States Federal Reserve.
It was front page news when President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act in December
of 1913.
The Act stated that its intent was, and I quote, to provide for the establishment of
the Federal Reserve banks, to furnish an elastic currency, to afford means of re-discounting
commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States
and for other purposes.
Let me unpack that statement for you for a moment.
What the enactors of the Federal Reserve Act meant by an elastic currency was that the
Federal Reserve would have the tools necessary to expand the money supply and contract it,
to make the currency stretch, if you like, and snap back.
That was considered to be very, very important as part of the strategy of allowing the Federal
Reserve Bank to not only facilitate growth in the United States, but also to be a bulwark
against banking panics.
What the Act meant when it said the re-discounting of commercial paper, it simply meant that
the Federal Reserve Act allowed the Federal Reserve to accept from banks loans that they
had made to private companies in exchange for currency.
This would be very, very important when a rush would occur on commercial banks and they
did not have sufficient cash to be able to meet the demand for their depositors, enter
the Fed, which could exchange some of their loans for cash.
Now, as we certainly recall from the first and second lectures, the United States had
tried before to create a Federal Reserve Bank.
It chartered the first bank of the United States in 1791 and the second bank of the
United States in 1860.
We also know that both banks were given initial charters only of 20 years and that neither
banks saw its charter renewed.
The Federal Reserve Act has been amended many times since its initial enactment in December
of 1913.
I'm only going to hit a few highlights.
In the 1930s, the Federal Reserve Act was amended to create the Federal Open Market
Committee, which was empowered to conduct monetary policy.
That committee is called the Open Market Committee because it oversees purchases by the Fed and
sales by the Fed of government bonds in the open market.
So in point of fact, it is the Federal Open Market Committee that decides on purchases
of Treasury bonds and sale of Treasury bonds.
And it follows that it is the Federal Open Market Committee that decides on interest
rate targets for the Federal Reserve and decides on strategies to hit those targets.
Announcements by the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee are closely watched by financial
analysts.
It's big news when FOMC announces an increase in the so-called federal funds rate and we'll
learn about the federal funds rate.
Investors know that an increase in the federal funds rate will shortly tighten credit markets
and raise interest rates across the board.
As a result, investment projects will be harder to finance, mortgage rates, and rates on auto
loans will rise as well.
Of course, it's also big news when the FOMC announces a decrease in the federal funds
rate because that decreases a harbinger of lower rates and looser credit markets.
We'll see how this works later in the course when we talk specifically about monetary policy.
Another amendment of the Federal Reserve Act was put in place when President Carter signed
the Humphrey Hawkins Act into law in 1978.
The Humphrey is Hubert Humphrey.
The Act required the Federal Reserve Chairman to report twice annually to Congress.
We have pictures of Bernanke going up the hill in part because of that Act.
And that Act, the Humphrey Hawkins Act, also spoke to the monetary policy goals and objectives
of the Federal Reserve.
The Act explicitly instructs the nation to strive toward four ultimate goals, full employment
of resources, growth in production, price stability, and balance of trade and budget.
Although in modern times in the current year, we normally think of the Fed's mandate as
having two parts.
Stable prices and low inflation rates is the first part of the mandate, and full employment
of resources is the second.
In 1999, President Clinton signed into law the Financial Services Modernization Act, which
effectively repealed some of the restrictions placed on banks in the 1930s after the Great
Depression.
And that turns out to be very important, so important, that we'll study the what and why
of that particular Act in a later lecture.
What does a central bank do?
One way to answer the question is to take a look at the balance sheet of a central bank.
We will see that investigating the balance sheet is as close as economists come to archaeology,
if you like.
The balance sheet contains current evidence about the Fed's behavior and evidence that
reveals its history.
So let's dig.
What we see is one of the most important assets of the Federal Reserve, our gold certificates,
$11 billion worth on December 28, 2005.
Why that date?
Let me explain.
I chose that date in particular because the United States was near full employment, and
we could imagine that the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve was, shall we say, in
a condition that was normal for a time when the economy was at full employment, where
times were good economically speaking.
We're going to see a little later on that the Fed's balance sheet looks very, very different
in the depths of a recession.
But I digress.
We see that the Federal Reserve all own something called gold certificates, $11 billion worth,
and it also owns something called special drawing rights, $2.2 billion worth.
These are vestiges from the gold standard.
The Federal Reserve acquired those gold certificates as a result of an earlier time when it was
required to back the U.S. dollar with gold.
And it acquired the special drawing rights as part of an IMF attempt to keep the gold
standard alive by issuing paper gold.
The Federal Reserve also has coin among its assets, and importantly, far more important
than the coin, $744 billion worth of U.S. Treasury securities.
Now, those Treasury securities are a very important part of history.
We've talked many times already in this course, and we will continue to talk about governments
that print money in order to pay their bills and finance their deficits.
And this is a time when we do a check here and realize that's not literally true.
What happens is that Treasuries borrow to finance deficits, but central banks and the
U.S. Federal Reserve sometimes buy some of those bonds, essentially printing or creating
money to do that acquisition.
And that's how our Federal Reserve has ended up with $744 billion in government bonds,
at least at the end of 2005.
We also have something on the asset side of the balance sheet called a repurchase agreement.
This is an interesting asset as well.
A repurchase agreement is a particular kind of reversible agreement, and the Federal Reserve
uses these when it attempts to say buy government bonds and also hold them for only a particular
amount of time and then resell them.
The actual asset it ends up acquiring is called a repurchase agreement.
There are some other asset items, relatively small.
We see loans.
Those are to banks.
Items in the process of collection.
Those are important because the Federal Reserve has, through time, helped clear checks.
And of course, there's bank premises and other assets.
The assets, $850 billion.
The liability side of the Federal Reserve balance sheet is also interesting.
And here we see something extremely important right at the top, the number one liability
of the Federal Reserve, our Federal Reserve notes, our paper currency, $759 billion worth.
We also have an item called reverse repurchase agreements.
They're the counterpart of repurchase agreements, but in the opposite direction.
We have deposits by depository institutions.
Okay.
So, $17.1 billion.
And what are these?
These are the deposits of commercial banks at the Federal Reserve.
Likewise, our own Treasury has deposits of $4.2 billion at our Federal Reserve.
Now, the Federal Reserve is not only the banker's bank, it's also our government's bank.
Our Treasury pays its bills by drawing on its deposit account at the Federal Reserve.
The deferred availability of cash items is the counterpart, an accounting entry that
again refers to the fact that the Federal Reserve plays a role in clearing checks.
The net worth of the Federal Reserve is $28 billion.
So, in summary, what is it that we learn when we do this archaeology activity from the balance
sheet of the Fed?
The most important things we learn are that the Fed balance sheet helps us to understand
what economists mean when they say that governments sometimes print money to finance their deficits.
The Treasury issues bonds and bills to finance its deficits, but the Fed sometimes buys those
bonds and bills.
When it buys them, it finances those purchases by creating new deposits.
So, when we say that governments sometimes print money to finance their deficits, what
we mean is that governments issue bonds and that central banks create new deposits in
favor of commercial banks and use those balances to buy the bonds from the Treasury.
In the previous lecture, I explained that commercial banks create money.
Let me clarify.
When a commercial bank makes a new loan to a customer, it adds funds to a customer's
deposit account.
As the money supply of the United States includes checkable deposits, the commercial
bank increases the supply of money when it makes a new loan.
When the Federal Reserve buys a Treasury security, it pays for the security by adding funds to
the deposit account of a commercial bank.
Remember, it's the bankers bank.
That in turn makes it possible for the bank to make new loans and create new deposits.
We'll look at this process in detail a bit later.
We also learned that the Fed helps commercial banks clear checks.
The items in process of collection and the deferred availability of cash item entries
in the balance sheet result when the Fed receives a check from a commercial bank, holds
it for a time until it can be presented to another commercial bank for payment.
That check may actually pass from coast to coast from the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York to the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
We also understand from our study of the balance sheet of the Fed that the Fed functions
as the paymaster of the Treasury.
The Treasury actually has a checking account at the Fed.
Now it would be interesting even if the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States had a balance
sheet that was somewhat unique.
But let's check for a minute and verify that the balance sheet of the Bank of England tells
a very similar story with only a couple of differences.
Looking at the balance sheet of the Bank of England, we see that it too owns government
securities, about 15.5 billion pounds.
It owns some other securities, 26.9 billion.
It makes loans, which in their balance sheet are called advances, and it owns bank premises.
On the liability side, we see that it too has as a liability pound sterling notes, 40.3
billion of them.
However, unusually there are some public deposits at the Bank of England which are of historical
interest but not of interest to us.
We also note that it too, the Bank of England, also is the banker's bank.
Banks have about 3.3 billion pounds deposits at the Bank of England.
At the end of the day, we realize that the Bank of England functions a lot like the Federal
Reserve Bank.
The largest assets and liabilities are securities owned by the bank and currency issued by the
bank.
Both commercial banks and private citizens may have deposits at the Bank of England.
The Bank of England makes loans to commercial banks and the Bank of England maintains separate
accounts for deposits that commercial banks hold as reserves and other deposits.
One interesting difference is that the Bank of England does not list any net worth.
It's assets equal its liabilities.
And the reason for that is that the Treasury of England owns by law the net worth of the
Bank of England.
That's a matter of law and of no particular importance for us.
What is very important is a better understanding of why central banks are the most powerful
financial institutions in the world.
Well, central banks are responsible for growth in the nation's supply of money.
When the Fed creates additional money and thus increases in the money supply at an appropriate
rate, it helps the economy grow by providing the new dollars that are necessary to support
the transactions associated with growth.
We saw in a previous lecture that in a period of time when the money supply grew not rapidly
enough in the late last quarter of the 19th century, there was actual price deflation.
There were two recessions and there was a banking panic.
So it's very, very important for the Federal Reserve to allow the money supply to grow
at a rate that keeps pace with the productive growth in an economy.
When we looked at a cross-country comparison of inflation and money growth rates, remember
please that we defined excess money growth as the money growth that created inflation.
And we defined excess money growth as money growth beyond the rate necessary to just keep
pace with real economic growth, which we measured in that case as the growth in income.
When the Federal Reserve increases money supply too rapidly, however, the rate of inflation
does increase and the value of the dollar in terms of other currency falls.
Looking over some decades of data provides examples of when the Fed has gotten it right
and when the Fed has gotten it wrong.
If we look between 1955 and 1965 at that decade, the growth in the base money supply, the supply
that the Federal Reserve controls, was 3%.
Real GDP growth was 3.9% and inflation was very, very small, 1.8%.
Very different story about the decade from 65 to 75.
Money growth, 6.8%.
Real growth in gross domestic product, only 2.9%.
And not surprisingly, the inflation rate rose to 5.5%.
On average in the decade, I know that you know that certain years in that decade had
higher inflation rates.
But we got an even worse decade just ahead.
In the decade between 1975 and 1985, the Fed allowed the money growth rate to rise to 8.1%.
Yeah, real GDP growth was slightly higher, 3.4%, but the major impact was an inflation
rate on average for that decade of 6.1%.
In the next decade, 85 to 95, the Fed allowed the money growth rate to be 8% again.
The GDP growth rate was 2.8% and surprisingly, the inflation rate was only 2.8%.
But I attribute that to the belief on the part of individuals that under first the Volcker
regime at the Federal Reserve and then the Greenspan regime at the Federal Reserve that
the Fed was beginning to decrease the rate of money growth.
And indeed, between 1995 and 2005, the money growth rate fell to 6%.
The growth rate of the United States, the real growth rate, rose to 3.3%.
And inflation came under control to 2.1%.
We will look in more detail at how central banks stimulate and de-stimulate the economy
in later lectures.
For now, we're going to end by reconsidering how crucial it is for central banks to get
it right.
We have learned today that central banks are the most powerful institutions in the world
because they have the power to increase or decrease the money supplies of their respective
economies.
When they get it right, economies grow and inflation stays in check.
When they get it wrong, they either stifle growth by keeping money growth too low or
they create inflation by allowing money growth to be too high.
And when they get it very wrong, as in the case of Germany in the 20s, 1920s, or Zimbabwe
today, hyperinflation can be the result.
The bottom line is that the Federal Reserve, because of its power and awesome responsibility,
is the most powerful financial institution in the world.
Thank you very much.
