Lecture 13 – Present Value
Every one of us needs to move money through time at some point in his or her life.
In the household, we may need to move money from our future into our present in order
to buy a house. After all, that is what we do when we sign a note and take out a mortgage.
At another time, generally later in our lives, we may wish to move money from our present
into our future in order to provide ourselves with a retirement income. One way of doing
this is by contributing to a retirement fund.
Business managers also move money through time when they borrow against the expected
future profits from a new plant or retail store in order to obtain the funds that they
need to build and install equipment, to build outfit and provide inventory for their store.
All of us need to move money through time. But, and it's a big but, deciding on how
to move money through time requires us to be able to compare the value of a dollar at
two different dates. I can hear you saying, hold on, a dollar is a dollar is a dollar
whenever we get it and whenever we give it. But that is simply not true. A dollar today
is worth more than a dollar tomorrow. What we need is a measuring stick or a set of scales
that allow us to properly compare the value of a dollar at different times. And today's
lecture will provide what is needed. The tool that is universally regarded as the right one
for the job is called present value. Let's begin with an example. A puzzle really to
make matters concrete and to give us a particular problem that we can solve using present value.
Pat and Jean are twins who just celebrated their 21st birthday. As a birthday gift,
their grandmother has given them a US savings bond that will pay $10,000 on their 31st birthday
and nothing before them or after them. Put another way, a fair division of the birthday
gift will provide Pat and Jean each with $5,000, but not until 10 years from now. Of course,
there's a problem there often is with siblings. Although they are twins, Pat and Jean are quite
different in some ways. Pat has worked for several years, currently has a bank account
of $15,000 and is happy to wait to receive his share of the gift. Jean is different. Jean
has started a business into which she has poured all of her funds. She would like to
have her share of the gift right now so that she can make further improvements to her business.
Jean suggests to Pat that Pat give her $5,000 now in exchange for her share of the gift. That is,
and let's be clear, Jean wants Pat to use some of the money in his bank account to pay her $5,000
now. Jean reasons that Pat will get the money back in 10 years time when Pat can lay claim
to both halves of the grandmother's gift. Pat's not so sure. Pat believes that it is
not fair to pay $5,000 for Jean's share of the gift that won't pay anything for 10 more
years. After all, he reckons, I could earn interest on the money in my bank account.
I won't receive if I pay Jean $5,000 for her share of the gift. But, and here is the rub. Pat does
not know what would be fair. Let's put that a slightly different way. Pat does not know a fair
amount of money to pay Jean for her share of the gift. And, and maybe more importantly, Pat does
not know how to explain to Jean what fair means in this situation and how, and how to explain to
Jean that the fair amount is actually fair. The key to solving the problem is to use the concept
of present value as we will see in this lecture. So, by the end, we'll solve Pat and Jean's problem.
Present value is one of the most important concepts that we will encounter in this course.
Understanding present value is central to an understanding of the relationship between bond
prices and interest rates. Present value is the key when asking what a share of stock should be
worth, and by extension, when asking when a share of stock is overvalued. Many economists believe
that the Federal Reserve should take countermeasures when either the stock market becomes overvalued
or the bond market becomes undervalued. But doing so only makes sense if one can say what
the right value for stock prices is and what the right value for bond prices is. Again,
present value is essential to such a determination. Finally, present value is a concept that
can usefully guide business managers as they decide whether or not to invest. And present
value can usefully guide householders like you and me as they decide on saving plans
for funding retirement or for future college expenses. With rare exemptions, and this is
the beginning of an understanding of present value, we must understand that a dollar that
will be received or paid in the future is worth less than a dollar in our hands today.
That's why Wimpy always said, I'd gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today. A dollar
in hand today provides its owner with a larger set of opportunities than a future dollar
provides. One of these opportunities is to hold the dollar until the future arrives.
So a dollar today is more valuable because the extra opportunities that it affords are
valuable. And of course, that includes the receipt of interest because normally one can
earn interest on a dollar today and have available in the future not only the dollar, but the
interest you could earn and that would be paid at a future date. Our own Treasury bill market
provides evidence of what I'm saying. What's a Treasury bill? Well, a Treasury bill is
the U.S. Treasuries promise to pay an amount, let's say $1,000 at a date in the future,
let's say 52 weeks from now. The current price of a Treasury bill is always less than that
thousand dollars, the so-called face value of the bill. That is to say, the bill sells
at a discount. As the date of the payment grows closer, that is, as we get nearer to
the end of the 52-week period, the market price of that bill converges to its face value.
I show you in the graph the price of a $1,000 Treasury bill maturing in one year for many,
many, many months between 1953 and 2010. So every point in the line you're seeing now
is the price of $1,000 to be received in one year at different points in our history.
The price you should observe is different in different months. Sometimes it's almost
a thousand, other times it can be as low as $850, but it is never as high as $1,000. When
we look at the data for the 70s, we see that the price is about $960. When we look at more
recent data, we learn that the price is just slightly lower than $1,000. And we'll come
to understand the precise relationship between bond prices and current interest rate conditions
in a future lecture. Why is the price of that bond always less than its face value of $1,000?
That is so because the discount rate set by the market varies with economic conditions
but is always bigger than one. But the thing one should notice is the price of that 1,000
Treasury bill that will provide the owner with 1,000 in one years in time is always
less than a thousand. Okay? Always less than a thousand. Therefore, a dollar in hand today
is worth more than a dollar tomorrow. We know that because markets say it's true. There
is a rare exception. Economists always deal with these arcane cases in order to check
our thinking. Imagine for a moment that a horrific natural disaster, a hurricane or a
flood, was several days away but pretty sure to happen. It would then be normal for market
prices to be such that you would trade a loaf of bread today for less than a loaf of bread
to be paid after the disaster occurred. But that's easy to understand and that rare situation,
bread tomorrow would be worth more than bread today simply because bread tomorrow would
be very, very scarce. Ovens would be shut down by the natural disaster and after all
you just can't store bread especially when the electricity is out. So for that reason
we can imagine that bread tomorrow might actually be more valuable than bread today. But that's
an unusual situation. It's a nitpicky point of the sort, as I said before, that economists
make in order to check their understanding of why the values of things change.
Okay. What does it mean to compute the present value of a future payment? It means to discount
that future payment. A discount rate is a positive number that defines the rate at which
a future payment loses value as the date of the payment moves further into the future.
The discount rate is expressed as a decimal. Right away we want to do an example. So I'm
going to use the symbol D for the discount rate. I'm going to assume the time is measured
in years and I'm going to assume a discount rate of 7% so that my D is equal to 0.07. Okay.
Typical in these examples to use decimal expressions for percentages. Then a dollar
to be received after one year is worth 7% less than a dollar in hand today. To discount
a future payment of a dollar is to divide it by a number bigger than one. So when we
think of discounting, we can say that a synonym for discounting is shrinking. The discount
is to divide by 1 plus D. To divide, shrink by 1 plus D. The present value of a payment
to be made at a future payment is to divide by 1 plus D.
Future date turns out to be an amount of money just large enough so that that amount
of money will grow to the size of the future payment by the future date when the growth
rate is D. Again, an example. The present value of a dollar to be received in one year
is $1 divided by 1 plus D. Again, I'm using my 7% discount rate.
7% as my discount rate and therefore 1 plus D is 1.07. So the present value of a dollar
to be received in one year is $1 divided or shrunk by 1.07 and that's 93.5 cents.
Now it's important for us to understand the relationship between present and future value
and to do that we can rewrite the formula to illustrate that present value grows into
the future value of $1. So remember, the future value is $1 and if present value is a dollar
divided by 1.07 or 1 plus D, then by simply multiplying through we understand that future
value is equal to 1 plus D times present value. So $1 is 1.07 times 93.5 cents. No other
number beside 93.5 cents makes that true. So when we write the equation in that way,
that simple equation, we see that the discount rate is the rate at which present value grows
through time.
Now we're going to take on a bit of a challenge. We're going to take a look at something called
the present value formula. The present value formula shows how to compute the present value
of a stream of future payments and I have to explain what I mean by a stream of future
payments. Suppose that time is measured in years and I'm going to use the letter lower
case T to be the present date and therefore T plus 1 will be a date one year in the future,
T plus 2 a date two years in the future and so forth. So suppose a stream of payments.
S at time T plus 1 are the dollars we'll receive in one year at time T plus 1. S with an indicator
of T plus 2 are the dollars we'll receive two years from now at time T plus 2 and so
forth.
What is that present value equation? The present value equation is a sum of distance
discounted values of each component of the stream of payments. The first component is
the dollars we'll get at T plus 1, S T plus 1. That's one year in the future so we shrink
it by dividing by one plus D.
Suppose we're also going to get some payments two years from now designated S T plus 2. Well
wait a minute, we've got to discount those payments all the way back to the present.
So we have to, if you like, shrink them twice by dividing by one plus D and then one plus
D again. So dividing by one plus D squared.
The payments we would receive in three years S T plus 3 would be divided by one plus D
to the third power, a triple shrinking and so forth and so on. So payments in general
that we would receive at some time M years in the future would be shrunk M times that
is divided by one plus D to the M power.
But you know I want to do an example to make sure this is clear. Now we're going to have
a simple stream of payments. You're going to get $100 at the end of one year, a second
payment of $100 at the end of two years and $1,100 at the end of three years. So I have
chosen a stream of payments that is a lot like the payments promised by a coupon bond
which has a face value of $1,000 and a coupon rate of 10%.
You might be asking about that coupon rate of 10%. Well that tells us how big our coupon
payments are and of course 10% of $1,000 is $100. So that's why we're receiving $100
after year one, $100 after year two and $1,000 plus $100 after year three.
What I really would like to do is use the formula to find the present value of this stream
of payments. I would like to point out to you that that present value has three parts.
The first is the present value of the first payment we'll receive, $100 in one year.
That payment adds $100 divided by our discount rate of $1.07. That turns out to be $93.46.
The second payment we're going to receive if we own that bond is $100 in two years.
But that $100 has to be shrunk twice because we're not going to get it for two years. So
we divide by $1.07 and then again by $1.07. When we do that we get not surprisingly a
number smaller than $93.46. We get in particular $87.34. And finally after three years we're
going to get $1,000 plus $100. That has to be shrunk three times or divided by $1.07
to the third power and that is $897.93. When we add those three numbers up we learn that
the present value of those payments is $1,078.73. That's an interesting number because the coupon
rate is 10% and the discount rate is only 7. We actually have a present value greater
than $1,000. So we have learned that $1,078.73 is the present value of the stream of payments.
100 after one year, 100 after two years, and 1100 after three. When the discount rate is
7% and now you're asking me, so what? Is there some way to understand why that dollar
amount, 1078.73, is a fair amount to exchange for the stream of payments itself because
after all that's where we are going. Remember our problem at the beginning. And yes, there
is a way to understand why present value is a fair amount to exchange for a stream of
payments. What is that way? That way is to understand that the present value of a stream
of payments is the exact to the penny amount that is just enough to actually replicate
the stream of payments. If you can borrow and lend at the discount rate you have used
in the present value calculation. There's an equivalence there and it's so important
that I'm going to do another example to show you how it works. So let's imagine that you
started out with the present value 1078.73 and you put it in an interest earning account
at 7%. After one year you'd earn some interest. How much? You can double check with a calculator
but it's $75.51. Hey, but after one year you're obligated to make a $100 payment because
we're replicating the stream. After you do that you are left with $1,054.24. But you're
not done. That $1,054.24 stays in the bank and earns interest for another year at 7%
with an interest payment of $73.80. But at the end of year two you have to pay out a
second $100 because that's the name of the game. And at the end of the second year you
have then $1,028.04. But you're still not finished. You're going to leave that $1,020.04
in the bank for a third year. You're going to earn a third year's interest at 7% of $71.96.
And at the end of the year you're going to pay $1,100 making the last payment in the stream
of payments. And guess what you're left with? Zero. You have exactly replicated the stream.
If one starts with an amount equal to the present value of the stream of payments, deposits
that amount in account paying 7% and makes withdrawals just sufficient to make the payments in the
streams, then that individual will exactly exhaust the available funds on the date of the
last payment. This example shows us the sense in which present value of a stream of payments
is equivalent to the stream of payments. And it's a fair price for purchasing the stream
of payments. The concept of present value is crucial in figuring out a savings plan designed
to provide sufficient funds for planned future payments such as those associated with college
tuition, house down payments or retirement. Suppose that you decide at the birth of your
child to save an amount each year on the child's birth they say to create a fund to pay for
that child's college education. Suppose further that your goal is to have $100,000 in the fund
on your child's 18th birthday. How much must you save each year? The key to finding the
answer is proper use of the present value formula. For example, the present value of the fund,
that is, the present value of what you want in 18 years is $100,000 discounted by dividing
by one plus the discount rate to the 18th power because you need the money in 18 years.
Now, the present value of your savings plan is much more complicated in equation terms,
but it's pretty easy to understand. Every year you're going to save an amount you're
trying to calculate. We'll call it X. We're trying to find X. In the first year, you put
X aside. In the second year, you again put X aside. In the third year, you again put X
aside. You do that for every year. But the present value of those $X savings amounts is
not the same. The first one we'll say is worth X on the child's birth date. After one year,
his first anniversary or her first anniversary, the present value is X divided by one plus
D. And so forth and so on. The present value of the last payment is X divided by one plus
D to the 18th power. Okay. In the above formulas, D is the discount rate and it would be
appropriate for you to use 4D, the rate of interest you can earn on your savings plan.
So you ask yourself, what will I be paid from my savings account? In the above formula, X
is unknown. It's the unknown amount you must save. How are we going to calculate X? That's
what we want to do. We want to get X. To calculate the savings plan is to find the value of X
so that the present value of the fund equals the present value of the plan. I want to use
a different D now, 2%. So suppose you can earn 2% on your funds. Then, and you can verify
this, X is equal to $4,378.18. Okay. How could you verify that with a spreadsheet or a financial
calculator? Armed with the knowledge of present value, we are going to return to the question
of how much Pat should pay Jean today, which would be fair compensation to Pat for giving
out the claim to $5,000 paid 10 years from today. Now, the present value formula tells
us that Pat should pay Jean the present value of $5,000 to be received in 10 years, or $5,000
divided by 1 plus D raised to the 10th power. What value should Pat and Jean agree on for D?
Well, Jean would like D to be as small as possible. Probably prefer D equals 0. In that case, Jean
would get $5,000 today. But Pat would like D to be somewhat higher. The larger D gets, the smaller
the current payment to Jean will be. Pat explains to Jean that he could earn 3% in a savings
fund or discredit union, and they thus agree that D equal to 0.03 is fair. So, Pat should
pay Jean the present value of $5,000 to be received in 10 years, which is $5,000 divided
by 1.03 raised to the 10th power, which is $5,000 divided by 1.344, which is $3,720.47.
In this lecture, we have learned about an important tool, present value. Economists and financial
analysts use present value to compute current-dollar equivalents for payments that will be received
or made in the future. This tool plays a crucial role in our course. Bonds promise future
payments, and economists compute bond yields by assuming that market forces drive the price
of the bond to equal the present value of the bond's payments. Stocks promise future dividends,
and economists compute fundamental values, a term that we'll learn more about later,
for those stocks by assuming that fundamental value is equal to the present value of future
dividends. As I said at the outset, present value is a powerful tool. It's a tool we will use often
in this course, and it's a tool that you can use in your own life.
