Lecture 21 Introduction to the Stock Market
The term stock market evokes images of wealthy capitalists who make and lose large fortunes
in short periods of time.
The Wall Street movies, the one starring Michael Douglas, made it appear as if stock markets
were populated by sharks constantly swimming about looking for their next meal.
Those movies, like the earlier movie Jaws, made me and made us frightened to go into
the water.
In our grandfather's time, few of us went into the water.
In our grandfather's time, a very small fraction of the population owned shares of stock.
But with the advent of mutual funds, stock ownership became much more common.
As more and more workers were covered by defined contribution pension plans, where you make
contributions and don't have defined benefits, as that happened, ownership of stocks became
even more common.
It's still the case today, however, that most stock wealth is held by the wealthiest segment
of our population.
Today, the wealthiest 10% of the population still own about 80% of stock market wealth.
But the middle class is making inroads and currently owns roughly 18% of stock market
wealth.
The case for owning stocks as part of a strategy to save for retirement and other long horizon
objectives is very strong.
What you see now is a graph of the cumulative returns on the New York Stock Exchange, net
of inflation for the period starting in 1945 and going all the way to 2009.
If I put that another way, the graph shows how $1 in purchasing power invested in the
New York Stock Exchange in December 1944 changed in purchasing power over the following years.
Over these 55 years, the average real return, so the return on the portfolio of all stocks
traded on the New York Stock Exchange minus the rate of inflation was 7.7%.
That means that every year that dollar would purchase 7.7% more at the end of the year
than it would at the beginning.
That average return accounts for the shape of that smooth trend line that you see pictured
in the graph.
An individual who purchased and held stocks over this period experienced 7.7% growth on
average annually in the purchasing power of their initial financial investment.
But the graph also shows that stock returns were volatile with large up and down swings,
especially in the last 15 years of the period.
The graph clearly shows the .com boom and bust, and it also shows the influence on the
stock market of what we've come to call the great recession.
The average real return to owning shares was, as I've said, 7.7%.
But there is no denying that purchasing stocks during the period was risky.
The next graph ranks annual real returns, remember that's inflation adjusted returns,
between 1945 and 2009 from the lowest return to the various highest return.
It displays the negative returns in red on the left and the positive returns in blue,
and of course there on the right.
Annual returns were negative in 19 of the 65 years between 45 and 2009.
If a return was negative or conditioned on it being negative, the average negative return
was minus 14%, so a loss of 14% of purchasing power.
But the largest negative returns were much worse than that.
Minus 44% in 2008 and minus 40% in 1974.
By contrast, real returns were positive in 46 of the 65 years.
And given that a return was positive, the average positive return was 16%, the maximum
being 42.7% long time ago in 1954.
In this lecture, I will provide an introduction to stock markets and stock prices.
The stock market is an important part of this course for several reasons.
The stock market is an important way in which savers channel funds to investors, although
please keep in mind that the transfer occurs only when the stock is initially offered.
But the stock market also provides a kind of market test of the value of various corporate
plans and projects and initiatives, and therefore the stock market guides corporate managers
in their decision making.
And of course, the stock market is an important source of wealth for many, and as we said
earlier, a growing number of U.S. households.
It's a bellwether of future economic activity.
Maybe that's the most important idea.
Namely, if things are getting good, economically speaking, it's often the case that the stock
market leads the way, and if things are going poorly, the stock market is often a harbinger
of that bad economic news.
And finally, the stock market is the subject of controversy about Federal Reserve policy.
How is that?
Well, some analysts believe that the Fed should act to stabilize U.S. stock markets, while
other analysts believe they should not.
So let me begin fairly simply.
What is common stock?
Exactly what do I mean when I say a share of common stock?
Okay, a share of common stock is an ownership interest in a corporation.
The management of a corporation is charged with advancing the interests of the owners,
the holders of those common stock shares.
Importantly, in the United States, ownership of a share of common stock confers limited
liability to its owners.
The emphasis is the word limited here.
And limited liability means that owners can never lose more than the value of their shares
as a result of their decision to purchase those shares.
For example, the owners of common shares of British petroleum stock could not be held
personally responsible for the 2010 Gulf of Mexico oil spill.
Those who were damaged by that spill, whether they were shrimpers or property owners or
vacation, vacation entrepreneurs, could not under U.S. law acquire the non-BP share wealth
of the BP common stock holders in compensation for damages.
They could lose the value of their shares, but they could not lose more.
Owners of shares are called residual claimants.
So they're the last who can make a claim against the net income of the corporation in whose
shares they own.
The corporation must pay workers, raw material suppliers, bond holders, and preferred shared
holders before they pay any funds at all to owners of common stock shares.
Owners of shares of common stock have the right to receive dividends and to vote on
major matters pertaining to the operation of the firm.
So that's what ownership of a share of common stock entitles you to.
Limited liability, the receipt of dividends, and the opportunity to participate in some
corporate decisions.
The oranges and the development of stock markets over history are very, very interesting.
The London Stock Exchange is one of the world's oldest stock exchanges, and it can trace its
history back more than 300 years.
The London Stock Exchange began in the coffee houses of 17th century London.
In January 1698, and I think I'm pronouncing his name correctly, John Costoing began to
publish from an office in Jonathan's Coffee House a list of foreign exchange rates, gold
prices, silver prices, and the prices of shares of bank stocks, the East India Company shares,
and the Hudson Bay Company shares.
In 1923, the London Stock Exchange received its own coat of arms that includes the motto
of the exchange, dictum meum poctum.
My word is my bond.
But you're probably more interested in the New York Stock Exchange.
The New York Stock Exchange traces its origins to early attempts by Alexander Hamilton to
provide for the commercial development of the United States.
In 1792, 24, let's call them merchant brokers.
They were businessmen, but they were also brokers, made a mutual pact called the Buttonwood
Agreement that formalized the trading of securities, including $80 million of bonds
that the U.S. Treasury under the guidance of Hamilton had issued in 1790.
Why the Buttonwood Agreement?
Those merchant brokers signed that agreement under a very old and very large Buttonwood
tree, and we call it a sycamore tree where I come from.
That tree was very old at the time of the signature, and it lasted until it fell in
a storm in 1865, and the tree stood at what is now 68 Wall Street.
While the New York Stock Exchange is synonymous with Wall Street, it was originally located
on Broad Street around the corner.
It was not until 1922 that the New York Stock Exchange had a permanent entrance on Wall
Street.
On December 9, 1865, the New York Stock Exchange moved to its first permanent home at 10 Broad
Street.
In 1867, just to give you an idea of what was happening then, Dr. S. S. Laws modified
the telegraph and created a telegraphic device which could impress electrical impulses on
a moving tape.
The ticker tape was born.
On September 9, 1901, the cornerstone for the new New York Stock Exchange building was
laid on the site of a previous building.
Until that new building was completed, the New York Stock Exchange operated at a temporary
location.
Not until February 18, 1971, was the New York Stock Exchange incorporated as a not-for-profit
company, which it is today.
On April 17, 1978, the Intermarket Trading System was created and that Intermarket Trading
System provides an electronic link between the New York Stock Exchange and other stock
exchanges in the United States.
The so-called ITS allows brokers to locate easily the best price for a security that
is traded on any of the markets in the United States.
There are several ways in which financial markets, including markets where stocks are
traded, are organized.
And there are several different ways in which trades are consummated.
But before we get there, let's ask, what exactly are the functions of a stock market?
I think you'll find this quite interesting.
The first price discovery, what?
Price discovery.
Markets should enable participants to find or discover prices at which they can buy and
sell shares.
But another function, one that we would clearly think of quickly, of the stock market is that
it provides a trading mechanism.
Stock markets, like all markets, should facilitate the making of agreements to buy and sell shares.
In common language, they should bring buyers and sellers together.
But a stock market should do more.
It provides a function that guarantees the execution of agreements that are made.
Markets should ensure that the terms of each agreement, whether to buy or to sell, are
honored.
And in particular, the market should include mechanisms to confirm that a trade was actually
made to ensure that ownership of the traded asset changes hands accordingly.
And finally, to ensure that payment for the traded asset has been made.
Can't tell the players without a scorecard who are the role players in the stock market.
Well, first there's people like you and me.
Public investors.
Public investors including private citizens, managers of pensions and mutual funds, managers
of trusts, and a variety of other types of individuals buy and sell stocks as part of
their strategies to grow and protect their wealth.
So that's one kind of actor.
A second kind of actor is a broker.
Investors act as agents for the public investors.
And in response, receive fees and commissions for their work.
A third kind of actor is a dealer.
Dealers buy, from, and sell to public investors' shares, shares of common stock.
But unlike the public investors, dealers benefit primarily from trading and the fees they get
rather than from holding assets in general and stocks in particular.
Now hold on a second.
You will have recognized that my definition of a broker and my definition of a dealer
seem very close, but there is a crucial difference between a broker and a dealer.
A broker does not hold inventories of stocks.
A dealer does.
So a dealer may be selling you shares from that dealer's inventory.
And finally, we have a group of individuals called specialists.
And specialists are agents who are obliged by the rules of the market, whichever market
they're in, to buy and sell shares.
They're obliged to buy and sell shares.
Economists call specialists market makers.
And their existence guarantees that it's always possible to buy and to sell.
In general, specialists may trade on their own behalf, meaning that they have an incentive
to buy low and sell high.
But they guarantee that whenever you enter the market, whether you want to buy or whether
you want to sell, you will have a counterparty who is willing to fulfill a transaction with
you.
There are different ways in which trades in the stock market are made.
In some markets, like the New York Stock Exchange, orders are the cornerstone.
The New York Stock Exchange is said to be an order-driven market in the sense that public
investors place buy and sell orders with brokers.
I want to buy shares of AT&T.
I want to sell shares of Duke Power, for example.
The market then matches buyers and sellers and consummates the trade.
In the New York Stock Exchange, there are specialists, as I've said already, who would guarantee
that if you wanted to buy AT&T, there would be someone who would sell it to you.
And if you wanted to sell Duke Power, there would be someone who would buy it from you,
even if that person was a specialist.
But there are other ways.
In some markets, like the National Association of Security Dealers Automated Quotations System,
we come to know and love that as NASDAQ, N-A-S-D-A-Q.
NASDAQ and like organized systems are quote-driven.
What's that mean?
Well quote-driven means that dealers quote bids and ask prices at which they are prepared
to buy and sell.
So now, instead of saying I want to buy 20 shares of AT&T, I will sell a price, I will
announce a price at which I am willing to sell.
Those who wish to buy decide whether the ask price is acceptable.
Those who wish to sell decide whether the bid price is acceptable.
So this is a price-led system.
Of course, bid and ask prices change.
They change constantly depending on the buying and selling behavior of public investors.
And importantly, competition among dealers keeps the difference between bid and ask prices,
the so-called bid ask spread, from growing to large.
When the bid ask spread is small, then dealers are receiving a small compensation for facilitating
a round-trip transaction.
Some markets, like the grain pits and bond pits at the Chicago Board of Trade, operate
a system of open outcry where floor traders shout, buy and sell orders allowed on the
trading floor.
The traders wear costumes, typically colored sport coats, that identify who they are and
they signal their trading desire with hand gestures.
I'll tell you, watching the CBOT, Chicago Board of Trade, pits near closing time in
the last 10 minutes or so and trying to figure out what is going on is a great way to spend
an hour when you visit Chicago.
And besides, not only will you see the CBOT, but you'll see other beautiful buildings on
LaSalle Street.
And these are a beautiful part of downtown Chicago.
So go!
Let me talk a little bit about stock markets, stock market indexes, and mutual funds.
These are obviously closely related.
There are several closely watched indexes that provide a summary of stock price movements.
These indexes are watched closely by you, by me, and by financial analysts, and they
are frequently cited in the media.
And we're going to refer to them many times in future lectures.
The first, the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
In November 1882, Charles Dow, Eddie Jones, and Charles Bergstresser formed a company
to provide financial news.
The partners agreed that Dow Jones was the more euphonious name for the company than
the alternative.
Continuous publication of Dow Jones prices of industrial stocks began on October 7, 1896.
The original list had 12 stocks.
The number was raised to 20 in 1916 and 30 in 1928.
Today, the Dow Jones Industrial Average is perhaps the most closely watched measure of
stock prices.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average today is an index of 30 large publicly traded stocks.
But there are other indexes.
The Standard and Pours 500 is an index of the share prices of 500 large publicly traded
companies.
And that index is the property of Standard and Pours, a company that also provides risk
assessments of corporate and government-issued bonds.
The NASDAQ and capital N, little a, little s, little d, little a, q is an index of shares,
all the shares traded over the counter through the NASDAQ system.
Other countries have stock indices that are closely watched.
The FTSE, FTSE 100, is an index of British shares.
The DAX, DAX is an index of German shares.
The CAC 40, CAC is an index of French shares.
The Nikkei is an index of Japanese shares.
The Hang Seng is an index of Hong Kong shares.
And the Shanghai is an index of Chinese shares.
Remember from earlier lectures that a mutual fund is a financial intermediary that sells
shares on itself, gathers funds from the sale of those shares, and uses those gathered funds
to purchase a portfolio of financial assets in accordance with the funds stated and published
investment objectives.
We recall that a mutual fund allows small financial investors to diversify their holdings.
It allows them to obtain the return and risk properties, not of any single share, but of
a portfolio that includes many more stocks than those individuals could purchase if they
managed their own portfolios and bought individual shares.
Why do I mention this again?
I mention it simply because it's possible to buy and sell mutual fund shares that mimic
the main market indexes.
You can buy the New York Stock Exchange.
You can buy the S&P, Standard & Poor's, 500, and so forth.
In today's lecture, we learn that stock markets provide a highly organized way for individuals
to acquire ownership rights in corporations.
While it's true that many businesses are privately held, it is also true that many of the largest
corporations throughout the world have shares that are publicly traded on various stock
markets.
Stock markets provide those who are willing an opportunity to share in the profits of
corporations around the world.
And what do they have to be willing to do to bear the risks that we talked about at
the outset?
We also learn that there are several different types of market mechanisms.
Each is designed to bring buyers and sellers together, but they differ in just how that
is accomplished.
The New York Stock Exchange is an order-driven system where the market finds the price of
a share that balances buy and sell orders.
On the other hand, NASDAQ is a quote-driven market system where dealers quote offers to
buy and sell.
In the next two lectures, we will closely investigate two very different views on how
shares of common stock are priced.
The first theory that we will look at says that share prices are determined in a highly
rational and dispassionate way.
We'll come to call that the fundamental market theory.
On this theory, shares are valuable because they are claims against company profits and
because those profits occur at advantageous times.
The second theory is very, very different.
It suggests that share prices have more to do with interpersonal psychology than with
the profitability of companies.
On this second theory, it is more important to understand group psychology and group behavior
than the profitability of firms.
