Let me begin this lecture by telling you the story of how I came to own the interesting
item that I'm holding.
Several years ago during the Christmas holiday, my family was visiting my wife's family
in Great Barrington, Massachusetts.
A baking frenzy was underway and I have no skills.
So I was sent to a specialty store to get some needed spices.
While there being a curious person and it being Christmas, I looked around and saw this
item and I asked the proprietor what it was.
The proprietor came and looked at it and then answered, it's a block of pressed tea.
So I picked it up and looked at it carefully and I turned it over and saw the repeated
pattern that had been molded onto the back and then it hit me.
I recognized that I was holding a lot more than a block of pressed tea.
I was holding money.
In today's lecture, I will trace the origins of money from its earliest uses until our
modern day.
I will argue that money has evolved substantially and I will identify five stages in this evolutionary
process.
First, barter, where money is not used.
Then the earliest use of money, using a commodity, something intrinsically useful, but using
it in a different way as money.
And then a form of money with which we're familiar, coins.
Finally we'll come very close to the present day with phase four and take a look at paper
money, but paper money somehow backed by coins.
And finally the fifth stage of the evolution, fiat money.
Money that's valuable because government says it's valuable.
But first, we need a working definition of money.
What does he mean, you might ask, when he says money?
I'll give you the standard definition used by economists.
Money is something that can be used as a medium of exchange.
So what does that mean?
When we make a trade, when we make an exchange, money is something that can be used in that
trade and that exchange.
But the most important idea of today's lecture is not the definition of money, that's easy.
It is that a person values money not because it's intrinsically useful, but because it
can be useful in exchange.
It can be used to buy other useful things.
The connection between money and exchange will help us to understand the most important
point of today's lecture.
That money is a social contract that lowers the cost of trading and has evolved gradually
through time.
That gradual evolution is not an evolution that was too slow.
It was necessarily slow because as the contract evolved, trust was built.
So let's talk about the first phase in the evolution of money, barter, which is no money
at all.
Jevons in a famous book called Money and the Mechanism of Exchange said, and I quote,
the first difficulty in barter is to find two persons whose disposable possessions mutually
suit each other's wants.
Mutually suit each other's wants.
There must be a double coincidence which will rarely happen.
Double coincidence?
What does that mean?
You imagine two members of an early society.
Let's call them Mark and George.
Mark is a very skillful hunter who regularly comes back to his village with more meat
than his family can eat.
What about George?
He's the best ax maker in the village.
He's really good at finding and crafting the right kind of ax head and then lashing it
to a good piece of wood so that it works very well.
The question is, can Mark and George trade?
Mark has meat to offer, but he may not want an ax.
He may already have one.
George probably wants meat, but he's only has one thing to offer, and that's an ax.
That's what Jevons meant.
Not only do I have to have something to offer, but I have to have what the counterparty in
exchange wants.
The search for such a narrowly defined trading partner, meat ax, meat ax, is costly because
it takes time to find someone who wants an ax and has meat to trade.
Indeed, an ax maker might trade his axes for, say, grain, only because he thinks it will
be easier to find someone who will trade meat for grain than someone who will trade meat
for an ax.
Wow, that's wasteful, right?
Not wanting grain but buying some just because you can then trade it away?
The costs of locating trading partners and negotiating trades are disincentives to specialization.
They lead George to be less willing to ply his trade as an ax maker, where he is really
excellent.
In fact, if the costs are high enough, the best ax maker in the world may decide to split
this time between making axes and raising cattle.
That is a waste, and you know what, economists hate waste.
Primitive societies face tremendous incentives to lower the cost of barter and often settled
on successful schemes, even including credit arrangements.
Think about that.
Primitive societies, where there was no money, nevertheless were able to come up with arrangements
where someone would give their meat today but receive payment a little bit in the future
in order to facilitate the trades that made that society better off.
Well, Adam Smith, again in the wealth of nations, suggested the next state in the development
of money when he said, and I quote, every prudent man in every period of society must
naturally have endeavored to have at all times by him a certain quantity of some one commodity
or other, such as he imagined few people would be likely to refuse an exchange.
Adam Smith suggested the next stage was the development of commodity monies.
A society uses a commodity money when individuals typically buy and sell the goods they want
by offering in exchange a particular commodity that is agreed upon in the society to be acceptable
in exchange.
Now, commodity money has taken many different forms.
What was used in many societies and many different geographic locations?
Cowry shells were used in Indochina and in Pacific regions.
We do not know exactly why, but cowry shells are beautiful and they are available, but
it takes effort to collect them.
Economists would say that cowry shells are scarce because of the effort it takes.
It may be that cowry shells were used as commodity monies in areas where the political
leader, the chief, liked wearing cowry shell necklaces.
There are other famous examples of commodity money.
Pretty much everyone in school has seen these pictures of large stones in the island of
Yap.
It is an example of commodity money.
Back to my T-brick, T-bricks were used as money in Inner Asia.
That pattern that I put it out to you on the back, why was that there to make it easier
to make change?
It allowed that T-brick to be broken into smaller uniform pieces.
It was a device that made that block of T more efficient in facilitating trade.
Before we leave commodity money, I want to point out that government often played a role
in deciding what commodity would function as money.
Animals such as oxen or birds were more likely to be money in societies where live animal
sacrifice was required.
If the ruler favored a certain kind of shell or feather, it might become money.
Keep in mind that the commodity chosen as money would have to be scarce.
If anyone could pick up unlimited quantities of money from the seashore or the backyard,
then no one in his right mind would give up something that he worked to produce in exchange
for those shells or feathers.
As we think about the evolution to the next phase of money development, we have to realize
that primitive peoples traveled beyond their borders of their homelands.
When they did, they frequently found that what they considered to be money at home was not
accepted by potential trading partners in the new lands that they visited.
But what they did observe was that metal, especially gold, silver, bronze, copper and
iron, were valued in other lands.
Indeed, Captain Cook on his voyage was able to give iron nails from the endeavor to the
peoples he visited.
They liked to have those nails.
So the next stage in the evolution of money was the use of metals and the coining of those
metals.
Several forces favored the use of metals rather than other commodities as money.
Metal was more likely to be useful in trade in other lands because it could be used to
make a variety of useful goods, such as knives, that were used throughout the world.
Metal was durable and typically metal was more valuable per unit weight, which made
the cost of transporting it on a trade mission sufficiently more efficient.
But there were two important disadvantages to the use of lumps of metal as money.
It was costly to verify the true metallic content of a lump and that purity of that
lump.
Remember all that glitters is not gold.
And it was also costly to weigh the lump.
But by creating coins from metal, government again played an important role.
They lowered the cost of using metal as money.
Coins are very old.
The earliest known coins are from Lydia, which is in modern Turkey, from the 7th century
B.C.
Copper, bronze, silver, and gold coins are widely found in ancient Greece and in ancient
Rome.
Words in use today trace their origins to early coins.
We've heard of the phrase the pound sterling, but a sterling was originally a silver penny
used in England by the Normans at around 1300.
Today sterling has a technical meaning, an alloy that is 92.5% silver.
How about the word dollar?
The word dollar derives from the German word, thaller, which was a coin minted in Bohemia
in the early 16th century.
Okay, we've already argued that governments playing an important role by coining money.
It's solving the problem of weights and measures.
And governments typically derived important revenues from its coining operations.
The governments own the mints that converted raw metals into coins, and they collected
fees from those who sold metal to the mint.
Aha!
But the owner of the mint, the government, could also raise revenue by lowering the metal
content of its coins.
The word seniorage denotes the revenue that a government obtains by deflating the value
of its money.
And that word, seniorage, derives from the French word for lord.
Now, when I say lord here, I mean lord of the manner, the senior.
How does seniorage work?
It could be as simple as shaving metal from the edges of the coin, or it could be as complicated
as changing the price that the mint offered for metal to be coined.
And it was a big deal, this seniorage revenue, a big deal for government.
In 1542, Henry VIII earned, this is a staggering statistic, six times the normal annual crown
revenue by lowering the silver content of English coins.
Six times.
Every day we handle quarters and dimes, minted in the United States.
And every day, if we think about it, we realize that those quarters and dimes are fluted.
They have fluted edges.
Why?
Was it the coin maker's art?
Not at all.
Very practical reason.
The ridges in our quarters and dimes derive from the early attempts to assure the coin
owner that the coins had not been shaved.
Well, there's no silver in our quarters and dimes anymore, so it's no longer necessary,
but that's why those ridges are there.
The transition from coins to paper money is rooted in the practice of allowing citizens
and many civilizations to deposit their goods in temples and palaces.
This is very old practice.
Temples and palaces were not only places of worship.
They were not only places to which you came to offer sacrifice, but they were places that
were secure and well guarded.
And they evolved to take on the role of protecting the wealth of their citizens.
In Babylon, by 1000 BC, private deposits were accepted at the Babylonian temple.
Even the Code of Hammurabi set out the rules for those deposits.
Those issued receipts to depositors and allowed them to transfer their deposits to third parties.
So the next step in the evolution of money is the use of money that's backed by metals
such as gold or silver, but itself takes on paper form.
And the origins of this paper money are the warehouse receipts that we just talked about.
Those receipts are receipts given by depositors for the precious metals that their customers
left or their temporal worshipers left in their possession.
The warehouse receipts began to function as money not when the metal was deposited, but
when third parties traded them for commodities rather than withdrawing their deposits.
But let's think of an example here.
So I have deposited, let us say, some gold at my temple.
I have received a paper receipt.
I now, say weeks later, wish to make a purchase for my home.
I go to the individual who is going to sell me what I desire, and instead of first going
back to the temple to get the gold, I simply present my warehouse receipt.
I, in a sense, sign it over to the person from whom I'm buying.
When that third party, the person who is selling me goods, takes my warehouse receipt and thinks
of it as her own or his own, that's when those receipts begin circulating as money.
Marco Polo found money printed on mulberry bark in China in the 13th century.
In the west, London goldsmiths gave receipts for gold deposited with them, and those receipts
functioned as money in the 17th century.
The use of paper money lowered exchange costs, since it was a heck of a lot easier to exchange
warehouse receipts than the actual deposits.
For one thing, the receipts were for a particular quality and quantity of gold, and the receipt
actually said that.
You hand it over the gold, you'd have to weigh it and assay it again.
Ah, and here is a very subtle but very, very important step in the evolution.
Talk about the people who are managing the depository, the London goldsmith.
We'll talk about that London goldsmith in detail in another lecture, but let's just
get a highlight.
Those goldsmiths soon realized that they could make loans to new parties by issuing new warehouse
receipts.
The scheme worked because on any given day, only a very small fraction of the people who
had deposited gold with those goldsmiths actually tried to get it back.
So here we are with money as gold or silver or copper coins.
But we know that that's not our money today, so what happened?
The final demise of the gold standard, according to Angela Reddish, occurred in two steps.
In August 1971, United States President Nixon temporarily suspended the convertibility of
the U.S. dollar into gold and made that suspension permanent in 1973.
So we come then to the final step in the evolution of money from barter where there is no money,
through commodity money, through gold coins, to fiat money.
Money that's valuable by fiat.
It's valuable because the government declares that it is valuable.
So let's do a kind of experiment here.
Pause for a minute, reach into your pocket, and take out a dollar bill.
This is a little bit like a scavenger hunt.
Search on that bill for evidence that that bill is not just money, you knew that, but fiat money.
You doing it?
Well, you won't have to search for long before you find the words, quote, this note is legal
tender for all debts, public and private.
Folks, that is the clear declaration that our money, the U.S. dollar, is valuable because
the U.S. government says it is.
In 1844, the Bank of England established a rigid link between the amount of paper money
and circulation and the gold reserves of the Bank of England.
This meant that the supply of money in England would fluctuate with the gold reserves of
the Bank and with the availability of gold in general.
For example, discoveries of gold in the New World led to rising prices of goods in terms
of gold.
As gold became more plentiful, its value decreased.
It was typical for the next 130 years for Western economies to back their paper money
with gold.
In most cases, paper money was convertible.
Holders of the paper money could demand gold in exchange at a rate set by the government.
So they could bring their paper money to the government and get the predefined amount of
gold whenever they wished.
Aha!
But in times of national emergencies, obviously World War I and then again World War II,
nations, the United Kingdom among them, abandoned the gold standard and suspended the convertibility
of their currencies into gold.
Why would they do that?
Well, suspending convertibility allowed nations to finance some of the costs of the war by
issuing more currency than their gold stocks would have previously permitted.
They wished to buy more munitions, buy more soldiers, and buy more of all the other war
goods that were required, and they didn't want to be limited by the amount of gold in
their repositories.
But at the end of World War I and again at the end of World War II, nations did return
to the gold standard.
But they quickly experienced problems, problems that they hadn't had before.
The supply of gold was growing too slowly and also too erratically to allow the supply
of money to keep pace with growth in the world's developed economies.
Money in the form of gold was not growing as rapidly as production in the post-World
War II economies of the nations of the world.
So for a time, the International Monetary Fund, and we'll talk about them in a future
lecture, attempted to keep the gold system, the gold standard working by supplementing
the supply of gold with paper gold that were called special drawing rights.
But the gold standard ended as Reddish reminds us with President Nixon's decisions to suspend
convertibility, to make a break between the number of US dollars and the quantity of gold
held by the United States.
Today in Western economies, we have pure fiat monies that are backed by no commodity at
all.
Money is valued partly because governments declare the money to be legal tender for all
that's public and private.
But ultimately, money is valued because people agree it is valuable.
It's valued because people agree to accept money in exchange.
It's valuable because people believe they can accept money and then turn around and
purchase useful things whenever they wish.
Some of our important themes have emerged from our examination of the evolution of money.
First, money is truly a social contract in which the members of a society agree to accept
money in exchange for goods and services.
It is an act of faith for me to give something that's truly useful, an axe or a pound of
meat in exchange for a piece of paper that really wouldn't even do a very good job of
lighting a cigarette or starting a fire.
It's true that the words in God we trust are printed on the back of our bills.
But if we want to understand why the dollar has value, we would be far better off with
the words in one another we trust.
Second, the social contract that is money has developed gradually through history because
it has taken time to develop the trust necessary to exchange something of intrinsic value,
a pound of nails, for something of no intrinsic value, a British pound note.
That trust had to be developed very slowly and had to be developed in the context of
the codes, the laws and the belief of the society that began to accept different forms
of money.
Third, the contract has developed as it has because members of society have constantly
sought to meet two goals and have always found that those goals to be in competition
with one another.
They've constantly sought ways of changing the money contract to lower the cost of trade.
We want trade to be efficient and inexpensive so that we can do more of it.
But at the same time, we have wanted to make sure that we adopt a money that holds its
value.
Throughout history, government has played a crucial role in development of the money
contract.
From coordinating the choice of a particular commodity to ensuring that the contracts made
by goldsmiths were honored so those goldsmiths didn't just renege, to setting up rules for
the coining of precious metals, to developing laws that define the powers and responsibilities
of the Federal Reserve.
So government is essential to organization of monetary arrangements and that's not surprising.
We are government.
A fiat money system is highly efficient.
Valuable metals such as gold and silver are not tied up as backing for money but are released
to alternative uses and electronics, jewelry and many other purposes.
And the Federal Reserve can allow the supply of money to keep pace with the growth in our
nation.
But our fiat money holds its value only if our Federal Reserve keeps the supply of money
from growing too rapidly.
If the Fed fails, inflation results and inflation is the modern counterpart to seniority.
Thank you very much.
