Lecture 36 – Challenges for the Future
I conclude this series of lectures by outlining three questions and related challenges that
the world's economies and particularly its financial systems will address in the coming
years.
Each of these is very important and, as I hope to explain, the resolution of these questions
will greatly affect future growth, future inflation, and future financial arrangements.
I very much hope that all who have followed these lectures are in a better position to
understand these questions, to understand these challenges, and to appreciate why they are
important.
The three questions and challenges are, will the United States solve its long-run deficit
problem and thereby free the Federal Reserve to pursue its primary policy objective of
keeping inflation low and stable?
Will the Euro survive?
And question number three, will financial regulators find a solution to the too big to
fail problem?
I will tackle these challenges one at a time, explain why each is important, and then, as
I finish today, explain how some of these challenges are actually tied together.
So first, will the United States solve its long-run deficit problem?
We took a look at data that documents the evolution of deficits in an earlier lecture.
The graph of that data shows the U.S. Federal deficit as a fraction of gross domestic product.
So it's scaled by dividing by GDP.
And I think there are two features of that graph that are particularly relevant.
With the exception of the period immediately after the Clinton tax increases in the late
1990s, the Federal budget has been chronically in deficit.
Indeed, since about 1970, you can count on the fingers of one or maybe two hands the number
of quarters when the U.S. economy's budget has been insurplus or balanced.
It would not be fair to say that the deficits have been caused by the Great Recession, although
it is correct that recessions have made deficits worse, and the Great Recession is no exception.
More deficits have grown dramatically as a fraction of gross domestic products since
about 2005.
The increased deficits are partly the result of the Great Recession, during which the government
increased spending, while at the same time experiencing lower tax revenues.
Those deficits are partly the result of our wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and those deficits
are partly the result of tax cuts implemented during the Bush administration.
The large deficits we have in our experiencing threaten the ability of the Federal Reserve
to keep inflation low and stable.
That is, they threaten the ability of the Fed to perform on what is widely agreed to
be the most important function of any central bank.
Why do I say this?
In a very important article published by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Review,
economists Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace argued that monetary policy authorities faced
what they called unpleasant, monetarist arithmetic.
The key to this arithmetic is the fact that the federal government must finance its fiscal
deficits in some way, either by issuing new treasury debt or by expanding the money supply.
Recall from earlier lectures that inflation results when the Federal Reserve allows sustained
growth in the money supply at rates higher than the rate at which the economy can grow.
If the Fed grows the money supply at the rate at which the economy can grow, it provides
what Milton Friedman called lubrication.
But if it allows the money supply to grow more rapidly, the result is inflation.
Keep in mind also that we know that inflation provides signorage to the government.
It's a tax on money balances, and importantly keep in mind that inflation is a tax that
no member of Congress must vote on.
Back to Sargent and Wallace.
Sargent and Wallace envisioned two regimes.
In regime one, the Federal Reserve is dominant.
It sets monetary policy to meet its dual mandate.
The other player, Congress and the executive branch, are forced to adopt tax and spending
policies that do not place too much pressure on the willingness of private individuals
to purchase government bonds.
They can run bond finance deficits sometimes, but they cannot run large deficits forever.
In another way, our current deficits under that first regime must ultimately be offset
by surpluses.
But Sargent and Wallace consider a second regime.
In regime two, Congress and the executive branch, the other player, dominate.
They dominate the Federal Reserve, and they allow large fiscal deficits to continue.
Maybe because controlling them is just too politically painful.
In this second regime, there will come a time when the Treasury will have difficulty selling
new government bonds at reasonable rates of interest.
That time will be a time when government bond prices are very low and the yield on those
bonds are very high.
At that point, the Fed will come under tremendous pressure to finance the deficit by printing
money.
Inflation will result, and because the deficits by then will be systemic, inflation too will
be systemic.
Keep in mind that Thomas Sargent argued in another paper that none of the hyperinflations
of the 20th century ended until fiscal reform occurred in those countries.
I'm not predicting hyperinflation, but I am warning that it is not enough for a central
bank to promise to stop allowing rapid growth in the money supply.
It is also necessary to remove the pressure on the central bank caused by the combination
of high spending and low taxes.
In my view, the United States is living on borrowed time.
Since the 1980s, the rest of the world has been willing to buy U.S. Treasury bonds and
has helped the United States finance its fiscal deficits.
But at some point, foreign investors will reckon that their holdings of U.S. Treasuries
are too high, and then the party will end.
When that occurs, U.S. interest rates will rise a lot, skyrocket even, and U.S. growth
will drop dramatically.
It will not be pretty.
The second question and challenge I'd like to address is, will the euro survive?
Some of you may be surprised that I would ask that question.
Well, consider the following headline from the Sunday Times of London's online edition
on May 20, 2010, and I quote, will the euro survive?
The Greek crisis may well prompt the unraveling of the eurozone, but the European Union should
not see this as a threat to its prosperity, end quote.
Think what that means.
Not only are they saying it's possible, they're also beginning to suggest that it wouldn't
be a terrible thing.
Keep in mind that the euro was introduced first as an accounting currency on January
1, 1999.
It began circulating within the countries of the euro area on January 1, 2002.
In 2011, 17 of the 27 members of the European Union had adopted the euro as their official
currency.
The 1992 Maastricht Treaty obliged most EU member states to adopt the euro upon meeting
monetary and budgetary restrictions, such as lowering fiscal deficits and domestic inflation
rates to standards prescribed in the treaty.
The United Kingdom and Denmark negotiated exemptions.
The Swedish people refused to adopt the euro in a 2003 referendum, and other EU members
who are not in the eurozone have not yet met the Maastricht standards.
The benefits of the euro to its members are substantial.
A common currency facilitates trade among the euro nations, and Adam Smith would have
been delighted.
Why?
By banding together, the euro nations have become a larger voice in world economic forums.
So the euro gives them not only a common currency, but allows them to speak as one on economic
matters.
A united Europe has been a goal of some EU members ever since World War II, and many
view adoption of the euro as just one step in the process of creating a united states
of Europe.
By banding together, member nations have been able to commit to a low inflation monetary
policy more credibly than they could have done individually.
In a sense, countries like Italy, for example, borrowed credibility from Germany, which had
a conservative monetary policy way before the euro began.
But if the benefits are substantial, the costs to members of adopting the euro are also substantial.
Before the euro, each member nation conducted its own monetary policy.
If a bad news shock hit that nation, and a recession threatened, the central bank of
that nation could expand the nation's money supply, lower interest rates, and offset the
shock.
After the euro, nations no longer had the ability to conduct individual monetary policies.
The European Central Bank, with its stated commitment to low and steady inflation, conducts
a unified monetary policy.
A euro member that experiences a recessionary shock that is not shared by the other member
nations will find that it has to do without counter-recessionary monetary policy.
In a famous article, Robert Mundell, winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1999, inquired
as to the nature of an optimum currency area.
Out of another way, the question asked by Mundell was, when would it be optimal for
a group of nations to adopt mutually fixed exchange rates, rather than to allow their
currencies to float with respect to one another?
It's important to realize that Mundell answers that a necessary condition for a group of
nations to form a successful currency area is that productive resources must flow freely
among and between the nations.
What does this mean?
In practical terms, free flow of resources means that labor from country A can move at
low cost to country B if unemployment in country A rises, and unemployment in country B does
not.
Now, it is true that technically citizens in any EU country may work legally in any EU
country, but there are still great barriers to labor mobility in the EU, and those barriers
are much greater than in the United States, in part because there is not a common language
in the European Union.
The Greek debt crisis in 2010 clearly raised the question of whether the Euro can survive.
During the subprime crisis, Greece revealed that it might not be able to pay its debts.
Panic ensued as holders of Greek bonds feared that those bonds might lose value or, worse,
become worthless.
The European Union, the European Central Bank, and the IMF put together a rescue package
for Greece, but that rescue package was very large relative to the EU's annual budget.
The rescue package came with conditions, including one that Greece cut its budget deficit from
14 percent of GDP to 3 percent within three years.
Riots ensued as Greek citizens realized that they would face higher taxes and lower levels
of government services and payments.
Germany's share of the rescue package was 123 billion euros, and German citizens were
angry because they saw themselves as rescuing Greeks who routinely spent beyond their means.
Germans saw the rescue as punishing them, the Germans, even though they behaved responsibly.
Germans saw the rescue as bailing out the Greeks, even though they behaved irresponsibly.
And for a time, there was a risk that panic would spread to other euro currency nations,
those with weaker fiscal records, such as Portugal, Spain, and Ireland.
The panic was due in part to the fact that Greek bonds were widely held by banks throughout
the euro-aero area.
Thus, the question of whether Greece would default became the question of whether banks
in other euro countries would fail.
The Greek crisis raised the possibility that some euro currency nations might try to opt
out of the euro.
Greece might decide that opting out was better than bearing the conditions imposed by the
IMF.
Germany might decide that opting out was preferable to picking up the tab for irresponsible governments.
These considerations led Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, to declare on May 19, 2010
that, and I quote, the euro is in danger.
My third question.
Will financial regulators in the United States find a solution to the too big to fail problem?
In May of 1984, the U.S. government contributed about one billion, seems like not very much
now, to save continental Illinois bank from defaulting.
At the time, Congressman McKinney, upon hearing that the controller of the currency admitted
that other large banks might also warrant support, said, and I quote, Mr. Chairman,
we have a new kind of bank.
It is called too big to fail.
Too big to fail, and it's a wonderful bank.
And quote, the cynicism you can hear in McKinney's voice, right?
Research shows that the stock price of 11 banks named too big to fail by the controller
of the currency not fell, but rose 1.3 percent immediately after they were so named.
Clearly, the market recognized that being too big to fail was a good thing for the banks
that achieved that size and that designation.
Well, let's take a moment to recall why too big to fail is a very large problem for our
financial system.
The Federal Reserve rightly fears that allowing a big bank to fail would create financial
panic as depositors and bank creditors fear that banks will not pay them.
When any entity fears that it will not be paid, the rational thing for it to do is to
not pay itself, hoard the cash that it has.
But when hoarding becomes widespread, the nation's very payment system breaks down,
and in that case, the nation grinds to a halt.
The Fed believes, and believes rightly, that it should not allow this to happen.
And as I documented in a previous lecture, took extraordinary steps during the subprime
crisis to make sure that it did not happen.
Now, but the other side of the question, if big banks know that the Fed will not let
them fail, they have an incentive to make riskier loans.
Remember how that argument goes.
If the risks pay off and the loans are paid, the profits of the bank are higher.
If on the other hand, the loans are not paid, the Fed covers the bank's downside risk.
Two things happen as a result.
Big banks systematically take bigger risks because they know they're too big to fail.
And small banks try to get bigger so that they too can become too big to fail.
There is disagreement about whether the Dodd-Frank Act adequately deals with too big to fail.
Federal Deposit Insurance Chairman Sheila Baer said that new liquidation authority under
the Act will allow the U.S. to end the practice of too big to fail for large financial institutions.
Baer stated that, quote, if properly implemented, these provisions will not only reduce the
likelihood of future financial crises, but will also provide effective tools to address
large financial company failures when they do occur without resorting to taxpayer-supported
bailouts or damaging the financial system, end quote.
It's true that the Dodd-Frank Act empowers regulators to identify both bank and non-bank
institutions that may represent systemic risk.
Combined with a credible resolution process, regulators should be able to proactively prevent
future crises.
But Robert Schiller disagrees.
Schiller said that while Dodd-Frank and the recent Basel III agreement will be helpful,
they aren't enough to solve the problems they address.
Systemic risk, which prompted government bailouts in 2008, is inherent in the modern financial
machine, Schiller said.
He said also that Dodd-Frank goes in the right direction, but he warned that it doesn't go
far enough in the right direction.
In a speech before the independent community bankers of America in Orlando on March 20,
Ben Bernanke said, quote, we have to end the too big to fail problem once and for all,
end quote.
He also pointed out that the Fed itself favors a three-part plan.
Bank supervisors must develop and must implement tougher rules to curtail bank risk-taking.
The nation, according to Bernanke, must become more resilient in part by developing mechanisms
to allow banks to price and liquidate assets when they are in trouble.
Remember that part of the problem during the subprime crisis was there was no market in
which banks could price the CDOs, the collateralized debt obligations that they held.
And third, according to Bernanke, the nation must develop a new legal framework that allows
winding down a failed critical financial firm without creating panic or without doing damage
to the broader financial system.
But something is clear.
And what is clear is that big banks are getting bigger.
The deposits of the four largest banks have grown from about $500 billion in 1998 to $2
billion, $500 billion in 2009.
And the market share of those four largest banks has grown from about 15% in 1998 to
nearly 35% in 2009.
There will be another financial crisis.
It may take some time, but the incentives to become too big to fail and earn additional
profits from being too big to fail are just simply too strong.
What remains to be seen is whether, when a big bank next gets in trouble, regulators
allow it to fail.
As we come to the end of the course, it is interesting to see how many threads from the
course have come together, are woven together.
Let me give you just a couple of examples.
Moral hazard affects not only individual banks and the stability of the banking system,
but also the stability of a currency arrangement, such as the euro.
It is reasonable to think of the threat that Greece poses to the euro as a moral hazard
problem.
The ECB has apparently decided that Greece is too big to fail.
The fact that inflation is not only costly to individuals, but a source of revenue for
governments is a second theme that we have visited several times in these lectures.
We revisited today when we realized that failing to get the U.S. federal deficit under control
may make it impossible for the Fed to continue keeping inflation under control.
And if there's one thing I hope, I hope I have convinced you by now that it is crucial
for you, for your children, and for your grandchildren that the Fed keeps inflation under control.
Remember, inflation is a tax that no member of Congress must vote for, but that nevertheless
raises revenue for the U.S. government, our Lord of the Manor.
Number two, that out of control inflation makes planning for distant expenditures such
as retirement or the college education of a child very, very difficult.
Finally, we end as we began with an understanding that the euro is no more than a very recent
attempt to provide a group of European individuals and nations with money in a way that better
promotes trade and further lowers the cost of trading.
The euro is just the latest incarnation of one of mankind's greatest inventions, money.
We hope you have enjoyed these lectures from The Great Courses.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at thegreatcourses.com or call our customer care representatives at
1-800-832-2412.
That's 1-800-832-2412.
Thank you very much.
