Lecture 11, Commercial Banks
What do you think of when you hear the word bank?
If you are like many others, you think of a vault with one of those huge steel vault doors
that weighs many tons and requires specially engineered hinges so that it can be swung open.
Well, there's a reason that the word bank evokes such an image.
There was a time long ago when the primary function of a bank was to store the wealth of its customers.
As we saw in an earlier lecture, a precursor of the modern bank was the European goldsmith
who expanded his business from fashioning items out of gold to storing the gold of his customers.
Of course, Hollywood has helped promote the image of a bank as a vault from Mary Poppins to Bonnie and Clyde.
A scene with a bank is almost always a scene with an impressive bank vault.
Another question for you, what do you think when you hear the word banker?
Again, if you are like many, you will think of the famous 19th to 20th century banker J.P. Morgan,
who had a reputation as a ruthless businessman.
Or, perhaps, you will think of Lionel Barrymore, the scion of the famous acting family,
who played Banker Potter, the adversary of Jimmy Stewart's character, George Bailey, in a Christmas classic movie.
It's a wonderful life.
I'm not an expert in psychology, but let me share an opinion.
I think it's likely that the Wall Street versus Main Street metaphor that we encountered earlier
was so often used to discuss the subprime financial crisis because it appealed to our society's preconceived notions
of banks and of bankers as ruthless businessmen who have no interest in the common man or his concerns or his needs.
In today's lecture, we will take a dispassionate look at a bank and the functions it performs in a modern economy.
We will learn why banks are the only private financial institutions that can create money.
We will investigate bank balance sheets and come to understand the role that banks play in channeling funds from savers to investors.
And we will study the process by which banks create money.
We will also see how the law, and in particular the Federal Reserve Act, has given an element of control over the process of bank money creation to the Federal Reserve.
The first point that we must have clear is that banks are not repositories.
In the very first Harry Potter film, Harry is taken to his vault at Gringotts,
from which he withdraws a number of coins to buy what he needs for his first year at Hogwarts.
In the film, the bank is simply a repository, a place of safekeeping.
It's guarded by goblins and, as we later learned, by more ferocious creatures.
But it is not a bank in the modern sense.
In the United States, the closest thing we have to Gringotts is Fort Knox, our gold repository.
But, despite what you may have heard or may have believed, Fort Knox is not a bank.
A good place to begin studying the modern bank is with a look at its balance sheet.
Now, let's think back and recall that a balance sheet is a list of the assets, liabilities, and net worth of a firm or an individual,
and in this case it will be a bank, and that net worth is defined to be the value of firms' assets minus the value of its liabilities.
Therefore, by construction, balance sheets always balance.
In this lecture, we are less concerned with any particular bank and more concerned with banks in general.
And for that reason, we begin our investigation with a look at the consolidated balance sheet of commercial banks.
That is, we lump together all the assets, all the liabilities, and look at the banking system as a whole,
at the balance sheet of all our commercial banks taken together.
Looking at the T-accounts of commercial banks is a lot like paleontology.
The numbers we're going to see in the balance sheet are the bones we dig up,
and our job is to try to figure out what the ancient animal looked like and how it functioned.
The T-account depicts the consolidated balance sheet of the commercial banks in the United States at a particular time.
The end of December 2005, when the U.S. and world economies were in the midst of an expansion.
What do we see? Let's look at the asset side first.
The total assets of all the banks taken together was $8,707 billion.
Well, let's break down those assets and see what the bank actually owned.
Treasury securities.
So banks owned securities that were issued by the Treasury, and that was $1,134 billion, or about 13% of all the assets.
Banks also owned other securities, including securities of some private firms,
to the tune of $907 billion, or about 10% of its total assets.
Banks made commercial and industrial loans of $1,045 billion, about 12% of its assets.
Real estate loans, $2,904 billion, or about 33% of its total assets.
Consumer loans, $705 billion, about 8% of total assets.
Loans to those who were borrowing to buy securities, to buy stocks and bonds, $262 billion, about 3% of assets.
And other sorts of loans, $525 billion, 6% of total assets.
Banks also made loans to other banks to the tune of $278 billion, about 3% of total assets.
And then we come to an interesting item, cash assets, $311 billion, only 4% of the $8,707 billion that collectively the banks owned.
And we have a rounding out item, other assets to the tune of $636 billion, or 7%.
So that's what banks owned. Collectively, what were their liabilities?
This is also a very interesting list, but it's somewhat shorter.
Collectively, commercial banks had accepted transactions deposits from customers.
Customers had deposited funds into the banks, $656 billion, or 8% of the asset total.
We'll use the asset total for computing percentages here.
They also had large time deposits.
Now, what are those? Well, some customers of a bank will deposit funds that they agree not to reclaim for a period of time.
For that reason, those deposits are called time deposits, and they typically provide the customer with a higher rate of interest.
There were $1,418 billion of time deposits held at commercial banks, or about 16% of assets.
There are other kinds of assets, other kinds of deposits, excuse me, $3,657 billion, or about 42% of total assets.
As I said before, banks borrow from other banks, and the borrowings from other U.S. banks were $361 billion, or 4% of total assets.
And borrowings from all other entities, about $1,360 billion.
So banks go out and attempt to borrow funds to do their business, and that amounted to 16% of total assets.
And other liabilities, about 568 billion, or 7%.
Net worth, the difference between assets and liabilities, $687 billion, or about 8%.
Okay, that's a lot of numbers, but we would like to understand these numbers using the language of sources of funds and uses of funds.
A bank's sources of funds are the places from which it gets the funds it uses to prosecute its business.
Where does the bank get the funds that it uses to acquire all these assets?
Well, banks accept deposits of several types.
Transactions deposits are those against which checks can be written.
Non-transaction deposits are deposits in savings accounts, from which funds can be withdrawn at any time, and time deposits, which have, as I've already explained, fixed maturity dates.
Large denomination time deposits are certificates of deposit in amounts at or over $100,000 that are generally purchased by corporations and other banks.
As I've said, banks power funds from other banks, from the Federal Reserve, from the Federal Home Loan Bank, and from corporations.
In December of 2005, total liabilities of the commercial banks in the United States amounted to slightly more than $8 trillion.
How did the banks use the funds that they acquired by accepting those deposits and doing those borrowings?
As we've seen, banks hold, to some extent, Treasury securities and other government agency securities, so they hold a bond portfolio.
Banks hold, to some extent, bonds and other securities of private corporation.
But primarily, banks lend funds to businesses for real estate purchases, to consumers in the form of auto loans and other types of consumer loans,
and to those who use the borrowed funds to purchase securities, and for some other types of loan activities.
Banks hold cash assets of two sorts, actual physical currency in their vaults, and deposits at the Federal Reserve.
Both are considered cash assets.
In December of 2005, total assets held by commercial banks amounted to a bit more than $8.7 trillion.
In 2005 also, bank net worth equaled $687 billion.
What is the relative importance of various sources and uses of bank funds?
Despite the fact that banks actively go out and borrow funds, they are still primarily depository institutions.
In that 70% of their liabilities are deposits of one sort or another.
By the way, it's important to keep track of the fact that it's only transactions deposits against which commercial banks are required to hold reserves,
and transactions deposits account for only about 8% of all liabilities.
Despite the fact that banks hold various kinds of securities, they are primarily lending institutions,
and 62% of their assets are loans of one sort or another.
In 2005, banks had net worth or capital equal to 8.6% of their liabilities, and about 8% of their assets.
Banks and bank regulators have worked hard, especially in recent years, to determine minimal levels of bank capital needed to assure bank safety.
Bank capital is a tricky business.
The value of bank capital can drop very quickly in bad economic times because the market value of the securities that the bank owns can fall,
and more importantly because the true value of bank loans fall.
We'll talk in later lectures about the true value of loans and how changes in that value affect the stability of the banking system.
But for now, keep in mind that what is important is to understand that bank capital isn't something physical that's locked in a vault.
Bank capital changes when the value of assets changes and falls when the value of assets fall.
A related point, and very important one, is to realize that banks are always susceptible to bank runs.
Remember again, it's a wonderful life.
Those are events where depositors all try to withdraw their deposited funds at the same time.
Why?
In December 2005, commercial bank deposit liabilities totaled $5.7 trillion, and of that $656 billion were demand deposits.
But bank cash assets totaled only $311 billion, less by far than would be needed to redeem even those deposits that depositors have the right to redeem for cash at any time.
In this sense, banks are fragile no matter how well they are managed.
Okay.
Now that we have a more precise understanding of the assets and liabilities of commercial banks, we are in a position for the first time in this course to define money in a formal way.
We've used the term money often.
I've talked about how the government, quote-unquote, prints money to finance deficits, and now we're actually going to define what is considered to be money in the United States.
In particular, we're going to ask and answer the question, which assets in the United States are considered part of the money supply in the United States?
I'm going to assure you that the definitions which we use in the United States are pretty much the same as the definitions used by all economies in the world.
Our reference point will again be December of 2005.
If you have at some time in your life taken a Principles of Economics course, some of the following points may be familiar.
But don't worry, I'm not going to dwell on arcane facts.
Keep in mind, though, that as we go through the various definitions of money, these various definitions share a common intuition.
I like to dwell on that intuition.
Money is some asset that its owners rightly believe they can quickly and without loss of value convert to purchasing power.
What? Well, let's say it a different way.
Money comprises those assets that can be used to buy the goods, services, and other assets that people wish to buy.
That's what I meant by purchasing power.
But the point's so important that I want to say a few more words in clarification.
I wished I owned a painting by Van Gogh.
If I owned a painting by Van Gogh, I'd be happy and I'd be wealthy.
However, I would never think of a Van Gogh painting as money.
It's not a liquid asset.
It would be exceedingly difficult to convert it to cash.
Think about how difficult.
I'd have to determine what its potential value was.
I'd have to arrange some way to sell it.
I'd have to allow for bids.
Oh, it might be a great asset, but it would never be money.
It could take me years to convert a Van Gogh to cash.
The narrowest definition of money that we use in the United States and other developed nations use as well is what's called M1.
Which equals currency held by the public plus traveler's checks by non-bank issuers plus demand deposits at commercial banks and any other checkable deposits.
Well, that's very, very intuitive.
Clearly, we can pay with cash, we can pay with our checking accounts, and we can pay with traveler's checks.
So all of that belongs in M1.
But that's probably not a broad enough definition of money to really capture the notion of money as purchasing power.
So a less narrow definition of money, and the one favored by economists when they studied the relationship between the quantity of money and economic behavior is called M2, capital M number 2.
That asset, excuse me, that definition of money, M2, equals everything in M1 plus savings deposits, including money market deposit accounts, and small denomination, time deposits at depository institutions,
leaving out IRA and Keogh balances, and balances in retail money market deposit accounts, again accepting IRA and Keogh balances.
Let's pause for a minute and understand that.
Why ought those items be part of our definition of money?
Very simply, if you've got funds in a money market mutual fund or something like it, you realize that you can quickly deposit those in your checking account or receive a cashier's check for them and use them to purchase goods.
That's why they're part of our money supply.
And by the way, when I showed you a graph earlier, which I showed you the connection between money growth and inflation, it was M2 that I used.
Our broadest definition of money is M3, which includes everything in M2 plus balances in institutional money markets and large denomination, time deposits, and large so-called repurchase agreements of depository institutions.
And also Euro dollars.
These are dollars held by U.S. citizens at foreign locations.
I'm not even going to talk about that.
Most economists acknowledge that M3 includes additional highly liquid assets, but typically revert to M2 when they're interested in talking about the money supply.
Take a look at a table that provides data on the quantity of money in the United States in December 2005.
Let's first take a look at the components of M1 so we can answer the question, how large was the money supply back then?
Currency, $724 billion on that in that December time.
Travelers checks, $7 billion.
Demand deposits, $321 billion.
And other checkable deposits, $317 billion.
So M1, the narrowest definition of money, was $1,369 billion.
M2, which added all those other assets that were liquid like money market mutual fund balances, much larger, $6,676 billion.
And M3, larger still, $10,154 billion.
Now, notice before we go on that bank loans are not counted in any of our money definitions.
But, and somewhat ironically, as we shall now see, banks create money when they lend to borrowers.
Commercial banks of all our financial intermediaries are special firms in that they are the only private financial institutions that can and do create money.
But how do they do that?
The key is that transactions balances at commercial banks are counted as money.
They're part of even the narrowest definition of the money supply.
So the first thing we must realize is that demand deposits at banks are money.
They are money because economic decision makers regard them to be money.
And they use those balances, those decision makers, in much the same way they use currency to buy what they want and pay what they owe.
Sometimes decision makers do have a strong preference for currency.
And every time I go to New York, I carry more cash than I normally would when I go to other places or stay at home because New York is a place where sometimes only cash can be used to buy things.
But generally, and most of the time, decision makers regard balances in their checking account to be money.
Why? Because they can easily use those balances to buy what they want and pay what they owe.
So, exactly how do banks create money?
I'm going to illustrate this story with a sequence of stylized balance sheets, T-accounts.
The story begins with a deposit of $1,000 in cash by some bank customers who finds it convenient to exchange currency for a bank deposit.
The bank, I assume, faces a legal requirement to hold reserves equal to at least 10% of deposits.
But the customer's decision to deposit cash has now left the bank with extra reserves or excess reserves.
For that $1,000 deposit, the bank is only required to hold $100 in cash as a reserve against the new deposit.
But has a whole $1,000 in cash after the deposit is made.
So the bank now uses its excess reserves to support a new loan of $9,000.
It picks one of its loan applicants that it deems worthy and lends that individual $9,000.
It credits the deposit account of the borrower with $9,000.
It adds $9,000 to that deposit account.
And at that moment, the bank has created money.
Now, how did I choose $9,000?
Well, I chose it as the largest increase in deposits that the bank could accommodate with $900 in excess reserves,
given that the reserve requirement is 10%.
And simply $900 divided by $10.1 is $9,000.
Now, I'm making a simplifying assumption.
None of the cash leaks out of the bank vault or out of the bank's balance sheet when the borrower's spend it.
But don't worry about that.
If bank customers spend those new loan funds with customers at other banks,
that simply means that this expansion of money process transfers from one bank to another.
It's not really important, and I won't really dwell on it.
At the end of the day, the deposit of $1,000 in cash increases the money supplied by $9,000
because commercial banks use the cash as reserves, super-dollars,
to support the deposits they create when they write new loans.
Because banks are required by law to only keep a fraction of their deposits in the form of reserves,
and banks create liquidity.
That is, they can use $1,000 of currency to support more than $1,000 of deposits.
We saw $10,000.
The ability to create liquidity is the ability to lend.
If banks were required to hold 100% of their reserves against their deposits,
they would not be able to lend.
And they would be simple repositories.
As we shall see in a later lecture, bank loans are a crucial source of funds for investors.
Without loans, many potential investors would not be able to grow their businesses.
If the reserve requirement had been 20%, it's not.
The deposit of $1,000 would have allowed the banks to create only $4,000 in deposits and money.
On the other hand, if it had been lower, 5%, the deposit would have allowed banks to create ultimately $20,000 in deposits and money.
As we come to the end of this lecture, it's fair to ask now how people should think of bankers once they really know what bankers do.
A banker is someone who helps a customer realize plans.
Plans to purchase equipment for their businesses, purchase a home, purchase a car, or purchase something else.
Of course, our newfound realization of the business of bankers does not completely rehabilitate their image.
Banks and bankers came under a tremendous amount of valid criticism for banking practices that contributed to the subprime mortgage crisis.
In a later lecture, we'll look at that crisis and think about the role of banks and bankers again.
But for now, let me ask you, how do you think about banks and how do you think about bankers?
Thank you.
