Lecture 23 Stock Market Bubbles and Irrational Exuberance
The charging bull of Wall Street is exactly the right image to evoke as we begin today's
lecture.
Seeing the statue of the Wall Street bull raises interesting questions.
First, what is meant by the bulls and bears metaphor, and how did these two animals achieve
iconic status on Wall Street?
It appears that no one knows for sure how the bull and bear images came to be used.
Through history, the bull has been used as a sign of optimism.
Wall Street bulls are buyers of shares, and more generally, individuals who are optimistic
about the future course of prices in the market.
Some believe that the bull became the symbol of stock market optimism because the bull
has long been the symbol of fertility.
After all, it's the animal responsible for impregnating all the cows in the herd.
Wall Street bears are sellers of shares, and more generally, those who believe that share
prices will fall.
In the early days of stock trading in London, traders who believe that share prices would
fall would short those shares.
That means sell the shares at a price agreed upon now, but agree to deliver those shares
later in the hope that when the shares were due to be delivered, they could be purchased
more cheaply because the expected price decrease had actually occurred.
Some believe that the use of the bear as a symbol of pessimism traces back to an old
proverb.
Don't sell the bear skin before the bear is caught.
The Oxford English Dictionary also references this proverb and suggests that bear was used
earlier than bull.
Whatever the origins, it is clear that the terms have been in use for a very long time.
And early etching pictures a violent interaction between the bulls and the bears in Change
Alley, a street which housed Jonathan's Coffee House, the precursor of the London Stock Exchange.
In the last lecture, I presented a highly rational and dispassionate picture of how stock
prices are determined in the marketplace.
According to that picture, share prices are determined by rational calculations on the
part of buyers and sellers as to the future profits of the firm that issues the shares
and the future dividends to be paid by that company to shareholders.
Future dividends are discounted by a required rate of return that is also computed in a
highly rational way by asking how the returns on that share correlate or co-vary with the
shares paid to the market portfolio, all stocks taken together.
Today's lecture will provide a theory of stock price determination that has much less to
do with the rational calculation and discounting of dividends and much more to do with group
psychology.
And what better starting point than the image of a charging bull?
The bull is the leader of the herd and herd mentality is one of the central ideas in explaining
stock market bubbles.
Why are stock market bubbles important?
Like all extreme events, stock market bubbles provide important insights into the workings
of markets.
Markets often cite stock markets as examples of markets that function well.
The existence of bubbles calls that belief into question and raises deep issues about
why stock bubbles occur.
In addition, some analysts believe that the Federal Reserve should act to deflate bubbles
before they become large, so large that popping those bubbles threatens economic activity
generally and the continued functioning of the marketplace.
An informed opinion on this issue about what the Federal Reserve should or should not intervene
certainly requires an understanding of how stock bubbles form.
Finally, there is an active debate about how frequently bubbles actually occur.
And the extreme positions are really far apart.
Some think that bubbles are theoretical curiosa that rarely, if ever, occur.
Others think that bubbles occur quite frequently and account for a lot of movement in stock
prices.
So what is a bubble?
A bubble and in particular a stock market bubble is an event where the price of a financial
asset grows more rapidly than is justified by the fundamentals and that that growth continues
for a substantial period of time.
I don't know how long, but not a day, not a month, a substantial period of time.
Robert Schiller, author of a study entitled Irrational Exuberance, I love that title,
defines a speculative bubble as, and I quote, a situation in which temporarily high prices
are sustained largely by investors' enthusiasm rather than by consistent estimation of real
values.
Schiller's definition is similar to mine in that it uses real values as a benchmark.
But Schiller's definition goes beyond mine because it identifies investor enthusiasm
as a cause of a bubble.
Schiller argues that speculative bubbles begin to inflate when market participants begin
to treat share price increases as news that justifies increased optimism about future
share prices.
Think about that.
You've seen the prices go up and you come to believe, you come to believe that they
will continue to go up.
When you enter that mindset, according to Schiller, bubbles are likely to inflate.
As the bubble inflates, market participants stop asking whether the price increases are
justified by dividends, profits, and fundamentals and increasingly believe that the price increases
must somehow be warranted by new economic rules.
Of course, that's very, very different than the fundamental theory, which says that present
value is the economic rule.
On December 5th, 1996, in a speech before the American Enterprise Institute for Public
Policy, Allen Greenspan, then Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, used the term irrational exuberance to describe the behavior of stock market participants.
Why do we use the term bubble to describe periods of rational exuberance?
Why bubble?
Well we use bubble for the most intuitive of reasons.
After all, a bubble is something that by its nature pops.
The most famous recent stock price bubble occurred between 1995 and 2000.
The following figure, the one you're about to see, shows the inflation adjusted, standard
and poor's 500 stock price index and inflation adjusted corporate earnings for the companies
included in the index.
The data run from 1870 to 2005, 1870 now.
When we take a look, what do we see?
Well we see two lines.
We see an extraordinary rise and fall in stock prices that begins in the mid 1980s, you see
it there, and ends very abruptly in 2000.
The data show clearly that the shape of the path of stock prices over that 20 year period
was very, very different than the shape of the path of corporate earnings between 1980
and 2000.
Look how flat the earnings path is, look at how sharply upward moving the path of market
prices is.
Some examples, on August 29, 1994, the S&P 500 closed at 470.99, that's the index value.
On September 1, 2000, it closed at 15, 2077.
Over that intervening six years, the index more than tripled, and the annual rate of
increase was 21.6%, about three times larger than the average return over the entire postwar
period.
But on August 27, 2001, the index closed at 1133.58, a stunning drop of 25.5% in one year.
And on August 26, 2002, the index closed even lower at 916, which is equivalent to an average
decline of 22.4% between the summer of 2000 and the summer of 2002.
Folks, that's called popping.
Another way to see just how extreme price growth was during the bubble period is to
look at changes in the price earnings ratio, the ratio of the price of a share of stock
to the earnings of the corporation that issues that share of stock.
The figure you're seeing now shows the ratio of the S&P 500 to the earnings of the companies
that make up the index.
So now not one firm, but the entire 500 firms that underlie the S&P 500 index.
What should you see when you look at this picture?
To me, the figure shows quite clearly that at the peak of what came to be called the
Millennium Bubble, the price of the index was 47.2.
That's on March 24, 2000.
In contrast, the average P&E ratio for the entire period is only between 15 and 20.
What does the P&E ratio tell us?
Well, in normal times, those who buy stocks are willing to pay somewhere between $15 and
$20 for the right to hold a share of stock that represents an annual earning of about
a dollar.
However, at the peak of the Millennium Bubble, people were paying $47 for that same share.
The Millennium Bubble has the classic features of a speculative bubble.
It's in the price of an asset, 300 plus percent, unjustified by fundamentals, followed by a
relatively rapid decline in prices once the bubble pops.
Keep in mind that the underlying economic information did not justify the inflation
of that bubble.
Gross domestic product rose by less than 40 percent between 1994 and 2000, important
fundamental.
Current profits rose by less than 60 percent between 94 and 2000, again a fundamental that
doesn't justify the run-up in stock prices.
To further understand how a speculative bubble can inflate, it is useful to use our fundamental
theory to show how the current price of a share of stock depends on expected future prices
of a share of stock.
Now hold on, I'm not confused here.
We will start with the fundamental theory, but then I'll show you a departure that explains
how inflations, how bubbles inflate.
So as we saw in the previous lecture, the fundamental theory tells us that the price
of a share of stock should equal the present value of dividends that the stock will pay
in the future.
Now I can rewrite the present value equation so that the current share price depends on
two things, the expected future price of the share and dividends.
So on one side of the equation we see the price of share z at time t.
On the other side of the equation we see two things, the dividend that will occur next
year, properly discounted by dividing by 1 plus rr, and one more thing, the price of
the share one year later also discounted because you'll have to wait a year until you get that.
So the price today should depend on any dividend you're going to get over the next year and
the price that you think you can sell the share at at the end of the year.
Here one period, say a year, a share of stock therefore entitles its owner to receive two
payments, the dividend paid next year and the sale price that could be obtained at the
end of the year.
And the fundamental theory says that the price today should equal the present value of those
two payments.
Well, amazingly, this equation is the source of the famous random walk theory of stock
prices associated with Burton Malkin.
Suppose we measure time in smaller and smaller units, so we've been using a year, let's stop
down to a quarter, no let's go to a month, no let's go to a week, no let's go to a day,
and even smaller, okay?
So we're going to move time to smaller and smaller increments, smaller and smaller units.
Now doing so, moving from years to days, for example, will induce two changes to the formula.
First, for most daily increments, a dividend will not be expected so that the first term
in the equation will evaluate to zero.
I don't expect a dividend in the next day.
Second, the required rate of return over a day will be much smaller than the required
rate of return over a year so that the denominator in the present value equation will be only
slightly larger than one.
For example, a required rate of return of 12% per year amounts to a required rate of
return of 0.03% per day.
So 1.0003 becomes the denominator, only slightly bigger than one.
So with time measured in days, the above formula becomes on the left hand side the price of
share z at time t and on the right hand side must equal the price of share z one day later
with the understanding that that future one day later price is the forecasted or expected
price.
This is the famous random walk expression for stock prices.
Keep in mind that the term on the right should be thought of as our best forecast of the
stock price of company z one period for now.
And the equation says that the price of a share today should equal whatever market traders
believe the price of the share will be tomorrow.
Why?
If the equation did not hold, individuals would expect it to be profitable to either
buy or sell shares.
If market traders thought that the price of company z shares would rise over the next
day, they would buy those shares today in anticipation of a profit.
And they would continue to buy those shares until the price rose to the point where the
equation held and no short term profits were expected.
The point at which irrational exuberance theory of stock prices departs from the fundamental
value theory of stock prices is the source of the justification for the expected increases
in share prices that we just talked about in the formula.
On the fundamental theory, only an increase in expected future dividends or a decrease
in the required rate of return could justify an increase in share prices.
But an irrational exuberance theory of stock prices drops fundamentals as the source of
the belief that share prices will rise.
The underlying cause of a speculative bubble is psychological.
When the irrational exuberance theory expected capital gains need not be justified by current
and expected future company profitability.
Any information that makes you think that share prices will rise is justification for
buying the share, driving its price up now, and contributing in a sense to the self-fulfilling
profit to see that share prices will grow at rates higher than the required rate of return.
The psychological process that drives ever higher share prices is sometimes called the
greater fool theory.
According to the greater fool theory, you may believe that you're paying too much for
a share of stock.
I mean, you see a high PE ratio.
You think it's overpriced, but you buy it anyway.
Why?
Because you think that soon someone called the greater fool will pay even more to buy
the share from you.
Notice that on this theory, buyers are focused on short-term capital gains, the gains to
be had from selling at a higher price than the price at which they bought.
And they're not focused on holding the stock for a long term in order to participate in
the company profits.
Wow!
If other buyers are behaving irrationally by paying unjustifiably large amounts for a share
of stock, it becomes rational to do the same thing.
During a bubble period, traders pay attention only to stock prices and their increases and
ignore other data.
That's really the stuff of a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In irrational exuberance, Robert Schiller describes many factors that contributed to
the buy, buy, buy mentality prevalent during the Millennium bubble.
Now, it's beyond the scope of this lecture to go into detail, but I mention a couple
of relevant points because they're so interesting.
Increased media attention to financial news may focus public attention on stock price changes
and potential profits more readily than on fundamentals.
The explosion of the Internet and the huge fortunes that have been made by Bill Gates,
Michael Dell and Larry Page and Sarri Bryn, the inventors of Google, may have created
the impression that any company that uses the Internet can make a fortune for its owners.
Schiller illustrates this last point by describing the rise and fall of a company called Etoyze.com,
obviously an Internet company.
Schiller notes that shortly after it went public in 1999, Etoyze shares had a market
value of $8 billion.
So if we added together the market price of all the shares and multiplied by the total
number of shares, we'd get $8 billion.
But Etoyze had annual sales of only $30 million, and if we calculated its profits correctly,
they would have had low losses of $28.6 million.
That's not the end of the story.
We need a comparison.
For that very same year, Toys R Us had a market valuation of less, $6 billion, annual sales
of $11.2 billion, and profits of $376 million.
Was very wrong with that picture.
At the end of the day, the psychology that underlies bubbles may be similar to the psychology
that leads gamblers to describe dice as sometimes being hot, the dice are hot, even though rational
thought tells those same people that the probability of rolling a seven is one six
on each and every roll.
John Maynard Keynes was famous for the suggestion that investors were sometimes possessed of
animal spirits.
I'm not sure whether Keynes had bulls and bears in mind, perhaps he meant that sometimes
investors seem to be motivated not by what their brains tell them, but by the instincts
that became part of the human makeup earlier in our evolutionary development.
If Keynes had had the chance to see it on TV, Keynes would probably have likened the
stock market to the game show Family Feud.
In that show, contestants were asked questions such as, what are the four most likely items
to find in a refrigerator?
Contestants earned points, not if they answered correctly, but rather they earned points if
they answered in accordance with an audience survey.
What people actually keep in their refrigerators had nothing to do with winning on Family Feud.
Figuring out what the audience would answer had everything to do with winning.
And that in a nutshell is the stuff of a bubble.
Let's return then to the image of the bull of Wall Street.
And let me tell you my favorite bull story.
You're in a roundup.
It's the last roundup of the season and you have led this herd of cattle.
You're only one day away from the station where you're going to take this herd into
the corral.
So you're in a celebratory mood and you and your cowboy partners have decided that you're
going to have a bit of a celebration and one of them, Tex says, you know, I've got some
firecrackers.
It'd be a great, great night to blow those off right after dinner.
Now on this story, we've got a very special bull in this herd.
He's the smartest bull in the herd.
He's so smart that he actually understands what Texas said and he knows that after dinner
and after the cowboys have their coffee and something stronger and after they eat their
beans and so forth, there are going to be loud sounds that are harmless.
It's not going to be gunfire.
It's not going to be an avalanche.
It's not going to be anything that could hurt the herd.
It is going to be firecrackers and our smart bull knows what those are.
But guess what, folks?
When the firecrackers go off, our smart bull is out in front running faster than anybody
else because he simply doesn't want to be trampled by all the dumb bulls and all the
dumb cows.
That story captures the essence of specular bubbles.
I hope you enjoyed it and I hope you value this lecture.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
