Lecture 26, Regulation of Financial Firms.
Walk along LaSalle Street in downtown Chicago is a journey into financial market history.
When you get to the end of the block you find the Chicago Board of Trade Building.
It's a beautiful building and it's capped by the statue of Ceres, the goddess of grain.
But turn around and back up the block and you will find the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
one of the regional components of the Federal Reserve System.
And right across the street, ironically, you will find the building that once housed Continental Illinois National Bank.
In the early 1980s, Continental Illinois was in trouble.
It had lent large amounts to Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma, which in turn had used those loans to finance oil projects in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
But when oil prices fell, Penn Square failed and Continental Illinois found itself in serious trouble.
Continental Illinois tried to raise enough funds to restore creditor and depositor confidence, but failed to do so.
But when failure was imminent, the government bailed out Continental Illinois.
The Federal Reserve guaranteed that it would meet all liquidity needs of the bank and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation guaranteed
all the deposits and all the creditor claims on the bank.
At the time of the crisis, Continental Illinois was the seventh largest bank in the United States.
And until the seizure of Washington Mutual in 2008, Continental Illinois was the largest bank failure in United States history.
In a 1984 hearing, Connecticut Congressman Stuart McKinney popularized the term too big to fail while discussing the bailout of Continental Illinois.
When and why is it in the public interest to bail out a failing bank or financial institution?
What is the connection between bank bailouts and bank regulation?
Why is the financial services industry so highly regulated?
And how does the concept of asymmetric information that we encountered in a previous lecture help us understand why and how banks are regulated?
We will look at these and related issues in today's lecture.
Let's first look at the case for bailing out a failing bank and a failing financial firm more generally.
As we have learned earlier, depository institutions such as commercial banks, savings and loans and other thrifts and credit unions fulfill the function of channeling funds from savers to investors.
And we have come to understand that that is an essential economic function unless funds can move from savers through investors, the nation cannot grow its capital stock.
So keep in mind that that is an essential function of a well operating economy and it's worth preserving.
But as we also learned, all depository institutions, all financial firms that accept deposits from customers are fragile.
And they are fragile in the sense that they never keep enough cash on hand to weather a bank run on deposits if one should occur.
Moreover, it would be inefficient for banks to keep sufficient deposits to weather a bank run.
If a bank always held enough reserves, enough cash in its vaults to weather a bank run, they would make little profit from lending activities and would have to charge deposits.
That's you and me folks, very high fees to maintain and protect their deposits and to permit them to write checks.
Deposits at banks and other depository institutions are also part of a nation's money supply.
When the financial system is functioning normally, depositors regard their deposits as available on demand.
That's why we call them demand deposits.
And that means that depositors treat those deposits just as available for spending as they treat the cash in their pocket.
If depositors were suddenly to lose immediate access to their deposit, the economy would suffer a devastating shock because depositors would stop paying their bills and stop buying goods.
The economy would grind to a halt.
So, it is in the public interest to provide support for a failing bank or financial firm when failure to do so would threaten public confidence in the financial system.
In a world where individuals have the option to lower their transactions costs by depositing currency and using deposits for transactions by check writing and by direct transfers.
In such a world, economic theory tells us that there are two possible equilibrium.
That is two possible steady states for such an economy.
And it's very easy to state what they are.
In one equilibrium, everyone deposits.
Everyone finds it optimal to use banks for deposits.
But in the other, very frightening equilibrium, no one deposits.
And indeed, one way to think about a bank run is a rapid movement from one equilibrium to the other.
When a large bank fails for any reason, that failure raises the prospect, increases the risk that other financial institutions will fail also.
Why? Well, the other institutions may have been owed funds by the failing bank.
Or may be thought of as suffering from some of the same problems as the failing bank.
If the public loses confidence in the safety of deposits, it becomes optimal for every single financial institution to stop making required payments.
After all, why pay what you owe if you've become convinced others will not pay you?
Hold on to your cash.
Don't pay your debts.
Wait and see what happens.
And you know what happens?
I'll tell you what happens.
The system grinds to a halt.
And if the financial system grinds to a halt, then most firms will be unable to obtain loans for their business projects.
And most households will be unable to obtain loans for big ticket purchases such as houses and cars.
Keep in mind that I'm not talking about simply businesses that are suffering from some sort of bad economic news or consumers where one of the workers in their households have been laid off.
I'm talking about all businesses and I'm talking about all consumers.
The economy grinds to the halt, to a halt for all.
Those who suggest that too big to fail indicates somehow a government preference for helping Wall Street, over helping Main Street, miss a very, very important point.
If our financial system fails, Main Street fails too.
As there often is, there's a big caveat.
When government bails out of bank to preserve the payment system, it creates some very perverse incentives.
Think about it.
Bank managers have an incentive to approve riskier loans.
If when those loans go bad, the government steps in to cover the losses.
Now let's take a look at the case for regulating banks and financial firms and understand how connected it is to this issue of system security.
Recall that banks and other lenders face asymmetric information problems because they know less about borrowers and how they will use borrowed funds than the borrowers themselves know.
Lenders face adverse selection problems because increases in loan rates and rates charged for loans tend to select prospective borrowers with riskier projects.
And lenders face moral hazard problems because once borrowers receive a loan, they have an incentive to use funds differently from the way they promise to use those funds on their loan application.
If one concedes that it is in the public interest for government to bail out a failing institution, when failure of that institution would seriously undermine public confidence in the entire financial system,
it follows that government itself faces an asymmetric information problem like those faced by the financial firms it's chosen to protect.
A lender such as a commercial bank knows much more about how well it vets borrowers and the true value of loans that it lists among its assets than the government knows.
When the government implicitly or explicitly guarantees that a bank will not be allowed to fail, it creates an incentive for the bank to acquire assets that have higher expected returns but entail more risk.
If those assets pay off, the bank earns higher profits but if those assets fail, the government caps the downside risk for the bank.
So what? Well, the goal of financial regulation is to counter the effects of asymmetric information on the entire financial services industry.
So banks and financial firms face several different types of government regulation under current law.
We understand the reason for regulation now but it's now time to look at the types of regulations that banks face.
And the first type of regulation is deposit insurance.
Currently depositors and their accounts are insured up to $250,000 per account.
Deposit insurance keeps depositors from running their bank when they hear news that that bank is in trouble or they hear news that banks in general are in trouble.
From the point of view of depositors, deposit insurance solves the asymmetric information problem by making the superior information about fun news possessed by the bank irrelevant,
long as you keep your balance under $250,000.
And deposit insurance also makes it unnecessary for depositors to monitor the lending practices of their banks.
How would you like to have to keep up with your bank's lending practices?
Deposit insurance shifts the asymmetric information problem from depositors all the way to the bank guaranteeors, the guarantors of the banks and financial institutions.
The second type of regulation faced by banks and financial firms are restrictions on the assets that those firms are permitted to hold.
Most famously, the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 separated commercial banking and investment banking in the United States and made it illegal for commercial banks to hold stocks and corporate bonds.
Since the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and more generally the U.S. Treasury guarantees deposits,
Congress recognized that banks had an incentive to take additional risks with deposited funds and restricted the use of those funds in an attempt to limit risk.
Unfortunately, some economists have argued with real reason that Glass-Steagall had a perverse and unintended consequence.
Possibly, its prohibitions actually made banks riskier by keeping them from holding a more diversified portfolio of assets.
If banks are not allowed to hold corporate stocks and bonds, what are they going to hold?
Well, then they will hold a larger share of their assets in loans.
And historically, those loans tended to be loans to households and firms in the same geographic area as the bank itself.
And when a local economy turned bad, as was the case in Texas when oil prices fell in the 1980s, then many, many of the bank's loan assets were affected and in a negative way.
Ah, so the Graham Leach-Bliley Act of 1999 repealed many elements of the Glass-Steagall Act.
The third kind of regulation faced by banks are bank capital requirements.
And those capital requirements take two forms.
The so-called leverage ratio, which is bank capital divided by bank assets.
So the amount that the bank has in capital divided by the total amount of its assets.
That ratio must exceed 5% for a bank to be considered well capitalized by bank regulators.
And if that ratio falls below 3%, the bank faces additional regulatory restrictions.
Secondly, the Basel Accord is an agreement among banking officials in 100 countries to impose risk-based capital requirements.
And without going into great detail, the Basel Accord recognizes four different categories of risk.
And the greater the risk, the more capital the bank is supposed to hold.
Why capital requirements?
Well, the idea behind capital requirements is to ensure that a bank itself has more to lose from a failure.
When a bank has very little capital, the guarantor faces moral hazard problems
since the bank has an incentive to promise to lend conservatively when it's talking to regulators,
but in fact to take great risks with its lending.
If the risks are successful, the bank wins.
If not, the bank is no worse off because its capital value is low in the first place.
The fourth and often overlooked regulation faced by banks is that banks must obtain a charter,
a right to operate from the controller of the currency if it's a national bank,
or from state banking authorities.
This means that entry into the banking industry is limited to those who can gain charters.
And limited entry lowers competition among banks with the consequence that banks who do get a charter are more profitable.
And that banks who do get a charter have an incentive to protect it.
And that's the point. That's the point.
Make charters valuable so banks will protect them.
On the other hand, of course, that limited entry of those who would be bankers raises the cost to bank customers.
Once the government guarantees deposits and signals that it will bail out a big bank,
it makes sense for government to create a situation in which banks are profitable.
Charters limit entry into the bank industry and keep profits higher than they otherwise would be.
So a cost of safety is allowing banks to be profitable.
And finally, the fifth kind of regulation.
Regulators require that banks adhere to certain standard accounting principles
and disclose information that helps the market assess the quality of a bank's asset portfolio
and enables stockholders, creditors, depositors, all those who have a stake in the bank to monitor bank behavior.
Since the Federal Reserve was first approved in 1913 and the Federal Reserve system was first developed in 1914,
the regulation of financial firms has been a work in progress in which Congress has tightened
and then loosened and then retightened regulations on many different occasions, often in response to crises.
There's not general agreement about how much to regulate banks and financial firms.
We do know, however, that extreme positions are not attractive.
Minimal regulation is not the answer.
Most depositors do not want to monitor their depository institutions.
They do not want to deal with the risks associated with uninsured deposit accounts.
But maximal regulation, as would occur if the banks were actually owned and managed by the government,
it's not an answer either.
Most experts believe that market competition makes bank operations more efficient,
provides a wider selection of financial market services to customers,
and keeps prices at closer to cost than they would be with a fully monopolized banking sector.
Since its inception in 1913 and development in 1914,
the Federal Reserve and the United States with it have swung between looser and stricter regulation of its financial institutions.
Typically, the periods of title regulation have come in response to crises.
Let's take a look at the historical record.
From 1913 to 1937, we experienced a period of fairly light regulation
and minimal intervention by the Fed in financial markets.
The job of the Fed during this period was to provide an elastic currency
by allowing banks to re-discount their commercial paper at the Fed.
But then came a crisis, the Great Depression.
Many, but not everyone, blame the banking sector for the depth of the Great Depression.
Runs on banks were frequent events and President Roosevelt declared a bank holiday as one of his first official acts,
saying, we have nothing to fear but fear itself.
Congress responded by tightening financial market regulation.
The Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 and the Banking Act of 1935 created deposit insurance,
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
It forced the separation of commercial banking from the securities industry
by making it illegal for banks to own corporate bonds or stocks.
Those acts prohibited payment of interest on checkable deposits, no interest on checking accounts.
Those acts limited insured deposits to commercial banks
and imposed interest rate ceilings on other deposits.
Crisis time, high inflation in the 1960s and 1970s.
The high inflation rates that resulted from the Vietnam War and oil price shocks of the 1970s
raised market interest rates to levels that exceeded the ceilings imposed by Glass-Steagall.
As a result, funds flowed quickly out of the commercial banks and out of savings and loans
to newly created money market mutual funds.
And Congress responded with decreased regulation.
The Depository Institutions, Deregulation and Monetary Control Act in 1980
and that act allowed thrift institutions a wider set of permitted activities.
That act phased out deposit rate ceilings.
It imposed uniform reserve requirements on all deposit accounts
and eliminated usury ceilings on loans and increased deposit insurance to 100,000 per account.
Also, the Garn St. Germain Act of 1982 allowed Depository Institutions to offer
money market deposit accounts and compete with money market mutual funds.
It also granted thrift institutions wider latitude in commercial and consumer lending.
The next crisis, failure of the thrift institutions and Continental Illinois in the 1980s.
In the early 1980s, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates in order to combat inflation.
We've heard about the Volcker Initiative before.
At the same time, and perhaps as a result, the U.S. experienced a very deep recession.
Dereen that recession, oil prices fell dramatically.
The economies of the oil producing states such as Texas were hit very hard
and thrift institutions in those states suffered very high loan default rates.
Losses at thrifts amounted to $10 billion in 1981 through 1982
and as many as one half of thrift institutions were judged insolvent.
The situation was made worse by regulators who allowed some of those insolvent thrifts to remain open.
Facing these perverse incentives, these so-called zombie institutions made many more high-risk loans
further increasing the liabilities to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Fund.
And, as I already mentioned, Continental Illinois succumbed to high deposit rates
and low energy prices in a similar way.
So regulation increased.
The Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989
provided new funds to resolve thrift institution failures,
created the Resolution Trust Corporation to liquidate the assets of the failed thrifts,
created the Office of Thrift Supervision to regulate thrift institutions,
raised deposit insurance premiums, and reimposed restrictions on thrift activities.
Again, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991
recapitalized the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, placed limits on too big to fail,
instructed the FDIC to establish a system of risk-based insurance premium
to be paid by depository institutions that offered insurance-insured deposit accounts.
It also increased supervision of banks and took other steps to tighten regulation
of domestic and foreign banks operating in the United States.
Now we come to the period of calm, the great moderation in inflation.
Between the late 1980s and the late 1990s, the inflation rates fell and remained low and steady.
There were no financial crises and few bank failures.
As a result, Congress decreased regulation.
The Regal Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994
overturned the prohibition on interstate banking and allowed banks to branch across straight lines.
And the Graham Leach-Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act of 1999
repealed most of Glass-Steagall and removed the separation of commercial and investment banking activities.
The 20th century history of bank regulation resembles a sequence of crises and regulatory responses.
I sometimes think of it as a tennis match.
Crisis, re-regulation, calm, deregulation, and so forth.
In many cases, the regulatory response to one crisis sows the seeds for a subsequent crisis.
The U.S. government has rightly sought to maintain confidence in the financial system,
understanding that if that confidence failed, the economy would fail.
But to maintain that confidence in the financial system, the government has sometimes bailed out financial institutions,
especially ones that are deemed too big to fail.
In doing so, our government has created an asymmetric information problem for itself
since the banks it vows to protect know a lot more about lending and other risk-taking activities than the government does.
It s an understatement to say that the financial market regulators walk a tightrope between competing goals.
Too much support for banks and banks tend to take greater risks knowing that they will be bailed out if things go badly.
Too little support for banks and economic crises can convert themselves into financial panics.
Too much regulation and the competitive forces of the marketplace are blocked from forcing financial institutions to be efficient.
Too little regulation and banks will be more successful in finding ways to take risks with other people s money.
Thank you.
