Lecture 28, Interest Rate Policy at the Fed and ECB.
In December 2010, the Federal Open Market Committee met to discuss the state of the
U.S. economy and to make decisions about monetary policy.
In its official statement dated December 14, 2010, the Federal Open Market Committee said,
and I quote,
Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in November confirms that
the economic recovery is continuing, though at a rate that has been insufficient to bring
down unemployment.
This statement goes on to describe some particular features of recent performance by the U.S.
economy.
The statement then describes what FOMC has decided to do.
To promote a stronger pace of economic recovery and to help ensure that inflation over time
is at levels consistent with its mandate, the Committee decided today to continue expanding
its holdings of securities as announced in November.
The Committee intends to purchase $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the
end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month.
What is unusual about this FOMC statement when compared to others is that the policy
statement describes two different kinds of activities.
As is customary, the FOMC stated its target values for the federal funds rate.
Because the economy in December 2010 was still growing very slowly after the Great Recession,
and because unemployment remained high and the inflation rate low, the FOMC announced
that it would continue to keep the federal funds rate between 0 and 1 quarter of 1 percent.
And these are very low levels indeed.
But the policy statement also described an extraordinary asset acquisition program that
is not normally part of Federal Reserve policy, but was an initiative taken by the Fed in
2010 to attempt to accelerate the recovery.
That extraordinary policy came to be called quantitative easing.
What exactly does the Federal Reserve do to pursue its policy objectives?
In today's lecture, I answer that and related questions.
Along the way, I like to compare the Federal Reserve policy with the policy undertaken by
the European Central Bank and show that these two very important central banks typically
agree about the right kind of policy medicine for their economies.
I will also explain that there is an important asymmetry in the relationship between central
bank policy and the response to that policy by banks and other financial institutions.
What is that asymmetry?
Well, when either the Fed or the ECB, Federal Reserve or European Central Bank, decides to
cool the economy, it does so by raising short-term interest rates.
And that policy is always effective.
But when the Fed or the ECB decides to stimulate the economy by lowering short-term interest
rates, they may or may not be successful.
Lowering interest rates provides an effective stimulus when banks and other lenders lend
more to investors and lend at lower rates.
But lowering interest rates is not an effective stimulus when banks and other lenders remain
unwilling to lend, even though their cost of acquiring funds has fallen.
Central banks can increase bank reserves, central banks can make it possible for lenders to
increase lending, but central banks cannot force increased lending if banks are unwilling.
The unwillingness of banks to lend explains why, in 2010, Federal Open Market Committee
policy included both low federal funds rates and direct asset purchases.
Okay, how does the Federal Reserve change the federal funds rate?
Well, by United States law, depository institutions such as banks, thrifts and credit unions must
hold reserves.
So if you accept deposits from customers, you must hold some fraction of those deposits
in the form of cash or deposits at the Federal Reserve.
The required level of reserves is 10% of checkable deposits called demand deposits.
Remember that demand deposits are those deposits that are available to customers whenever they
want on demand, but banks and other depository institutions are not required to hold reserves
against time deposits that depositors agree to leave with a bank for a specified period
of time.
So banks have to hold reserves against demand deposits.
Now technically, if you were to look at the small print describing reserve requirements,
you would learn that reserve requirements are smaller on the first 58.5 million dollars
of any bank's deposits, but that doesn't really matter.
For all practical purposes, the banking system taken as a whole faces a 10% reserve requirement
on any increase in its day-to-day operations.
So if it receives another dollar in deposits, the banking system as a whole must hold a
dime of reserves against that dollar.
If we're going to talk about the federal funds rate, it's a good idea to remember what federal
funds are, and it's quite simple.
Federal funds are funds that qualify as reserves.
So we have reserve requirements.
The question is, what kind of assets can we hold to satisfy those requirements?
Federal funds are either cash in the vault of the depository institutions or actual deposits
in favor of those institutions at the Federal Reserve.
This is a good point to remember that depository institutions, such as banks, actually have
accounts at the Federal Reserve, which is why the Federal Reserve is frequently referred
to as the bankers' bank, because banks are their customers.
When the Fed wants to lower the federal funds rate, what does it do?
It buys U.S. Treasury securities on the open market from Treasury security dealers, and
that purchase increases the supply of federal funds.
But how?
Well, the Fed pays for those funds with, let us say, a check.
So the purchase of bonds by the Federal Reserve means that the Fed writes a check to the bond
dealer.
But the bond dealer doesn't want to hang on to the check.
And when the bond dealer deposits the check at its bank, and then the bank, in turn, presents
the check to the Fed for payment, the Fed honors that check that it wrote by simply
adding to the bank's deposit account at the Fed.
Poof!
The Fed has created new federal funds, and those new funds allow commercial banks to
loan ten new dollars for every one new dollar in federal funds.
We speak of the federal funds market.
What's that?
The federal funds market is the market where banks who have excess reserves lend those excess
reserves to banks who borrow them to meet their own reserve requirements.
Okay, let's pause for a minute and understand that.
Not every bank has exactly the right amount of reserves, the amount required by law.
Some banks will come to an accounting day and have too few federal funds.
Others will have more than required.
The federal funds market is the place where banks with more funds than required will lend
them for a short term to the banks who have too little of those funds.
In a sense, that market is a place where mutually advantageous exchanges are made and federal
funds are used more efficiently.
What's the federal fund rate?
The federal funds rate is the rate of interest determined by that market for loans of federal
funds from one bank to another.
So the provider of federal funds in the marketplace earns the federal funds rate and the borrower
of federal funds pays the federal funds rate.
Now the funds are lent for very short periods of time because the borrowing banks need
them just long enough to bring their reserve totals up to the required level when on the
last day of each two-week reserve maintenance period.
So there's an accountancy day that happens once every two weeks.
When the Federal Reserve buys bonds, it increases the supply of federal funds and thereby lowers
the market rate at which these funds are borrowed and lent.
It stands to reason, right?
If the supply of those funds is greater in the marketplace, the cost of borrowing them
should be less.
When the Fed wants to raise the federal funds rate, it reverses the procedure.
It sells U.S. Treasury securities on the open market to private securities dealers.
What happens then?
Okay, the dealer pays for those bonds that it has purchased with a check, which the Fed
collects on by lowering the deposit balance at the bank where the bond dealer has an account.
It's the opposite procedure.
In fact, it makes sense to say that selling bonds destroys federal funds.
The decrease in the supply of federal funds raises the market rate at which the funds
are borrowed and lent.
While the monetary system in Europe is similar to that in the United States, there are some
important differences.
I will highlight these in the next part of the lecture before I move on to talk about
a comparison of European Central Bank and Federal Reserve policies.
You will remember that the European Central Bank, or the ECB, is the central bank for
the European nations that use the euro as their common currency.
The central banks of individual euro nations, such as the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Banque
de France, now function more like branches of the ECB than as freestanding central banks.
Seventeen member states of the European Union use the euro as their currency.
Let's see, that's Belgium, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Cyprus,
Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia, and Finland.
Perhaps the most notable member of the European Union that is not part of the euro area is
the United Kingdom.
That's an interesting story for another day.
Sweden and Norway are also not part of the euro area, although Sweden is part of the
European Union, but Norway is not.
The European Central Bank pursues its policy objectives by also conducting open market
operations, by maintaining something that they call standing facilities for participating
credit institutions, and like in the United States, by requiring credit institutions to
hold minimum reserves with the euro system.
The ECB requires credit institutions, which they call counterparts or counterparties,
to hold minimum reserves on accounts with the national central banks as specified by
the euro system.
The list of liabilities against which counterparties must hold reserves is broader in the euro
system than in the Federal Reserve system when it's simply checkable deposits.
The ECB requires that reserves be held on something called overnight deposits, deposits
redeemable on demand, just like in the United States, deposits with maturities up to and
including two years, unlike the United States, and debt securities with the maturity of up
to two years, also unlike the United States.
Counterparties hold reserves in the form of deposits with the national banks, so with
the branches of the ECB if you prefer.
The ECB uses end of month balance sheet data to compute required reserves that institutions
must hold during a one month period that begins one month later.
So banks have more time to adjust in Europe than in the United States.
For example, credit institution liability balances at the end of February determine
required reserves that those same institutions must hold during April, so they get lots of
advanced notice.
The reserve requirements are different for different liability classes.
In the United States we have one reserve requirement, 10%, and only one class checkable
balances.
The ECB also has what they call two standing facilities that credit institutions may use.
Counterparties, remember those are like banks and other financial institutions, may use
the marginal lending facility to obtain overnight liquidity, overnight loans from national central
banks at a pre-specified interest rate.
Now the counterparty must offer appropriate collateral, and so this is not unlike borrowing
from the Federal Reserve's discount window, or re-discount window as it's more properly
called.
The marginal lending facility is intended to satisfy counterparty's temporary liquidity
needs.
It functions in the Euro very much like the federal funds market functions in the United
States.
Counterparties can use the deposit facility to make overnight deposits with national central
banks.
The deposits are remunerated at the pre-specified interest rate.
The deposit facility allows counterparties to receive interest income on the reserves
that they hold.
Only in special periods of U.S. history has the Federal Reserve paid interest on reserves,
only as part of its response to the subprime crisis and the Great Recession.
But history before then, the Federal Reserve did not pay interest on reserves, although
the European Central Bank does so routinely.
The European Central Bank also conducts open market operations in a manner similar to the
Fed.
The ECB may buy and sell debt certificates, bonds and the like, issued by the ECB, and
all debt certificates issued by the national central banks of the Euro system prior to
the date of adoption of the Euro.
All traded debt certificates must meet high credit standards, so the ECB will only buy
and sell high quality securities.
All traded debt certificates must be issued or guaranteed by central banks, public sector
entities, private sector entities, or international and supranational institutions.
Now this is a very broad list of admissible securities, far broader than the Federal Reserve
will buy and sell in normal times.
The ECB conducts open market operations to keep the Euro overnight index average.
I got to say that again, it's a mouthful.
Euro overnight index average, EONIA, E-O-N-I-A, I say EONIA, and it tries to keep the EONIA
close to a published target rate.
Ah, so EONIA to the ECB is like the federal funds target rate to the Federal Reserve.
When the ECB wishes to stimulate the European economy, it lowers its target for EONIA, just
like the Fed lowers its target for the federal funds rate.
And to hit that lower target, it buys debt certificates, thereby raising the amount of
reserves and lowering the cost of borrowing them.
And when the ECB wants to de-stimulate the European economy, it raises its target for
EONIA and sells debt certificates, thereby lowering the amount of reserves and raising
the cost of borrowing them.
The rates that the European Central Bank charges to borrow reserves in its marginal lending
facility and that the ECB pays for the reserves on deposit in its deposit facility provide
an upper and lower bound for EONIA, okay, a sort of corridor in between which EONIA
will always lie.
Okay, let's take a few minutes now to ask, how does Federal Reserve policy and how does
European Central Bank policy vary over the business cycle?
Well, right off the bat, we have to acknowledge that the objectives of Federal Reserve and
ECB policy are not exactly the same.
The ECB has one priority mandate to conduct monetary policy in a manner that is conducive
to price stability.
Its charter specifically subordinates maintenance of full employment to its primary objective,
which is maintenance of price stability.
The difference is that the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate, and I'll discuss that
mandate in great detail in a future lecture, but for now, the first part of that mandate
is to maintain price stability.
The second part of the mandate is to promote full employment of resources in the economy,
and the chartering law itself does not prioritize those two mandates.
Most economists, however, argue that price stability is and ought to be primary, and
is and ought to be the superior mandate, and that full employment should be pursued only
when doing so does not jeopardize price stability.
But many politicians and elected officials disagree, and so there is a difference between
Fed mandate and ECB mandate.
The chart that you're going to look at now shows how the Federal Reserve adjusted the
federal funds rate over two business cycles.
What do we see when we look at the graph?
Well, first of all, we note that the dates run between 1995 and 2011.
As we begin in 1995, we notice that the federal funds rate was kept somewhere between the
high 4% and about 6.5%.
I like to say that the Federal Reserve, during that period, was keeping the federal funds
rate at a station keeping level of, let's say on average, 5.5%.
So it was keeping the federal funds rate at a station keeping level.
But beginning in 1999, we see that it raised the rate from about 5% to about 6.5%, and at
that point it did so explicitly to counter inflationary forces that the Federal Reserve
believed were beginning to influence the U.S. economy.
The Fed reversed course late in 2000, and over the next year, and you can see this clearly
in the diagram, dropped the federal funds rate from 6.5% to 1.75% in an attempt to
offset recessionary forces.
And the gray band that you see in the chart are the official dates, beginning and ending
dates of the recession that actually occurred.
The Fed dropped the rate further, all the way to 1% after 9-11, in an effort to maintain
liquidity and keep the financial system solvent.
That decision was criticized by many, as you'll recall, after the onset of the financial market
crisis in 2008.
Beginning in 2004, the Fed began raising the federal funds rate back to a station keeping
level of about 5.25%.
But as the diagram clearly shows, late in 2007, the Fed began dropping the rate dramatically
to offset the financial crisis and the great recession.
The Fed continued to keep the federal funds rate just slightly above zero throughout 2009,
2010 and 2011.
I think it is interesting to compare European central bank settings, Freonia, with Federal
Reserve settings for the federal funds rate.
Doing so shows that the ECB responded in much the same way as the Fed did during this period.
The ECB did not lower Ionia as far as the Fed lowered the federal funds rate in 2001.
Adding credibility to the view that the Fed believed that more policy stimulus was required
after 9-11 to maintain worldwide confidence in the U.S. payment system.
By making the federal funds rate lower, the Fed made it cheaper for banks to borrow cash assets
that they may have required to fulfill their payment obligations to individuals and other institutions.
At the beginning of 2011, the ECB and the Fed had lowered Ionia and the federal funds
rate respectively to values only slightly higher than zero.
The Fed had never in its history set the funds rate as low as it did from 2009 to 2011.
The fact that short-term interest rates were near zero during the financial market crisis
and the great recession of 2007 to 2010 raises a very important question.
What is a central bank to do when it has lowered rates to zero and the economy remains in recession?
Is a central bank helpless in such cases?
The fact is that the Fed did not respond to the financial market crisis and the great recession.
The great contraction, if you prefer, simply by keeping the funds rate low.
It took other extraordinary and in some cases, controversial policy measures as well.
In a later lecture, we will learn what those measures were and why the Fed took them.
Indeed, that lecture is called Extraordinary Policy for Extraordinary Times.
We will also explore the legal foundation under which the Fed took its extraordinary measures.
As we look at these extraordinary decisions, I hope you will continue to ask yourself
whether you believe that the Federal Reserve showed important and appropriate leadership
in a crisis by taking these extraordinary measures
or whether you believe instead that the Federal Reserve exceeded its authority
and exercised power beyond that which its congressional mandate and prudent behavior would authorize.
Thank you.
