These lectures are part of the great courses.
The great courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Pause our catalog or website at thegreatcourses.com and imagine how much you could learn if you
spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the
world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the great courses and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Money and Banking, What Everyone Should Know.
The lecture is Michael K. Salemi, Professor of Economics and Chair of the Department of
Economics at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
He has been a member of the faculty there since 1976 and has held three distinguished
term professorships, once as the Zachary Smith Professor of Economics and twice as the Bowman
and Gordon Gray Professor of Economics.
Professor Salemi completed undergraduate studies in economics at St. Mary's College
in Winona, Minnesota.
He has master's degrees in economics from Purdue University and the University of Minnesota
Minneapolis.
He also received his doctorate in economics from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Professor Salemi is the author of two books and more than 60 published articles in macroeconomics,
Domestic and International Monetary Theory and Economic Education.
He routinely teaches principles of economics and has also taught intermediate and advanced
macroeconomic theory, money, banking and financial markets, and macroeconomic policy.
An acknowledged expert in economic education, Professor Salemi has been an instructor, workshop
director and workshop program director for national programs in teacher education.
He has served on and shared the committee on economic education for the American Economic
Association.
Professor Salemi has received numerous teaching awards from UNC Chapel Hill, including the
Economics Undergraduate Teaching Award, the Tanner Award for Teaching and the Economics
Graduate Teaching Award.
He has also been recognized nationally with the Bauer Medal in Economic Education from
the Council for Economic Education and the Vallard Award for Research in Economic Education
from the National Association of Economic Educators.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes lecture guides, a glossary
and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review the graphs and charts
in the guidebook before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1, The Importance of Money
Hello, and thank you for joining me.
I have been fascinated by money since the beginning of my career as an economist.
I know what you are thinking.
We all like money, and most of us believe we should have more.
But what interests me is not the question of my income or yours.
What fascinates me is money as a social institution.
Money as an agreement among individuals.
Money as a collective contract that, if we keep it, makes our economic life much better
and allows our economies to grow more rapidly.
This course is about that contract and about what it means to keep it.
The contract called money is important.
As important to our modern society as the invention of the wheel.
I will say that again.
Money is as important to our modern society as the invention of the wheel.
Thus, this course considers issues that are of fundamental importance to our lives and
our well-being.
In the very last lecture, we will consider challenges that face our monetary and financial
institutions in the coming years.
I believe, and I think you will come to believe, that rising to these challenges is extremely
important.
Of course, there is a lot to learn before we can consider these challenges.
You will remember that the nation's attempts to recover from the subprime mortgage crisis
and the Great Recession were often discussed using the metaphor Wall Street versus Main
Street.
That phrase, Wall Street versus Main Street, evokes for me a drama of the sort written
by John Steinbeck.
Let's see, with Henry Fonda playing the role of the common man and Lionel Barrymore playing
the greedy capitalist.
In that drama, it's every man versus the plutocrats.
On October 3, 2008, as the subprime mortgage crisis was going from bad to worse, and as
the Great Recession was showing itself to be far more damaging than any typical downturn
we'd experienced in recent decades, Congress enacted the Emergency Economic Stabilization
Act of 2008.
That act created the Troubled Asset Relief Program, TARP, Troubled Asset Relief Program,
which provided funds for the bailout of financial firms that were in trouble.
In September 2008, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson had testified on Capitol Hill in favor of the Emergency Stabilization Act and the
TARP Fund.
Members voted in favor of the act and President Bush signed it.
Over the coming months, the Fed and the Treasury used TARP funds aggressively to keep banks
and non-bank financial firms from failing.
But at the same time that funds were flowing to help threaten financial firms, there was
a populist outcry.
That outcry said that the federal government should do more for Main Street, for the workers
and the firms that were suffering at the hands of the Great Recession, and less for Main
Street, for the banks and financial institutions and their management.
Green his campaign, President Barack Obama condemned, I quote, greedy CEOs who are taking
too much risk, although as president he continued to support both the Treasury and the Fed initiatives
to rescue the financial sector.
Nevertheless, throughout the time of the Great Recession, one frequently heard the view that
the federal government supplied too much assistance to the financial sector and too little to
the common man.
If the government can help those big banks, they can help me keep my home.
If there is one idea I hope you will take away from this course, and I hope it fervently,
it is that the Wall Street versus Main Street idiom is inherently flawed.
Oh sure, at any given time, if the federal government gave fewer dollars to help commercial
banks, it would have more dollars to help the unemployed.
But that very narrow truth misses a much larger and much more important truth.
The success of Main Street and the success of Wall Street are inextricably bound together.
Main Street cannot win without Wall Street, and Wall Street cannot win without Main Street.
The most important point that we will encounter in this course is that economies require efficient
and ever-evolving financial institutions and markets in order to maximize their potential.
We will encounter this idea many times in different ways and guises and in different contexts.
In this first lecture, I would like to provide a preview of the ways in which we will come
to understand the connection between financial matters and economic well-being, the interconnectedness
of Main Street and Wall Street.
For the sake of specificity, I will give you four reasons why the fates of Main Street and
Wall Street are intertwined.
The first reason, stable value money is essential to efficient trade.
Famous quote, it is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that
we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.
We address ourselves not to their humanity, but to their self-love, and never talk to
them of our own necessities, but of their advantages.
That very famous quote, those words are from perhaps the most famous economist of all time,
and from that economist's most famous book, The Man, Adam Smith, The Book, The Wealth of
Nations.
The quote goes to the heart of Smith's argument that a nation becomes wealthy when it organizes
its productive efforts to take advantage of specialization.
What Smith warns us, specialization is an inherently social activity, producing lots
of excellent beer, great quantities of tremendously good bread, or the best beef in your village
will make sense only if we can trade a lot of it for other things that we want, but that
we do not produce.
So Smith teaches, trade is essential to wealth creation and to the improvement of the quality
of life.
But Smith goes further.
He warns again that trade can only be accomplished efficiently in a society that has adopted money.
While I'll take this point up in great detail in coming lectures, the following story captures
much of what is true about the importance of stable value money for trade, that creator
of wealth.
I love stories.
I hope you like this one.
Suppose you were a homesteader in the first half of the 19th century in some place like
Kansas or Missouri.
You engaged in subsistence farming, but despite your great ingenuity, you could not provide
for all of your needs.
So occasionally, you took the days required to travel to a town and purchase what you
needed, but how would you pay?
Let's say that you brought some wool from your sheep with you to market, and your first
stop was at the shop of a garment maker who had bought wool from you in the past.
Here in luck, the garment maker will again buy your wool.
You agree upon a price and then are presented with bank notes drawn on a bank in Illinois.
Immediately, you wonder, are the notes any good?
Will the owner of the general store accept them when I visit him tomorrow?
And if not, will they keep their value until I find someone who is willing to accept them?
Now, suffice it to say that your concerns are extremely legitimate and they represent
an impediment to trade.
Your sheep may produce the finest wool in the territory.
The garment maker may agree that your wool is without equal in quality, but that will
be cold comfort to you and cold comfort to the garment maker if you find it a risky proposition
to sell that wool.
In this course, we will come to understand that money is a social contract and we will
study the evolution of that monetary contract from very early times when money was typically
a portable, highly used commodity.
And we'll continue that study to modern times when money is, let's face it, intrinsically
worthless paper currency or in many cases balances in electronic record books.
My second point for you.
Property banks are essential to the process of channeling funds from savers to investors.
Let's stay with our example of homesteading on the Great Plains.
Some years have passed now and you have neighbors with whom you cooperate and socialize.
At one of your gatherings, one of you mentions that it would be a great enhancement to your
productivity if each of you had a windmill to pump water from the wells you have dug.
But there's a problem.
None of you has the funds necessary to purchase the pipe or the moving parts required.
Each of you saves something each year for a rainy day, but none has enough to order
the necessary from back east.
After talking for a while, you realize that collective action is possible.
You realize that if you pool your funds with your neighbors, one windmill could be built
immediately.
You and your neighbors have just decided to create a bank.
At its core, a bank is an institution that channels funds from savers, those who save
from their income in order to spend more than their income at a later time, to investors,
windmill builders, those who wish to build productive equipment and buildings, which economists
refer to as capital.
Channeling funds from savers to investors is fundamental to economic growth.
Because those with productive ideas had to wait until they accumulated sufficient funds
from their own saving before they acted on their ideas, little growth would occur.
Channeling funds from savers to investors is mutually beneficial.
Savers earn interest on their savings.
Investors gain the opportunity to enact their ideas sooner rather than later.
You and your homestead or neighbors will come to learn that your decision to pool funds
so that one of you can build a windmill sooner is not without its challenges.
How will you decide which neighbor builds?
How will you decide how much interest to charge?
How will you ensure that the borrower will repay?
In modern economies, many of these problems are solved by financial institutions such
as banks and the markets for credit in which they operate.
Efficient asset markets are essential to establishing values for dead instruments like bonds, currencies
and shares of stock.
Financial markets are essential.
So remember our original homesteader problem.
Our homesteader was offered payment for wool in the form of a paper bank note drawn on
a bank in Illinois.
One way to express the problem that our homesteader faced is to say that the homesteader did not
know the value of that bank note in terms of some widely accepted payment medium, let's
say gold.
Knowing the value of things is very, very important even when those things are financial
instruments.
One of the key reasons for the subprime mortgage crisis that led to TARP and certainly contributed
to the depth of the Great Recession was the simple fact that banks held large quantities
of mortgage-backed securities.
Of course it was a problem that those securities lost value once house prices began to fall
in 2007, but an even bigger problem was that banks and potential lenders to banks had no
way of determining the value of those mortgage-backed securities once the house and crisis began.
Why?
Because there was no market in which those securities were traded.
The value wasn't the face value and the value wasn't zero.
Part of the job of markets would be to find out or discover what the value was.
Markets play essential roles in the functioning of our financial system.
Bond markets provide a way for large and well-known businesses to obtain investment funds, funds
to build their firms.
Friends price financial securities so that borrowers and lenders and financial institutions
know what those securities are worth.
Contrast for a moment our homesteaders' currency problem with what you might consider to be
a similar problem today.
Suppose you are traveling to Europe, doesn't have to be France or Italy or Germany, Czech
Republic for example.
You know that you will need either euros or some other foreign currency to buy what
you want to buy, but you do not have to guess the value of the euro.
You do not have to guess the value of the Czech currency because many billions of euros
are exchanged for dollars in foreign currency markets every day.
Indeed, many, many billions of financial currency units are traded every day for dollars,
not just euros.
We will study financial markets, bond markets, stock markets and currency markets in detail
in this course.
We will come to understand what is traded in those markets, how to think about the prices
that those markets set, and why those markets play an essential role in a modern economy
such as ours.
We will also come to understand the connection between those markets and important financial
institutions such as the United States Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the
People's Bank of China.
I promised you four reasons, here is number four.
A well-designed and well-executed monetary policy is essential for an economy to keep
inflation low and steady and to keep resources fully employed.
Modern economies need well-crafted monetary policies.
Here we have to leave our homesteader metaphor behind us.
It makes no sense to talk about monetary policy in the first half of the 19th century.
Why you might ask?
We had no monetary policy then.
It's true that our nation made decisions about money and banks in the 19th century and we
will cover some of those decisions in our lectures.
But monetary policy, as we think of it today, began with the creation of the Federal Reserve
System in 1914.
In fact, the requirement that the Fed promote low and steady inflation as well as full employment
of our resources is an even more recent development as we shall learn.
But what is a well-designed and well-executed monetary policy?
There's a great deal of disagreement about how to answer that question, even among economists.
We will learn how the Federal Reserve changes interest rates in order to pursue its policy
objectives.
We will learn that sometimes, as in the years of the Great Recession, the Fed does even more.
It lends directly to financial firms and we will learn why this is so.
In 2014, the Federal Reserve will celebrate its 100th anniversary.
Some economists and politicians believe that the best thing we could do on that anniversary
would be to eliminate or greatly change the Fed.
They argue that the Fed wields too much power.
They point to steps taken by the Fed during the Great Recession as evidence of that power.
And they are angered by the Fed's bailout of financial firms during that period.
Put another way, some critics hold that the Fed did too much for Wall Street and too little
for Main Street.
Some critics go so far as to suggest we'd be better off returning to the gold standard.
Others believe that the Fed has learned a lot about the proper conduct of monetary policy
during its first 100 years.
They argue that Fed policy under Volker, Greenspan and Bernanke, that's Paul Volker, Alan Greenspan
and Ben Bernanke, has done an excellent job of conquering inflation in the United States.
And we will take a look at the evidence that supports that view.
But even those who are Federal Reserve champions would like to see the Fed revise and fine
tune its operations.
Some believe that the Fed should set a more explicit inflation target like that set from
time to time by the Federal Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Ask yourself the question, do you know what the target rate of inflation is?
Of course you don't.
The Federal Reserve does not announce one.
Some believe that the Federal Reserve has yet to find a way around the terrible incentives
created by bailing out failing banks.
And my goodness, we will talk about those incentives in great detail.
Those who look for improvement in this particular area are less motivated by the Wall Street
Main Street distinction and more motivated by the concern that the Federal Reserve creates
terrible incentives when it bails out a failing bank.
Economists call this problem the too big to fail problem and we will study too big to
fail also in some detail in this course.
Let's talk for a moment about powerful individuals.
And for the sake of argument, let me concede that the President of the United States is
the most powerful single individual in the world who, in your view, is the second most
powerful person in the world.
Take a moment to think and write down your view.
Or if you're watching with someone else now, take a moment and exchange your views.
Have you done it?
Okay.
Permit me to share my humble opinion with you.
The second most powerful person in the world is not a president, is not a general, is not
an admiral, does not hold a cabinet post in our government or in another, and is not even
elected.
The second most powerful person in the world is Ben Bernanke, the chairman of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
But why is Bernanke so powerful?
A substantial portion of this course will be devoted to understanding central banks and
central bankers, not only in the United States, but also in the United Kingdom, in the European
area, the Euro area, in China, and in other developed nations.
We will come to understand why central banks and central bankers are entrusted with the
job of making sure our money retains its value.
We will come to understand that it is the central bankers of the world that we hold
responsible for keeping our monetary contract intact.
We will come to understand that it is the central bankers in the world in whom we place
the trust to keep this great invention working well.
In this context, we will ask and answer several questions.
What threatens the value of money?
Many of you will say inflation, but if I asked you why, what would you say?
Why more basically is it important to preserve the value of money?
These are pieces of paper, after all.
How can a central banker preserve the value of money?
What can a central bank do to preserve that value?
And very, very importantly, if we have a central bank that is committed to preserving the value
of our money, is committed to keeping that social contract functioning well, is that
all it can do?
Or is there room for it to do more?
Turn again, please, for a moment to the Main Street versus Wall Street theme we encountered
earlier.
We're the Stabilization Act of 2008, the TARP Fund, and the way that our Treasury and
the Federal Reserve use that fund as central to the Federal Reserve's job of preserving
the value of the U.S. dollar.
If you say yes, you should understand why.
If you say no, you should likewise understand why.
Is it the case that Ben Bernanke, a non-elected individual, should somehow come more directly
under the control of the voters, or is there wisdom in allowing Ben Bernanke and the Federal
Reserve latitude to pursue its policy?
Part of this course is dedicated to answering all of these questions, and I look forward
to the journey with you.
Until next time, I wish you a very good day.
