On Saturday, September 13th, 2008, government officials and senior Wall Street executives
met at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in Lower Manhattan, not far from the famous
statue of the Wall Street Bull, but they were hardly bullish.
It had been a turbulent 12 months.
During the previous December, President Bush had outlined a rescue plan for subprime mortgage
borrowers, and the Federal Reserve had coordinated an initiative by the central banks of five
countries to loan billions to commercial banks throughout the world.
In early March of 2008, the Federal Reserve made an additional $200 billion in loans available
not only to commercial banks, but also to non-bank financial firms that held mortgage-backed
securities on their books, and were having difficulties raising funds on their own.
On St. Patrick's Day, the Fed made another bold attempt to quiet trouble financial markets
when it provided $30 billion in loans to J.P. Morgan to assist it in the acquisition of
Bear Stearns, a former financial market giant that had been driven to its knees by its large
portfolio of mortgage-backed securities.
And more recently, on September 7th, the U.S. Treasury nationalized Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac, two huge quasi-government mortgage lenders before they could fail.
But on September 13th, memories of recent turmoil were prologue rather than past.
That wasn't stake on that Saturday, it was the failure of another once-mighty financial
firm, Lehman Brothers.
And as the day wore on, it became clear that no white knight was going to ride in and rescue
Lehman.
The Fed signaled that it would not bail Lehman out, with Chairman Bernanke later saying that
he did not have the legal authority to do so.
And private investors were unwilling to mount a rescue of their own, fearing that any new
investments would be reduced to pennies on the dollar by market pressures in the days
to come.
By the end of the day, it had become clear that Lehman Brothers was not too big to fail.
And with tsunami-like implications for financial markets generally.
Two days later, on September 15th, 2008, the stock market suffered its largest loss since
9-11.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped 504 points, or 4.4 percent, and the market recorded
a sales volume of more than 8 billion shares.
That market fall was less about the failure of Lehman Brothers and more about the fear
of what lay ahead.
Insurance giant AIG had written many insurance contracts on mortgage-backed derivative securities.
Market participants feared that a failure of AIG would cause these contracts to be worthless
and that the entire financial system might fail as a result.
As the New York Times put it, market participants worried, quote, that without a cash infusion
for AIG, losses on its financial insurance contracts could cause a ripple effect that
would damage other companies, end quote.
The subprime crisis turned what might have been a garden-variety recession into a near
depression.
Banks stopped lending, consumers stopped spending, firms stopped producing.
The result was not only a sharp drop in gross domestic product, but also a rise in the unemployment
rate to the highest levels seen since the early 1980s when the Federal Reserve rung
inflation out of the U.S. economy.
But inflation was not the issue this time around.
Indeed, between 2008 and 2010, consumer prices actually declined.
In this lecture, I will treat the subprime crisis sort of like a case study.
I will consider the causes of the crisis, I will explain how mortgage-backed securities
contributed to the crisis, and I will ask how the regulatory reform that followed the
crisis is likely to change the financial market landscape.
But make no mistake, the combination of a recession with the subprime financial crisis
is much worse than the sum of those two pieces of negative economic news.
Indeed, some economists have created a special term to define the combination.
They call it a contraction.
Okay, we'll recall that a subprime mortgage is a mortgage by a borrower who has a credit
score below 620, a limited credit history, or some other credit impairment.
A prime borrower is a low-risk borrower.
A subprime borrower is a high-risk borrower.
As we learned in the lecture on derivative securities, a collateralized debt obligation,
a CDO, is a derivative security that is issued against a whole portfolio of underlying securities.
In the case of the subprime crisis, the underlying securities were mortgages.
The idea behind a CDO is embodied in the exemplary balance sheet that you can see now.
The issuer of mortgage-backed securities buys, say, 1,000 mortgages, each with a face value
of $200,000, from a mortgage lending specialist such as Countrywide.
To acquire the funds to buy these mortgages, the issuer sells several different but related
mortgage-backed securities.
The third tranche or grouping of mortgages is the riskiest security.
It absorbs all of the losses from all of the mortgages on the asset side of the balance
sheet until those losses are so large that the third tranche security has zero value.
The second tranche is the next riskiest security.
It absorbs losses in excess of those that drive the value of the third tranche to zero.
And of course, the first tranche is the safest security.
It only absorbs losses when losses from the underlying mortgages are so great that they
have reduced the value of all other tranches to zero.
Now, traditionally, mortgages are fairly safe debt obligations, but they are not riskless.
Mortgages can experience adverse events such as job loss that keeps them from meeting their
mortgage obligations.
Of course, in a pool of 1,000 mortgages, one never knows in advance which mortgages will
lose value because of default and which will not.
The CDO arrangement creates a sorting of the mortgages into risk categories before knowing
which mortgages will default.
The highest quality tranche is offered to buyers who wish to hold very safe securities and
receive a lower return.
The lower quality tranches are offered to buyers who are willing to take on additional
risk in exchange for higher return.
As I've pointed out before, actual mortgage securitization can be more complicated than
my example.
Some issuers buy bundles of CDOs and issue a new security called a CDO squared.
That is, those issuers repeat the securitization a second time.
The owners of mortgage-backed securities have little or no knowledge about the ultimate
borrowers, those individuals who sign a mortgage to borrow money to purchase real estate.
This is therefore a classic case of asymmetric information.
The mortgage signers know much more about their ability and willingness to pay than
the mortgage issuers, and perhaps more importantly, the mortgage issuers know more about the quality
of the mortgages they wrote than the financial institutions that bought them as inputs to
the securitization process.
Finally, the financial institutions that securitized those mortgages know more about the mortgages
than the buyers of the collateralized debt obligations.
As one remedy for this cascade of asymmetric information problems, mortgage issuers use
the services of rating agencies such as Moody's, Standard & Poor's, and Fitch.
Prior to the crisis, the rating agencies typically gave all but the lowest CDO tranches their
highest rating, declaring them to be safe.
But hold on a second.
Those rating agencies are paid by those who seek a rating.
A decision by the rating agency to downgrade a CDO issue would frequently lead the seeker
of that rating to say that they would use a different rating agency to try to get a
different result.
Many economists and financial experts have pointed to this conflict of interest of rating
agencies as a problem that has to be solved going forward.
If the rating agencies are paid by the financial firms whose securities are being rated, then
the interest of potential purchasers of those securities is not being properly represented
in the marketplace.
It's important to know that both subprime mortgages and collateralized debt obligations
grew dramatically in use between 1995 and 2007.
For example, subprime mortgages grew from $97 billion in 1996 to $600 billion in 2006.
The total amount of mortgage-backed securities issued almost tripled between 1996 and 2007,
with the final number being $7.3 trillion.
Wow.
So now I'd like to turn attention to what caused the subprime crisis.
And I'm going to break my comments into two parts.
In the first case, I'm going to look at the proximate cause of the subprime crisis.
Then I'll move on to look at the ultimate cause.
The proximate cause first.
The performance of CDOs and the idea that the higher tranches are virtually riskless
rests critically on the assumption that the default of any one mortgage is independent
of the default of any other mortgage.
Recall our earlier example when we had a mortgage pool of only two mortgages.
When mortgage defaults are independent events, the probability that both mortgages default
will equal the product of the probabilities that each mortgage will default.
Why is that important?
An example helps.
In a pool of two mortgages, if the probability of default is 5%, reasonable number, the probability
that both mortgages will default is only one-quarter of 1%, okay, the product of .05 and .05.
Now in normal economic times, it's reasonable to assume that default of mortgages are independent
events because the default of any mortgage is likely to be due to some idiosyncratic
event such as the sickness of the borrower, an accident, the death of the borrower, or
some idiosyncratic bad news in that borrower's professional life.
But in some cases, overall economic events affect many mortgages simultaneously so that
when one mortgage fails, many, many mortgages fail.
In this case, as we saw very painfully during the subprime crisis, CDOs can be much riskier
than the rating companies suggested.
The proximate cause of the subprime crisis was the bursting of the housing bubble in
the United States real estate market.
The graph shows the Case Shiller House Price Index between 1987 and 2009.
Between 1996 and 2006, the Case Shiller Index grew at an annual rate of 8.8%.
But between 2006 quarter two and 2009 quarter one, that same index fell by 32% from 189.9
to 129.1.
Research begun after the onset of the crisis indicates that rating agencies had assumed
that housing prices could not fall, could not fall, would never fall when they gave
their highest credit ratings to CDOs.
The fall in house prices worked like a coordinating event that made many mortgages fail at the
same time.
Many subprime borrowers had borrowed on the presumption that they would experience capital
gains, higher house prices.
And therefore, they expected that such gains would offset the fact that they had inadequate
income to make mortgage payments at higher interest rates.
Many subprime mortgages offered borrowers low initial payments but required higher payments
later as low introductory rates expired and principal payments, which might have been
zero in the beginning, began.
In numerous cases, once housing prices fell, it became economically rational for owners
of properties purchased with subprime mortgages to default on their mortgage and walk away
surrendering their property.
Holders of CDOs found themselves in possession of assets that had clearly fallen in value.
But they faced a big problem.
The problem was that it was difficult to know what the various trotches of collateralized
debt obligations securities were worth.
That uncertainty was due both to the complexity of the derivatives and to the uncertainty
about actual default rates for the underlying mortgages.
And the problem was compounded by the increased likelihood that AIG would not have sufficient
funds to pay off insurance contracts that they had written and which owners of CDOs
used to hedge the risk associated with their positions in mortgage-backed derivatives.
As the financial crisis deepened, it accelerated the economic downturn that had begun in the
last quarter of 2007.
Owners generally lost wealth as housing prices fell.
The bursting of the housing bubble affected all homeowners.
Banks became unwilling to lend to businesses and homeowners because they were uncertain
about the depth of the financial crisis and the recession.
As banks stopped lending, spending dropped further because even healthy businesses and
good credit risk homeowners were unable to obtain loans.
The Treasury and the Fed, of course, took unprecedented measures to offset the effects
of the subprime crisis.
And the policies of this period will be a focus of a future lecture.
Okay, if the proximate cause of the subprime crisis was the popping of the housing bubble,
what about the ultimate cause of the subprime crisis?
Because after all, if we are going to solve a problem, we have to look to the ultimate
causes.
At the outset, it's important to acknowledge that research on the ultimate causes and consequences
of the subprime crisis is in early stages.
A fair answer would be that there's no consensus yet as to what caused the subprime crisis.
But, and I think you'll agree, there are two interesting candidates.
Candidate one of the ultimate cause.
Candidate one is that the crisis was caused by a long period of low interest rates in
the United States.
Those who favor this line of reasoning will make several points.
The Federal Reserve lowered interest rates to very low levels after 9-11.
The Fed was concerned that the attack on 9-11 would undermine confidence in the U.S. financial
system and weaken consumer confidence in the U.S. economy.
Now, critics of the Fed believe and argue that the Fed kept interest rates too low for
too long.
According to this line of argument, these lower interest rates had a two-pronged effect
that contributed to the subprime crisis.
Low rates on Treasury securities led savers to seek higher return alternative assets.
Mortgage backed securities were attractive because they were touted as safe and so savers
flocked to them.
Also, low rates lessened the incentives for commercial banks and other financial firms
to spend scarce resources to assess the risks associated with lending.
If you're not earning very much from lending, you're not going to pay very much attention
to the people to whom you lend.
The decline in monitoring was reinforced by the fact that financial markets had been stable
markets for a long period of time.
Financial markets leads individual firms to be somewhat blasé about the risks they face.
The second candidate for the ultimate cause of the subprime mortgage crisis is quite different.
The second candidate is that the crisis was caused by a glut of global saving.
The United States and many other nations experienced large current account deficits in the period
leading up to the subprime crisis.
A current account deficit results when a nation imports from other nations a volume of goods
much greater in value than the volume of goods that it exports.
Now keep in mind that you have to make allowance when you compute the current account for income
flows unassociated with trade that result from the fact that nations own capital and
businesses in one another.
But once you make those income adjustments, you have the current account and the United
States during this period was experiencing very high current account deficits.
When a US experiences a current account deficit, other nations have a surplus of US dollars
which they use to purchase US financial assets such as bonds, stocks, and mortgage securities.
Think of it this way.
We are buying from the rest of the world more goods in value than we are selling to the
rest of the world.
So the rest of the world is holding extra dollars at the end of the year.
They're not extra but an additional amount of dollars.
They're not going to hold currency, they're going to use those dollars to buy interest
earning financial assets in the United States.
Because the US had a current account deficit, those hot dollars stream back in the US creating
a demand for assets that were judged safe but still paid an attractive rate of return.
At the time interest rates and government bonds were low during the period and many
of those hot dollars were used to purchase mortgage backed securities.
No less than Ben Bernanke has argued that nations that experienced current account deficits
were more likely to experience house price bubbles.
Wait a minute.
Think about that for a minute.
Ben Bernanke has presented an argument where he looks across many nations and finds a high
correlation between nations that were experiencing current account deficits and nations that
experienced bubbles in their housing markets.
And so Ben Bernanke among others favored that second reason as an ultimate cost, an ultimate
cause of the subprime crisis.
Okay.
After crisis comes reform.
That's the story of the American history of financial market regulation.
But what sort of regulatory reform is likely to result from the subprime crisis?
One thing to keep in mind is that the process of re-regulation after a crisis is often dominated
by highly charged politics and political arguments.
In the aftermath of the subprime crisis, many politicians won points by complaining that
the Federal Reserve and the Treasury did too much to help Wall Street and too little to
help Main Street.
In addition, people want to assess blame for a crisis that leads to bad economic outcomes
and are receptive to policy changes that punish the guilty.
Unfortunately, such a mentality can lead to changes in financial market regulation that
make matters worse rather than better.
What do we have so far?
The Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 is a lengthy and complicated act that was passed by Congress
and signed by President Obama in July 2010.
The stated aim of the act is, and I quote, to promote the financial stability of the
United States by improving accountability and transparency in the financial system.
To end too big to fail, to protect the American taxpayer by ending bailouts, to protect consumers
from abusive financial services practices, and, if that wasn't enough, for other purposes.
End quote.
Wow, the act is a mouthful, but the entire act is even more of a mouthful.
The act contains 16 different titles and requires the creation of hundreds of new rules and
the completion of 67 different studies.
It also mandates various agencies to produce 22 different periodic reports.
Will Dodd-Frank solve the problems that were revealed by the subprime mortgage crisis?
In many ways, it is too soon to say.
Regulators and scholars will take a long, long time to understand exactly what the Dodd-Frank
Act will do.
However, a panel of experts at the 2011 Allied Social Science Association meetings, a panel
of financial experts and economists, agreed that the act does not solve the problem of
too big to fail.
Financial firms still have an incentive to grow to the point where their failure would
be contradicted by the nation's desire for system stability.
The subprime crisis and the Dodd-Frank Act were the latest installment in the back and
fourth cycle of crisis and regulatory reform.
They reveal how important the problem of asymmetric information is.
The back and forth is the result of a fundamental tension between wanting financial firms to
be held accountable for their decisions and wanting a financial system that is stable.
Thank you.
Thank you.
