Lecture 7 Hyperinflation is the repudiation of money.
Hyperinflation is the ultimate repudiation by a government of its money.
These are powerful words, but they are literally true.
If the inflation rate increases to a high enough level, the real cost to a nation's government
of redeeming its money in terms of goods and services is nothing.
What exactly does that mean?
When hyperinflation occurs, prices rise to such levels that the outstanding stock of
money issued by the government in earlier times will buy virtually nothing.
We have all seen cartoons where someone flaunts his or her wealth by using a $100 bill to
light a cigar.
The idea of burning money is so shocking that we laugh in surprise.
But the world has experienced inflations of such a magnitude that citizens came to realize
that their best use of their currency was to burn it as fuel.
Because in those economies had risen to such levels that a stack of currency could produce
more heat by burning it than it could by using it to buy wood or coal.
Happily, the United States has never experienced the hyperinflation.
We've experienced periods of high inflation, such as during the Revolutionary War when
prices grew so rapidly and paper money lost value so quickly and completely that we gained
an entry into the American phrasebook.
It's not worth a continental.
Remember that the continental was the paper money of the Revolutionary War period.
Perhaps you would be tempted to discount the value of today's lecture because you believe
that a hyperinflation could not happen in the United States.
Hold on, please stay tuned.
I will explain toward the end of the lecture why our large national debt in the United
States is a temptation for us and for our government, for our monetary and for our fiscal
authorities to allow a very large inflation and maybe even to cause one.
Look, I'm not predicting hyperinflation in the United States, but incentives matter.
That's a key tenet of economic belief and it's important as we think of our priorities
as citizens to explain to ourselves why a large national debt is an incentive to cause
or tolerate a large inflation.
Okay, so exactly what is and what isn't the hyperinflation?
We know from the previous lecture that inflation is a sustained increase in the general level
of prices.
We know that a one-time increase in oil prices, for example, even if it were large, is not
in and of itself inflation.
Inflation occurs when most items in a price index rise over time, when most items in our
consumer's bushel basket have price increases and the rate at which the price of that bushel
basket increases is called the inflation rate.
We have also seen that inflation is the modern day counterpart of the ancient practice of
signorage, where the monarch of a land would shave the coins he received in tax payments
and use the shavings to mint new coins.
The result of signorage was a decline in the value of the money held by private citizens.
A transfer of wealth from those citizens to the monarch attacks that that monarch never
explicitly declared or imposed.
Most economists believe the job one of the Federal Reserve Bank of the United States
is to keep inflation low and predictable, thereby preserving the purchasing power of
our dollar.
Helping you understand the causes and consequences of inflation is an important goal of this course.
We study cases of extreme inflation because they're very interesting and because they
have a cautionary element to them.
They caution everyone to understand just how damaging to society inflation can be.
For the record, the term hyperinflation is reserved by economists to describe episodes
of inflation during which the monthly inflation rate is larger than 50%.
I mean that, larger than 50%.
So just how much inflation is that?
At a monthly inflation rate of 50%, an item that cost $1 on January 1st would cost $130
on January 1st of the following year.
And that same item would cost $2,184,164 on January 1st the year after that.
Yikes!
It just couldn't happen, you say.
It can and it has.
The ultimate cause in hyperinflation is a government's decision to finance large deficits
by creating new money.
To fix ideas, let's consider the most studied and best known hyperinflation of the 20th
century.
That that occurred in Germany between 1921 and 1923.
On average between August of 1922 and November of 1923, so 15 months or so, prices in Germany
rose at a monthly rate not of 50%, 322%.
This means that prices quadrupled each month during the 16 months of the hyperinflation.
Imagine that happening in your life.
A pound of chicken that cost $2 at the beginning of May would, if inflation was occurring at
the German hyperinflation rate, cost $8 at the beginning of June.
How would you run a household under those conditions?
The things were going to get worse.
In the last days of the German hyperinflation, the inflation rate was much higher, 41% per
day in October of 1923.
During the hyperinflation, the German government increased the supply of money by fantastic
amounts at an average rate of 314% per month.
Clearly, a hyperinflation causes great distress to the people who experience it.
It would be bad enough for wage earners who receive wage increases that never seem to
keep pace with inflation, but it would be devastating for individuals such as pensioners living
on fixed nominal incomes.
Incomes fixed in Marx in Germany, imagine no increase in your income in response to
these huge increases in the prices of things.
Why did the German government do this to its people?
Well, there's a story.
As a result of the treaty that ended World War I, Germany was forced to cede equipment
and territory to the victors and was required to pay substantial war reparations in gold
to the victorious nations.
The fact that the treaty-specified payment in gold placed great strain on Germany because
its gold stocks were depleted, Germany had used those to prosecute the war, and at the
end of the war, its export sector was operating at a very, very low level.
In short, Germany had little opportunity to gain gold to pay its reparations.
The situation went from very bad to very much worse in January of 1923, when the French
Army occupied the Ruhr Valley because German payments had fallen below levels specified
by the end of war treaty.
What did Germany do?
After the Ruhr occupation, Germany lost access to both natural resources, coal fields for
example, and the taxes that derived from their use, and Germany responded to that occupation
with what they called a passive resistance that included direct payments to German citizens
in the Ruhr.
It paid its citizens not with gold, but with paper money.
The German government kept printing money to pay for expenditures in excess of the expenditures
that could be financed by tax revenues.
Tax revenues were very, very small relative to expenditures, and the difference the German
government financed by printing money.
Interestingly, the connection between the high rates of money printing, the high rates
of money creation, and ever rising inflation rates was not acknowledged and in many cases
was not understood in Germany at the time.
Karl Helferisch, a prominent German economist of the time, said, and I quote, the increase
in the circulation has not preceded the rise of prices and the depreciation of the exchange
rate.
And it followed slowly and at a great distance.
It is not possible that this increase had caused the rise in prices of imported goods
and the dollar, end quote.
So notice that Helferisch is making a timing argument.
He is saying that money growth followed inflation rather than occurred in advance of inflation
and therefore money growth could not have caused inflation.
Well, economists today, including myself, think otherwise about the causal role of money
growth in hyperinflation.
Once it becomes clear that government has committed to printing money to finance a substantial
deficit, people expect inflation to occur.
They're smart after all, and they are reluctant to hold paper money for any period of time
because they fear the loss of value that will result from inflation.
A game of hot potato commences where individuals spend money as fast as they receive it.
In fact, in Germany, people would leave their workplaces during the noon hour, asking for
their morning's pay to rush to the stores to be able to convert that money to the things
that they plan to eat for their supper.
That's really a game of hot potato.
Of course, the increasing inflation rates that result from people bidding up the prices
of goods cause further damage to government finances and lead to even higher rates of
money creation.
The hyperinflation spiral is underway.
Money creation, rising inflation, even higher rates of money creation, still higher inflation.
What results then is a decrease in the ratio of money to prices as individuals rationally
decide to hold less wealth in the form of money.
Think about that for a minute.
They're lowering their desired levels of money holding even faster than prices are rising
because they don't want to expose their wealth to the perils of future inflation.
The money growth is causing inflation.
Individuals are responding rationally by lowering the amount of money they use.
Notice then how causality works in a hyperinflation.
The people's belief that prices will rise ever more rapidly causes them to act in advance
of the actual price increases and lower the quantity of money they hold.
People purposely lessen their money balances, thereby driving prices up all the more rapidly
as they spend the money they have.
To those who do not understand the process, like Carl Helfrich, it would appear that inflation
was causing the growth in money because the timing indicated that.
But in fact, the opposite was and is true.
Current and anticipated future rapid growth in the money supply causes hyperinflation.
When and why did the hyperinflation in Germany end?
According to Thomas Sargent, the German hyperinflation ended with a monetary reform that occurred
late in 1923.
But Sargent doesn't attribute the end of the hyperinflation solely to the monetary reform.
He argues that three important things happened abruptly and simultaneously.
Quote, additional borrowing by the government from the central bank stopped.
The government budget swung into balance and inflation stopped.
Notice how Sargent links the end of hyperinflation to a change in government spending and borrowing.
Now how can we square Sargent's view with Friedman's claim that inflation is always
and everywhere a monetary phenomenon?
Well, Sargent points out that the root cause of hyperinflation, the root cause, is a government's
decision to spend amounts far in excess of what tax revenues permit.
In Germany, the government made direct payments to citizens as part of its passive resistance
to the French occupation of the world.
The government begins by borrowing funds through the issuance of bonds.
Money growth occurs when the central bank buys the government bonds that the treasury
has issued, perhaps in an attempt to keep their prices from falling and their yields
from rising.
Musical reform is necessary, according to Sargent, to end a hyperinflation because
without it, everyone in the nation knows that the government will continue to borrow and
the central bank will have a very strong incentive to buy the bonds issued by the government.
That is, to create the money of which Friedman speaks.
In a nutshell, Sargent's view is simple, a nation cannot end a hyperinflation unless
it tackles the root cause that led to the hyperinflation.
So we are now in a better position to understand the behavior of those Germans who could produce
a fire in their stoves more cheaply by burning money than by using the money to buy coal
or wood.
The German hyperinflation had devastating effects on the German people.
The German middle class was largely wiped out because they were unable to buy law to
raise rents of the properties they owned fast enough to compensate for rising prices.
The middle class owned apartments and the value of those apartments fell as rents were
not allowed to rise.
On the other hand, companies that owned large stores of commodities improved their lot during
the hyperinflation.
You know the name of one of those companies, it was owned by the Krupp family.
Some historians go so far as to argue that the hyperinflation in Germany that raged
until 1923 actually contributed to the rise of national socialism in Germany.
The German hyperinflation may be the most studied but it's not alone and it's not the
most recent and as we will see it's not even the champion inflation producer.
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay each experienced a hyperinflation
between 1970 and 1987.
During the hyperinflations in these Latin American countries, dollarization occurred
at a citizen's used US dollars in an attempt to avoid the loss of wealth in holding their
own currencies.
I myself experienced dollarization when I visited Kiev about 10 years ago in Ukraine.
I could buy things as easily with US dollars as I could with the local currency and even
local crafts people who offered their handicrafts were willing to accept dollars and knew the
prices they wanted to charge in dollars.
Among the Latin American inflations, the Bolivian hyperinflation is an interesting case that
further illustrates what Thomas Sargent had in mind.
In 1982, Hermann Seals Swazel took power as head of a leftist coalition that wanted to
satisfy demands for more government spending on domestic programs but faced growing debt
service obligations and falling prices for tin, an important export.
The Bolivian government responded by issuing bonds that were purchased by the central bank
of Bolivia.
In effect, the Bolivian government, its treasury and its central bank together, printed money
to finance the regime expenditures.
Faced with the shortage of funds, the Bolivian government raised revenue through an inflation
tax instead of raising income taxes or reducing other government spending.
One of the reasons that dollars are held throughout the world is that citizens of many nations
consider the dollar to be a more dependable store of value than the currency in their
own nations.
U.S. currency is recognized as a symbol of stability and integrity around the world.
That quotes from Michael Merritt, deputy assistant director of the U.S. Secret Service.
It's not widely known that the Secret Service not only protects the president but also protects
our currency from counterfeiters.
The report produced by the Treasury Department, in which that quote appears, estimated that
about $450 billion of the $760 billion U.S. dollars in circulation as of December 2005
is held abroad by citizens of a foreign nation.
When citizens of other nations hold dollars, the U.S. collects a modest amount of seniority
from them, approximately equal to the rate of return on U.S. Treasury bills, because
holding dollars is equivalent to making the U.S. government an interest-free loan.
The stable value of our currency has real advantages for us.
It's something worth protecting.
Most of the world's citizens willingly pay that tax in order to avoid the risk of losing
much more by holding their domestic currency.
They hedge their risks by holding the U.S. dollar.
Okay, again, while the German hyperinflation is better known than others, the current hyperinflation
in Zababwe is actually much worse.
Steve Hockey of Johns Hopkins University and the Cato Institute reports that between January
of 2007 and November of 2008, Zimbabwe experienced an astounding average monthly inflation of
1,124 percent.
That is, prices rose by 11-fold every month on average.
The highest monthly inflation rate during the period occurred, not surprisingly, in
the final month and amounted to a daily inflation rate of just under 100 percent.
As a byproduct of his work, Hanky has created his own rogue's gallery of hyperinflations
that have occurred since 1923, the year of the famous German hyperinflation that we already
talked about.
The numbers are so staggering that we're reporting on them and the numbers that describe them
present a very big challenge.
I like to think of that challenge as zero dazzle because you have to add so many zeros
before the decimal point in order to capture accurately the monetary increases and the
increases in prices.
But Hanky has developed an interesting table where he provides a different way to compare
hyperinflations.
Hanky reports the amount of time necessary for prices to double in several famous hyperinflations.
By Hanky's measure, Germany only ranks fourth among the hyperinflations, Zimbabwe ranks second.
The all-time champion hyperinflation is Hungary, where at its worst, prices doubled every 15.6
hours.
It would be frightening to take a nap.
For Hungary, the hyperinflation occurred in 1946, prices doubled in 15.6 hours.
In Zimbabwe, in November of 2008, they doubled every day.
In Yugoslavia, which experienced the hyperinflation in 1994 and January, they doubled every 1.4
days.
In Germany, that we've talked a lot about, in October of 1923, they doubled every 3.7
days.
Peace in 1944, 4.5 days, and in China in 1949, every 5.6 days.
Does the government of Zimbabwe understand that it is responsible for hyperinflation?
It is hard to doubt that it does, although I must say that it denies responsibility.
According to the New York Times, Mr. Mugabe blames a western plot for his nation's troubles.
By now, however, you are well prepared to discount such self-serving claims.
Before we end this lecture, let's refocus for a minute on why hyperinflation is so damaging.
Hyperinflation destroys wealth that is held in the form of money, or in any asset with
a value fixed in terms of the depreciating currency.
Hyperinflation destroys the efficiency that results from the social contract inherent in
the use of paper money.
In Germany, it reduced most people to barter.
Hyperinflation creates tremendous psychological costs as individuals worry about an uncertain
future.
Hyperinflation allows the government to collect revenues outside the political process.
Perhaps some of the citizens and politicians in the United States who worry about our federal
deficits and our accumulated national debt are really worried because our debt is a temptation
to create inflation in the United States.
Why would we ever want to create an inflation to lower the pain of repaying that debt?
In fact, inflation in the United States would be a repudiation, not only of our dollar,
but also of our debt.
And as I said at the outset, hyperinflation is the ultimate repudiation by a government
of its money.
