Lecture 17, Bond Prices and Heals.
Bond markets determine interest rates, paid by borrowers and earned by lenders.
It is bond markets where these very important prices and rates are determined.
These are prices and rates that allocate funds and determine which projects go forward
and which do not.
But exactly how does this happen?
The short answer is that by setting the price of bonds, bond markets determine the yields
to maturity of those bonds and yields are interest rates.
So bond markets determine interest rates.
How bond prices determine yields to maturity is not obvious, but it will be clear at the
end of this lecture.
And to make it clear, we will use our old friend, present value.
Why is it important to understand the relationship between bond prices and the yields to maturity
of those bonds?
The yield to maturity is the rate that a corporation which issues the bonds should
compare to the loan rate quoted to it by a bank before deciding which funding strategy
to employ.
The yield to maturity is the rate that a corporation which issues bonds should compare
to the productivity of its investment project to determine if that project is worth doing.
The yield to maturity is also the rate that a lender should compare to the interest rate
she can earn on, say, a certificate of deposit at her bank before she decides on her own
financial strategy.
And yields to maturity determined in the bond market are market standards to which other
interest rates adjust, including rates paid by consumers and home buyers.
The first step is to understand that after they are issued, the great majority of bonds
and other debt instruments trade on secondary markets, treasury bills, treasury notes, and
treasury bonds trade on secondary markets, and we will focus on these debt instruments
in our examples.
So treasury bills, bonds, and notes are sold and resold in secondary markets every business
day.
What does that mean?
Well, while the U.S. Treasury is the original seller of each of those securities, each
bill, note, and bond, private individuals and businesses buy and sell those Treasury
securities from one another in the secondary market.
These are second and third sales.
That's why the term secondary market makes sense.
The financial media regularly report data on secondary market purchases and sales of
Treasury bills, bonds, and notes.
Let's, as we often do, look at some data.
This data describes trades in the secondary market for Treasury securities.
What we see in the left column is a description of the Treasury security itself.
And this is only one page of a multi-page report.
In the next column, we see that the currency, so this particular website, is prepared to
talk about dollar and non-dollar securities.
More interesting is the data on price.
We see a high price, the low price, and the median or middle price for November 17, 2010
for each of the securities.
Not all the securities were traded that day, and so in the next column, we see the number
of trades, and we see evidence about the volume of trades.
And finally, as that market closed, we see the final bid and the final ask.
And we know that that is the offer price and the demand price, and we see that they're
quite close together.
The existence of a secondary market means that it is easy to convert a Treasury security
into cash on any business day.
Put another way, Treasury securities are highly liquid, but not liquid enough to be considered
part of the money supply.
The existence of a secondary market also means that individuals who wish to move money from
the present to the future have a large menu of maturity date and opportunities than the
menu offered by the Treasury for the newly issued securities.
Suppose for example that the U.S. Treasury issued a 4% 30-year bond in the year 2000,
and by 4% I meant that its coupon was 4%.
The maturity date of that bond is thus 2030.
Those bonds will continue to trade in secondary markets until they mature.
So in 2005, those bonds will provide an opportunity equivalent to the opportunity provided by
a newly issued 25-year bond.
In 2010, those bonds, although they were issued in 2000, will provide an opportunity to a
purchaser equivalent to the opportunity provided by a newly issued 20-year bond, and so forth.
The table presents a set of Treasury securities and their market prices for November 17, 2010.
We can zero in on one entry in order to understand better how the secondary market works.
The last line of the table describes a Treasury bond that will mature on February 15, 2019
and has a coupon rate of 2.75%.
Remember that the coupon rate determines the periodic payments that one receives, typically
every six months.
That bond was actively traded on November 17, 2010, with a median trade price of 102.47%
of the bond's face value.
What's that mean?
It simply means that if the face value of the bond is $1,000, that bond traded for $1,024.70
on November 17.
The reason that the bond sold at a premium for more than its face value was that its
coupon rate was higher than market interest rates on November 17, 2010.
Now it makes sense that a bond sold at a premium because the bond offered coupons that were
larger dollar amounts than the interest payments someone could have received by financially
investing $1,000 at the rates that prevailed on November 17.
In effect, the price made the bond's yield close to prevailing interest rates, as we
shall see.
The fact that Treasury securities trade on secondary markets means that their prices
and yields change with every change in price.
In another way, the yields on Treasury securities change constantly, every trading day and many
times within the trading day.
The Treasury bond market overview for November 18, 2010, the next day, reported that prices
of most Treasury securities were slightly lower than they had been the day before.
Shortly, we will confirm that the overview also reported that Treasury yields had risen.
The yield to maturity of a Treasury security is what is called the internal rate of return
on the stream of payments promised by the security.
Now recall from an earlier lecture the formula for present value.
The present value of a stream of payments is the value of the stream of payments divided
by the appropriate discount rate.
So the payment that will be received one period in the future is divided by one plus the discount
rate.
The payment that will be received two periods in the future is divided by one plus the discount
rate squared because it has to be shrunk twice and so forth and so on.
The value of a payment to be received M periods in the future is shrunk M times by dividing
by one plus D to the M power.
Add all those various payments present value together and you get the present value of
the stream of payments.
The formula says that the present value of a set of payments to be made on different
future dates is the sum of the appropriately discounted value of each of those payments
and remember that D is the discount rate.
So let's begin with a relatively simple example.
The stream of payments promised by a 52-week Treasury bill, no coupons.
On November 1, 2010, a 52-week Treasury bill with a face value of $1,000 had a secondary
market price of $997.90.
T-bills always traded a discount.
The ultimate surety of this Treasury bill is the value of the discount rate that makes
the present value of the payments the bill will make just equal to its market price.
Let's call that value of the discount rate, that special value, that value that we're
trying to find YTM for yield to maturity, a good memory peg.
The formula is that market price, that's one pan of the scale, must equal present value
of the payment the bond will make, which is the payment itself that will be received
in one year divided by one plus the yield to maturity.
In our example, that's $997.90.
In the left pan of the scale and in the right pan of the scale, $1,000 divided by one plus
the yield to maturity.
The value of YTM implied by that equation, in other words, if we solve the equation for
YTM, we will get 0.0021, or slightly more than two-tenths of a percent.
Clearly the yield to maturity of Treasury bills was very, very small, less than one-half
of a percent in annual terms in November 2010.
In a later lecture, I'll take a look at this period of time and I'll ask carefully why
interest rates yields to maturity were so low back then.
For now, we simply use these data as an example for computing the Treasury bill yield.
Let's now make things slightly more difficult and consider a bond which promises some coupon
payments.
Now suppose the date is November 15, 2010, and we want to compute the yield to maturity
of the Treasury note listed in the third line of the table that you are seeing.
The note has a coupon rate of half a percent.
That's going to define the size of the coupons.
A face value of $1,000, a maturity date of November 15, 2013, and a market price of $990.50.
Now for the sake of simplicity, I will assume the time is measured exactly in one-half year periods,
and I will also assume that the very first payment is going to occur in exactly one-half year.
Does no violence to my point allows me to keep things simple.
The stream of payments promised by the note is given in the table.
On May 15, 2011, one-half year after the note is issued,
the bearer will receive $2.50 in a coupon.
On November 15, 2011, a year later, another $2.50.
On May 15, 2012, yet another $2.50.
On November 15, 2012, excuse me, $2.50.
And on May 15, 2013, $2.50.
And finally, the last of the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 payments will be the final coupon plus the face value paid on November 15, 2013.
And that amount will be $1,002.50.
So what? Well, remember, we are going to assume that the market price is equal to the present value of that stream of payments
and figure out what discount rate makes that true.
The yield of maturity of this Treasury note is the value of X, X is the unknown,
that sets the present value to this stream equal to its price.
So again, in one pan of the scale, $9.91.50.
In the other pan of the scale, the present value of the six different payments.
$2.50, which we'll get in six months, divided by 1 plus X.
$2.50, which we'll get in two six-month periods, that is, $2.50 divided by 1 plus X squared,
and so forth, until we get to the final payment, $1,002.50 divided by 1 plus X to the sixth power.
Okay? Now notice, I have used a unit of time of six months.
So X is going to be a half year rather than a full year rate.
The value of X is 0.00285.
So what? Well, that's a semi-annual yield of 0.285%, again, very, very low.
But that's equivalent to an annual yield of about 1.5%, in fact, 0.57%.
Again, very, very low, and we'll come back to why the yields were so low in that period of time.
Now, before you run out and get a paper and pencil and try to do this on your own,
you cannot find the value of X that solves that equation, that is,
you can't easily find with paper and pencil the value of X that makes
market price equal to present value. You're going to need a financial calculator set up
for just this fact, or you're going to need some facility with a spreadsheet,
or you can ask your friendly economist.
We now, and this is why we went through these computations, we now have a valuable opportunity
to understand why the price of treasury securities and the yields to maturity of those securities
move in opposite directions. Prices up yields down. Prices down yields up.
I'm going to make this point as simple as possible, so I'm going to revert back
to the treasury bill example. Remember that the market price in one pan of the scale
was equal to the payment you will get one year later divided by the yield to maturity.
Well, wait a minute. How are we going to make, how are we going to come to understand that?
Only two things can change here. The final payment will never change.
Okay, so if the market price goes up, then in order to make the other side of the equation
go up as well, you have to lower one plus the yield to maturity.
Okay, because it's in the denominator of the other side of equation. So when market prices rise,
the yield to maturity must fall. Conversely, when the market price falls, the yield to maturity
must rise. It's a mathematical fact. The same is true for a bond that pays coupons.
A decrease in the market price of a bond always implies an increase in the bond's yield and
maturity, but don't worry. We're not going to go through that example.
That is why the bond market overview presented previously shows opposite movements
in the prices and yields for every maturity considered. Now, I'm going to introduce to you
a new concept called the holding period yield of a treasury security. And I'm going to explain
that the holding period yield of a treasury security will not generally be the same as the yield to
maturity. The yield to maturity is the ex ante or before the fact yield that a bill notar bond
purchaser will earn if he or she holds the bond from the date of purchase all the way to the
date in which it matures. Put another way, the yield of maturity is the rate at which the
purchaser's initial investment will grow between the date of purchase and the date on which the
security matures. But because there are active secondary markets, the purchaser may decide
to sell the bill notar bond before it matures. And holding period yield on the bond on the bill
or on the note is another kind of an interest rate concept. It's the rate of return that the
purchaser earns on her financial investment between the date she purchases it and the date she sells
it. Of course, if she sells it one instant before maturity, those two yields are the same. But
they don't have to be because she could sell it earlier. While the exact relationship between
holding period yields and yields to maturity is extremely complex and really beyond the scope
of our course, there are facts about holding period yields that are easy to understand and
that I think you will find interesting. For example, if the yield to maturity of your bond rises
between the time when you buy it and the time when you sell it, then your holding period yield
will be smaller than the yield to maturity that you calculated when you bought the bond.
Hold on. Why is this so? This is so because the price of your bond will be lower when you sell it
than you originally would have predicted. Why? Because that bond has to meet a market test for
the new yield to maturity and it does so by changing its price. On the other hand, if the yield to
maturity of your bond falls between the time when you buy it and the time when you sell it,
good news, then your holding period yield will be higher than the yield to maturity that you
calculated at the time you bought your bond. And why does this make sense? Again, extremely
intuitive. This makes sense because of the price of your bond will be higher when you sell it than
you originally thought. Your bond then is offering a coupon stream that's even more valuable relative
to current market conditions. Market forces will bid up the price of that bond and you will benefit
when you sell it. Before we conclude today's lecture, I want to consider a practical problem.
One that will allow us to also check our thinking about bond prices and interest rates. That is bond
prices and yields. Suppose for a minute that you have purchased a 10-year U.S. treasury bond
that you expect to hold for five years and then sell. Okay, so there's some possibility that your
holding period yield will not be the same as the yield to maturity that you know when you buy.
The interesting question is what sort of economic news would likely create a capital loss for your
bond holdings? That is, for you to sell it at a lower price than you bought it. And what sort of
news, presumably different news, would likely create for you a capital gain? Now, happily we
now understand that the answer to this question depends on what has happened to the yield to
maturity in the time between your purchase and when you sell the bond. If the yield to maturity
has risen, you will experience a capital loss because the market price of the bond you sell
will be lower in order to make the bond you are selling competitive with newer bonds that are
promising higher yields. If, on the other hand, the yield to maturity has fallen, good news.
You can expect a capital gain because the market price of the bond you will sell will be higher
because it offers a higher yield to maturity than newer bonds and the market will equate those two
yields. So, the question of capital gains can be restated. What sort of economic events,
events would make yields to maturity rise? And what sort of economic events, events would make
yields to maturity fall? Here are a couple of economic events that might change yields to maturity.
If economic growth increases beyond the expectations that were in place when you bought the bond,
then yields to maturity will have risen and you will sell your bond at a lower price than you
expected. Why does this make sense? Well, hold on a second. If the economy is growing very,
rapidly and in particular more rapidly than the market predicted when you bought your bond,
then the market for credit is tighter. Many more individuals want credit than previously
and they're going to bid the price of that credit up. And indeed, in a future lecture,
we'll talk about that market process. You lent your money at a low rate and now the market demands
a higher rate of interest and therefore you must sell for a lower price in order to make
your bond attractive to buyers. And hearkening back to our discussion of the debt ceiling
in the previous lecture, if anything happens to make it more likely that the U.S. government
would default on its bonds, then the yield to maturity of newly issued bonds will rise.
Why? Market participants will now demand higher yields as compensation for the higher risks
that they face in lending to the U.S. government. If you think that that's an impossible outcome,
remember the same rules we're talking about today would apply to corporate bonds. So if any
news occurred that would lead us to believe that a corporation was more likely to default
on its bonds, the same forces would be at work. Again, you will realize a capital loss because
a fall in the selling price for the bond you are selling is required to make it attractive
to prospective buyers. In this lecture, we have learned several important things.
The present value equation provides the crucial link between bond prices and bond yields to maturity.
The yield to maturity for a discount security, like a treasury bill or a strip, is the rate
at which the current market price for the security must grow so that the security is worth its
face value on the day of maturity. A bond or note that has coupons provides two sources of
information. The first is the coupon payment. The second is the capital gain or possibly
capital loss associated with paying the market price and receiving the face value at maturity.
In this case, the yield to maturity is computed again using the present value formula to account
for the amount and timing of all payments. Indeed, the yield to maturity is the discount rate
that makes the present value of the payments offered by the bond or the note or the bill
exactly equal to its market price. Someone who purchases a bond and sells it prior to maturity
can receive a holding period yield different from the yield to maturity computed at the time of
purchase. If interest rates fall after the purchase, the holding period yield will be greater than
the yield to maturity at the time of purchase. If interest rates rise after the purchase,
the holding period yield will be smaller than the yield to maturity at the time of the purchase.
In this lecture, I have talked a bit about the connection between economic events
and changes in the interest rate. In the next lecture, we will investigate more fully
the connection between economic forces and market interest rates. Thank you.
