Lecture 31, Extraordinary Tools for Extraordinary Times
During the autumn of 2010, the Federal Reserve embarked on what at the time was the latest
in a series of extraordinary policy initiatives that were designed to ease the downward force
of the Great Recession on unemployment and output.
On November 3, 2010, the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed Committee charged with
the responsibility to make monetary policy decisions, announced that it would purchase
an additional $600 billion of longer maturity government securities over the coming months.
That policy came to be called quantitative easing too.
The FOMC explained that the purpose of this measure was, quote, to promote a stronger
pace of economic recovery, end quote, and restated its view that the policy was consistent
with its commitment to maintain inflation at mandated levels.
But not all members of the FOMC voted for this policy initiative.
Thomas Haynick voted no because he was concerned that, and I quote, this continued high level
of monetary accommodation increased the risks of future financial imbalances and, over time,
could cause an increase in long-term inflation expectations that could destabilize the economy,
end quote.
During the period beginning with the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008, the Federal Reserve
and the Federal Open Market Committee entered uncharted waters by expanding the kinds of
policy initiatives that they undertook and the degree of commitment they made to soften
the blow of the Great Recession and its evil twin, the subprime mortgage financial market
crisis.
The new Federal Reserve initiatives have led some to criticize Ben Bernanke, the chair
of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Some of Bernanke's critics are worried and were worried that the unprecedented attempts
by the Fed to expand credit would ultimately lead to increase inflation rates in the United
States.
At a meeting where he appeared on a panel with Alan Greenspan, Bernanke said, and I
quote, we're not in the business of trying to create inflation.
Our purpose is to provide some additional stimulus to help the economy recover and to
avoid potentially additional disinflation, end quote.
But even some Fed insiders were unconvinced.
E. Gerald Corrigan, a former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said
that he felt, quote, uneasiness, end quote, about the latest Fed decision.
In this lecture, I seek to answer two questions.
First, what is normal Federal Reserve policy?
While I discussed how the Fed changes the federal funds rate in the previous lecture,
in this lecture, I will return to that question in a new way that quantifies what normal means
and explains why it was reasonable for the Fed to believe that normal policy would not
provide a sufficient remedy to the financial market crisis and the Great Recession.
The second question I'd like to address is what exactly did the Fed do during these crisis
years and why did Ben Bernanke and members of the FOMC believe that these steps would
aid the economy?
Here again, we are going to have to look to behavior by the banking sector to understand
the Federal Reserve's thinking.
In a later lecture, I will explain what other central banks were doing to stimulate their
economies during the financial market crisis and the Great Recession.
In particular, I'll ask whether it appeared that central banks were somehow coordinating
their policy or if they each went their own way.
But for now, I'm going to focus on the extraordinary behavior and the extraordinary policy initiatives
that were undertaken by the Federal Reserve after 2008.
So let's begin by looking at normal Federal Reserve policy in a new way that helps us
understand why normal policy was inadequate to deal with the financial market crisis and
the Great Recession.
We can both understand and quantify the concept of normal Federal Reserve policy using that
Taylor rule that we learned about in the last lecture.
Recall that the Taylor rule specifies that the Federal funds rate should be adjusted
in accordance with a rule or an equation.
The variables in the formula are the Federal funds rate, symbolized by FFR at time t, the
inflation rate, symbolized by pi t, the target for inflation, symbolized by pi star, the
output gap.
And remember, the output gap is positive when the economy is operating above its long-run
full employment levels but negative when the economy is operating below its long-run levels.
High rates of unemployment imply negative values for the output gap, very low levels
of unemployment imply positive values for the output gap.
And finally, the equation contains the term r star plus pi star.
And we came to understand that r star plus pi star was the Fed's estimate of the long-run
equilibrium value of the Federal funds rate.
So if the Fed were hitting its inflation target and the output gap was zero, these are ideal
conditions, the Fed would be keeping the Federal funds rate at station keeping, r star plus
pi star.
Okay, according to the Taylor rule then, the Federal reserve should anchor that a Federal
funds rate at the nominal rate of interest implied by the long-run equilibrium rate of
interest r star and the inflation rate pi star.
And this means that the Taylor rule requires the Fed to set the long-run value for the
Federal funds rate at a level consistent with long-run equilibrium market forces.
Not fight against those forces, but cooperate and coordinate with those forces.
Now the graph that you're seeing shows the actual Federal funds rate and the Federal
funds rate recommended by the Taylor rule.
Not just during the Greenspan years but between 1987 and 2011, Greenspan and Bernanke regime.
What do you see in this graph?
Well, you see the actual Federal funds rate in blue and you see the Taylor rule prescription
in green.
And you note that the Taylor rule prescription tracks the actual Federal funds rate pretty
well for the early part of the period, suggesting that the Taylor rule provides a good approximation
of what the Fed actually does.
Note particularly that the Federal funds rate falls when the Taylor rule says it should fall
and the Federal funds rate rises when the Taylor rule said it should have risen.
But note what happens to the Taylor rule prescription in 2008.
At that time the output gap became a large negative number as real gross domestic product
fell as much as 8% below potential.
Moreover, the inflation rate fell below the target value which we're defining to be 1.5%.
With those two inputs to the Taylor rule, the Taylor rule prescribed a negative value
for the Federal funds rate.
You can see that in the graph.
This bears emphasis.
Normal policy at the time would have been impossible because normal policy would have
required a negative value for the Federal funds rate.
Now, during 2008, the Fed lowered the Federal funds rate to very near zero, but the Taylor
rule which specifies how the Federal funds rate should normally respond to economic conditions
prescribed even more stimulus, a negative value, and of course a negative Federal funds
rate, it's impossible.
This prescription is an indication of how bad the economy was performing.
So, the Federal reserve responded to these extraordinarily bad times which called for
a negative Federal funds rate with extraordinary policy initiatives.
What extraordinary measures did the Fed undertake during the Great Recession?
Very nicely, very usefully, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco provides a cogent summary
of Federal Reserve initiatives taken by the Fed during the financial market crisis in
the Great Recession years, and it provides them in chronological order which helps one
get a nice picture of what was going on.
I think it's helpful to say that the Federal Reserve was really responding to three different
kinds of problems, okay?
Three different kinds of problems.
First, the Fed provided remedies to problems that resulted from the financial crisis itself.
Well, you'll say all the problems resulted, but these were more direct problems that resulted
from the crisis.
During the financial crisis, short-term credit markets ceased functioning because lenders
believed that if the financial system failed, no creditors would be able to repay their
debt obligations.
Difference of how serious the matter was can be found by looking at data for the TED spread.
Defined to be the difference between the three-month London Interbank lending rate and the three-month
U.S. Treasury Bill rate, okay?
TED?
Well, the T in TED comes from Treasury Bill and the E.D. in TED comes from Eurodollar
because the London Interbank rate is a rate on Eurodollar balances.
Normally, the TED spread is very, very small.
Why?
Loans in London and Treasury bills are very close substitutes, so people who want the
highest possible interest will buy, will hold either Treasury bills or Eurodollar balances
and they'll arbitrage those two rates into very close agreements so that their difference
is very near zero.
But as the chart you're looking at now shows in 2008, the TED spread spiked, went to very
high levels.
What did the Fed do?
Well, the Fed normally provides loans only to depository institutions such as banks and
normally does so through its so-called discount window.
But in March 2008, the Fed created two new programs to provide short-term secured loans
to securities dealers similar to discount window loans.
So they provided loans to securities dealers the way they would normally have provided
those loans to banks.
The graph that you're looking at now shows the volume of those loans made under these
two programs.
Short-term credit markets improved dramatically in 2009 and the TED spread returned to normal,
a sort of victory for the Federal Reserve.
In the fall of 2008, the Fed also intervened to improve credit conditions in two markets
that were breaking down.
Money market mutual funds collect funds from savers who consider them safe, pool them and
use them to make short-term loans to businesses, very short-term loans.
That's one market.
Second market, the commercial paper market is a source of short-term loans that businesses
rely on.
But after the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, savers feared that commercial paper could
become worthless and cease lending and started withdrawing funds additionally from money
market mutual funds because they were afraid that they too would use value.
So what did the Fed do?
Something extraordinary again.
As a remedy, the Fed provided secured loans to institutions offering commercial paper
and money market mutual funds.
So if you were discounting commercial paper for businesses or if you were running a money
market mutual fund, the Fed was lending to you directly.
And as a result, those two markets returned to normalcy early in 2009.
Finally, in terms of direct effects or addressing direct problems of the crisis, the Fed intervened
to save financial institutions when a deemed that failure to those institutions would undermine
the functioning of the financial system.
We've heard already, but it's bears repeating, that the Fed provided loans to J.P. Morgan
to assist it in acquiring Bear Stearns.
And the Fed provided loans to AIG because it determined that that insurance company was
not too big to fail, but it was somehow too connected to fail.
Recall that AIG had written insurance contracts on mortgaged back securities.
Okay, before we go forward, remember that while the Fed took some extraordinary measures,
we have evidence that those measures had desirable effects.
The Ted spread spiked in 2008.
And after the Fed initiatives, those two markets, the one in London and the one for
Treasury bills, returned to their normal functioning.
What's the second kind of thing that the Fed did?
Well, the second kind of policy initiative that we would call extraordinary was that
the Fed provided extraordinary remedies to problems faced by banks.
When banks became reluctant to loan funds to one another, and the Ted spread is evidence
of that, the Fed increased the availability of loans from itself to banks.
Keep in mind that the increase in the Ted spread indicated that short-term loans from
private institutions were very hard to get during this period.
In particular, the Fed created the term auction facility, which increased the availability
of one and three-month discount loans to banks.
Fed's going to loan to banks through the discount loan facility.
The Fed also increased the availability of dollar-denominated loans to banks in other
countries, knowing that there was a high demand for dollars, not only in the United States
but elsewhere.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, in coordination with the Fed, created a Temporary
Liquidity Guarantee Program that provided guarantees on newly issued bank debt and expanded coverage
of deposit insurance.
Now, clearly, this was designed to calm the nerves of all participants in financial markets.
The Fed conducted stress tests of major banks.
Why?
Well, it wanted to ensure, not only themselves but the public, that the banks could weather
future bad economic times.
The purposes of the tests were not only to force stressed banks to raise new capital,
but also to restore confidence in the stability of the banking system.
And not surprisingly, the Fed supported systemically important banks by providing loans to Citigroup
and Bank of America, two banks that were deemed too big to fail.
As a result, bank share prices, which had fallen dramatically over 2007 and 2008, stabilized
at the beginning of 2009.
One final thing the Fed did, one final thing the Fed did, the Fed beginning in 2008 also
began to pay interest on reserves that banks deposited with them, providing those banks
with another source of income that helped to stabilize their bottom line.
The third kind of thing that the Federal Reserve did, that we would consider extraordinary,
was that the Fed undertook extraordinary initiatives to stimulate the economy.
Now, as we've already seen, the Fed lowered the federal funds rate to unprecedented levels
in late 2008, near zero, can't get much lower than that.
The Fed, which normally buys and sells only short maturity Treasury security, Treasury
bills, normally, in normal times, the Fed only enters the T-bill market.
But in these extraordinary times, the Fed provided extra stimulus to the economy by buying longer
term Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities.
It purchased $300 billion of longer maturity Treasuries in 2009.
It had already purchased $1.25 trillion of mortgage-backed securities in 2008.
It guaranteed $175 billion of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac outstanding debt.
And in the fall of 2010, the Fed committed to purchasing an additional $600 billion of
government securities of longer maturities.
This last decision triggered the doubt that we mentioned at the outset of the lecture.
The Fed also supported securitization of consumer and business loans.
Now, securitization refers to the practice of creating derivatives, and remember they
aren't necessarily bad things, creating derivatives that allow the marketing of bundles of securities
such as mortgages.
So loan securitization creates an important source of funds through which not only mortgages,
but student loans and other credit is made more affordable.
Not surprisingly, during the subprime crisis, securitization dried up.
But this threatened dramatic increases in the cost of mortgages, student loans, and
similar kind of debt.
What did the Fed do?
The Fed created the term asset-backed securities loan facility that provided credit to those
institutions that engage in securitization, those specialists, the business of whom is
to securitize debt.
As a result, issuance of asset-backed securities returned to normal levels in 2009.
Were these extraordinary policy measures necessary?
Well, we've already seen that at least one member of the FOMC and many other doubters
believe that the Fed provided too much stimulus during the Great Recession and thereby sowed
the seeds of future inflation.
But one very powerful way to appreciate why the Fed took the measures it did is to look
at bank balance sheets during the Great Recession.
The table you are looking at now clearly shows that the Great Recession was a time when banks
greatly increased their holding of excess reserves.
How do I show that?
Well, and how does the table show that?
You have two columns in the table.
The first is dated October 2007.
It shows that total reserves of the banking system in October 2007 were $42.5 billion.
Of those, required reserves were $41 billion and extra or excess reserves were $1.4 billion.
What's that mean?
The banks, as a group, were holding just a little bit more of reserves than was required
by law given the deposits they had accepted from customers.
Okay, these numbers would be interesting but not really important except that they provide
a baseline to think about reserve positions in October 2009, only two years later.
In October 2009, total reserves of the banking system were $1 trillion, $56 billion.
That is not a typographical error, $1 trillion, $56 billion.
Of those reserves, $61.7 billion were required and $994.1 billion were excess reserves, reserves
that the law did not require the banks to hold.
This, more than any other data I could show you, indicate that commercial banks were behaving
in non-normal ways.
In normal times, banks would have responded to those increases in reserves with increased
lending and that increased lending would have raised required reserves because that
increased lending would have created new deposits for loan customers.
But during the great recessions, banks preferred to hold huge quantities of reserves rather
than to assume the risks of lending.
The bottom line is that during the financial crisis and the great recession, the Fed's
normal policy response, lowering the federal funds rate, was simply inadequate.
The Taylor Rule tells us that times were so bad that a negative federal funds rate and
impossibility would have been warranted.
The Fed acted boldly to provide credit and to stabilize the payment system.
It acted because banks would not act, whether it went too far has yet to be determined.
The question that we will answer sometime in the future will be whether the Fed can
reverse course quickly enough once the economy begins to grow robustly.
If it does, the Fed, I hope, will be credited with the successful piloting of the economy
through its most dangerous period since the Federal Reserve was brought by law into existence
in 1913 and developed in 1914.
But if it does not, and if inflation again rears its ugly head, the Fed will be blamed
for once again allowing inflation to be woven into the fabric of American prices.
Thank you.
