Lecture 33, The Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar.
In an op-ed piece in the New York Times on July 4, 2004, author Ted Fishman referred
to the 21st century as the Chinese century.
The expression Chinese century appears to have found a permanent place in the American
ethos.
The term has its own Wikipedia page.
But in 2010, China did surpass Japan to become the second largest economy in the world with
a larger gross domestic product than any other nation except the United States.
But at that time, an extrapolation of GDP growth rates led some to predict that the
Chinese economy would overtake the U.S. economy sometime between 2020 and 2030.
China frequently centers on its currency, the Renminbi, or people's currency, which
is measured in units called WAN.
In the United States, our currency is called the dollar, and we measure prices in dollars.
But in China, the currency is called the Renminbi, and they measure prices in WAN.
So sometimes, people do refer to the Chinese currency as the WAN.
As the 20th century gave way to the 21st, politicians and economists paid lots of attention
to the balance of trade between the United States and China.
According to foreign trade statistics published by the United States Census Bureau, the U.S.
trade deficit with China was $10.4 billion in 1990, $83.8 billion in 2000, and $273 billion
in 2010.
Many analysts attributed the persistent trade imbalance between the U.S. and China as due
to low Chinese wage rates.
But others focused attention on the Chinese exchange rate and argued that the Chinese
government made it a policy priority to keep the Renminbi price of the dollar artificially
low.
For example, Ian Campbell and Jeffrey Goldfarb described a currency war involving China, Japan,
and the United States.
And New York Times columnist and Princeton economist Paul Krugman wrote that China had
gotten itself into a monetary muddle with a weak currency policy that could bring on
a world crisis.
Today's lecture is the first of a group of three lectures that looks at international
monetary and financial relationships.
Today, I will explain exchange rates and what determines the exchange value of two currencies.
I will also explain that while most developed nations allow the value of their currencies
to float freely and change in response to the forces of demand and supply, like a boat
on the water, China does something else.
China pegs the value of the Renminbi to the dollar.
Indeed, China is the only major economic power to fix its exchange rate.
Now, it is true that the Euro nations fix their exchange rates within the Euro area,
but more importantly, the Euro area allows the value of the Euro against other currencies
like the dollar and the yen to float freely.
Moreover, many analysts including Campbell and Jeffrey Goldfarb of the New York Times
believe that China has kept the value of its currency artificially low relative to the
dollar and the Euro.
How China does this and the implications for the United States economy are also the business
of today's lecture.
In later lectures, I will explain the roles that financial institutions play in international
trade and finance.
And I will look into the case for coordinated monetary policy among the nations of the developed
world.
But first, today, I'd like to consider exchange rates and the system of floating exchange
rates that is used by most nations of the world.
In a floating exchange rate system, the foreign exchange value of the dollar is determined
by the forces of demand and supply, maybe our best economic friends.
An exchange rate is what?
An exchange rate is the market price of one currency in terms of another.
It's a trading ratio between two currencies.
An exchange rate can be always expressed in two different ways.
The number of dollars required to buy, for example, a yen or the number of yen required
to buy a dollar.
To an order of approximation, the dollar price of the yen is the reciprocal of the
yen price of the dollar.
For example, if one dollar will buy 80 yen, then one yen will buy 180th or 0.0125 dollars.
I know, I know, anyone who has traveled knows that at the end of a trip to a foreign nation,
one typically sells his or her foreign currency that's left over for less than they paid
to buy it.
The difference between the buying price and the selling price is revenue for the financial
institution that provide currency exchange services.
That bid-ask spread is typically smaller for exchanges of bank deposits by the way than
it is for exchanges of currency.
But today I'm going to ignore those differences between bid-ask and think of the reciprocal
rule when I think about the relationship of the dollar-yen exchange rate and the yen-dollar
exchange rate.
I think you'll find it interesting to learn that currency markets are the most active
markets in the world.
Those market trades, those markets trade 24 hours a day from 5 p.m. Eastern Standard
Time on Sunday to 4 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on Friday.
The daily volume in currency markets is about $2 trillion, $2 trillion of trades per day,
something to compare with.
Well, in contrast, the daily volume on the New York Stock Exchange is $30 to $40 billion
on a typical day.
Wow, what a difference.
An index of the value of the dollar vis-à-vis a market basket of the currencies of the United
States trading partners is displayed in the graph you're looking at now.
Since 1970, the dollar was most valuable between 1980 and 1985.
1985 was a period when interest rates in the United States were high relative to interest
rates elsewhere.
The relatively high U.S. interest rate caused an increase in demand for the dollar on the
part of foreigners who bought those dollars in turn to buy high-yield U.S. assets.
But you also notice in the diagram that since 2001, the value of the dollar has declined
by a lot, by about 40%.
During that period, the U.S. has consistently experienced trade and current account deficits.
Now, these deficits are equivalent to increases in the world's supply of dollars and an increase
in the supply of dollars lowers the value of the dollar and what amounts to the same
thing raises the number of dollars one must pay to get a pound, a euro, or a yen.
If we looked at a graph of the dollar-yen exchange rate, we'd see that it would tell
a similar but not an identical story indicating that the average value of the dollar relative
to all our trading partners is not exactly the same as the value of the dollar relative
to any specific trading partner like Japan.
We would see that the value of the dollar in terms of the yen began to fall after 1985
reached its low point in the mid-1990s and has remained relatively constant ever since
then.
I promised you that we were going to think about the value of exchange rates using the
old economic friend's demand and supply.
A demand and supply diagram illustrates how economic forces translate into changes in
the value of the dollar in terms of other currencies.
In the diagram that you are now seeing, the yen, I'm going to use the case of Japan,
so the yen price of the dollar, the yen price of the dollar is graphed along the vertical
axis.
When the yen price of the dollar increases, we say that the dollar appreciates and the
yen depreciates.
When the yen price of the dollar falls, we say that the yen appreciates and the dollar
depreciates.
The number of dollars exchanged for yen in the marketplace is measured along the horizontal
axis, and so larger volumes of exchange are movements to the right along that axis.
The demand for yen is graphed as a downward sloping schedule.
That demand schedule summarizes the behavior of people who use yen to buy dollars, including
Japanese who import US goods, Japanese who wish to buy securities for which payment in
dollars is required, and any governments that buy dollars with yen in order to influence
the yen dollar exchange rate.
The negative slope of the demand schedule, that is the inverse relationship between the
yen price of the dollar and the quantity of dollars demanded, reflects the fact that
as the yen price of the dollar increases, US goods and securities become more expensive
to people who have yen, and therefore demand for them falls.
Other factors that affect trade and security purchases are represented as shifts in the
demand schedule.
The effects of the exchange rate itself are movements along the demand schedule, but if
something else happens that affects the demand for dollars, we represent that as a shift
in the demand schedule.
An increase in the dollar price of oil would shift the demand schedule toward higher quantities
for a very simple set of reasons.
First, Japan imports all the oil it uses, and oil exporters typically require payment
in dollars.
So if Japan just wants to hold its oil imports constant, it will demand more dollars.
We have a second schedule called the supply schedule.
The supply of yen is graphed as an upward sloping schedule, and we see the upward sloping
line in the graph.
Now the supply schedule summarizes the behavior of people who use dollars to buy yen, including
Americans who import Japanese goods, Americans who wish to buy Japanese securities, and governments
anywhere in the world who supply dollars to influence the yen dollar exchange rate.
The positive slope of the schedule reflects the fact that as the yen price of the dollar
increases, Japanese goods and securities become less expensive.
So Americans supply more dollars in order to buy more of them.
And once more, changes in other factors that affect the yen dollar market are represented
by shifts in the supply schedule.
For example, an increase in U.S. interest rates would shift the supply schedule toward
lower quantities because financial investors would use fewer dollars to purchase Japanese
securities.
Why?
Well, because U.S. securities now offer a relatively higher return.
When governments such as the U.S. and Japan allow their exchange rates to float, the exchange
rate is determined by the forces of supply and demand.
And in the diagram, the equilibrium rate equals 80 yen per dollar, and is designated by point
A. To really understand how this model works, we have to take it out for a walk, shock it.
And we will see that the exchange rate varies with shifts in the demand and supply schedules.
Two examples.
First example, suppose that the U.S. trade deficit with Japan increases, and perhaps
there's a shift in preference toward Japanese autos, the Prius, or perhaps income grows
more rapidly in the United States than in Japan, so our imports grow relative to theirs.
The result is an increase in the supply of dollars in the yen market, and a movement
from point A to point C in the diagram as that supply schedule shifts.
Perhaps the result, the dollar depreciates in value, the yen appreciates in value.
Second example, suppose instead that oil prices increase.
Well, as we said earlier, the result is represented by an increase in demand for dollars in the
end dollar market.
And the result, given that we started back at point A, would be a movement from point
A to point B in the diagram, and an A appreciation of the dollar as Japanese bid up the value
of the dollar.
Let's use our knowledge of demand and supply now to interpret the data we looked at a bit
earlier.
Most of the depreciation of the dollar relative to the yen in the past 30 years has been due
to the persistent deficits the United States has recorded in its bilateral trade relationship
with Japan.
We've been important more from Japan than we have exported to them.
Toward the end of the data period, relatively low interest rates in the United States accounted
for further declines in the yen price of the dollar.
Okay.
Having talked about freely floating exchange rate and using Japan as an example, it's time
now to go back to China, the place where we started this lecture, and to ask, what's different
about the way in which the dollar renminbi exchange rate is determined?
Once more, we will use demand and supply, but in a different way.
First, let's look at some data.
The graph you're seeing now shows the won price of the US dollar between 1980 and 2011.
Between 1980 and 1995, the $1 exchange rate rose from about 1.5 to 8.1 to the dollar,
where it remained for quite some time.
Between 1990 and 2010, the renminbi price of the dollar rose from about 3.75 to 7.
That is, the dollar doubled in value over the period.
But between 1990 and 2010, the US trade deficit with China rose from $10.4 billion to $273.1
billion.
These results are opposite of what we would have expected from our demand and supply analysis
that we conducted earlier.
The increased trade deficit should have resulted in a depreciation rather than an apreciation
of the dollar.
The resolution of this puzzle is that China requires that the People's Bank in China follows
a fixed exchange rate regime.
Thus, the values of the $1 rate displayed in the diagram should be thought of as those
chosen by China rather than those determined by the forces of supply and demand.
We can adapt our demand and supply diagrams and show how a fixed exchange rate regime works.
The axes and the demand and supply schedules are those shown earlier for the yen dollar
market.
Only this time, we measure the 1 price of the dollar along the vertical axis and the
quantities of dollars supplied in the 1 dollar market along the horizontal axis.
The supply schedule shows the dollars that the US supplies to China as a function of
the 1 dollar rate.
So when we run a trade deficit with China, we know that we shift the supply schedule
toward higher dollar quantities.
The diagram, by way of illustration, shows one such shift from the supply schedule labeled
supply to a second further to the right supply schedule labeled new supply.
And we see that if the United States supplied more dollars to the 1 dollar market, demand
and supply would predict that the 1 price of the dollar would fall, that is that the
1 would appreciate and the dollar depreciates.
That is, if the people's bank of China behaved passively in the foreign exchange market,
an increase in the supply of dollars would lead to movement from point A to point B in
the diagram.
And as I said earlier, to an appreciation of the renmin B and a depreciation of the dollar.
But that's not what happens, and that's certainly not what happened during recent history.
Suppose instead that the people's bank of China itself increases its demand for dollars.
How?
By creating new renmin B and then using those new renmin B to buy dollars from Chinese exporters.
In a sufficient quantity that keeps the renmin B price of the dollar from falling.
What we see then is that that increase in supply is offset by an increase in demand and
that the 1 price of the dollar is represented as a movement in the diagram from point A
to point C. The people's bank of China has pegged the 1 price of the dollar and in the
diagram I suggest at 8.
This is the basis for Campbell and Goldfarb's article and their claim that the renmin B
is undervalued.
Now we could certainly explain the benefits to China of keeping the value of their currency
artificially low.
China is an export oriented nation and keeping the value of its currency low allows its exports
to be competitive in foreign markets including the United States.
One of the reasons we keep running those deficits.
But keep in mind that there are also costs to China and the people's bank in pegging
the value of the renmin B to the dollar.
If China pegs to the dollar the people's bank of China is no longer free to pursue other
stabilization objectives.
What?
Yes, if the people's bank of China is committed to the peg of the renmin B it loses the ability
to conduct counter cyclical monetary policy.
It loses the ability to use monetary policy to offset inflation.
Indeed, the increased supply of renmin B required to keep the value of the 1 low can translate
into inflation.
This is precisely what Paul Krugman meant when he wrote on January 20th, 2011 that China
had stumbled into a monetary muddle.
Krugman argued that quote, the root cause of China's muddle is its weak currency policy
which is feeding an artificially large trade surplus.
A policy that hurts the rest of the world increasing unemployment in many other countries,
America included.
The weak currency policy has also begun to hurt China as well with the pain coming in
the form of rising inflation rates that are estimated to rise above 6% in 2011.
Today we have learned about exchange rates in a way that allows us to better understand
what has happened to the value of the dollar in the last 20 years or so.
By running large trade deficits, the United States has increased the supply of dollars
to the rest of the world.
For those nations that allow their exchange rates to float, the result has been appreciation.
Appreciation in the yen, appreciation in the pound and appreciation in the euro and depreciation
of the dollar.
China who has traveled abroad to Europe has certainly noticed this phenomenon.
China however has followed a different course.
It has committed its monetary policy to one objective, keeping the value of the renmin
be lower than it would be if the forces of demand and supply were allowed to operate.
China has followed this policy presumably to keep world demand for its export goods high
by keeping the prices of those goods in dollars low.
But as Paul Krugman suggests, the party may be nearing an end.
Longer run forces are at work that will raise inflation rates in China.
We will return to the question of what lies ahead in our last lecture.
But for now, thank you.
