Alright guys, we are back, this is going to be, this is the first one back after only
a week where we didn't produce an episode.
That break, when we were in Dubai and other places.
It was kind of funny though, I noticed that when we had started this whole thing, like
before it moved here, before any other thing, I remember we kind of assumed we were going
to have to do this in like 10 episode seasons just because of traveling, you know, we kind
of thought it was going to be tough to put together.
So the fact that we got 20 episodes, 19 actually, it was 19 without a single break, so 19 weeks,
19 episodes.
You know that people don't care, they're going to be like, what are you guys doing?
Guys, we're doing our best.
They're like, I'm in the car, I've got nothing to do.
Actually it was funny though, this morning I woke up to frantic messages from Julian
of like lists of studies and all these other things to go through, and I think Kylo was
taking pictures of you with your whiteboard.
Yes, well there were some interesting, yeah, yeah.
Now one of my favorite things about this, this happens I would say, probably about once
a month on average, where you like get a wild hair up your ass and you're like, Tyler,
you're like a dragon in the rabbit hole, first thing.
Just like the...
Yeah, there's no foreplay on this one.
It's like, also when Julian says, you got five minutes for a call, what that means is
you have 90 minutes for a call.
And it's going to be interesting.
Yes, but today you had messaged me a few things that were actually really, really lined up
with what we wanted to talk about today, which is Carl Friston stuff.
Not going into all of what his stuff is because that's going to be the bulk of this episode.
The concept.
Yeah, yeah.
But the guy himself is a, what is this, was it a neuroscientist or a neuroimaging scientist?
He is a neuroscientist, he started as a psychiatrist, that's where he wanted to go, was the root
of mental illness, schizophrenia, stuff like that, so that's what he wanted to, to fix,
whatever you want to call it, to cure, was mental illness and everything.
And he moved into more neurosciences, an excellent mathematician as well.
One of the things that I had seen, I had some notes here from an article more on the guy
than on his work, but was it like, basically his neuroscience stuff now that he had done
is all of his brain imaging and all that stuff, is actually like his, kind of like
his hobby now, while he's driving really, really, really far forward now onto his free
energy stuff.
Yeah, well, yeah.
And then he also is driving the field of artificial intelligence, which I'm talking about, I don't
even know that the people in the neuroscience understand the lips forward made in the field
of artificial intelligence because of him.
Like all the new stuff that we see coming up is a direct follow-up on his work.
That's why, like, it's not artificial intelligence anymore, it's basically artificial learning.
That's where the Skynet is coming from, it's artificial learning and that's from his work.
It goes so deep, it's insane.
There was an, so one of the things, so Carl has these meetings, do you know where is
he from?
Where does he live?
London.
Okay, okay.
So he has these Monday meetings where I think like anybody can go and ask questions, right?
And one of the things that happens, I guess what's interesting about this, he has everyone
ask all their questions up front and then he just dives into all of them.
Yeah.
And then whatever, I'm sure he wants to talk about, and half the crowd leaves halfway through
because they also pissed because they don't get it.
The other side of it too is I think he says these meetings are like 12.30 in the afternoon
and then he will not say a word all day until he's there.
Like the first word he speaks out of his mouth is actually at the thing, which is crazy.
Yeah, so he has an understanding with his wife and kids, he's a very interesting guy,
this way, this way, where they are not to talk to him that morning.
At breakfast, they grunt and go, mmm, mmm, mmm, mmm, I mean, maybe they talk to him, but
he does not answer back outside of grunts or stuff like that.
I don't think anybody talks to him until he shows up and it's not a meeting, it's more
than that.
He's in a, what do you call it?
Yeah, it's like a theater, yeah.
Like because he teaches at the number one college in London when he comes to Neuroscience.
What is the leading neuroscientist in the world?
Well, this was one of the notes I had, was 90% of papers that have been published on
brain imaging use Friston's work.
He's cited as well.
Yeah, but he's cited in most of Neuroscience, he's the leading neuroscientist, he's cited
on everything.
Is the Einstein of Neuroscience, or actually I would, I would, I'm tempted to say Einstein
was the Carl Friston of physics.
He's produced.
Maybe not, but like basically they are the same level.
They come up with novel shit like no one else.
They said he's produced a thousand papers this year, 2000, 85 and 85 in the year 2017,
which is like four, or one every four days.
And you have to see the papers, it's like if people want to see, there's one for example
in 2007 called Free Energy in the Brain.
The concept is the most innovative stuff I've ever read since Schrodinger, What is Life?
Which is the direct continuation of Schrodinger's work.
No, no, he's the most brilliant man, there's no such thing as brilliant man ever, but alive
right now, there's no question.
So in that theater where he's giving his lecture, because he's part of the, you know,
he's a fellow Neuroscience University of London, whatever it is, like there's a name
for it, I just can't remember.
But if you look in that theater, you have so a third of them are all artificial intelligence
people.
So they understand what he's saying, then you have neuroscientists, psychiatrists, yeah,
people from the top minds in the world go there.
And again, half of them leave the session saying, well, that makes no sense.
Yeah, that's, well, the first few times you had mentioned like the subject, I could understand
little pieces, you know, there was a concept that we'll get into a lot of, which is the
prediction error thing.
Fundamentally, I felt like I could, I could figure that one out, because I could, you
could almost directly apply most of it.
A lot of the other stuff is, it's almost though that a lot of that math is for validation,
or not validation, but to explain it, and I get into that, and I'm like, whatever this
part is, I just don't need it to move the gun, I need to.
But you have to understand, no one understands Calvaryston.
Yeah.
Like it's, it's one of the stuff, like that's what I have for them, leave the stuff so
pissed because they're like, I don't understand what he's saying.
Yeah.
But I think they're lacking the where he starts, the finality versus causality.
That's where free energy and the brain is about.
And it's a direct continuation of shorting girls' work.
So we're going to get into that.
But that's, if you miss that part, it would be very hard to understand where it's coming
from, I think.
Yeah, I agree.
So where do we want to dive in at the very first into what the work is?
Yeah, what the work is always a neuroscientist, right?
But I think we have to start with a very quick, with a shorting girl, what is life?
Like I said, people don't understand shorting girl was a guy with a cat, I mean, but he
came up with a wave function, which is the most successful theory ever produced in a
sense of it was never proven wrong, right?
Is the one who the wave function is the probability of an electron to be in a certain
place, whatever, everything is based on probability.
Welcome to quantum mechanics.
This changed the world as we know it.
There is no computer.
There's no iPhone.
There's no TV LCD of any of that without the wave function, shorting girl's wave function.
So he's one of, he's one of the Einstein of civilization, which most people
just don't know who he is outside of the cat thing.
But he's one of the greatest scientists ever.
And he came up with a book in 1944 called What is Life?
Where he's trying to connect biology and quantum mechanics, saying like there is a
deeper relationship that we understand with quantum mechanics, life and stuff like that.
And so that book generated the feel of what is called now quantum biology,
which is where we we're all going.
And in that book, he talks about causality versus finality.
So causality, basically, the idea was that you have two types of things.
You have non life and non life.
Non life obeys the laws of causality, which is the entropy always increases.
We're going from order to disorder.
Everything essentially just constant decomposition, basically.
And then so we start in an orderly state and you move to our disorderly.
Everything decomposes.
And at the end, we're all dead, right?
If people like that, because it works to all of physics today is based on that,
because it's not alive.
And it's a linear progression from order to disorder.
And that's that's Newton's laws of movement, for example.
Everything is based.
That's where the math go, tak, tak, tak, tak, tak.
And people love that because it's a linear world without surprises.
Like, you know, where the earth is going to be six months from now.
And where it was six months ago, where it's going to be six months from now.
There is no time element in that linear system.
It's two plus two equals four, four, yeah.
There's no complication.
The world is simple.
We invented everything.
Everything is safe.
And that's basically the late
1800s, even or even actually up to 1920.
This was the world we lived in.
People won't understand.
But in the late 1900s, one actually someone said that everything that was
worse inventing was invented because at the time, like you have to understand,
when Isaac Newton came up with the laws of movement, we thought
physics was figured out.
A few decimals, a few decimals out there, you know, but up to the way of that,
like the six decimals or whatever, we had to figure out everything.
And here comes first Einstein.
Yeah. Right.
Who come up with the goals of the school and all that stuff.
And then we go into quantum mechanics and quantum mechanics.
And you should introduce the idea of probability, like nothing is set.
And that's when we kind of when we kind of come to the realization at that point,
we had just we just left this phase in which we have discovered all that there
is to discover somewhat.
And to now it's like, oh, we don't actually know anything because some of the stuff
quantum mechanics was saying to this day are not possible.
And yet they happen all the time.
It's stuff like entanglement, where two entangled particles,
no matter what the distance is in between the two,
no matter what the distance between the two are connected,
that goes against everything we know, like literally if you take one particle,
so particles spin a certain in a certain direction, right?
Just a crazy idea.
School entanglement, a particle spins either one way or the other.
If particles entangle, that means that one one particle, if you
you don't know which way they spin until you look at it, that's quantum mechanics.
I can't go into that one.
But until you you look at the particle, you don't know which way it spins.
Once you look at a particle, let's say the one on the right spins left.
Yeah. The other one will speed the other way.
So clockwise, counterclockwise.
It's like basically I'm telling you, I have socks of different color.
You don't know which foot orange is on which foot.
But the second my right foot is red.
As soon as I see one, I know what the other one is.
OK, it's the same idea.
So then you take those socks
and you put them at the opposite side of the galaxy, right?
So I don't know which one is which.
But the second I see, I'll test one of those particles because that's the only
way to know which way it spins.
Then I know that the other one spins the other way.
Yeah, even though they're not physically attached or in any sort of physical relationship,
that's quantum entanglement, I think.
Yes, exactly.
And we don't know what that means because it's a communication between the two
that we cannot explain.
Now, the interesting thing, I had actually just read a deal the other day where they
had somebody had confirmed the what they had is they had two separate systems
of observation.
Yes.
And while they would they would they would observe at the exact same thing at the exact
same time, each observer observed it in a different exact.
So not only can you have two separate things that are entangled,
you can actually have the same thing.
And there was a problem because both testing was right.
Both testings were right.
So but they basically came up with different answers.
So both answers were right, even though they said the opposite thing
on the same experiment.
So like we don't the point is we don't know what it means.
Yeah, that's welcome to quantum mechanics.
We don't know.
But I think I don't know.
I still think that's an important thing to carry over into almost everything else
that we run into is that there you can observe very separate things and they can
both be right for that moment.
That you know, because the problem is the state is the is the state.
But OK, so but the idea was so there was a probability.
That's what Einstein didn't like about quantum mechanics is the probability
aspect. And that's why he famously said God does not play dice
because everything was had the probability to it anyway.
So quantum mechanics comes and basically changes physics.
So basically now Newton's laws of movement are mostly right.
That mostly like, you know, that's entropy always increases almost.
Most of the time.
Yeah, exactly.
That that change the world.
That change physics completely because then suddenly something that we knew.
We had that very linear view of the universe.
Everything is chemical.
Everything is that and here come quantum mechanics who basically change everything.
So Schrodinger, after coming up with a wave function and the probabilities,
applies this to biology and he basically separate things in two groups.
No life obeys the laws of basically Newton laws of movement.
We go that way.
And still on the quantum mechanical level is probability based.
But then suddenly it says life obeys different rules.
So everything goes from order to disorder.
That's causality, but it seems life obeys finality, which is trying to fight the disorder.
Life does everything it can to not let entropy go a wire, to not let entropy
increase to the because
maximum entropy is a death of a system.
Anything that goes to maximum entropy has no interaction with everything is dead.
It doesn't move.
There's no interaction.
It's done, which is where the universe, if we are right, will end up one day.
Right. So but basically life fights that.
There's everything he can for entropy not to develop too much.
Entropy is what is called also free energy.
And that's where the work of Christen comes in.
And he basically said he could quantify free energy.
And that's his paper 207, for example, when he says free energy in the brain.
We explained that life, not just us, just life in general,
is trying to limit the creation of entropy free energy.
How does he do that by minimizing surprises that a surprise creates entropy,
creates disorder, creates free energy?
Yeah, it's something that's almost needs to be.
You know what I mean?
Like now it has to be quantified and it has to be put together.
Otherwise, it just creates more chaos.
Exactly. And so he stuff was that's what.
So from a neuroscientist perspective, that's what the human nervous system does.
It's a learning machine that has one job is to minimize surprises.
Because if you minimize surprises, you minimize the creation of disorder.
You minimize entropy free energy and you can stay alive more.
So my question is then is
is an extreme on either side good in that department?
As far as what we look at what we're seeking for,
you know, so we're going to get into how we're going to make this these predictions
in the reduction of free energy for humans, for the way we think, the way we act,
the way we learn, but is that is reducing free energy, even though that's
something that life seeks, if we were to completely.
No, you can't do that, you can't.
But that that was even further.
What he did basically is that's our quantum
mechanical moment for the study of life.
The problem is OK.
So there was a second Newton, which was very linear movement.
And then quantum mechanics comes comes and just changes physics.
Right. Medicine did not have that.
The medical world is on the same thing.
Everything is chemical. Yes.
Just like physics had Newton's laws, which everything is linear.
You do this, you do a, you get B.
Medical science was like that with that empirical double blind study.
It was like, look, you do a, you cause B, you have causality.
Everything follows a linear pattern.
And even though it's not true at all,
that's basically what they wanted to get to because it allows you to have a world
that is simple to understand.
That's humans for you right there.
Right. Yeah, exactly.
That's human because we all,
the universe has no responsibility toward you to make sense.
Now, this isn't this isn't seeking like a reduction in variables as though we're
like crawling back into a cave.
Necessary. No, no, no, no.
So what he did basically, what Friston did is introduce the idea of probability.
Just like quantum mechanics said, well, everything is a probability.
We know where the electron is going to be.
It's going to be maybe.
But if I have enough of them, I can tell you what the probability of it being here
versus there, right? Yeah.
That's that, that what Einstein hated that.
Yeah. Mostly.
Over a lot of enough numbers we know on one can be anywhere.
We don't know until we look.
All right. So that was the same thing with Friston.
Friston came about and said that.
So the belief was that your neuron are basically at rest until they
being excited, being awakened by a stimulus from the outside.
That creates a reaction into your brain, especially chemically.
So electrical neurons creates a chemical reaction.
And basically, your body carries on so that we are a passive
reaction to whatever happens in the world.
The neurons don't do shit.
They're being stimulated by light or whatever.
Then you react to it and then you
carry on with the reaction to what happened in the world.
Which is my total understanding of the way that things work.
Right. This is the Newton equivalent, the general laws of one equivalent for
medical world. That's how the brain works.
Right. A causes B.
That's a that's a it's a linear world that can go forward or backwards.
That is simple to understand.
And where A causes B, just like Newton laws, like, you know,
the apple falls because gravity down.
No. Right.
So that's where we are in the medical world.
Right.
Quantum mechanics comes about and say none of this is true with Newton's laws.
It's far more complex or like shit.
It's mostly true.
Newton's laws, like in most of what we do is true.
But the second you start to go at the very small, it's not true anymore.
All right. So freestyle comes about and says the same thing.
Like it's all about probabilities.
So we introduced a quantum mechanical moment.
So what does he say?
He said that that's not true.
Your neurons are not waiting for anything.
They are constantly trying to predict the probability of an event.
So what does he mean by that?
An event is not based on the outcome.
Your system is not trying to predict if the apple is going to fall.
Your system is constantly trying to predict how it's going to feel
when the apple falls.
How are you going to feel about that whenever you see the apple falling?
And so he's going to try to make a prediction based on that,
the probability of this versus that, like, oh,
there's a 60 percent chance I won't like this when it happens.
And then after that, it's going to match that prediction versus the actual
sensation of the stuff.
And if everything goes according to plan, it's great.
If it doesn't, you have a prediction error and then there are corrections that
need to be made.
And that's what we're going to talk about.
But basically he introduced the idea of probability like your system is never
passive, it doesn't wait for shit to happen and reacts on the contrary.
It's very proactive and calculate the probability of something happening
constantly, something happening, not being outcome based, being how it's going to feel.
And that's important thing, I think, is that and that's that's where I had
to get past the fact that the I thought in the beginning that the prediction was
about things like survive on thing.
It really is only only trying to match a feeling because I suppose it's how you
become in tune with reality.
You become a tune with reality through your peripheral nervous system,
which is the only way we have to connect with the outside.
So perception is reality to it's like that's basically what is showing with
this is to life.
Perception is reality to something not alive because it doesn't have perception.
They have their reality.
We have our totally separate.
Yes, because we can feel and therefore we have our own quantum mechanical system
based on probability of how is something going to feel like.
And you are constantly anticipating the shit to happens next as a learning mechanism.
So we are on alpha zero on like that's what artificial intelligence is going
toward is it's not me making human intelligence in a sense of consciousness.
It's me making human behavior in the sense of learning.
It's artificial intelligence is about learning like our nervous system learns,
which is probability based of how something is going to feel.
There was a so one of the examples that I had come across was like, how did they word it?
They said like the the the fear of pain.
Yeah, is actually far greater than the feeling because that's your probability
because and especially once you've experienced that if I put my hand on
something and just burn the shit out of it, that sucks.
Yeah, but then when you go, if I were to go back again a week later, you get close.
I will almost need somebody to stuff my hand on it because it's it's an intense
experience, though at this moment, there's no fucking input.
No, but the probability of pain is so high.
Yeah, your system is going to overdrive because it is what you know from that.
Yeah, so you always learn.
So you always make a probability of what happens and then you learn from what
actually happens. So there's two phases.
There's a prediction and there's the expression.
You predict something and then you're going to an hypothesis.
You're going to make an hypothesis.
And basically you're going to confront that hypothesis with what the sensory
input you get from the world outside.
If they don't match, there's a problem, there's a correction.
If they match, then you know for sure.
And then you move on with that feeling.
So that means that you're going to have to redo it constantly before we go.
That when it when it matches, that is what we would define as a reduction of free energy.
Right? Yes. That is that is exactly it.
It's about matching, not good and bad.
Does it's not good or bad?
It's not it's not.
This is the things beyond your control.
I like this. So I don't have nothing to do.
It didn't match what I thought it was going to match.
So I I put my hand on the stove and I burn myself like you can see that with a kid.
The next time they come, even if the stove is not on,
you can't get the hand close to it because you know it's going to hurt.
You're wrong, but it doesn't matter because at that moment, that's all that matters.
I would have to force like this and you go like, ah, so that's there's actually nothing.
That's why I can't get my dog in a fucking bath.
Yes. Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Fuck it up one time, fuck it up one time.
And then it stands forever because he's incapable of recreating to change his prediction.
So that's what we're going to talk about.
So when there's a prediction error, then there are different ways of dealing with it.
But you have to understand that once you're sure of a prediction,
it's like that's how your system has learned is moving forward with that.
It's so hard to break because it matched.
So if something hurts, you know that for a fact, it always hurts.
Yeah, you don't like the taste of something.
We're going to have to associate and it takes a lot to break that.
I remember there was this was an old, I think this is some old like military
interrogation thing, but there was they had actually said that electrocution was
the thing that they had used because it's such a I mean, like massively intense
sort of pain. It's over your whole body.
I never tried, but I'm sure it is.
I did stuff in my fingers in the outlet a few times to see.
I've had a few moments working as a technician where I got lit up real bad.
And one of them to where like I almost didn't crawl out of the fucking situation.
But so I know what it feels like and it feels really, really, really, really bad,
obviously, but but they said when they when they would test it,
when they would like to torture people, one of the reasons they would use
electrocution is because it sucks so much, but they actually barely have to use it
on you, meaning they hit you a couple of times and then all they have to do is
threaten because you're like, no, no, no, no, no, you come with it.
Like it's it's it's it's it's massive.
The the the urge to get away from this is important because that's the nature
of chronic pain. Yes. Yeah.
Well, you don't need the stuff anymore.
It already hurts that you see that with people like I can't get away from pain
anymore because that's the problem is that prediction get is true now and
constantly active. Maybe this would be let this this might be a good opportunity
to to use that as an example, like a specific example for this.
For let's let's go down the the the chronic pain route.
Yeah, because I think a lot of people will understand that.
So let's say I a deadlift and I have a thing.
It's a physical thing.
This at this point, it's not mental, right?
And and I don't stay tight.
Things shift a little bit and and a disc gets a little wonky and also my back
hurts a lot. Yeah, I'm going to start walking around now and I'm going to start
to relate certain movement patterns or positions that are going to cause pain
while it's reasonable at that point.
I have an injury. So I bend over. Fuck, it hurts.
You know, a couple of days past everything I do where I try to be exactly.
And the problem actually, the problem with this is you bend over and it hurts.
That's not the problem.
The problem is you go, oh, I felt something and now I'm fucked for three days.
Yeah. The next time you feel something, anything.
Now you freak out because you're like, last time I got fucked for three days.
There's no greater fear than that one going like, oh, I fucked my back.
And this is when in training, you'll often see somebody who will come in and they'll
say, OK, I'm ready to start going, but I'm not going to deadlift.
And that's when you do things that this is that's not how they say it.
They say, I'm not going to deadlift.
They must breathe and they're like, I can't do it.
I can't do it. Like that's when you see the fucking thing,
because they have learned that once they go clock,
it's three days, it's a three days of a fucking nightmare.
And that's that we're going back to electrocution.
That's the same principle.
And so what happens is they will still end up making,
because we say that the fear of pain is much greater than pain, that that that learning.
We have already done the learning.
The prediction has matched at that moment.
So now they know.
So what I see that's always interesting, like is some of these other parallels
that still fit, right?
So one of the ways like Dr.
Stu McGill does some things with back injuries is he's like, well,
do what you can that does not hurt.
Yeah, whatever that is, do that.
If that's walking, if that's walking and wiggling your arms,
if it's carrying weights, start there.
But very often you'll still see people once they get back a little bit of things.
At first few and the problem is over the course of a rehab,
they don't they don't expect that there's going to be setbacks and there always are,
right? You're going to get stronger.
You're going to move poorly once or even or even if they will use the setbacks
because they do barely anything, right?
They go like, oh, you're fine.
But the problem is the second you go back into the position,
the problem that caused the issue in the first place, which is you relax when you
none of that is fixed.
And so all you got to do is go into a deadlift position and not feel comfortable.
And then and you're not deadlifting.
Exactly.
Yeah. And the bar is not coming off the floor.
Exactly. Exactly.
But that's how you end up with and that's why from an imaging standpoint,
they always say that you can't tell someone who's in pain and someone that's
not because a lot of it is going to be how they've,
what they've done over the course of the actions that they've taken since then
to allow them to be, to not have this really negative prediction associated with
this. And by the way, that's part of the issue because that's when doctors will
do a MRI.
And if you have a bulging disc, say you have a bulging disc, even though you are
this now, yeah, even though the bulging disc might not be where the pain or cause
the pain or where the pain is, because there's been many studies on this where
80, 90 percent, 80 something, 88 percent of saying it was,
people out there with no back pain have bulging discs.
Everybody does. You have bulging discs.
But since we cannot
understand where the pain comes from or we used to,
then it was, I need a liner world where there is a cause,
a visible cause for everything.
So I'm at B, there's an A.
I take a radio, I see bulging discs, there's my A.
It's bad science, but it happens all the time.
It's bad science because we did not have our quantum mechanic moment where
a guy like Freyston comes about and says, but that's not what's happening.
So that that's how we can turn something like chronic pain into a
self-fulfilling prophecy because that's the point of life is a self-fulfilling
prophecy. The point of life is to limit, is to mitigate surprises.
So literally, this is my prediction.
And you're going to do everything you can to make the prediction right.
Because if you, if it's not right, you have a surprise,
surprise creates free energy, entropy that leads you to death eventually.
So the body doesn't care about right and wrong.
It doesn't care about good and bad.
It cares about no surprises.
And this isn't even, and this is almost,
it seems to me, separate from a survival or evolution thing.
It really is a life versus not a life.
Bacteria.
You know what I mean?
Like, like this is literally life behaves in different ways than things that aren't.
And that's what that's the depth of what Schrodinger was saying.
This is the most important concept I've ever read about what Schrodinger said.
That's why I was like, how he has not made a ripple,
or maybe a ripple in the world, obviously, because now there's Tristan.
But this was the most mind boggling thing I've ever read in my life.
Past niche to me was everything was that book from Schrodinger, where I was like,
you guys don't understand what he's saying.
He's saying that life has his own way of doing.
And that's what life does. He fights entropy.
So that means on a quantum mechanical level,
anything alive will do everything it can to mitigate surprises.
That's how we do. That's how we move forward.
That's what life is, is a way to mitigate surprise.
So the purpose of life is to fight death.
So we addressed in the chronic pain example where you have you have a negative
reaction to something, right? It's a prediction.
It's whatever. But now, but now you know what you're what's a prediction is set.
Now you're in trouble.
Well, but there also there isn't anything you know what's going to happen.
If you get into that position the next day, you just know.
So but how do you how does one what happens when the prediction is wrong?
Let's say
probably if I give an example off the top of my head, we're going to be married to it
for the rest of the thing. But but what's the example that you can think of?
OK, let's use this way.
Let's take away from training.
For example, sexual behavior, you're sure you don't like something
because you saw a movie, a porn movie or whatever.
And you thought, oh, I would not like that because you judged it from a belief
perspective, not having done the stuff.
But you've been told parents, friends or whatever.
This is disgusting. I don't do that.
Right. So you know, going into it, that you don't like it.
You happen to do the stuff or whatever.
And suddenly the outcome does not the outcome.
But what you feel does not match what you knew for sure you were going to feel.
That's easier to get in touch with because that happens to everything.
It's like, that's not how I thought I would feel.
And now you're like, wait, what?
That's a surprise.
And now basically your system is like has to again, has to go against the what?
And has to marry the two back together.
So now once you have a prediction error,
yes, this is how I'm going to feel.
Well, that's not how I felt.
It was worse whether you like it or not.
It's basically the other way.
I'm going to love this.
Like you think like,
you know, you're all I'm in love with that guy, sex is going to be awesome.
Yeah, not always.
Not always, right? Or the opposite.
Anyway, now you have you have a prediction error.
There's three ways to correct that.
You can it's
there's a balance between the three and usually this function happens when it's
one over the other two. Anyway, we're going to get into that.
So the first the first thing is you have to change your prediction.
Right? That's the easiest way to do.
So I'm on the sled.
I'm going to do the sled.
I'm going to do 100 feet in 12 seconds.
All right, I put too much weight on it.
It's not going to move.
Yeah, you get or you get two seconds in and you're like,
no, this is not going to take 12 seconds because you fucked up on the way.
Yeah. Right.
So it's the same idea as you thought the sexual position was going to do that.
And you're wrong.
Wrong prediction. All right.
So you have to change your prediction on that.
Do you want to do one, two, three?
Let's so let's go back and so let's just say that on the one from a
so we're basically where we change the prediction, right?
From the from the training standpoint, it is kind of simple.
And they're like, OK, well, now my expectation is very different.
Yes, but exactly.
But there's a very important point about that.
How you make you have to understand where you make the prediction.
This is where your brain comes in.
The brain, the purpose of the brain is to allow you to make prediction.
Right. So the certain parts of the body that are designed for these three
ways to marry the prediction and then the expression, right?
And making the prediction, that's the role of the brain.
Like literally, I have a study if you all want that I can link about all this.
But actually, it seems that that's what the interoception or that stuff comes in
is the role of the brain is to make the prediction.
This is what the test negative that I talk about
all the time is about is that's the job of the brain.
We thought the job of the brain was basically again,
the neurons are there and they just passive and then they react to stimulus
and then they order the body to do stuff.
No, that's not what the brain is for.
The brain is to make a prediction is to decide the environment you're going to be in.
So that's what the test negative is.
So that means that's also where your sense of self is.
So that's basically you're going to make
prediction based on who you are or who you think you are on your personality.
To change your prediction, you need to change who you are.
So what do I mean by that?
On the sled, I put too much weight.
Yeah, because I thought I was the guy capable of pushing that.
You're not that guy, but you're not that guy.
So you're going to have to change your sense of self because your sense of self
is the one deciding the prediction.
Why? Because it's in a test negative network and a test negative network is sense
of self morals, it makes prediction on past and future.
It's where the any change in the in the peripheral stimuli.
So this is where the test negative network is so important that we talked about
in other podcasts is that's the one responsible for making the prediction.
That's who you are, who you think you are.
Right. So to change your prediction, you need to change who you are.
This is why addicts, in order to get away, need to change who they are.
John does drugs because John is with his friends.
John has an environment there, right?
In order to take go away from drugs, if he's addicted enough,
John has to die and become Mike because Mike won't do drugs.
But every time I go back to being John in that environment, I'll go back to drugs.
It's environment behavior, identity, right?
Identity is based on his prediction.
Prediction is identity.
So on the same, the inverse of that, if
if I go up and I'm going to I'm going to try and deadlift
six hundred and fifty pounds and I think, all right, I think I can get this.
It's going to be and then it comes off the floor like it's nothing.
Yeah.
Next thing I know, I'm like, seven and a quarter is fucking not now.
I'm the guy who can do that.
Well, you know why?
Because you become a guy who destroys six fifty.
Yeah. And so now you want to become the guy with the lift seven.
Yeah. Like that's, you know, like.
So whereas if I were to go into thinking this was going,
you know, I mean, you go to a lift that you think is going to be very challenging.
Yeah. And it's easy.
All of a sudden you're like, I maybe am a bad motherfucker.
Exactly. So your sense of self went up.
Yeah. The same thing where your previous 90 percent today feels like a fucking
hundred and twenty percent. Yeah, it's like I got a little bit of reality check today.
Your sense of self goes down.
So because you are you are the prediction in that sense.
But neurologically speaking, you are the prediction.
That's the problem when you want to do eighty five percent today in training,
no matter what is if today for other reasons happen to be heavy.
Yeah.
It's going to crash your sense of self because you are the prediction from a
neurological perspective, from a test, negative network.
You are your prediction.
You have to understand that there's different parts of your body.
There's different parts of your nervous system.
This different one is the central nervous system.
There's a peripheral.
There's basically the inter-rack nervous system.
They are different parts of you.
The one that makes a prediction, that's the goal of the brain.
That's a test, negative network.
And that's where your sense of self is.
So that's why making the wrong prediction can be so
damaging to you because it directly links to your sense of self.
From a neurological perspective.
Because your identity is tied up in the prediction, because that's how you see
everything because that's the way it works.
Yes. Well, OK, I am not about to judge evolution.
Three hundred thousand years to become human, the nervous system has been around
for five hundred million years.
That's how it works.
The test, negative network is the reason we are on top of the food chain.
Right. We build things
in society, you know, basically the one thing we have as humans over every other
animal is that we can change our environment better.
Yeah. So our test, negative
or way of making prediction is better than the others.
We better are making predictions.
So our sense of self is superior to every other animal because we can change our
environment better than others animals.
It's environment behavior identity.
That's what I call a freestyle environment is basically one when you can,
when you decide if you're going to be successful or not.
But that's a very important part when we go back to pain, right?
Because you have to be successful in making your prediction.
So there's a problem with addiction and pain and everything.
If you know for a fact that your prediction is dead lift equals back pain,
then when they lift equals back pain, it raises your sense of self.
Just like for you, oh, I can I smoke 650.
I feel better. Yeah.
Every time I hurt myself on the lift, my sense of self goes up because I was right
in my prediction. That's how fucked up he can be, though.
Yeah. He can work both ways.
Yeah. And then they become even more certain.
But then he goes the other way.
That means if that lift doesn't hurt my back, then who am I?
Because I'm wrong in the prediction.
That's a surprise what you're trying to fight against.
So that's the power of the prediction.
And what happens when there's a prediction error?
It's to life.
It means literally death with your choice.
So if you make the wrong prediction,
whether the prediction is good or bad, doesn't matter.
That's the problem.
As long as you make a prediction that is right, your body is awesome.
So we're trying to constantly basically just
address everything with certainty, because certainty is order.
Certainty is life.
Yeah. And then as soon as there's something that's a surprise,
that's fucking chaos.
And that's why there has to be a correction.
There has to be a correction.
So that's the key. There are three corrections.
If you're stuck in one, like changing the prediction,
your sense of self is attached to that.
That means that every mistake that you
make, any non-mistake, any surprise that you have in your life.
For better or worse, it's that diminishes your sense.
Well, it's always bad.
So any surprise, even if it's a good surprise, it's bad.
If it's a bad surprise, it's bad.
In the sense of any surprise is bad.
If you can only, there's three ways to correct.
The first one is changing the prediction.
If that's your way to correct errors, then any surprise is bad.
Even if the surprise is has a good
outcome outside, you will still see it as bad and it gets worse.
No matter what, how good that surprise is,
it lessens you as a human being.
It makes you feel worse about yourself.
That's why in some people that are fucked up, happiness hurts.
Because they're happy, that's a surprise.
That surprise makes them feel lesser as human being because really,
it does, it just destroys their sense of self because it is a surprise.
Because that is the only way they can deal with a prediction error.
That's the problem.
And that's when you see a lot of issues with ego and stuff like that.
Because if you don't have the other ways to deal with prediction error,
then everything is a challenge to your sense of self.
Any surprise.
So anything that feels good when you're sure it doesn't lessens your sense of self.
Imagine the hell that you live in.
Imagine how scared you would be to walk around knowing that everything that feels
good will make you feel like shit as a human being.
That is hell, that is literally hell on earth.
Were you raised Catholic or no?
I'm French.
My grandfather sure was.
My grandfather thinks he raised me Catholic.
I can't tell you that.
But so we have the changing the prediction is the big one.
And that's a big problem, right?
So yourself, what are your other options?
So the second one is you're going to create movement to basically make the world
fit the prediction, right?
So that's the one where they live hurts my back, right?
So I'm going to fuck up the form.
Like I did lift and it feels good.
I don't want that.
So I can either change the prediction going like, well, maybe they live doesn't
fuck me up or because I don't like it, I'm going to change my form until I hurt
myself, that self sabotage all the time.
But again, self sabotage in itself isn't bad.
It's just trying to limit the surprise.
So you could basically change the movement
into one where you hurt yourself.
And then the prediction came true and that's OK.
So that's where also like I'm going to freak out.
So basically you will do movements to our freaking out,
which can be mass breathing, which basically you're going to you're going to act
on the prediction to make the world fit it.
Like, so the prediction doesn't come true.
I can either change my prediction or I can make the world fit the prediction.
I can create movement that will make me feel the way I thought I should.
So you can go the other way, which means I love to squat.
I'm going to change my position until I feel the squat.
Feel good.
Yeah.
Like, so what is my point?
You you love to snatch because at one time you snatch and you went, oh.
Yeah, that was awesome.
So the way now if you're snatching feels like shit.
So you have a choice.
You can quit snatching or you can do it until you feel that movement and you go.
That one and you find that again.
That one.
And you don't know what you did, by the way, but you know it's that one.
That one was true.
That's the one.
Right.
And that's so that's what we talk about technique about anecdotal evidence
about learning skill, because that's what learning skill is.
It's number two.
It's learning to make something feel the way it should.
So that's where mastery of movement comes in.
That's where mastery, that's where mastery of making espresso come in.
Is the action should feel a certain way.
Then you start to go through repetition again and again and again and again,
because every single repetition gets you a little bit closer to what you think
that action should feel like.
Yeah.
And that's where mastery comes in.
That's why after a while.
Because then eventually you have very precise control.
You have more of your action.
Exactly.
And that's why people understand how masters of anything can be so precise in
what they do, how can they replicate and replicate something to almost perfection?
How can the guy who makes the soup makes it ever so slightly different?
But every time it's great, right?
Because he has mastered the movements necessary to duplicate exactly that.
So that's why you see the great Olympic well lifter where they do a movement
that to the untrained eye always looks the same.
Yeah.
It's it's like and you go like, oh my God, look at you.
You can you can tell the mastery of movement.
Why? Because they can duplicate and replicate
the movement almost to the same level.
Every time it works for them because that number two,
every time there's a prediction error, we didn't feel right.
They have learned to adjust to make the bar do what they want.
Well, and as they progress, you know, same thing with like the sport of basketball.
If you use the three point shooter, I'm not one of those.
But but like but but when I shoot still like, like, you know, I would say within
80 percent, 80 percent of the time the ball leaves my hand,
I would know for sure if it's going right.
And mastery is Kobe Bryant knew 95 percent of the time if not 98.
Yeah.
And then the great and he could get to that feeling.
Exactly. And the greatest shooters are 95 plus percent of the time.
Nailed it. That's what the guy turns around.
Stephen Curry, he knows.
Yeah. So him is at probably 99 percent where he knows that when he feels a certain
weight, he makes it. That's mastery of movement.
That's repeated. That's because every single prediction error, it physically
he physically worked out, changed the world to fit what he wanted.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's interesting.
And that's the power of that's mastery right there.
That's anecdotal evidence.
That's where I will talk about this, but that's where I fight for anecdotal evidence
so much is because that's where mastery is.
That's where you cannot learn a skill with an anecdotal evidence because they have
a whole thing about anecdotal evidence being being useless and that's completely
wrong in the sense of you cannot learn any skill with an anecdotal evidence.
So you can't use anecdotal evidence to convince others.
But that's not the point.
The point is you need to convince yourself first.
Yeah. I mean, I could read all of these studies specifically on how a basketball
shot is supposed to look until I get in there ago.
And I know what that feels like.
It's like, well, I think this and then it applies to me
anecdotally, but that's what matters to me.
That's the only way I'm going to learn the shot.
Exactly. And but from a neurologic, from a freestone perspective,
that is extremely important because it's one of the three.
Yeah. So you have to make the correct prediction, which means so you have to.
That's where memorization comes in in that sense of this is what a shot is.
But at some point it takes the fucking million shots.
It takes what is anecdotal evidence of you basically going through prediction
errors physically. And many times you're like, oh, I want to quit because you don't
want to go through that basically second way of fixing prediction error.
Your quitting is I made the wrong prediction,
which is shooting, which means I want to play basketball.
Yeah. So you're going to change your
prediction going like I don't want to play basketball anymore because you're
tired of going through the second solution, which is changing the world
every single time until it fits what you want.
Yeah.
So third option.
Yeah. If I have to change the prediction, the prediction is wrong.
Yeah. What before we get into the third one, this is what I want to know.
Are these choice based necessarily?
Is this a decision to choose which of these three
it's a balance, but yeah, yes.
Well, now the question is who makes the choice, right?
Is it it's basically from you have learned from previous behavior,
which one is more effective?
OK. That's why if you'll have your go to
if you quit long enough, it's obviously effective because you change
your prediction every time, then it becomes your behavior.
So environment to behavior, to identity.
If you have decided to change your prediction, you create an environment
where anything goes hard, you quit because that's the environment you created
because that's the way to that's how you change the
that's how you fix a prediction error by changing the prediction every time.
So that will do be your behavior, which is every time something gets
it's every time there's a surprise.
Yeah. I change the prediction that becomes your personality.
So you create an environment where things get hard.
It's a surprise.
Yeah. You much rather quit than you become a quitter.
Yeah. So it's environment, behavior, identity.
What you get to choose is the environment.
OK. At that stage, you get to decide, I am not.
I will not if there's a surprise, I will deal with it and not get away from it.
That will affect your behavior.
You're not a quitter anymore, but you can't control the behavior.
You can't control your identity.
That's what people quit.
But say, I'm not a quitter.
No, you don't get to do that.
Yeah.
The only thing you can decide of you can choose is your environment.
So you get to choose which one of the three or all three you get to use.
That's where this comes in or consciousness, whatever the fuck it is,
whatever we have that all other animals don't have, we get to create an environment.
Lions are stuck.
They're not going to go migrate 300 miles to find this.
Basically, they have a territory and they're stuck there and there's no food.
They might move a little bit.
But basically, they're fucked.
They're not going to build an air conditioning because it's too hot.
They're not going to be able to dig a well in it.
So where we can do us is we are very good at with a prediction thing.
We can create an environment better than anybody else.
So that's where I think people need to understand where the success in life is.
Is they get to choose the environment?
They don't get to choose their behavior.
They don't get to choose their identity because that is based on the environment.
Environment, behavior, identity, so, but you get to choose the behavior.
That is the one thing you get to do is you get to go like, this is where I want to be.
So you think you're fat, you're out of shape, you're unhappy, you decide to go to the gym.
Now, once you're in the gym, you don't get to decide the rest.
That's the problem, too, is you go to the gym that you think is going to feel good.
You won't know.
And so now, basically, from that, you say, oh, I'm a loser.
You're not just supposed to feel like shit.
You're just wrong in your prediction on how a workout is supposed to be.
It's not supposed to feel good.
It's supposed to make you better, but it's not supposed to.
So after that, it's out of your control.
But being in that gym, being a correct gym will make you train harder and then
eventually you'll become a winner.
But you don't get to control that part.
All you get to do is choose a gym.
So what do I mean by that?
You join a gym, but you don't like the mood.
The vibe doesn't fit you.
You don't like the people there.
They're not supportive to you or whatever.
What do you think the best program in the world will do to you in that environment?
Absolutely zero.
So now you went into that gym, you chose that gym, right?
At least you chose to go to a gym.
That's the gym you're in.
Now, what you would like is you would like to change the coaching there.
You would like for people to be more supportive and everything.
Yeah, but it's not that gym.
You don't get to choose that.
And so from there, after that, basically it starts to tax your identity because you're
like, people should be like this.
Now you bitch about the facts.
So now basically you're making predictions based on here and you go like, I can't do
this. Yeah, you're right.
But because you're trying to control what is not controllable, what is controllable
is change the gym until you find one that fits what you want.
And once you find a gym that fits what you want, your behavior will be of someone
who trains harder because you feel everything.
And from there, you become a winner.
So the wrong gym will make you a loser.
You don't get to control that.
And then you start to associate different things with different results too.
Once you become a loser, then that's a prediction you make.
Yeah. So now it's a feedback loop, right?
And the prediction is I lose and now you lose.
Yeah. And now you're in a bad place where because you try to control far too
down the line, the only thing you can control is the gym.
Your gym makes you a loser.
Fine, change the gym.
That's the only thing you can control is that is your environment.
Yeah. It's interesting.
You know, like so if a regular person walks into a gym and they see some big
thick neck, son of a bitch, dead lifted and bang and weights, and that guy's an
asshole to them from then on out, that person is going to going into the gym,
seeing any big strong.
It's going to be like this place.
But that tells you two things.
Because people ask us all the time, how should I choose my gym?
Choose my gym like in Jiu Jitsu or whatever.
I'm like, get in there, see if you want to go back.
Yeah.
Do you feel off
whatever energy is there?
Yeah. If you do, you'll win.
If you don't, you'll lose.
And there's nothing you can do about it.
Because you're not going to change that asshole banging the weight.
He might change, but that is not under your control.
And you telling him is an asshole, most likely won't change him, by the way.
But you know, and on the other side of if you go in and there's some big thick
deadlifting and banging a bunch of weights and and then he talks to you
afterwards and he's a nice guy and you're like, oh, you have no problem.
Same situation happens exactly.
And you're like, oh, I know that.
By the way, that tells you how important you are.
Gym owners are out there because that means literally you defining the outcome
of that person's life by providing an inviting environment or one that is not
inviting. That's what to me, the gym owners, we go back to that conversation.
We had so many times are so important.
And I think that's the only job really is create an environment where the kind
of people you want in your gym can thrive.
Yeah, that's it.
If you create an environment, you change the behavior, you change the behavior,
you change your identity.
That's how much power we have in people's lives.
So if you want your gym to do better your way, change the environment,
make the environment into something that will create the right behavior,
that will create the right identity.
That's why I think the gym is the most important place in the world.
Yeah.
So our third option.
This is actually the one that I actually I walked over at seven or eight
times and was completely misunderstood.
Yes, that's that's so this one, this one, I'm going to need you to kind of guide
the thing and I'm going to ask a lot of questions from this as in because I
don't fully understand this one.
This one is basically we have to in order to change or correct a prediction error.
We have to change the way the brain samples input.
Yes. So basically is that the third way you could change the error is you could
change how you feel about something.
All right, so that's the source of most dysfunction.
Right.
Again, the point is to mitigate surprises.
The surprise happens, not good.
The fact that surprise happens is always bad.
So I need to either change the way
what I think about make the prediction or move the thing until it does what I want.
In the feeling sense, or I change the way I feel about it.
That could be a that's where you see in a life changing event like a near death
experience where basically they used to have a certain personality and everything.
They used to feel a certain way about these things that used to be important to them.
No longer no long girls are because they have changed the way they perceive the world.
Right. Because that's what happens through
dynamic anyway, all that stuff.
So that would be the source of dysfunction.
This would be like the source of schizophrenia or stuff like that, where
something happens and basically I'm going to
I'm the son of Jesus Christ, right?
I'm being was proven that no, you're not, right?
Doesn't matter. You're not going to change your prediction.
Now, you're going to you can't make the world.
The world's not going to get on board with that.
Exactly. Oh, and you can't walk on water.
You can't change the the world in a way that proves your prediction.
Right. And so what you're going to do,
the only thing you can do is change that basically how you feel about about things.
That's where you could see schizophrenia coming in, basically.
So you have changed the expression.
So that would be the the source of most dysfunction like you create.
So
psychosomatic events.
Yes, that would that would be that, for example.
So the delift is going to hurt my back.
I left. No, we didn't.
My form, I can't manage to my form hasn't changed, right?
So I did not physically hurt myself.
There's no aggravation, nothing yet.
I wake up the next morning and I'm in pain
because I made the world the prediction fit, for example.
That's one example, but there's many.
But that's where psychosomatic events would apply is you have made yourself feel
a certain way about that.
So there's a positive as well.
Let's go back to our sexual behavior.
There is that action that I thought I would hate.
But then basically there's a surprise that tells me that this was not bad.
It can be because I never wanted to do this because this is more only bad.
But the men I love or the women I love likes that action in bed.
All right, so I have two chances.
I can change the prediction.
I can basically not do it or whatever.
Or I can suddenly the next time I do it, I can make myself like it.
I can change the way I feel about that.
That's what the psychosomatic stuff happens so much.
We see it with placebo stuff all the time.
We see it all the time.
But that's also, unfortunately, the source of many dysfunctions.
Because that's what also chronic pain is.
Is I am so sure that something hurts me that it actually does.
So this is people getting really good wooses going like, oh, my God,
my finger hurts so bad, they're not kidding.
They have trained themselves into feeling pain of anything, even though
you could say, oh, I poked you, even if it's not true, and they would actually feel pain.
That's the source of many, many dysfunctions.
What I'm trying to come up with some other
so for this for this third one, because this is the one that needs the most clarification,
the easiest way to do this is the thing that we think we fall into a lot
with food, you had mentioned.
Yes. All right. So easiest way to let's say I want to go sympathetic.
Yeah, I enter a situation where I know I need to move.
Right. I'm bored.
Right. I'm sitting here.
I'm at my desk and I'm feeling bored.
Bored basically is the need of it's a change of behavior.
Right. I need to do something.
And I need I'm angry.
So I need to fucking express the anger.
Right. So not changing the
prediction, because in that case, your body means you feel you need to do something.
So either you start enjoying what you're doing, you're at work and you don't want to do that.
So second, you need to go sympathetic.
But you don't do that either.
Sympathetic can be mouth breathing.
Or basically you need number
option number three, which is I need to feel sympathetic.
Yeah. So instead of acting, I could go grab
nuts, something that would any food, honey, sugar that will create a sympathetic
reaction, because now I'm at work and instead of changing my prediction,
instead of making me like changing my work into something I would like,
all I need to do now, that's option number three, is to create a sympathetic feeling.
And the easiest way to do that is to have sugar, because sugar triggers and
sympathetic reaction.
So now imagine a fucked up that would be if
anytime I need to have a sympathetic reaction, I could just feel sympathetic.
That means that anytime I need to take action, I could
instead rely on something that makes me feel sympathetic.
That would basically be the third way to deal with a prediction error.
So imagine if I put all my energy into option number three, everything I have.
So it's a triangle, but instead I'm going to use number three,
which means anytime there's a prediction error,
I'm going to I'm going to use something that makes me feel a certain way.
So imagine if you could do that with food.
Anytime I need to go sympathetic, anytime I need to
basically make the world fit what I want and everything.
Instead, I'm going to grab sugar that makes me feel sympathetic and therefore
allows me to fix the prediction error.
Imagine the power that would have and that's our relationship with food.
So we are using food as a third option
to basically not have to do shit.
So that means that we are using food
not to change a prediction, even when we're wrong, and not to do anything about it.
That is how bad our relationship with food is.
Unfortunately, neurologically speaking, it allows us to not do shit.
Well, and that's I had a note here even from the from the thing I'd read earlier,
was they said that he said that basically
both your perception, your perception is completely bound to action.
Yeah, there's no there is no way around it.
Like, like if I want to if I want to change my perception of the world,
it has to be action, I have to breathe, I have to move around.
My eyes need to move to see something different.
I have to breathe in in order to smell something there.
There has to be an actual action in order for us to like in order for your perception.
And so eating becomes the biggest,
the not the biggest, the easiest way to fix a prediction error.
Why? Because five thousand years ago,
you did not have access to all those different foods.
Yeah, you didn't.
You had basically one type of carbs, right?
Three types of protein and I was it.
So because there was so little choices of food,
they had to be so much more behavior changes, behavior changes being the change
of prediction or the making the world fit it.
So now we have now that we have the quantity of food we desire
and choices of food we never had before,
it's basically limiting completely the need for a change of behavior or a need for movement.
Yeah, so all
all choices of food literally determines how much movement and prediction we're going to do in life.
When we are at our disposal, such a wide variety of foods,
which is the worst thing I can do to human being.
Extremely wide variety of things and really fucking good and quantity.
And so it's always new and novel if you want it.
So you're bored?
I can go have myself a new experience.
Or the food that created that feeling that one time.
Exactly. And so that's the thing is,
I think you're either in most cases, you have the ability to really
you can just replace a lot of necessary things with still there's enough variety.
So you're not stuck in this.
No, but look, but it is that means that I make the wrong prediction,
which means I like assholes.
You know, like the girl who's always dating that asshole and everything.
So I thought he was good. He's a dick.
Yeah, like the guy like the tanks guys before you or you dating that bitch and everything.
Yeah, well, guess what?
The other 10, they were exactly the same way, right?
It was just as well for women or men, by the way.
Instead of changing the prediction,
which means realizing that your sense of self,
that you're wrong into who you want to date.
Basically, your personality is in the wrong place.
You're dating people that are destructive to you.
Your personality is a wrong place.
Instead of changing that,
instead of actually trying to date a good guy, all you got to do is eat
a specific type of food and you will have mitigated the prediction error.
Yeah.
And because in the grand scheme of things, food is still very short term.
That becomes a lot of constant behavior.
So you will need the quantities and you will need the different kind.
And we have both.
And then we get into the kind of the patterning as a result of this.
Basically, you can see the connection between food and mental illness.
You can see food as a mental illness.
And I do believe that's what it is now.
Food, as because of the quantities and the choices we have,
is what's stopping you from moving forward in life.
And that's what depression and food,
if we see that through the enteric nervous system,
there is a link between the gut flora,
through the afro nervous system, the enteric nervous system going into it.
There's a link between the gut flora and depression,
because those choices in food will allow you, will have a direct impact on your
behavior, whether it is making the world fit what you want or changing your prediction.
So imagine how bad our relationship in the Western world is with food.
So that means that in order to do you know,
I know a few people basically that are stuck in life because they can't change
their behavior and they can't do shit.
They can't find their hammies.
They can't exercise the way they want.
They can't find intensity because they cannot move to make the world fit what
they want or they can't change the prediction, which is they're stuck in life
because to change the prediction error, they go toward food.
This is the biggest drug and the most dangerous one of all,
because this is the one that will ruin your life.
And it's interesting back to kind of the first way to correct the prediction too,
is that a lot of those people aren't willing to change their
sense of self either because they, you know what I mean?
So then you end up with another good option and then they're still in the middle
of this self-destructive or at least not self-serving.
But that's what basically drugs are, by the way.
Drugs make you feel a certain way, right?
So that's what that's the source of dysfunction.
That's option number three.
This is something with drugs.
Because I'm in a bad, my life is bad, right?
I don't do shit about it, but I feel good.
I'll mitigate the error.
And often in the case with drugs,
even though you don't feel good, it still is familiar.
You know what I mean?
So it's like, even though it's amidst all this mess, it's like, no, no, no.
It's a right prediction.
I know what I'm getting.
There is no surprises when you're on drugs.
Everything feels a certain way.
So that's why drugs are so powerful.
But people have to understand food is exactly the same.
The difference is you don't have to snore cocaine, but you have to eat.
And that was always the thing that I thought was interesting with
you know, like habitual overeating and things like that.
People with with eating disorders was that was the thing they always mentioned.
Was it's like, yeah, but, you know, you don't have to, like, you know, snore
something, drink a little whiskey every day, like, like, but I got to eat some food
at some point.
So it's like you're always having to be in the environment with which.
Yeah, you can follow.
So you're going to.
So but it also means that there's a direct
correlation between how many choices of food you have versus how many behaviors
you can take, the more choices of food you have, the less behavior.
Changes you will have.
It's you will either choose new foods over new behavior.
So if you want to do stuff in life, if you want to change prediction,
you're going to have to lower the quantity and choices of food that you have.
So the most boring in that sense, your diet is the better your life will be.
That's literally literally.
So on a nutrition perspective, that means that you have breakfast.
Basically, that's where you see that a lot with standing for doing vertical diet.
Is you want everything to you want to be able to behave the way you want.
You want to be able to train the way you want.
You want to be who you want to be.
And that means that especially the strong fit way means breakfast is going to be
a certain kind of fat that does good to you, whatever that is.
Lunch could be a certain type of carb that does good to you from its rice.
And nine times is going to be certain kind of protein that does you good, right?
And you do that and basically the same choices.
Day in, day out, we allow you to have better actions in your life,
better decision making, that's a prediction and better actions towards your life.
You are using food to avoid better decision making and better actions.
That's literally how we use food.
That is it is that photo.
I think that has us.
That's a great conclusion.
But that's basically the freestan.
That's what that's the conclusion.
That's the direct conclusion of Karl Freesten's work.
That's why I created the the strong fit nutrition protocol is to fit Karl
Freesten's and Schrodinger's work.
That's causality versus finality.
But people have to understand the deep, deep relationship between food and behavior.
And even from a neurological perspective,
then we go into the gut flora, which is another one on top of that.
Food and behavior are linked far more than people understand.
And it is, I believe in Western world, the most destructive force.
You do not understand what that cheat day on the weekend does to you on a
neurological level like this.
And I'm not saying to go called Turkey like this, but you have to understand
that what you eat will change your behavior and decision making in life.
And not from a chemical perspective, from a freestan perspective.
That's the problem is most people look at it.
We only look at we only look at food via chemistry.
Exactly. Yeah.
And so they go like, well, who's to say protein does that?
That's not the point.
That's even how I see like eating dysfunction
addressed is it's brought as well.
You see, so you eat this because then you get this feeling of happy.
And it's this chemical that much chemical,
that much sugar does insulin this and insulin that and everything.
That's a Newton's way of looking at the world.
That's a linear way of looking at the world where it doesn't work like that.
The world is quantum mechanical first.
The work is neurologically speaking, you follow the freestan model.
All those other things fall in line just to make sure
that correcting prediction errors happens.
Yeah, that's the option number two.
Also, like making the world fit to make the world.
That's what the chemistry comes in, right?
But it's a what it's not a why it's a how not a why, right?
What matters is the why and the why is the freestan model.
And so that's why many times your diet
fucks you up or different diet creates certain results.
Because fundamentally, though, it's the same principle every time.
It's a freestan environment.
That's what matters.
Now, to go forward, this is not the format for us to give out
any like good follow up reading information for for freestan's work.
But I will I will I will add actually I have there's there's one really good
concise, I won't say good for layman, but it's a good description of who he is,
his background and a good overview of some of the work.
And I'll add that into our our link on our Instagram stuff.
And add the free energy in the brain.
Yes, I go to a seven PDF at that one, please.
That's a good one.
So I can always get a couple of those on a link tree.
And stuff. So if you guys want to take a little bit of a dive into what you can.
But just to finish your list, this is why I believe what we do is so important
because people have no idea how arrogant I am.
Like they think I'm trying to like the they think I know for sure that the diet
is going to help sleep and get for me leaner or stuff like that.
And then so they're all getting pissed at me.
But you have no idea how far I can actually I think I can take.
I'm so much more arrogant than this.
I believe so movement and nutrition.
We can have the control of two and three.
And so I believe we can go at mental illness.
I believe we can go at addiction.
I believe we can do through that.
We can control so much.
Most of this field called a psychoneurobiology.
Yeah, that goes into in a way, the freestand model, even though they're not
talking about it, which means for whatever reason, maybe they don't want to quote him.
But it's obviously seems to be the foundational basis for all of it.
Just Google psychoneurobiology.
It's obviously part of the freestand model.
But anyway, they're going at it through worlds, through psychotherapy,
the flowed away.
That's the test negative.
That's the changing the prediction.
That's the option number one.
They are not going into two or three, which is very strange to me.
And I think we with strong fit, that's what we can do.
Well, that's and that's interesting.
You had mentioned it was really interesting how how you had kind of gone
through some of this stuff, too, a strong fit, even without maybe having
this framework in front of you to define it as,
you know, the first thing was going to be to change the prediction,
which is going to be basically intensity.
Yeah, oh, yeah.
So in a way, I've been doing this forever.
This is why the more I dwell into this, the more I was amazed how right I was.
I was amazed at the power of all this.
Like, for example, if you look at changing, changing the prediction,
that's so as I was saying, it's changing who you are, your personality, right?
That's been the question.
It's you think it's going to do that.
Well, we're going to go past that we're going to change your prediction.
And to do that, I'm going to burn your sense of self.
I'm going to give you a new personality, right?
So burn your soul until, you know, burn who you are, all that stuff.
That that was exactly that.
It was changing the prediction.
But that's exactly what burned the question.
That's that's that's the thing we've talked many times.
You need to become the person who can do this.
And so you become the person who can take that slate and over there.
And that is the choice you create that you get to choose.
That environment you get to you get to choose the environment.
So for me, it was the harness where I chose the environment in which I could
change me. Yeah.
And the second is then just like here, it's movement.
It's mastery of movement, movement, quality, being deliberate, being, you know,
I mean, all of that stuff.
And number three is the nutrition is to stop using that.
That we are developing mental illness with the food thing.
I truly believe that.
And all the stuff I've read about the gut flora shows me the same.
The behavior, the Western world is basically, I think that's where the anxiety,
the depression comes from, is we are creating the wrong behavior.
And food is a major, major one into that.
So in a in a weird way, that's what strong fit has always been about,
is to basically give control of option one, two and three.
Yeah.
Is to give you the capacity to do all the three, to give you the capacity to
not create for energy to capacity to be alive.
Now, for you having had kind of had these as principles,
maybe not worded in this way or framed with these concepts, right?
I knew, but I know.
I just want to know, I want to know what is it like when then,
when you have you're having to read something from, you know,
a pretty brilliant guy and all of a sudden it lines up and you're like,
oh, fuck, yeah, that's basically what I've been doing.
Is that?
Yeah. And is that like what, you know, because I read this stuff and I'm like,
hey, that's my life.
Yeah. So I am not crazy.
No, but it's it's the it's the vindication of everything I've ever worked on.
It's not even a vindication because I never felt I had to be vindicated
because I knew I was right.
I always know when I'm right.
But it was the there is the physical
proof of my life's work, gold, dreams, whatever you want to call it.
There's a guy who quantified it in a scientific way, showing everything
you always worked on is quantifiable in in that sense.
He has mathematical stuff and everything.
He's like, yeah, do all the all the stuff you've been working on has a neurological basis.
You just felt it.
Yeah.
And to read that on paper in front of you, it's like the guy talks to you directly.
Like, you know, it's when you read those books and you feel like the author is talking to you,
reading at Fist and Stuff.
I was like, thank you.
Yeah. And you were never chasing the
the math, either.
No, that was never like, I didn't know there was.
You just wanted to understand it.
I didn't know there was a math.
I saw when I read Schrodinger, I was like, oh, my God, this is man blowing
because I knew this.
But then suddenly the guy is telling me, no, no, quantum mechanically speaking.
That's what happens.
I was like, I knew it.
And then I would freestyle and I was like, oh, my God.
But then also they gave me a roadmap on how to do it now because I felt the stuff
and I knew a lot of it had to do it on myself, not even all of it.
But I was like, those are things I could feel, except I was like, I don't know
how to do it.
And then there's a roadmap into everything that is doing.
That is how we save mankind.
And I think it's there.
And it's important because you still think differently and operate differently
than than most of us, you know what I mean?
Which means you were never you never gave a fuck either way.
If there was a thousand research papers published on this subject,
it didn't matter to you at all.
Not because I knew it sooner or later.
Yeah, but but it is but it is good to see like even for me, like like going
through the few new notes from we had today on first and stuff, my understanding
of other than just the real basics now, but my understanding is much broader
simply because I found different words to attach it to, you know, to attach
to which which it has to be at this point.
Otherwise you're not getting it.
And so you're trying to communicate your feeling all this time on it.
And and now that's I think the important part of having
kind of discovered that this work has been going on is that now now there's
an easier way to teach this to people.
Yeah, because I thought it was almost I thought my only recourse
for the longest time was philosophy.
Yeah. Logical evidence.
That's the only way I could ever explain what I was feeling like, guys,
I know I'm right, but let me take you to philosophy to prove it.
Explain to you why.
Yeah, exactly.
Because because I can if I'm good at something as I can see patterns.
So I saw patterns because I read everything, you know,
from paleontology to philosophy to history to stuff like that.
So I saw the patterns.
I was like, but I did it plateau and and socrates to help me explain it
to people, whereas no, no, this dude is that smart.
He actually figured it out from a new as a neuroscientist.
He figured out how the shit works.
This is his main kinds and I don't hate me, but screw Jesus Christ.
He's a savior.
This was this was the really interesting thing that I had circled
this here on my thing.
He had said basically, if it was to define its work, right,
and it was like he's trying to organize the principles of all life
and intelligence and the quote that is left here is,
if you are alive at all, you have life, what behaviors then must you show?
And that's where all of this where all of this is coming coming into.
Exactly.
So like life behaves in this way.
OK, so the guy has mapped out life.
That's literally what he's done.
And he's telling us there is a way to live because everybody has an opinion.
Oh, life does. No, no, no.
It seems that life has guidelines just like physics
has the wave equation.
Actions has the wave equation to define the behavior of particles.
Christen define the behavior of life.
And he's telling us in order to go to our more life, this is how you behave.
So it's not a matter of opinion anymore in the sense of that I live my life
the way I want. No, you live your death the way you want and in most cases.
And to tie it back to learning, what's really interesting is the fact
that I'm trying to think of how to put this.
This is one I knew I was going to have a couple of these moments on this podcast.
It is Calphe's turn. No one understands him.
So it's all good.
But but when we get into learning, yeah, in general, right?
The first phase is memorization anyways.
And so a lot of these people and me included is the the concept of prediction,
prediction errors, the self of the prophecy model, the
you know, and now on how minimizing prediction errors and correcting them is done.
Now that you know that now you can go about your day and you can kind of see
where things are. You you're in that memorization phase now.
And you can understand that it's not all here that at some point
is going to have to be your movement.
Yeah. And then once you understand it, then you can now live in it.
But that's why as a musician, you know, at some point, you're going to have to feel the music.
Exactly. So it's not enough to know the notes.
At some point, you're going to have to feel the notes.
That's changing how you feel about something.
The sensory input.
It's not enough to go ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
No, it has to feel a certain way.
So now you're going to do ding, ding, ding, ding.
So you have one, two and three, right?
You know that the prediction isn't good enough because it still surprises.
So OK, so then there's a mechanic.
But then after you're going to move mechanically differently to make a better note.
And then you're going to move based on how the note feels.
Yeah. And now you're like, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding, ding.
Then expression in playing music.
And that's the reason you play music.
Exactly. And now you're mastering it because you have all three going.
Every time you need to change your prediction slightly, because it's not what you thought.
Then you make your fingers move a certain way and then you make the note feel a certain way.
And now you have music.
Now you have art, which is the foundation of who humans are.
So that's what art is.
Art is life because art is all three.
Art is a way to minimize surprises.
That's why beautiful music, we know what it is because it is literally an expression of life.
I think eventually we'll do a podcast on that subject at some point,
because that's something I've been very interested in as of late,
as you know, as trying to just learn in a vacuum without risk.
We try to do all our learning when the stakes are higher, like training.
That's a tough game. It's good to learn how to learn.
But that's very important because then we can go into anecdotal versus logical versus empirical evidence.
Because if you look people now, the trainers all try to look to learn through empirical evidence,
which means they want to read something that makes them change the prediction.
But without having to make the world fit, so without having to do anything with it or how they feel about it.
So it's a laziest way to learn.
You can't learn just through empirical evidence.
You don't learn shit.
You're saying it's thinking that you're going to do scramble legs, the Gordon Ramsay way, because you read the...
That's learning how other people do things.
Yeah, but you still haven't learned how he did it.
Just because you read about Gordon Ramsay's life and you read his recipe doesn't mean you can do the scramble legs the way he did it.
That's the problem is that's what they want.
It's like, oh, but just tell me how you did it.
It doesn't matter because that's not how you're going to do it because that's not how this works.
So you think changing the position gives you control of life where you are so mistaken.
It is only one way needs to dysfunction.
Anytime you don't use all three, you are being dysfunctional.
So whenever you think empirical evidence will give you truth,
all you're doing basically is to be morally superior to everybody else.
You're in your ivory tower where you think you can bring the truth to everybody like your Moses on Monsignor.
Basically, because you want an easy way to mitigate surprises,
which actually there's the other two that you need to go to put yourself through.
You'll see that Moses function resides in people relying on one way to change, to mitigate surprises.
Either they change a prediction, which means either they quit on everything or they want everything without actually having to work.
Or they just use movement, but then keep the same behavior going, the fucked up behavior,
but just keep acting on it, trying to fix it without even realizing where they fuck up in the first place.
Right? Or they basically have this function of trying to change the way they feel.
Drugs, food, mental illness, anxiety, all that stuff.
That's what this function is, is when you do one option over the others.
I think we just summed up all of Carl Friston's work in like an hour and 20 minutes.
Well, you wish, but yeah, I hope so.
By all, I mean the two paragraphs of his stuff that I had to reference today.
Yeah, but that's where we talk a lot about it in that online, the nervous system workshop that we're going to release in a week or two.
Yeah, by the time we get out, we should be able, we should release it.
This is the base of everything I do, like, but now I have a neurological understanding of it.
So this is where strong fit is going.
It's going into behavioral modification.
It's going toward how to be alive, I guess.
But the progress I've made on myself, because that's why basically I keep getting linear,
because I apply basically that to nutrition and the effects are ridiculous.
So now I'm playing pool so much better, because I'm applying that when I play pool.
I understand where my dysfunctions were before, so that's where OCD is.
OCD is option two, make the world fit.
So you're like, no, I need my hand here or my hand here, because I think the only way to really get surprises is to do something physical about it.
That's OCD for you.
You mean when I'm not sure whether or not I started the cameras and I have no matter,
while I went up and looked it right in the face and turned them on five minutes later,
and you still come back and you go like, just do me a favor?
Yeah, because you know why?
Because you don't want the surprise of fucking up.
But so you need a little bit of option number three, which would be like, good, relax, it's all good.
You know you have it.
I've only done it once, it was only one camera.
Exactly.
I don't think anyone even complained on YouTube.
So but you need obviously you need to change your prediction in order to not make the same mistake again.
Right.
So you see it's that it's so three constantly in balance.
That's where you make progress.
So that's I've been applying that to pull.
It's ridiculous.
Like this morning I had a really good session based on that alone.
Yeah, it was a while.
So now the fun stuff.
Yeah.
All right.
So that's going to have us wrapped up for this week, I think.
So you guys follow Strong Fit One on Instagram, you can follow me at Tyler F.
and Stone on Instagram, strongfitequipment.com.
That's where we have all the sandbags, apparel, t-shirts, and you wear one, I'm not even wearing one either.
So we got to we'll have to start wearing that because we have more cool t-shirts coming.
So yeah.
So we've got that.
But also now we do have strongfitequipment.eu.
Yep.
So for Europe, some limited apparel there.
We'll get more stuff in there at the time.
But but that's the stuff that's coming directly out of this office here.
So exactly.
So the shipping is better.
Let's split this work for you.
So we have the strongfit community and strongfit community on Facebook.
By the way, I heard a lot of people saying they heard about it through the podcast.
So we have to mention it.
Yeah, good.
That's my that's actually probably my favorite forum.
We have we have some some private stuff here and there.
But but that group is nice because that's people who have seen some stuff and are excited enough to get in.
We're not yelling to to a room full of people who don't give a shit.
So it's a lot of like-minded people.
Yes, really good dialogue in there.
We're going to release the so the auto regulation nutrition group number two is starting on April 1st.
And then we are just so we can tell people we're starting in the auto regulation training group on May 1st.
So in the next podcast, I'll explain what that is.
Yeah, let's see.
We have the training group, nervous system work, the online nervous system workshop that we that we're going to release that, you know, week or two as well.
Yeah, OK, I think we talked.
So by the next podcast, we can we can start by talking about the training perfect.
Because that kind of fits because we need to talk about intent.
Yeah, I like it when it comes to training.
Yeah, so that's next week.
And by next week, we mean like tomorrow for us.
Yeah, tomorrow.
But so I'll have a different t-shirt and I'll fake it like it's next week.
I'll shower, I promise.
All right, bye.
That'll do it.
Good. You need something to drink.
