Welcome back. The hero of our first lecture on the art of public speaking was Demosthenes
of Athens. He was once asked by an admirer after he detained preeminence as the greatest
public speaker in the known world, what is the single most important element of public
speaking? And Demosthenes answered, action. So they said again, well, what is the second
most important element? And Demosthenes said, action. And the third, action. Now, what did
Demosthenes mean by this word we translate action? In the classical set of elements for
good public speaking that was propounded by later speakers like Cicero in Rome, pronunciatio,
pronouncing your speech, was everything to do with delivery. In other words, not the
text of the speech itself and not your own eloquitio or elocution in pronouncing it as
we think of the word pronouncing, but the way you got your voice and your body into
the speech. And it's amazing that Demosthenes, so focused on the words, so focused on the
text, still thought voice and body language were the most important. I mentioned in our
first lecture that Demosthenes believed in cross training. And I talked to you about
a couple of examples. The pebble in the mouth, a very odd sort of exercise working on a sort
of secondary point, the clear eloquitio of the words, he clearly wasn't going to speak
in public with that pebble, but his voice would ever after be more attuned to exact
pronunciation, clear enunciation of the words because of the pebble. The running up the
hill, the shouting over the waves, this was athletics brought into the training for public
speaking. And I do want to say there's something about getting your body under your control
that helps with public speaking. If you think about the number of times you've heard sports
figures, male or female on the television or on radio being interviewed, you have not
heard any inarticulate ones. Whatever they may have to say, they feel very free and easy
about saying it. And somehow the control of the body carries over. It is a form of cross
training. Demosthenes did cross training in a way that may seem very natural once you
hear it. He studied with actors. Athens was famous for having a great drama. It had giants
like Sophocles and Aristophanes and Euripides who'd written plays in the generations before
Demosthenes was alive. These plays were classics now. He went down to the theater and he apprenticed
himself to actors who could talk to him about tone of voice, dramatic pauses, gestures,
stance. They didn't go into facial expression because they wore masks. But everything that
could be conveyed by the way you were standing, the way you were moving gestures with the
hand, that's what he was studying. Also, how do you project your voice to thousands of
people without amplification? So cross training is important to us as we focus today on our
topic, which is the use of the voice, the use of the body to reinforce your meaning.
It's a fascinating fact that more of your impression on the audience is going to be
made by the voice and the body than by the words themselves. You can completely undercut
a great speech by reciting it in a monotone, by ending every sentence as if it were a question,
or by being uncertain and monotonous in your gestures and your delivery with your body.
At some point, television commentators were told they should use their hands. And so a
certain number of stock gestures happen again and again. Nothing should ever happen that
is not motivated by something in the words, but you will infinitely reinforce the impact
of your words with proper use of the voice and with proper use of the body.
We are going to turn to one of the giants of the American Revolution, the man whom Thomas
Jefferson said founded the revolution, Patrick Henry, who was speaking to the Virginia House
of Burgesses in 1775, trying to get his fellow members of the House to vote to join the revolution.
At this time it had begun in Massachusetts, everything depended on Virginia, the biggest
and richest of the colonies joining in. Patrick Henry gave the famous, give me liberty or
give me death speech in order to get Virginia off of its position of being on the fence
and clearly behind the revolutionaries.
By great good luck, we have a record from an eyewitness of what Patrick Henry looked
like as he gave that speech and what he sounded like. Let's hear the words of an eyewitness.
This was in fact a Baptist preacher who happened to be in St. John's Church on that day in
1775. The tendons of his neck stood out white and rigid like whip cords. His voice rose
louder and louder until the walls of the building and all within them seemed to shake and rock
in its tremendous vibrations. Finally, his pale face and glaring eyes became terrible
to look upon. At the words, or give me death, at the end of his speech, Patrick Henry plunged
an imaginary dagger into his heart and collapsed back into his seat. You have to be careful
on the gestures. There were things that must have seemed dramatic and exciting in 1775
that might seem to us over the top. Nonetheless, it's very clear that what got people so excited
was the sound, the theatricality of his delivery. And as you will see when we go through a portion
of his speech, he has built some of the elements into his own words with lots of repetitions
which call for differences in delivery in order to be effective.
So here we go. We are in St. John's Church in Virginia. Patrick Henry, a bold voice,
has risen to speak. He's already notorious for a speech that is remembered by us as the
if this be treason, make the most of it speech. So they're all braced for something powerful.
I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of experience. I know
of no way of judging the future but by the past. And judging by the past, I wish to know
what there has been in the conduct of the British Ministry for the last 10 years to justify
these hopes with which the gentlemen have been pleased to solace themselves and the
house.
If we wish to be free, we must fight. I repeat it, sir, we must fight. An appeal to arms
and to the God of hosts is all that has left us. They tell us, sir, that we are weak, unable
to cope with so formidable an adversary. But when shall we be stronger? Will it be the
next week or the next year? Will it be when we are totally disarmed and when a British
guard shall be stationed in every house? Sir, we are not weak if we make a promise
proper use of the means which the God of nature hath placed in our power. Three millions
of people armed in the holy cause of liberty and in such a country as that which we possess
are invincible by any force which our enemy can send against us. The battle, sir, is not
to the strong alone. It is to the vigilant, the active, the brave. The war is inevitable
and let it come. I repeat it, sir. Let it come.
Gentlemen may cry, peace, peace, but there is no peace. The war is actually begun. The
next gale that sweeps from the north will bring to our ears the clash of resounding
arms. Our brethren are already in the field. Why stand we here idle? What is it the gentleman
wish? What would they have? Is life so dear or peace so sweet as to be purchased at the
price of chains and slavery? Forbid it, almighty God. I know not what course others may take,
but as for me, give me liberty or give me death. When he finished, there was cheering,
yelling, applauding, and an almost unanimous vote that Virginia would join the revolution.
A lot of the power of that speech came not from the words, good though they were not
they are, but from what that anonymous observer told us, the passionate action, that thing
that Demosthenes referred to, that put the words across. And as I tried to point out,
you heard how he wrote into his own speech elements that would lend themselves to varied
expression. In particular, it's those repeated phrases and repeated words. I'd like to stay
on this one more moment with another example from a very different person, although equally
a revolutionary, Oliver Cromwell. He who had Charles I beheaded, after this king of England
seemed to have betrayed the people's trust, he who then became Lord Protector himself,
put in a parliament, and then became so disgusted with that parliament that he came down to
the House of Commons and disbanded it in what is called the dismissal of the Rump Parliament
in 1653. We have it on record that after hearing them debating that they would extend their
own term so that they could continue to debate longer, he rose in a fury from his place,
clapped his hat on his head, and began to stamp up and down, kicking and shouting at them
the following words. You are a factious crew and enemies to all good government. You are
a pack of mercenary wretches and would like Esau sell your country for a mess of potage
and like Judas, betray your God for a few pieces of money. You have no more religion
than my horse. Gold is your God. Which of you have not bartered your conscience for bribes?
You who were deputed here by the people to get grievances redressed are become the greatest grievance.
I command ye therefore upon the peril of your lives to depart immediately out of this place.
Go! Get you out in the name of God! Go!
That was a section of a speech in which the go, get you gone, was repeated again and again
each time we can imagine accompanied by the stamping of Cromwell's boots on the floor of the chamber.
And what made it so terrifying to all presence was of course not the words, not the biblical invocations
which you heard were then later shared by Patrick Henry as they will be shared by Lincoln
and many others. All that artistry would have been nothing without the forcefulness of that delivery.
Now, as we look at this expression of voice and body that needs to accompany the words,
we remember Damasani's action. Action for him, remember, has two parts, the voice, the body.
Let's talk about the voice first. It may never have occurred to you how many elements make up your vocal production
in terms of coloring the meaning and the emotion of every speech you make.
There's volume, pitch, tone, pauses, that is silence. There's also the pace of what you speak,
the accents you put on individual words, and finally the inflection at the end of a phrase.
All of this is part of speech and to some extent you need to be making conscious decisions
about how you are going to inflect your words in order to give them the utmost of meaning, meaning and force.
Now let's start with volume. That's the easiest one. Just as in music there is forte, loud, like this
and there is piano soft, like this. If you were to give an entire speech either softly or loudly, it would be intolerable.
You have to use variety. You have to save the forte and the piano, the loud and the soft, for specific moments
or make your speech what a musician would call a crescendo, as Patrick Henry has said to have done
with the give me liberty or give me death speech. Then there's pitch. I'd like to spend a bit of time on pitch
because it's what keeps our words literally from becoming monotonous. Monotonous, mono, one, tonos, tone
means you stayed on one tone for the entire speech and believe me it was monotonous.
What you want to do is vary the pitch from low pitch to high pitch with most of the speech given in a comfortable middle range
but with high pitch and low pitch used for dramatic value. I think we can get some instruction from Winston Churchill,
one of the most famous orators of the 20th century on this matter by looking and listening to a couple of clips
where he is talking about issues to do with World War II and in the first clip, I believe, is not setting us a good example.
He's giving a list of things at the beginning and he's hitting the same high pitch again and again.
It becomes somewhat monotonous. It would be much more forceful if he would vary the pitch. Let's listen.
What kind of a people do they think we are? Is it possible they do not realize that we shall never cease to persevere against them
until they have been taught a lesson which they and the world will never forget?
He got wild applause for that but think how much more effective it would have been if he had not five times hit the same high note
at the beginning, it almost begins to get into the way of your understanding the words if they are all put on the same pitch.
Let's return to that great speaker, Winston Churchill now, for an example in how to use everything from high to low
and how to put different words onto different pitches when he gets to his climax. Here it is.
Not given to us to peer into the mystery of the future.
I allow my hope and faith sure and in violet, but in the days to come the British and American people will for their own safety
and for the good of all work together in majesty, in justice and in peace.
You could hear in that second clip he was using the lower tones more frequently, I think that's always better.
High pitch suggests tension in the vocal cords and fear on the part of the speaker, but he was also varying with some high stuff in the middle
and did you hear that fairly monotonous stuff to begin with, those lines where he kept the same pitch?
That's to prepare you for an explosion of feeling and force and excitement as he begins to vary the pitch on every word.
The way to go after this I believe is cross training through singing. I love to sing, you may hate to sing, but singing can help you.
I would recommend signing up for an amateur chorus or just singing in the shower, but thinking about the different pitches that you assign to the different words.
Singing will also help you think about breath control, supporting your voice, projecting your voice to a large crowd or in a big space
and it will also make you think about enunciation, about the vowels and the consonants that make up your words.
Cross training with singing I believe is a great tool.
I'd like to share with you one of my favorite passages from English poetry which a good composer has I think treated in a way that helps us see how you can learn to project words in speech even through singing.
The poem is by Adelaide Proctor and it's called The Lost Chord.
It was set to music by Sir Arthur Sullivan, most famous for his work with Gilberton Sullivan as the musical part of a partnership that produced the Savoy operas.
Here is Adelaide's poem.
Seated one day at the organ, I was weary and ill at ease and my fingers wandered idly over the noisy keys.
I know not what I was playing or what I was dreaming then, but I struck one chord of music like the sound of a great amen.
Sullivan in his musical setting starts as Churchill started when he was presenting that second speech in monotones to add force to the moment where every word, every syllable gets its own different pitch.
Here we go.
Seated one day at the organ, I was weary and ill at ease
and my fingers wandered idly over the noisy keys.
I know not what I was playing or what I was dreaming then, but I struck one chord of music like the sound of a great amen.
Like the sound of a great amen.
Now Proctor doesn't repeat the last phrase, but Sullivan wanted to and he made sure that he varied the pitches so there would be a sense of climax and newness to the expression.
That may have seemed like it didn't get to the greatest climax it could have.
That's because we have a long way to go with this song.
Sullivan is reserving as you should when you give a speech.
Your climax for the most important point.
The most important point is her last words.
It may be that Death's Bright Angel will speak in that chord again.
It may be that only in heaven I shall hear that grand amen.
I don't have a high C. Listen to Caruso singing this and you will hear the proper ending to Adelaide Proctor's The Lost Chord.
All of these lessons are actually more easily learned by singing than by continuing to speak and just trying to work on your pitch.
Nonetheless, write some notes as you go into the text of your speech to remind yourself high, low, soft, loud, but especially when you want to pause.
I often find that when I'm looking out at a big crowd and I've somehow gotten in a flow of words that hasn't let up for a while and the sound of my voice has been ceaseless.
The Bible simply pause the focus snaps together again.
Sullivan knew that every single pauses before they hit his words amen at the end of each of those phrases.
Now, in addition to voice, of course, we have the body.
The most important part of your body as you speak is your eye.
You may remember that Patrick Henry was famous for this.
That observer that saw him give the liberty or death speech said he fixed the audience with a glare.
He was staring at them.
He was not looking at a script.
He was trying to hold them fast, hold their attention.
If you were looking straight into a person's eyes, it's very hard for them to look away.
And the intensity of your meaning and your emotion will come through to them very clearly.
I often try to find a few sympathetic people in the audience who seem to be smiling or nodding and look at them bouncing back and forth to the ones who seem to be in tune with the message.
That helps me keep eye contact.
But I also try to feel that at the end of every talk, even if there were a thousand in the hall, I hope everyone felt I was looking at them at some point.
So work on that.
It means that you're going to need to get free of the script.
It means you're going to need to look up at times.
It means ultimately, ideally, you'll either have the speech memorized, which I don't really recommend as a word for word thing,
or feel free to, more or less, extemporize your speech.
Winston Churchill once said he had to write everything down.
He had to memorize it with all of its inflections.
Other people are able to, as he said, fly on unpinioned wing.
Extemporize as they go.
He admired that, but the result is the same in either case.
You need to be able to look your audience straight in the eye.
Beyond that, beyond the eye, it's really the body, the limbs that we're talking about.
First rule, stand up straight.
Make the most of your height, whatever it is.
You need to be standing tall, standing proud.
Standing straight suggests assurance, conviction, pride.
All of that needs to come across when you are speaking.
Then there are the gestures.
You shouldn't move unless it is inspired by or reinforcing a phrase or a word.
If you have nothing exciting to illustrate, it's fine to just stand at attention and speak.
But as soon as you begin to feel that there are specific words you want to emphasize, start using your hands.
Use them as you would in ordinary speech.
Don't work up a separate set of oratorical poses.
Simply make it seem natural.
Work with the rhythm of the words.
Reinforce the rhythm of the words.
Your gestures, the movements of your body, they should all convince the audience you're alive.
Nobody wound you up and pressed the on button.
You're a human being like them, and those gestures will help reinforce that impression.
I think we can get some amusement now out of Abraham Lincoln's old book on the sort of lessons on elocution.
When we see that book go against its own lesson about matching the unique gestures and unique intonation to the specific words.
If we look on their suggestions, there were four illustrations, how you should stand when you're talking.
Let's look at this bit of instruction and see what we can make of it.
First, I want to reiterate.
A correct speaker does not make a movement of limb or feature for which he has not a reason.
But then they go on.
They are talking now about the attitude, that is the position that you should put yourself in when you are beginning to speak.
And this is what they say about the boy, the student who is in this class on elocution.
He should rest the whole weight of his body on the right leg.
The other just touching the ground.
The knees should be straight and braced.
The body inclining to the right.
The right arm must then be held out.
With the palm open, the fingers straight and close, the thumb almost as distant from them as it will go,
and the flat of the hand, neither horizontal nor vertical, but exactly between both.
When the pupil has pronounced one's sentence, the hand, as if lifeless, must drop down to the side.
The body, without altering the place of the feet, poise itself on the left leg,
while the left hand raises itself into exactly the same position as the right was before.
This seems to be a perfect example of what not to do with your body when talking.
According to Scott's lessons, you are then supposed to alternate every sentence back and forth, left to right.
I think one thing they were trying to get at here was to encourage the student not to be standing there at attention
lifelessly, staring straight ahead, but to engage both sides of the hall.
Nonetheless, this is not the way to do it.
Perhaps more congenial to us are the pages and pages which tell the would-be orator
how he should compose his face and his expression,
and also use gestures and positions of the limbs and the body to convey a certain kind of meaning.
My favorite one is cheerfulness.
Cheerfulness at a smile.
I would say that should be your default setting.
Even at a eulogy for a beloved dead member of the family, a smile is not out of place.
And if you continually practice on letting a smile be your guide, be your standard expression,
you will immediately draw your audience to you in a sense of sympathy and mutual good feeling.
Let's go on for a few more.
Joy. Clap the hands.
Grief. I really wonder if this one was ever used.
Beat the head, grovel on the ground, screaming, weeping, lifting the eyes.
Remorse. This is after they've caught you in that financial or sexual scandal.
Cast down the countenance.
Steady and cool.
Open the countenance.
The voice.
Firm and even.
Exhorting as a general to his army.
This one surprised me.
A kind, complacent look.
And finally, intoxication.
Eyes have shut.
An idiot smile.
An affected bravado.
A heavy head.
Well, we don't need to go quite that far, but all of these things can help us be more impressive public speakers.
Don't forget, please, that you are needing to use your entire body, your entire vocal equipment in order to reinforce the words of your speech.
So, let's sum up.
We have a number of lessons that Patrick Henry and our other speakers are teaching us.
First, use your voice and body language to reinforce your message.
Second, always match your voice and movements to specific words and emotions.
Third, at first, when you start out as a speaker, mark the tone and gestures into your text as reminders.
They are as important as the words themselves.
Fourth, establish and maintain eye contact with your audience.
Fifth, and this one's just for me, in cases where you are not inciting a revolution, smile.
