Welcome back. In this lecture, we're going to wrap up our first section of the course
on public speaking, that section that we have devoted to preparing yourself to become a public
speaker. And we've covered things like Demosthenes with his cross training of athletic work and
studying with actors, his determination to get over those speech impediments. We've also talked
about our need to develop voice and body language control so that we can really make the best of
our delivery as we deliver our speech. And then just last time, we were talking about how you
need to get personal in your speeches. As it said on the temple at Delphi in Greece that I study as
an archaeologist, Gnothi si auton, know thyself, and I would go on to say and put yourself into your
speech. We're concluding our quartet of opening lectures with one about humor, one about jokes.
Now, this is a very personal choice that you have to make. And in many societies, it wouldn't arise,
because many societies do not equate giving a public speech with telling jokes. But I have at home
a little leather bound volume printed in the mid 18th century, which is a tiny crib book that a
gentleman could carry in his pocket to a dinner where he might have to make an after dinner speech.
After dinner speech, it was to give him ready to hand a whole selection of anecdotes, jokes,
humorous pieces on all sorts of different subjects so that he could shine as a speaker.
Our obsession with the idea that if you're going to stand up, you're probably going to need to be
funny is a very old one in the English speaking world. But we know that other societies don't feel
the same way. A friend of mine, who is a great enthusiast for Japanese art, told me a funny
story about going to a conference of Japanese American culture where the speaker stood up
and said to all of this assembled group, some Japanese, some American, in America,
it is customary to open a speech with a joke. In Japan, it is customary to start every speech
with an apology. I shall pay a tribute to both traditions. I shall start my speech
with an apology for not knowing any jokes. Well, it got a big laugh. It got things off,
but it pointed out that this interest that we have in the English speaking world for jokes
and humor in public speaking is not universal. The actress, Meryl Streep, pointed out one of
the reasons why you need to be careful in deciding where you want to go in this realm of humor.
Once when she was accepting an award or a tribute, she reflected back on a recent film
that she had made where she played for almost the first time a comic part and laughing herself
ruefully. She said, dying is easy. Comedy is hard. She's right. You can't tell
what effect your jokes will have on a given group. Often you will offend people more than you
please them with a joke or with a satirical story. It's like a minefield when you get out there on
that humorous terrain. And yet many audiences expect it. And I will say this now and we're
going to come back to this at the end of the lecture. There's nothing that unifies an audience
more than laughter. So if you feel it in you to use jokes and to use humor, I would say this is
that last element you're going to want to think of as you put together your arsenal of, well,
we won't call it weaponry, but of tools as you start to approach your work as a comic
speaker, if that's what you're going to be. But any kind of speaker, you may want to use
this element, but you need to think about it in advance and you need to use it.
I myself am one of those people that falls into the category of that man we just talked about who
made the joke saying I'm going to apologize for not knowing any jokes. I'm not quite that bad. I
know one. I'm going to tell it to you now. We'll revisit it at the end. You can decide during the
time between now and when we get to it what possible application there could be for me
an archeologist in using this joke in every course I teach. I don't know what is wrong with my DNA.
I don't know what's wrong with my mental processes. Jokes slip off my mind and I've heard thousands
as food slips off Teflon. I just can't retain them, but I remember this one. It's a dark night.
A policeman turns a street corner and sees in front of him on the pavement in the pool of
light under a lamppost a man on his hands and knees desperately feeling around on the pavement
as if he's lost something that's a matter of life or death.
The policeman says to the man sir what's happened what's wrong and the man says I lost my wallet.
Let me help you says the policeman and he gets down on his hands and knees and in a short time
they've covered every square inch of that pavement and the gutter and the base of the lamppost
right out to the rim of the light and the policeman stands up a little confused and says
sir where did you lose this wallet and the man points to a dark alley well down the block and
says I lost it over there then why are you looking here and the man answers well the light's better
here. Now believe it or not that has a serious archaeological message. I'm not sure it would
fit into everyone's career as a joke that makes a point but it does in mine. It's the only one I
can remember. It always does get a laugh I tell it at the beginning of of my classes and I get that
laughter that ripple of of unanimous mirth that makes me feel the class is kind of pulled together
around that joke. We'll come back later on and look at its meaning. What I want to do now is introduce
you to our guest lecturer for today American humorist Will Rogers. Will Rogers was a man who
started as a stand-up comedian at a very good career in films was highly respected in America
so much that as we will see he was invited by Columbia University to be a speaker an after
dinner speaker at a very important event. The year was 1924. Columbia with its president Butler in
charge had invited lots of their biggest donors all of them alumni to come to the college they were
actually honoring an old alumnus Alexander Hamilton who of course as a treasurer of the United States
was the right man to be honoring if you're going to talk about money and when Will Rogers published
this speech and he almost never published his after dinner addresses they were off the cuff and not
meant for posterity he called it education and wealth. Here we go. President Butler paid me a
compliment in mentioning my name in his introductory remarks this evening. I am glad that he did that
because I got the worst of it last week. The Prince of Wales in speaking of the sights of America
mentioned the Woolworth building the subway the slaughterhouse Will Rogers and the Ford factory
he could at least have put me ahead of the hogs.
Everything must be in a contrast at an affair like this you know to show anything off
you must have the contrast. Now I am here tonight representing poverty. We have enough wealth right
here at this table right here at the speaker's table alone. Their conscience should hurt them
which I doubt if it does so that we could liquidate our national debt. Every rich man reaches a time
in his career when he comes to a turning point and starts to give it away. I have heard that of
several of our guests here tonight and that is one of the reasons I am here. I would like to be here
for the psychological moment. I'm not here to keep cool with coolage but to praise President Butler.
Columbia was nothing 20 years ago. Now President Butler has gone round and gotten over 100 buildings
and has annexed Grant's Tomb. Butler was the first man to go around to the graduates and explain to
them that by giving money to Columbia it would help on the income tax and also perpetuate their
names. Columbia is the foremost university. There are over 3200 courses. You spend your first two years
in deciding what course to take, the next two years in finding the building that these courses
are given in and the rest of your life in wishing you had taken another course.
That's about two-thirds of Will Rogers' speech but it's enough to show us all the different kinds
of humor that he brings in without ever, as we might think he would put it, stooping to tell a
simple joke. One of those jokes that are impersonal, something not about himself, not about the occasion,
but a joke with a punchline that people listen to and then burst out laughing at the incongruity
or whatever it may be that is the source of the humor. I'd like to go back through this
speech a little bit and look at the different forms of humor and the different lessons we
can get from it. He starts deadpan with a long section about being thankful to President Butler
for mentioning his name at the opening ceremony and his gratitude because he was badly treated
as he thought by the Prince of Wales. We expect a joke coming but we're still not getting it
and then we start to sense it when we understand the charge that he's making against the Prince of
Wales, that this foreign visitor enlisting the Sites of America mentioned the Woolworth Building,
the Subway, the Slaughterhouse, Will Rogers and the Ford Factory. Pretty honorable mention to be in
that company but I'm sure there was a big pause there while he let the audience try to work out
what was coming and then he used the brand of humor which involves crudeness, low language,
in a setting where you expect everything to be prim and proper with his sentence.
He could at least put me ahead of the hogs, especially mentioning hogs at a dinner is something
that seems a little incongruous and that low language, that crudeness, very mild certainly
in our eyes but stronger back in 1924, must have gotten his first big laugh of the evening.
He then goes on for another setup. It's not a string of punchlines, everything has to be set up.
You can almost hear in this speech the pauses and the shifts of gear where he's moving into
his next setup for that next punchline. Everything must be in contrast in an affair like this.
You know to show anything off you must have contrast. That's a simple truth. It almost
rates as another thing that used to be part of every speech, platitudes, something that everybody
would agree on, a sort of self-evident proposition that every speaker felt safe in making.
But he's about to explode the platitudinous mood with, I am here tonight, representing poverty.
Well, that's a funny thing to do. We talked about Queen Elizabeth exposing her weaknesses to view.
Now, Will Rogers is going to show you what he feels is his weakness, his Achilles heel.
He's a poor man. Now, that's not the contrast yet. What is in contrast to him? The fact that we
have enough wealth right here at this table, right here at the speaker's table alone, note
the repetition for emphasis. He's bringing them on board, he's building up that crescendo, and then
a little parenthetical phrase, their conscience should hurt them, which I doubt if it does,
so that we could liquidate our national debt. I bet that got a big laugh, because it probably
wasn't far off in the truth. Columbia's graduates and alumni at that time numbered some of the
most important and some of the richest men in America. They might have been able to make
a dent in the national debt, and I want to point out something here about the nature of this humor.
Will Rogers is playing the part of a court jester, something we're all familiar with
from the Middle Ages, that privileged person who was allowed to entertain the company
with jokes made at members of the company that would be completely unacceptable in a
normal social setting, but that jester can get away with it, because it's under the cloak of humor,
and the laughter is felt to be in that same realm of laughter that we consider the special
province of roasts, those ceremonial dinners where someone is toasted with jokes and barbs and
witticisms at their expense. He's doing that same thing at these men who are in fact the guests
of honor at the dinner, because they are the men, as you remember, who've given all that money so
Columbia can grow as it's grown with all these new buildings. Now he wants to set up again our next
joke, so we go on with every rich man reaches a time in his career when he comes to a turning
point and starts to give it away. I think probably people laugh at almost anything Will Rogers said,
but that's not humorous in itself, it's part of the setup, it's a platitude in a way,
but he is going to be able to laugh at these people now freely partly because I want you to
remember back the first laugh was at himself. Remember that? He's laughing now at these rich men,
they could liquidate the national debt. I think their conscience should bother them, I don't think
it does. He's laughing at them, but he laughed at himself first. Remember our jester, he comes out
as a clown, he's wearing caps and bells, he's frolicking around, he's often someone who just
physically has some characteristics that people want to laugh at. Will Rogers makes himself
acceptable as a person who can poke fun at others because he made the first joke at his own expense.
I was put lower than the hogs and the slaughterhouse in the Prince of Wales assessment of Sights of
America. Now he's free to make jokes at others, but you should never laugh at anybody before you
laugh at yourself, just to kind of tie in our being personal with this idea of the uses of humor
in public speaking. We're now to every rich man reaching a time in his career, he comes to a
turning point, he starts giving the money away and he's heard that about some of the guests tonight
and that's one of the reasons he's here and now his little punchline, I want to be here for the
psychological moment. Well that tips off the audience there that anybody who hasn't yet given,
he's assuming now that the real reason behind this fancy dinner is so that people will open
their wallets as they leave or their checkbooks and leave President Butler with a very healthy
contribution to the Columbia Fund for new buildings. Now he goes on to the reasons
and I bet this got to laugh even though it's not really funny, it's really true, but it sounds
like a joke. These other things have been hyperbole when he said that Columbia was nothing 20 years
ago. Hyperbole, overstatement, comic overstatement that President Butler has created 100 buildings
and annexed Grant's Tomb, more hyperbole, this is a very common form of humor just overstating the
case. He's gone to so much hyperbole that when you hear President Butler had the genius to go
around to the alumni, the graduates and tell them that if they gave money to Columbia it would help
on their income tax and perpetuate their names. I'm sure that got a huge laugh, it's the truth
and yet it's told as if it's a joke, it's in the context of the other hyperbole,
he's not making many real jokes here, he is building up his information and his delivery
of facts and the body of the speech which is in fact a pretty serious speech in terms of its
overall message about America, about education, about wealth, he's building it up into a series
of punch lines that grow out of the material itself and his comic genius in structuring it
for those moments of laughter. And then this lovely thing at the end where we get into the
coursework, there are 3200 courses, I don't know that may be true, it sounds like a hyperbole,
you spend your first two years in deciding what course to take, the next two years in finding
the building that these courses are given in and the rest of your life in wishing that you had taken
another course. That's lovely and one thing it does is something we saw in Elizabeth and then we
had many other speakers and when we got to St. Paul in our next section of the course, we'll
hear it again, the importance of thinking in threes, you do it when you are making serious
points, here's Will Rogers doing it to build the crescendo for the comedy, the first two years
picking your courses, the second two years looking for the building and then finally
rest of your life wishing you'd taken another course, a big laugh at the end of the whole thing.
So we've got here some techniques of comedy, the build up, the surprise, the incongruity,
the hyperbole, all of which are things that Will Rogers is a master of, but please notice
every single laugh that he evokes is making a point, every laugh is helping to focus
attention on the real substance of his speech. This difference between poor people and rich
people and what rich people mean to American education is a very serious subject and it's
a subject so delicate it probably couldn't be addressed at all except through humor. So Will
Rogers was the right man for President Butler to invite. If he wanted a memorable speech most
after dinner speeches are eminently forgettable. I'm sure the people who were there in Columbia
University's dining hall in 1924 all remembered this for the rest of their lives even if the
jokes were at their expense. I like humor that grows out of the subject you're talking about.
I often am talking about history. I found that there was one historical anecdote about the
Oracle at Delphi in Greece that when I told it always got a laugh as if it were that big
payoff that people have been waiting for as they sat solemnly and patiently through my description
of the archaeological work at Delphi and studying the the geological setting of the Oracle. Here's
the story and it helps that it's about someone that they know from history. It's about young
Alexander the Great. Alexander the Great came to Delphi looking for an Oracle. He was a very
young man. He had not yet set out on his campaigns to conquer the world. He wanted a sign from the
god Apollo the god behind the Oracle speaking through the mouth of the woman who channeled the
god's voice. She was the Oracle. He wanted a sign that he was on the right track that the gods were
with him and he got that sign when he went to Delphi. He came on a day when the Oracle was
nominally closed. The Oracle was only open for one of the full transcessions where the woman
would channel the voice of the god and the crypt of the temple one day a month and only nine months
of the year. Well, he didn't come on one of those days, but he's Alexander the Great. And even though
he was only in his teens, he wasn't about to be balked of his purpose by tradition or custom at
this temple. So he went around the village of Delphi. He found the woman. He got her to the
temple and was pushing her down the ramp toward the crypt when she turned to him and said,
boy, there's no resisting you. And Alexander took his hands off her and stepped back and said,
that's the only Oracle I wanted to hear. And he left very satisfied with the Oracle. He got at
Delphi. Now it takes the audience a minute to understand as they go back to what the Pythia,
the woman who gave the Oracle said to Alexander that he was interpreting her words as if they
were the Oracle from the god and not in the temporary meaning of quit roughly handling me. I
I can't fight you. I can't oppose you, but I don't want to be doing this. No, he took. There's no
resisting you as the god's word. You will conquer wherever you go. And that was almost the truth
for his career. So it's there's then a laugh that comes both with the the wit of Alexander in
making this play on words and shifting from the the sort of petulant teenager to the man who is
treating this as the word of a god. Many different elements combine to make that a humorous moment,
something that I always put in. And when I feel that laughter go through the room,
I feel people are focused again. And it's not because I told a joke that distracted from the
matter at hand, but because I turned something that was central to the whole issue into a source
of laughter. You may wonder, does every subject lend itself to jokes or at least to laughter and
humor? We need to face the fact in our society that our idea is about solemnity and absence of
laughter from great religious occasions or formal occasions is something not shared by the rest
of the world. The Greeks were often ready to have laughter at their most sacred moments.
They had a god named Dionysus who patronized the comic theater. Sue Indians out on the American
plains at their most solemn ceremony, the Sundance, which involved bringing dozens of tribes together
in a gigantic temporary community with a great lodge in the middle for the ordeal of the Sundance,
they would be awakened every morning of their ceremony, which went on for days, by a sort of
crier, a bit of a chester, who would spend his time going through the camp and finding out funny
stories and humorous anecdotes about the people who were there. And he would ride around the
perimeter on a horse at dawn, both being the alarm clock to wake everybody up and at the top of his
voice proclaiming these humorous anecdotes about the people who were there. When they were asked
about this, the Sue said, laughter opens the spirit to higher things. We don't have that
view in our religion in general. Laughter is felt to be inappropriate in a solemn occasion,
a religious occasion, a mystical occasion. Others have not felt that way. So I think we need to
look to other traditions and see how gently they sometimes insert humor into some very serious
moments indeed. I'd like to turn to a speech by a very important fighter in a metaphorical sense
for rights. She is Burmese. Her name is Dao Aung San Suu Kyi, and she, having won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1991 in 1995, delivered the keynote address to the NGO Forum on Women in Beijing.
She wasn't there. She was afraid to leave her native Burma. So she sent her speech on a videotape,
and the people, the hundreds of people in attendance, crowded in to listen to what she had to say. Her
message was extremely serious. The world is in crisis. Half the world, the women are still,
in traditional societies, kept from contributing, and they're the mercy of conflicts and wars
that are created predominantly by men. Into this extremely serious discourse, she put a couple
of very mild jokes. Let me give you the first one. She quotes a Burmese proverb,
The dawn rises only when the rooster crows. You have to take a moment, as I'm sure Will Rogers'
audience took a moment sometimes, but then you realize there's a double level here of humor,
silly rooster. So blind that he thinks it is his crowing that brings up the sun. But then you get,
oh, this is about women, women's rights. Right. The rooster is a male. We're seeing a masculine,
a male take on the world, attributing everything, every great important thing to men. And I'm sure
there was sort of a two-tiered laugh at that, and also the laugh that comes from surprise,
not expecting her to make a joke. But she goes on quite seriously to point the moral of this.
The dawn rises only when the rooster crows, says the proverb. But Burmese people today
are well aware of the scientific reasons behind the rising of the dawn and the falling of dusk.
And the intelligent rooster, another joke, surely realizes that it is because dawn comes
that it crows and not the other way around. It is not the prerogative of men alone
to bring light to the world. And by that grand spiritual term, light to the world, evoking both
the Buddhist faith, the Christian faith, Islam, all of these great religions, she makes that
transition from her humor that got us open and laughing and feeling surprised that we could be
amused in this way by her speech to the grandest levels of thought and of inspiration.
She's going to give another one in her speech. She's prepared us by giving us a little joke
at the beginning here toward the end. There is an age-old prejudice the world over to the effect
that women talk too much. If that did not get a joke laugh in Beijing, I would be very much
surprised. But is this really a weakness? She's serious again. Women have a most valuable contribution
to make in situations of conflict by leading the way to solutions based on dialogue. So she
took the joking little phrase, women talk too much, kind of turned it on its head, women engage in
dialogue where men engage in violence and in action, and drew a message from it. These, to me,
are models of what we should pattern our own discourse on when we are giving a public speech
and we try to work humor into what we are saying. Remember our Mark Twain, his talk about
all the fear that he had as a public speaker for the first time, the knees knocking, his
exaggerations of this and that. Remember how he is making a serious message too. Nothing is more
frightening than stage fright. Nothing is more desperate for people who must get up and speak
in public and he is trying to help those who are going to speak in public get around that fear.
All right, back to my joke. Our policeman, our man on the sidewalk, this strange claim,
well I'm looking here because the light's better. Notice I didn't tell the joke again.
One danger of telling jokes is when you repeat them exactly, people don't want to hear them a
second time. Here's the moral. We in archaeology look where the light is good. Places like Olduvai
Gorge in Africa where we've got two millions of years of fossil data exposed by the chance that
a river ran through. Is it statistically likely that where the light is good is where the important
things happened in human history? No, it is not. We are always going to be needing to be prepared
for new revelations in places where the light is currently bad and the darkness is probably
concealing the most important clues to early human history. Well, let's wrap all this up
by turning to some of the lessons that we've learned from Will Rogers and our other speakers today.
First, laugh at yourself before you laugh at others. Second, comedy helps relax your audience,
especially at formal occasions. Remember that Columbia dinner. Third, use humor to focus on
your theme, not to distract from it. Fourth, jokes can illuminate serious points, providing new
thoughts and perspectives. Fifth, as with every other element of your speech, your humor should
reflect your own personality. You may be a person who doesn't like to make jokes, doesn't like to
laugh. Avoid them or find the kind of deadpan humor that you need, but make the jokes grow out of
yourself as well as from your message. And finally, sixth, nothing unifies an audience quicker than
laughter. I find I have a mystical moment when I'm giving lectures when suddenly, and sometimes to my
surprise, I'm not aware of having been funny, the whole hall will laugh together and I feel a little
circle of unity like light come out from behind me and go around to the back of the hall and click
and I feel we're together. Humor may not come naturally to you, jokes may initially seem
artificial and applied from without, but try them. Try that additional step toward reaching your
audience, because once you hear that laughter, you will know that for the rest of the time, they are with you.
