Welcome back. Over the first three lectures of this part of our course, this middle part,
on crafting your speech, we've been considering big questions of structure and overall form.
We've looked at storytelling, narratives as something that can give form to your words.
We've looked at the tripartite structure, which really should lie behind almost every
speech, the introduction, body, and conclusion. And then we've looked at the idea of building
a logical case following a single line of reasoning, or Aristotle's word, logos, from
beginning to end of your talk. What I want to talk about today is something
that we agreed wasn't very appropriate to those logical arguments that were the focus
of our last lecture, and that is painting pictures in words. And I think the best person
to introduce us to that concept is a great Indian leader of the Shawnee tribe, born in
my part of the United States. His name was Takamsa. He was a war leader of the Shawnee
during their wars against the United States in the early 19th century. And he, more than
any other speaker I know, and he was very much part of a longstanding oral tradition,
shows us how powerful images, pictorial language, concrete examples, and even imagined dialogues
can be. Let's start in the year 1810. Takamsa is addressing William Henry Harrison, the
United States governor for the Old Northwest Territory, and he is making points about Indian
rights to their land, about Indian unity, and about the iniquity of some Indians being
bribed or intoxicated by the Americans so that they will sign away rights to all Indian
land. Houses are built for you to hold councils in. The Indians hold theirs in the open air.
I am a Shawnee. My forefathers were warriors. Their son is a warrior. From them I take my
only existence. I have made myself what I am. And I would that I could make the red people
as great as the conceptions of my own mind when I think of the great spirit that rules
over us all. I would not then come to Governor Harrison to ask him to tear up the treaty,
but I would say to him, brother, you have the liberty to return to your own country.
You wish to prevent the Indians from doing as we wish them, to unite, and let them consider
their lands as a common property of the whole. You want by your distinctions of the Indian
tribes to make them war with each other. You never see an Indian endeavor to make white
people do this. No tribe has the right to sell land, even to each other, much less to
strangers. Sell a country. Why not sell the air, the great sea, as well as the earth?
Did not the great spirit make them all for the use of his children?
How can we have confidence in you white people? When Jesus Christ came on earth, you killed
him and nailed him on a cross. You thought he was dead, but you were mistaken. You have
shakers among you, and you laugh and make light of their worship. Everything I have told
you is the truth. The great spirit has inspired me.
This is a very antagonistic speech, and yet he has raised issues about human relationship
with the divine that put the whole thing on a very different footing than it would be on
if he were just appealing to the law of the land and Indian rights as guaranteed by the
American government. He's wanting to raise the ante. He does that with these religious
images, invoking Jesus on the cross, shakers, those early American religious sect members
who separated themselves from the main population and were known as the Quakers were for their
religious trances. Now we're in 1811, the following year. He's trying to rally the Indian
tribes, and he is talking to them, the Osages, and later the Choctaws and the Chickasaws about
the importance of Indian unity. We heard some of his vividness, some of his concreteness
in that first speech. Now we're really going to get it when he's talking to his own people.
Brothers, we all belong to one family. We are all children of the great spirit. We walk
in the same path, slake our thirst at the same spring, and now affairs of the greatest
concern lead us to smoke the pipe around the same council fire. The great spirit is angry
with our enemies. He speaks in thunder, and the earth swallows up villages and drinks
up the Mississippi. And I should say at this point, he is referring to the great earthquake
called the New Madrid earthquake of the years 1811, 1812, which he actually, if one believes
the speech is predicted. Where today are the Pequot? Where are the Narragansett, the Mohican,
the Pocahont, and other powerful tribes of our people? They have vanished before the
avarice and depression of the white man as snow before the summer sun. Sleep no longer
oh Choctaws and Chickasaws in delusive hopes. Will not the bones of our dead be plowed up
and their graves turned into plowed fields? Now with this kind of very pictorial language,
Tecumseh is holding the interest of his listeners in two very specific ways. One is when he
gives you a very concrete example that is a real world example of something that he
sees is going to happen. He doesn't just tell you we shall be defeated by our enemies
and lose our land. And will we not then have this problem of our tribal lands and all of
our revered tombs of our ancestors being desecrated? He wants you to feel it. Will not the bones
of our dead be plowed up? Their graves turned into plowed fields? This is powerful. A simple
prediction that there would be trouble ahead or there would be desecration of land doesn't
carry this kind of power. And this is what ultimately rallied the tribes behind him
to join in a unified effort to hold on to Indian land east of the Mississippi River.
But what I really am impressed with in Tecumseh is his genius for picking metaphors. Now a
metaphor is a figural piece of language, a figure of speech, where you use one image
to represent another. Where he talks about how these peoples walk the same path, slake
their thirst at the same spring, now sit around the same council fire. Well they are actually
physically sitting around that same council fire at the moment, but he calls on a lifetime
of experience, the walking the same path, the slaking the thirst at the same spring.
Those are metaphors for being all one people, but they are putting it in terms you can picture,
images that you can easily remember, hold in your heart that seem to call on a commonality
of experience and really enhance, really reinforce his meaning. That's a metaphor, but there's
also the simile where he's saying one thing is like another. And in that beautiful roll
call of the dead tribes, where are they? Where are the Pocanat? Where are the Mohican? He
ends with an extraordinary simile worthy to come out of the Iliad or the Odyssey by Homer,
which is a pair of books full of similes. It's the moment where he says they have vanished
as snow before the summer sun. To make it a metaphor, he would have said they were the
snow before the summer sun. The simile is as snow or like the snow. In either case, we
are getting the richness, the power of that image to give new life and a much longer life
to the thought that's embedded into comps's words. To complete his story, having become
the war leader of the Shawnee, he was in some senses betrayed by his own brother, a prophet
who carried on wars without him and lost them. And he eventually fought on the British side
in the war of 1812, died in battle and no one knows where his body lies. Nonetheless,
to me he ranks with Lincoln among the greatest American orators of the 19th century.
Now, I think we saw into comps a perfect use of figural language, of poetical pictorial
language. Let's listen to a little bit of an address he might actually have seen a copy
of. And that is Thomas Jefferson's inaugural address of 1801, as he's being sworn in as
president, to see both some metaphors that get out of control and also then a perfect
example of a metaphor that helps an audience focus on the words. And remember, an inaugural
address is somewhere between the logical case that we talked about last time, where the
speech is going to be covering a series of points in an orderly fashion governed by logos
and an inspirational speech where you are trying to get people behind your vision of
what's lying ahead in the coming term. Here we are, Thomas Jefferson, 1801. During the
throes and convulsions of the ancient world, during the agonizing spasms of infuriated
man seeking through blood and slaughter his long lost liberty, it was not wonderful that
the agitation of the billows should reach even this distant and peaceful shore. Mr.
Jefferson, this is too many metaphors for one sense. We have three at work here, and
they are all the more jarring for being metaphors and not similes. First, we have throes and
convulsions, agonizing spasms. These are metaphors drawn from the world of sickness, of people
in fevers and horrible medical conditions. That's where we begin, but suddenly we find
them seeking through blood and slaughter their long lost liberty. Well, this is a contrary
image. If you're on the sick bed, you shouldn't be in the next claws out on the battlefield
with a weapon cutting your way through a bloody field. It just doesn't make sense, and we're
starting to lose even the grip we originally had on his thought. And finally, by the time
we get to the agitation of the billows that reach this distant and peaceful shore, well
now we've got a nautical image of the waves upon the sea, all in one sense. There used
to be a little comic feature in the New Yorker magazine, perhaps there still is, called Block
That Metaphor, where examples just like this are picked out of current newspaper and magazine
publications where someone's words are quoted. And typically, it's three or more of these
jostling, jarring, incompatible metaphors all yoked together. One, per sentence, as
Tecumseh knows, is the right way to go. And yet at the same time, just a little later
in that same inaugural address, we find Jefferson in the most quiet, simple way possible, elucidating
how the view of a leader is different from that of the view of any other person in the
country. Because the leader has the high ground and sees it all, here's what he says, when
right I shall often be thought wrong by those whose positions will not command a view of
the whole ground. Now this is as simple as a metaphor can be. It is simply talking about
those moments when you're high up and suddenly you see the whole countryside spread out at
your feet and you understand the relationships between things and the relative positions
as opposed to a person down in the field who can only see a much more restricted horizon
and makes judgments based on that limited view. The metaphor is perfect. The idea of
the leader in that higher place actually makes a very precise correlation between Thomas
Jefferson's highest office in the land and the idea of a person on a physically high
place having the wide view and everybody below taking issue because their limited view causes
them to draw different conclusions. So, Thomas Jefferson, I think an example for what we
shouldn't do in his mixed metaphor, an example of a perfect metaphorical use of pictorial
language to make his speech memorable and not only that, but make it clear at the moment.
Soon as one hears that, one feels a little disarmed. One feels, gosh, I've been doing
that. I've been criticizing leaders. They must see more than I do. The message comes
through in the metaphor. Now, in the Western tradition, a lot of metaphors go back to Homer
and to the Iliad and the Odyssey. Homer belonged to an oral tradition like Tecumseh. As a college
lecturer, I belong in that same oral tradition. I'm someone who stands up and delivers hundreds,
as I think I may have told you probably by now about 2,000 times, speeches, lectures,
presentations to people who need to understand knowledge. I want to keep them focused. I
want to keep them interested and I want to be sure that they are picturing exactly what
I'm picturing, especially if I use technical terms. So, I turn to the same technique as
Homer, the one that we saw Tecumseh using, of employing metaphor or simile so that they
get a picture of what I'm talking about. Homer has infinite variety in his use of metaphors
and similes. My favorite comes at the end of book 8 of the Iliad. When the Trojans have
at last burst out of Troy, Achilles, the Greek hero, is sulking in his tent. The Greeks
are getting the worst of it. But the first time in 10 years, Hector is able to lead
the Trojans out so that they can encamp for the night in tents and bivouac on their own
great plane. And each tent lights a fire, and there are the fires burning on the plane.
It's poetical already, but Homer takes it a step further and tells you, so shine the
stars around the moon on a clear night. That's the watchfires of the Tensili, Trojans on
the plane around the great central moon of the city of Troy itself. But he goes further
and describes the whole night. The solitude, the quiet, the sound of the shepherd's pipe
and the rejoicing of the shepherd's heart as he alone sees this majestic scene of the
stars and the moon and then heaven itself seems to burst open to its uttermost reaches.
He doesn't need to do all that. His metaphor is feeding into creating the mood, just as
you saw at Tecumseh, using those specific metaphors. What does snow before the summer
sun do for you? It suggests something they all know, the passing of a thing that seemed
permanent during the winter, but has only too short a lease on life, that snow. So Homer
is working at the same level as Tecumseh. He's trying to use images from the natural
world that everybody can understand and picture in order to reinforce his message. I'd like
to read you a little passage from Homer that is one of my favorites, where at book 23 at
the end of the Iliad, an old king Nestor is trying to tell his son, Pysistratus, how you
can win a chariot race if you don't have the fastest horse. Now what he is using here,
Nestor, what Homer is putting into his character's mouth, are a series of images where Nestor
is using comparisons. The point is very simple. Nestor is telling his son, if you want to
win the race with slower horses, you're going to have to use craft, arts, cunning. We don't
have a single word in English for that cluster of things, but the Greek word metis means
something like cunning intelligence, art, craft. I'm just going to use metis in this
translation that I've made from the Iliad. Here's King Nestor. To win the prize, keep
metis well in mind. By metis, not brute force, men fell great oaks. By metis, steersman on
the wine dark sea, steady their swift ships through the tearing gale. By metis, charioteer
beats charioteer. There was only one real message. You're a charioteer. You can use
this cutting to win, but somehow by evoking the woodsmen out in the great forest, cutting
down the oaks and shaping them, and by picturing the pilot, the steersman at the rudder of
the ship trying to guide that ship through the storm, Homer has enlightened the issue,
has made through the parallels one feel all the sense of danger and tremendous accomplishment
that can come from this use of metis. Something, the Greek's prize, something we don't, but
it's the images, it's the concreteness of it rather than just giving a general rule
that makes it memorable and that makes it something that helped by Cystratus to in fact
come in second in that big chariote race. As long as we're with the Greeks, I'd like
to point out that the Greeks had a great fondness for this kind of use of an example. One of
the most familiar elements of Greek culture in our world is Esop's fables. Esop was a
real person of the 6th century B.C. He lived on the island of Samos and he collected and
in some cases wrote little tiny animal stories like the fox and the grapes that stick with
us as part of our mainstream culture. They were originally used not so much by nursery
maids and with their little children to entertain them, although that's why I found them was
in my pre-school books, they were used by orators making speeches in public to make
serious points and yet at the same time hold the attention of the audience. You've probably
heard of the one about the boy who cried wolf. A statesman would stand up and say, please
don't listen to my learned colleague who was just addressing you. He's been claiming
that the Persians are going to invade for the last 10 years and they still haven't.
He's like the boy who cried wolf, who wanted to see what the townspeople would do if he
stirred them up so he would stand out there by the sheep and shout from the hill, wolf,
wolf, and they would all come running out and he did it again and again until finally
the people didn't believe him and then when the wolf really came there was no one to come.
He was not believed. Or there would be an example to stick with the shepherd, the wolf
in sheep's clothing. Here's an ambassador come and you are saying he looks very fair
and very friendly, he's a wolf in sheep's clothing. His master, the king of that foreign
country is actually out to destroy us. The tortoise and the hare. Yes, I'm a slow and
plotting person. I don't have the brilliance of my colleague. But believe me, I am to be
trusted. I'm like the tortoise that continues to put one step after the other while the
hare gets distracted or gets overconfident and is in fact overtaken by me at the end
of the race. And finally, one of my favorites, not so well known about how one person, if
they are strong, forceful, and believe in themselves, can really count for much more
than a multitude, is Esau's fable about the vixen and the lioness. A vixen, a female fox
laughed at the lioness because the vixen had many cubs and the lioness had one cub. Yes,
only one, said the lioness, but a lion. With all of these little images, these little stories,
the Greeks would enliven their political discourse, make the crowd interested. There was even
a story about how one orator rebuked a crowd because all they wanted to hear were these
Esau's fables. And we know from Plato that when his old master Socrates was in prison
waiting for his death sentence to be carried out with the drinking of the hemlock, he spent
his days turning Esau's fables into poetry. They were little nuggets of wisdom, little
observations, pictorial scenes, as from a cartoon, that you could easily grasp, easily
remember, and made a consistent point. Another great source of beautiful images in poetry
that comes out of an oral tradition can be found in the Hebrew Bible in the Psalms, which
were some of them written by David himself, a shepherd, and others written for the court
of his son King Solomon. Let's hear Psalm 127 for an example of how you make abstract
ideas concrete through images. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that
build it. Except the Lord keep the city, the watchman wakeeth but in vain. It is vain for
you to rise up early and sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows, for so he giveth his
beloved sleep. Low, children are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb is
his reward. As arrows are in the hand of a giant, so are children of one's youth. Happy
is the man that hath his quiver full of them, he shall not be afraid to contend with his
enemy in the gate. I think an exceedingly beautiful thing there is as the flow of the
images goes by, and you sort of expect them to each be taken up in turn and then dropped.
It's a wonderful moment when the children are described as those arrows in the hand
of a giant, and they show up in the next clause as the householder, the family man, with
a quiver full of those arrows, a quiver full of children, surrounded by his children when
he meets in the gate, that is the court, to defend his rights among the people. None
of that would stick with you if it was a simple statement of the facts about the necessity
of relying on the Lord and on your children to support you in this life. That either seems
like a platitude not worth stating, or as something that among all the other platitudes
and rules you're just not going to focus on. Images make you focus. The things that you
picture through the image are things that you will retain and continue to think about
and continue, in this case, to be inspired by. Now, although I don't encourage the idea
of using a lot of images and poetical language and metaphor in the kind of logical speech
we were talking about last time, let's listen to one of America's great speakers, Daniel
Webster, as he is making a presentation to the jury, to the court, in a murder trial,
the trial of John K. K. Knapp for murder. He has done the murder. No eye has seen him.
No ear has heard him. The secret is his own, and it is safe. Ah, gentlemen, that was a
dreadful mistake. Such a secret can be safe nowhere. The whole creation of God has neither
nook nor corner where the guilty can bestow it and say it is safe. How powerful that is
as Daniel Webster imagines the secret as a physical thing that can be hidden in nooks
and corners and yet truly can never be hidden. We see it. We feel it. We feel the terror
of the convicted person, of the accused person, as that secret is talked about in that way.
Let's close with an example of a speech from 19th century America that uses vivid language
and shows us both how to do it and then a little later how not to do it. Our speaker
is William Jennings Bryant. It's the presidential campaign, actually the nomination campaign
of 1896, and this is his famous cross of gold speech. In the middle part of the speech,
he uses vivid language in a perfect way. Burn down your cities and leave our farms and your
cities will spring up again as if by magic, but destroy our farms and the grass will grow
in the streets of every city in the country. Such a powerful way of expressing the idea
that it is rural America that is the true basis of American strength and prosperity.
But at the end of the speech, we sort of go off the deep end. This is what made the speech
famous, gave it its name, the cross of gold speech. He's talking about the gold standard
and he gets into biblical language that seems so inappropriate, hyperbolic and over the
top that it's hard for me to believe that it was ever taken as seriously as it seems
to have been. Here we go. If they dare to come out into the open field and defend the
gold standard as a good thing, we will fight them to the uttermost, saying to them, you
shall not press down upon the brow of labor, this crown of thorns. You shall not crucify
mankind upon a cross of gold. It's memorable. It's poetical. It's got that biblical basis
that is typical of so much of the imagery used by American orators, but it is so completely
inappropriate, in my view at least, to compare the results of going one way or another on
the arguments about bimetalism to the crucifixion of Jesus or to the crucifixion of mankind
upon a cross of gold that it's my personal opinion. This is why he lost the presidential
election. Maybe not, but William Jennings Bryant is best known for that image of the
cross of gold. So with all this in mind, how to do it, how not to do it, let's think of
some lessons that we can draw from Tecumseh, especially but from all of our speakers, about
how you may want to, as you craft your speech, think about ways to express abstract ideas
in more vivid form through the language you choose. So first, focus the attention of your
listeners with words that create images in the mind. In other words, paint a picture
with words. Next, in emotional or personal speeches, especially less often in the sort
of reasoned argument that we talked about last time, use poetic language. Use pictorial
metaphors to make your words easy to recollect and make them more evocative of memories,
of feelings, of shared experience with your audience. And third, in logical arguments
or technical explanations, use metaphors to help your listeners see a problem or situation
more clearly than they would with a sort of abstract, non-metaphorical way. But I think
we've got a few other rules here too, a few other ideas that we can draw from this discussion
of the kind of language that you use to express your ideas. First, a big don't. Don't mix
your metaphors and make sure your metaphors are appropriate for the particular occasion
and audience. Second, make abstract observations and principles vivid to your listeners by
adding concrete, easy-to-picture examples. That's not necessarily in the world of metaphors
or similes, but that's just thinking, what would this really look like played out in
reality and then citing those examples, those little things, whether they're in fable form
or drawn from the newspaper, give examples of how this principle is affecting the real
world. So those can either be poetical or they can be kind of homely and ordinary.
Next, go beyond rhetorical questions. Energize your presentation by imagining dialogue and
dramatic confrontations as you remember Tecumseh does, as he imagines how he will dismiss Governor
William Henry Harrison with a bit of dialogue from his own lands. And finally, apply images
and vivid language when you are speaking from the heart. Simple abstractions don't convey
much meaning on an emotional level. It's the pictures you paint, it's the images you
use that if you are making an appeal to people, to something other than their reason, to their
emotions, to their deepest held convictions, it's those images that are likely to be remembered
long after the sound of your voice has faded away.
