Have you ever wondered why do some people get addicted while others don't?
After all, many people drink alcohol socially on a regular basis without ever becoming alcoholics.
And many others have been prescribed addictive drugs for pain relief, or have used them recreationally
without developing an addiction.
But other people do develop an addiction, even if they've had less exposure to drugs
than others who didn't become addicted.
Why is that?
Are some people born alcoholics or cocaine addicts?
When our genetic makeup make us more susceptible to addiction?
And if so, how?
These are the kinds of questions I want to address today.
I'll begin by talking about studies suggesting that our genetic makeup can indeed increase
our risk for addiction, although even the most susceptible people aren't necessarily
destined to become addicts.
Next, I'll give a brief introduction to what genes are and talk about how geneticists
have gone about looking for genes that contribute to addiction susceptibility.
And finally, I'll discuss what geneticists have learned about what these susceptibility
genes do by looking at studies using genetically engineered mice.
Let's begin with some studies that demonstrated that certain people are innately more susceptible
to addiction than others.
The story begins back in 1959, when Gerald McLean and David Rogers at the University
of California Berkeley were studying alcohol consumption using inbred mice.
Now inbred mice strains are created by repeatedly mating brothers and sisters for at least
20 generations.
Yes, you heard me right.
After 20 generations, the same sex members of an inbred strain are roughly 98% genetically
identical.
And all this inbreeding allows scientists to perform experiments in which genetic effects
have been experimentally controlled.
Well, McLean and Rogers tested alcohol consumption in mice from a few different inbred strains,
all of which had been raised in the same environment from birth.
Specifically, they offered the mice a choice between two bottles.
One bottle contained plain water and the other contained a 10% alcohol solution.
And what they found was very interesting.
Mice from one of the strains showed a strong preference for alcohol, while mice from another
strain showed a strong preference for water.
Other strains showed intermediate levels of preference.
All these mice were raised in the same environment, so the difference in alcohol preference must
have been due to genetics.
One strain of mice had a genetic predisposition to like alcohol, and the other strain didn't.
So apparently drug preference, or at least preference for alcohol, is influenced by genetics.
This work led to dozens of follow-up experiments that found similar results for other aspects
of addiction.
In addition to drug preference, different inbred strains of mice exhibit different
degrees of tolerance, and different degrees of dependence and withdrawal.
Together, these studies have shown that virtually all aspects of addictive behavior can be influenced
by genetics.
Now, you might be asking yourself, okay, maybe that's true in mice, but how do we know
if it applies to humans?
After all, aren't mice and humans extremely different genetically?
Well, surprisingly enough, the answer is no.
It turns out that about 98% of mouse genes are also present in humans.
Those genes may be on different chromosomes than they are in humans, but the same genes
are there, just in different places.
And what that means is that genetic studies in mice can and do tell us a lot about ourselves.
Nevertheless, there are plenty of human studies that also demonstrate genetic susceptibility
to aspects of addiction.
Many of these experiments have compared identical and fraternal twins.
Identical twins share virtually identical DNA.
They're essentially clones.
So if an observable trait is based entirely on genetics, then identical twins will be
guaranteed to share that trait.
And that's why identical twins look alike.
On the other hand, fraternal twins are no more similar genetically than any other pair
of siblings.
So a trait based on genetics might be shared by fraternal twins, but it also might not
be.
And that's why fraternal twins share a family resemblance, but they don't look identical.
Now, geneticists use these facts to figure out how much of the variation in a trait in
a particular population is due to genetics versus environment.
In particular, if identical twins in a population always share a given trait, while fraternal
twins only share it sometimes, then that trait is said to be 100% heritable, meaning that
variation in that trait is determined entirely by genetics.
On the other hand, if a trait is no more similar in identical twins than it is in fraternal
twins, then it's not heritable at all.
And finally, you can have traits that are partially heritable.
So if identical twins don't always share the trait, but they're still significantly
more similar than our fraternal twins on that trait, then the heritability falls somewhere
in between 0% and 100%.
Now a number of large twin studies have been done on addiction using this kind of logic,
and the results are telling.
Consistent with the mouse studies, genetics influence most aspects of addiction in humans,
with estimates of heritability ranging from around 30% to 70%.
For example, the heritability of alcohol abuse and dependence is typically found to be between
50% and 70%.
Smoking initiation has been estimated to be around 50% heritable, and nicotine dependence
around 60% heritable.
Likewise, addiction to illegal drugs is partially heritable, with estimates ranging from 25%
to 55% for stimulants, sedatives, and heroin.
Put simply, these numbers mean that our genetic makeup can indeed influence how susceptible
we are to addiction.
Some people really are born more susceptible to addiction than others.
Nevertheless, it's important to remember that just because someone is genetically susceptible,
that doesn't necessarily mean that they'll become an addict.
It just means they're at risk.
It's like if heart disease runs in your family.
You may be more at risk, but that doesn't necessarily mean you're going to have a heart
attack, especially if you exercise and eat right.
Likewise for addiction.
Even if you're genetically susceptible to addiction, you still have to take the drugs
or drink the drinks to become addicted.
Obviously, a person who never touches alcohol isn't going to become an alcoholic, no matter
how genetically susceptible they are.
Okay, so your genes can make you more susceptible to addiction, but which genes?
And how can we find them?
It turns out that finding the offending genes is extremely difficult.
As you may know, our genetic material is stored in 23 pairs of chromosomes in the nucleus
of cells.
Each chromosome is a molecule of DNA, which is wrapped tightly into a sequence of bundles,
making it look kind of like a sequence of pearls on a necklace.
The DNA molecule itself looks like a spiral ladder, and each of those DNA molecules is
long.
In fact, if you uncoiled the DNA in just one of your cells, it would be about 6 feet long.
Now the rungs on the ladder of DNA are made of molecules called nucleotide bases that
are arranged in pairs, and we'll be hearing more about nucleotide base pairs a little
later.
Well, as you can imagine, there's a lot of genetic information encoded in your 6 feet
of DNA.
There are often over 100 million rungs on the ladder in just one chromosome, and with
23 pairs of chromosomes, there are well over 3 billion rungs in total in each cell.
So what are genes?
Well genes are small sections of each of these ladders, ranging in length from a few hundred
nucleotide base rungs to well over a million.
We all have over 20,000 genes, and each of them encodes the information needed to make
a few of the hundreds of thousands of proteins that do a lot of the work in your body.
And exactly which proteins get made is what makes you, you.
How tall you are, your natural hair and eye color, the color of your skin, even your intelligence
and personality are significantly affected by the proteins encoded by your genes.
The two chromosomes in each pair contain the same genes in exactly the same places, but
they might be different versions of those genes.
The version of a gene in one chromosome comes from your mother, and the version of the gene
in the paired chromosome comes from your father.
And each version of a gene is called an allele.
You might inherit one allele of a gene from your mother that gives you a lot of freckles,
but the same gene from your father on the other chromosome might be an allele that's
not associated with freckles.
And then whether you have a lot of freckles or not would depend on whether one of the
versions is dominant.
Okay, so we inherit two versions of each gene from our parents, and apparently one or more
of these genes can influence our susceptibility to addiction.
In particular, some gene variants or alleles might increase susceptibility while other alleles
might decrease risk.
But which genes?
And how can we find them on this six-foot-long, three-billion-rung ladder of DNA?
Well, as you can imagine, finding genes can be very tough.
Geneticists therefore often try to narrow down the search using a technique called linkage
analysis.
The key idea behind linkage analysis is this.
Geneticists know that if one part of the DNA ladder gets passed down to a child, then nearby
parts are also likely to get passed down from that same ladder.
That is, nearby parts of a DNA ladder are likely to be linked and passed down together.
For example, suppose two genes, A and B, are right next to each other on a chromosome.
Now remember, there will be a version or allele of each gene on both chromosomes in a pair,
and the two versions may be different.
So let's call the alleles for the two genes on the first chromosome, big A and big B.
And let's call the alleles on the other chromosome, little A and little B.
Now assume that person has a child and they pass on the big A version of gene A, then
it's almost guaranteed that they'll also pass on the big B version of gene B to that
child because the two genes are right next to each other on the first chromosome.
They're linked because they're so nearby on the same ladder.
On the other hand, if the two genes were really far apart on the DNA, then even if big A were
inherited, there'd be no way to predict which version of gene B would get inherited.
Because the genes are far apart, they aren't linked.
And so the child may get big B or little B. There's no way to know.
So how can you use this fact about linkage to narrow down the search for genes related
to addiction?
Well, what you can do is start with a whole bunch of genetic markers whose location you
already know.
Think of choosing 400 rungs of the DNA ladders that are spread out over all the chromosomes.
Now suppose one of those markers, let's call it marker X, is linked with an addiction gene,
meaning the two almost always get inherited together.
Well, then we can infer that the addiction gene we're looking for must be close to marker X.
To do this, geneticists analyze DNA samples from people in big, extended families that
contain a lot of addicts.
Then they look for genetic markers that get inherited with the addiction.
And when they find one, they can narrow down the search to the area around the linked genetic marker.
And once they found a promising area on a specific chromosome, geneticists will then
often perform what are called association studies in order to try to identify the specific
gene in that region that's associated with the addiction.
The first step is to identify parts of the DNA that are in the target region and that
differ in different individuals.
Remember the rungs made of nucleotide bases?
It turns out that the vast majority of the rungs on the human DNA ladder are the same
in everyone.
In fact, if you compare the DNA of any two normal humans, you would find that over 99%
of the rungs are the same.
So obviously the rungs that differ account for a lot of the variability we see among
different human beings.
And those rungs that vary are called polymorphisms, which just means multiple forms.
Furthermore, because the rungs are made of nucleotide bases, the individual rungs that
differ across different people are typically called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or
SNPs for short.
But SNPs play a big role in genetic association studies.
Association studies of addiction analyze genetic data from thousands of people, some of whom
are addicts and some of whom are not.
And they look at what form of a target SNP each person has.
If a particular form of a SNP occurs significantly more frequently in the addicts than it does
in the non-addicts, then that SNP is said to be associated with the addiction.
And a gene near that SNP is likely involved.
Well in recent years, techniques have been developed that make it possible to analyze
a huge number of SNPs simultaneously.
In fact, geneticists can now analyze SNPs covering the entire genome, that is all the
DNA, in all the chromosomes.
This kind of genome-wide association study, or GWAS for short, makes it possible to find
new genes that might contribute to addiction, even without a prior linkage analysis.
Well by now, dozens of linkage and association studies have been done to investigate the genetics
of addiction, and to identify genes that might influence susceptibility.
I want to make two general points about the results.
First and foremost, there is no single addiction gene.
George Ull and colleagues at the National Institute on Drug Abuse reviewed association
studies in people addicted to alcohol, to methamphetamine, and to nicotine.
They looked for genes that had been identified across multiple studies, not just one.
And they found around 90 genes for which there was converging evidence of an association
with addiction.
In short, susceptibility to addiction is a polygenic trait, meaning that many genes
can affect risk.
Now this is both good news and bad news.
The good news is that even if you happen to carry the risk version of one of these genes,
it doesn't increase your susceptibility to addiction very much at all.
It probably requires a combination of many genes to increase your risk substantially.
The bad news is that it makes it much harder for scientists to unravel the biological mechanisms
of addiction susceptibility.
I mean figuring out how one gene works and how it might contribute to a trait is a significant
undertaking by itself, even if that gene is very strongly associated with the trait.
But figuring out how the interaction of dozens of genes contributes to addiction, especially
when each one is only weakly associated with addiction, is a much, much harder problem.
Nevertheless, some important progress has been made, which we'll talk about in just a few
minutes.
The second general point to make, based on the linkage in association studies, is this.
The same genes contribute to many different addictions.
Genetic studies of alcoholics, of addicted smokers, and of addicts of illegal drugs have
identified many of the same genes.
Also, although some genes are only associated with susceptibility to a single substance,
many of the genes appear to affect susceptibility to addiction in general.
So there may actually be a scientific basis to the idea of an addictive personality, that
is, of a person who is at risk of getting hooked on any kind of addictive substance or behavior.
These findings may also explain why so many addicts have multiple addictions, for example,
to both alcohol and nicotine.
And they may shed light on why some people get addicted to specific behaviors, like gambling
or video games, that don't even involve consuming an addictive substance.
Okay, now let me ask you a simple question.
Why bother figuring out where a gene is?
After all, does it really matter whether a susceptibility gene is on chromosome 4 or
chromosome 19?
Well, actually no, it doesn't.
Geneticists themselves aren't typically interested in figuring out the location of a gene as an
end in itself.
So then why in the world do they go to all this trouble collecting genetic and behavioral
data from thousands of people and analyzing linkage and associations if all it's going
to tell them is where a susceptibility gene is?
The answer is that once you've figured out where a gene is, then and only then you can
begin to study what it does.
And understanding what a gene does can provide insight as to why some people are more susceptible
to addiction than others.
But how can we figure out what a gene does?
Well, geneticists often turn to mice to answer that question as well.
In fact, they often genetically engineer mice to answer that question.
Genetic engineering refers to intentionally changing or engineering some aspect of the
DNA of an organism.
And one very powerful technique is knocking out the operation of a particular gene in
a set of mice and then observing their behavior compared with normal mice.
Mice in the behavior of these so-called knockout mice can often shed light on the function
of the target gene.
One particularly powerful example comes from studying the genetics of nicotine addiction
and the role of a chemical called acetylcholine.
Acetylcholine is a so-called neurotransmitter that some brain cells use to communicate with
others.
When a brain cell releases acetylcholine, the acetylcholine can attach to special molecules
called acetylcholine receptors on other brain cells, which could lead those cells to become
active themselves.
Well, nicotine can also attach to those receptors and it can therefore mimic the effects of
real acetylcholine.
In fact, because these receptors respond to nicotine, they're typically called nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors.
Now, these receptors, like most complex biological structures, are made up of proteins.
And do you remember how proteins get made?
By genes.
And it turns out that some of the genes that linkage and association studies found were
associated with addiction to cigarettes were actually genes that encoded the proteins that
make up the nicotinic acetylcholine receptors.
So this led geneticists to a specific hypothesis.
Maybe some versions of these genes make the receptors more responsive to nicotine and
therefore increase susceptibility to nicotine addiction, while other versions of these genes
make the receptors less responsive and decrease susceptibility.
To test this idea, they genetically engineered mice that lacked these genes entirely.
What they found was very interesting.
Normal mice will self-administer nicotine and they show many of the behavioral symptoms
of nicotine addiction, but these genetically engineered mice didn't.
Also, do you remember our addiction molecule, dopamine?
In our previous lecture, we pointed out that all addictive substances lead to increased
levels of dopamine in the reward system, which may be associated with wanting or craving.
Nicotine does the same thing, or at least it does in normal mice.
However, the genetically engineered mice did not show an increase in dopamine when nicotine
was administered.
It's as if the genetically engineered mice were no longer susceptible to nicotine addiction.
Many other knockout studies of addiction have been performed and they've taught us a lot
about how different genes contribute to addiction.
For example, knocking out one gene produces mice that are less sensitive to painkillers,
like morphine, compared with normal mice.
Knocking out another gene leads to mice that are unusually attracted to cocaine.
While other knockout mice are less likely to develop morphine dependence, and others
are more sensitive to the effects of alcohol.
Now, these kinds of findings are particularly exciting because they offer the hope of new
and better treatments for addiction.
I mean, every time a gene is identified that contributes to addiction, that gene becomes
a potential target for a biologically based treatment.
For example, once we understand how a genetic variant increases addiction risk, we could
potentially design treatments to counteract those effects.
Likewise, if a genetic variant is found that is protective and decreases risk, we could
design treatments that mimic and strengthen that effect.
Furthermore, treatments could be tailored to the specific genetic profile of a particular
individual.
For example, different people might be susceptible to alcohol addiction for very different reasons.
Maybe one person has a genetic profile that leads to a strong reward response when they
drink.
Another person might be susceptible because they quickly develop dependence.
Yet another person might have strong withdrawal symptoms, and another person might not break
down alcohol as efficiently as others.
Now, as you can imagine, the most effective treatment could be different for these different
people.
And by analyzing their genetic profile, physicians in the future might be able to design a treatment
program that is personalized specifically for them.
Dr. David Oslin at the University of Pennsylvania, along with a number of his colleagues, conducted
an experiment that illustrates the promise of considering the genetic profile of an addict
when deciding on treatment options.
Their study investigated a drug called naltrexone, which is commonly used to help treat alcoholism.
We'll talk more about naltrexone when we talk about alcohol in lecture 7, but for now, all
you need to know is that the drug blocks the pleasurable effects of alcohol, and that can
often reduce alcoholics' cravings to drink and help them remain abstinent.
But naltrexone doesn't work for everyone.
Some alcoholics report experiencing the same cravings to drink, whether they're taking
naltrexone or not.
So why does the drug help some alcoholics, but not others?
Dr. Oslin's group found evidence that the genetic makeup of the individuals can make
a difference.
Specifically, they analyzed a gene that, among other things, influences how strongly the
brain's pleasure center, the nucleus accumbens, responds when it's stimulated.
Some variants of the gene are associated with a stronger pleasure response, while other
variants are associated with a weaker response.
And it turns out that how well naltrexone works depends on what version of this gene
you have.
People in the study who had the genetic variant associated with a strong pleasure response
tended to respond well to naltrexone treatment.
They were significantly less likely to return to heavy drinking, and even those who did
start drinking again typically waited much longer before doing so.
In contrast, people who had the version of the gene associated with a weaker pleasure
response didn't respond nearly as well to the treatment.
And one natural explanation is that if you're genetically endowed with a weak pleasure response,
then blocking that response with naltrexone is unlikely to make much of a difference.
So these results suggest that physicians might want to consider the genetic makeup of an
individual before deciding on a treatment plan.
For some patients, naltrexone might be the best option, but for others, a different approach
will probably be more effective.
Okay, well let's conclude today's lecture by summarizing a few of the major take home
points about the genetics of addiction.
First, studies have shown that some people are indeed more prone to addiction than other
people.
And that's not a character flaw.
It was in their genes from birth.
Nevertheless, just because someone is genetically susceptible to addiction, that doesn't necessarily
mean that they'll become an addict.
It just means they're at risk, and they need to be careful.
Second, there is no single addiction gene.
Dozens of genes have now been identified that affect addiction susceptibility, and most of
them probably only have a very small effect by themselves.
It's the interaction of multiple genes that leads to addiction susceptibility.
Third, many of the same genes contribute to a variety of different addictions.
Many of the genes that increase risk of alcoholism also increase risk of addiction to nicotine,
cocaine, and heroin.
Finally, geneticists have begun to figure out what some of these addiction genes actually
do, and that knowledge offers the hope of designing more effective and personalized treatments.
Okay, by now we've reviewed a lot of what is known about addiction at a behavioral level,
at a neural level, and now at a genetic level.
Next, I want to turn our attention to drugs.
What do psychoactive drugs do to the brain?
How do they produce the effects that they produce?
We'll answer these and many other related questions in our lecture, Your Brain on Drugs.
I hope you can join us.
