We've reached the final lecture in our course on the addictive brain, and we've covered
quite a variety of addictions, ranging from alcoholism to heroin addiction.
We've seen that different addictions share many similarities in the underlying mechanisms,
both at a genetic level and especially at a neural level.
They're also all characterized by a persistent continuation of the problem behavior despite
significant negative consequences.
Well, by now you may have thought of many other behaviors that some people persistently
engage in despite significant negative consequences, and some of those behaviors may involve the
consumption of a stimulus other than a psychoactive drug.
In this lecture, I want to talk about three such stimuli, junk food, pornography, and
video games.
Are some people actually choco-holics, or chip-aholics, or mick-aholics?
That is, can you really become addicted to junk food?
What about pornography, or video games?
Now, it's important to point out at the outset that we're entering a gray area here.
Scientists themselves don't yet agree on whether a difficulty controlling one's use
of these kinds of stimuli constitutes true addiction.
A lot of that controversy revolves around how one defines addiction.
But regardless of one's definition, what is absolutely clear is that millions and millions
of people have significant difficulties controlling their consumption of these stimuli, to the
point that it significantly interferes with their daily life.
Why?
What makes some people get so consumed with these stimuli?
Well, we'll address this question from two angles.
First, we'll talk about the psychology of junk food, porn, and video games.
In particular, we'll discuss ways in which these stimuli are in some sense super normal.
That is, they exaggerate features of normal stimuli that human beings were designed to
find rewarding.
And second, we'll talk about the neuroscience of these super normal stimuli.
How do junk food, porn, and video games affect the brain?
And are those effects similar to the effects of drugs of abuse?
Well, let's begin with psychology, and in particular, with some work by the Dutch scientist
Nicholas Tinbergen.
Tinbergen systematically observed how different birds, fish, and other animals behaved in
their natural settings, and he carefully described many interesting and sophisticated behaviors
that were previously unknown.
One animal that Tinbergen studied in detail was the stickleback fish.
During mating season, the male stickleback develops a red-colored underbelly, and it becomes
very territorial.
It builds a nest in the center of its territory, and it tries to attract female sticklebacks
to lay eggs in the nest.
But if another male enters the territory, then the stickleback fish will attack and
try to drive the other male away.
Well, Tinbergen tried to figure out what it was about other males that triggered the
fish to attack.
He began by introducing different fish models into the stickleback's territory.
He tried very realistic fish models and simple oval-shaped models that didn't look much
like fish at all.
He also tried varying the color of the models, and that's when Tinbergen discovered something
really interesting.
He found that the male stickleback would attack anything red.
It didn't matter whether the model was realistic or not.
All that mattered was the color.
The sticklebacks actually ignored realistic fish models that weren't colored, but they
vigorously attacked a red model, even if it was just an oval shape that didn't look like
a real fish at all.
In fact, there was even a report of a stickleback fish trying to attack a red postal van that
was parked across the street from the lab.
Next, Tinbergen started experimenting with how red the model was, and he found something
else very interesting.
The redder the model, the stronger the attack response.
In fact, he found that the stickleback would attack a bright red model more strongly than
it would a real male stickleback fish.
And Tinbergen noticed the same kind of behavior in many other animals.
For example, the gray-lag goose will instinctively use its head to roll back an egg that has
gotten out of its nest.
And given the choice between rolling back a normal-sized egg and a larger model egg,
the goose would roll back the larger model.
In fact, it even preferred trying to roll a volleyball back into its nest instead of
a normal-sized egg.
Likewise, Tinbergen found that small birds would ignore their own small eggs in order
to sit on large polka-dotted model eggs, even models so big that the bird would slide off.
Male butterflies preferred mating with a cardboard butterfly that had exaggerated markings compared
with a real butterfly that had less defined markings, and baby gulls were more likely
to beg for food from a red stick with white stripes compared with a real mother gull.
In all these cases, Tinbergen was able to identify key features of a natural stimulus
that triggered a specific behavior.
And by exaggerating those key features, he could construct artificial stimuli that actually
induced a larger-than-normal response.
And he referred to such stimuli as supernormal stimuli.
OK, but what does all this have to do with junk food, pornography, and video games?
Well, you can make a case that all three of these stimuli are also supernormal.
In fact, Dr. Deirdre Barrett wrote an entire book about the important role that modern
supernormal stimuli play in the many types of compulsive behavior displayed in modern
society.
Take junk food, for example.
As you probably know, obesity is a significant health problem in the U.S.
In fact, about two-thirds of Americans are overweight, and about one-third are clinically
obese.
Now, there are a number of reasons for the epidemic of obesity in the U.S., but I think
it's fair to say that one of the most important is our easy access to junk food.
For almost all of human history, people had no choice but to eat fresh, unprocessed food
that was relatively low in calories.
There simply weren't any alternatives.
High-calorie foods were very rare.
Furthermore, most people had to walk long distances and perform quite a bit of manual
labor just to survive, and they therefore burned a lot of calories relatively quickly.
Now, in these kinds of environments, calories are actually a precious commodity, and so
it's important for us to be motivated to consume high-calorie foods whenever we can, and our
brains are designed to do just that.
Foods that are high in sugar, fat, or salt can taste very good and be very rewarding.
In fact, motivating us to consume high-calorie foods is one of the things that our reward
circuit was designed for.
And for most of our history, being motivated to eat high-calorie foods was actually a very
good thing, because it inspired us to get as many of those precious calories as possible.
Now, here's the problem.
In Western society today, calories aren't nearly so precious.
In fact, they're very easy to come by.
High-calorie foods for our ancestors were things like fruit and nuts.
Today, we have high-fat junk food and refined carbohydrates.
These kinds of foods have far more calories than anything our ancestors would ever eat,
and so the motivational circuits in our brains find them extremely rewarding.
So in a very real sense, they're super normal stimuli, just like Timbergen's bright red
fish models and extra-large eggs.
Today's junk food is like an exaggerated version of our ancestors' fruits and nuts.
And eating such food therefore engages the motivational circuits in our brain in a very
powerful way, and it can lead to significant cravings and overconsumption.
The bottom line is that our brains were designed for simpler environments, but now they have
to cope with the modern world.
And to be honest, our brains aren't that well-suited to many aspects of modern life.
Our brains are expecting us to eat fresh produce and walk everywhere, not drive through at
McDonald's and sit in front of a computer all day.
Now let's turn to pornography.
If you think about it, exactly the same argument can be applied.
The same neural circuits that motivate us to eat high-calorie foods also motivate us
to be fruitful and multiply.
These circuits reward us handsomely whenever we engage in sex, and they motivate us to
do so.
Again, this is one of the things our reward circuit was designed for.
After all, if we weren't motivated to have sex, we might not have any children.
But here's the thing.
Our brains are adapted to an environment in which sexually provocative stimuli are rare.
After all, before magazines, TVs, and computers, it was actually pretty rare to see someone
without any clothes on, unless you were married.
Just ask any male who grew up before the Internet.
Of course, everything has changed in modern Western culture.
In today's culture, we are inundated with images of naked or nearly-naked people.
In fact, two out of every three shows on television today include significant sexual content,
and that proportion only goes up during prime time.
Ten percent of today's shows either depict or strongly imply sexual intercourse.
And of course, TV is nothing compared to pornography.
Now, getting reliable statistics on pornography is tough, but consider these facts.
In 2005, pornography accounted for approximately 70 percent of the total pay-per-view Internet
content market.
An analysis of 400 million web searches between July 2009 and July 2010 found that 13 percent
of those searches were looking for erotic content.
Another study examined the most common query terms on a single day in 2006.
Would you believe 21 of the 25 most common terms, at least in image searches, were sexual?
Well, as these numbers suggest, the pornography industry is incredibly big business.
In fact, in 2007, worldwide pornography revenues were estimated to be about $20 billion.
That's larger than the annual revenue of Netflix, of Yahoo, and of the National Football League.
Combined.
Clearly, porn is another example of a modern-day supernormal stimulus.
In fact, it may be even more stimulating and rewarding than junk food.
So whereas in simpler times, it would be relatively rare to see sexually provocative stimuli,
now it's as simple as a click of your mouse.
And obviously, people are clicking those mice in record numbers.
Now let's turn and look at our third example of a supernormal stimulus, video games.
Video games have come a long way since Atari introduced the very simple tennis game Pong
back in the 1970s.
Today's games involve sophisticated graphics, elaborate and detailed fantasy worlds, and
extensive quests and adventures.
And they are very big business.
For example, the game Grand Theft Auto V earned more than $1 billion in the first three days
it was for sale.
By comparison, that's more than five times faster than any movie in history.
Now scientific studies of video gaming are still in their infancy, but there is a growing
consensus that modern video games can lead to compulsive use in some individuals.
For example, Dr. Douglas Gentile at Iowa State University surveyed nearly 1200 American
kids between the ages of 8 and 18 about their use of video games.
He then took the criteria used to diagnose pathological gambling and he adapted those
criteria to estimate the incidence of pathological video game use.
And he found that about 8% of American kids met at least six of the criteria for pathological
video game use and could be tentatively classified as pathological gamers.
These kids played video games an average of about 25 hours a week and they experienced
significantly more problems as a result of their gaming than did other kids.
In extreme cases the negative consequences can be absolutely tragic.
For example, in 2005 a 28 year old South Korean man actually died from exhaustion and dehydration
after playing the popular game Starcraft nearly non-stop for roughly 50 hours.
Two years later, 16 year old Daniel Petrick shot both his parents after they forbidden
him to play Halo 3.
The legal defense based their case on the claim that Daniel was addicted to video games.
And in 2009 a 3 month old infant died of malnutrition while her parents raised a virtual child in
an online game.
Now obviously these kinds of cases are the exception rather than the rule.
Much like gambling, most people who play video games can do so with enough self control that
they don't lose their job and their family, or worse their life.
But at the very least, I think we can agree that video games can be extremely engrossing.
But why?
Well, a video game designer named Michael Astolfi wrote a thesis at NYU that identified
many features of modern video games that are super normal.
Here's the basic argument.
Before the development of commercial agriculture and refrigeration and shipping, people had
to hunt and forage for food for themselves and their family.
And so at a fairly primitive level, we may be designed to hunt and to find hunting rewarding.
And modern video games take hunting to a whole new level.
For example, hitting a target with a projectile is one of the core skills involved in hunting.
And people also find it inherently rewarding.
Sports ranging from archery to basketball involve hitting a target with some kind of
projectile.
In fact, we even call it shooting in both basketball and hockey.
So perhaps it's not a coincidence that some of the most popular and engrossing video games
are first person shooter games, which involve trying to hit targets with projectiles.
Furthermore, in most first person shooter games, there are a large number of targets
to shoot at almost all the time.
A skilled player is therefore constantly being rewarded with a hit on the order of every
few seconds.
Now, let's contrast that to real hunting, particularly if you're using a primitive projectile weapon
like a spear.
Well, in that situation, hitting the target might happen only once every few days.
So once again, we see how the modern stimulus is super normal.
It takes a naturally rewarding behavior and jacks it up to be significantly more stimulating
than the original behavior was.
And the huge video game industry is evidence of just how rewarding and engrossing that
super normal stimulus can be.
Now let's turn to neuroscience and ask how these stimuli affect the brain.
Are the neural effects of these kinds of stimuli similar to the effects of drugs of abuse?
Well, scientific studies of these questions are still in their infancy.
And in particular, neuroscientific studies of porn addiction are very few and far between.
There are, however, some new studies on the neuroscience of compulsive eating and compulsive
video gaming that shed some light on how these stimuli affect the brain.
Let's start with dopamine.
Recall dopamine is the molecule that's associated with wanting or craving, and it underlies
our motivation to do virtually everything that we do.
And that definitely includes eating.
As we mentioned briefly in lecture three, my colleague Kent Barrage at the University
of Michigan compared the behavior of normal mice to that of mice that had been genetically
engineered to have abnormally high dopamine levels.
And he found that increased dopamine levels led to increased food craving.
Specifically, high dopamine mice run significantly faster towards sweet tasting fruit loops than
normal mice do, even though they show no signs of liking the fruit loops more.
And dopamine has also been found to play an important role in video game playing.
Matthias Kepp and his colleagues at the Hammersmith Hospital in London used positron emission
tomography to measure dopamine levels in the reward circuit while participants played
video games.
And they found that playing a simple tank navigation game led to significant increases
in dopamine in the reward circuit.
And furthermore, people who had the most success when playing the game also released the most
dopamine.
Now notice, it's dopamine, not sugar or testosterone that's associated with food craving and video
game playing.
The desire to eat chocolate or to play Call of Duty both derived from dopamine acting on
the brain's reward circuitry.
A second important point we made about the neuroscience of addiction is that the pleasure
response can get numbed by repeated activation.
So over time, addicts often feel less pleasure from the same dose of their drug.
addicts often turn to larger doses in an effort to overcome their numbed experience.
But doing so only further numbs the pleasure centers.
Well it turns out that the same process can happen for our super normal stimuli.
My colleague Ashley Gearhart at the University of Michigan used functional MRI to measure
the neural response to food and food cues in two groups of young women.
One group was classified as potential food addicts based on their answers to a food
addiction questionnaire that Dr. Gearhart developed.
The other group was classified as controls.
The brain activity in the two groups differed in two interesting ways.
First, when food related cues were presented, like pictures of food, the food addicts showed
increased activation in the reward circuit relative to the controls.
However, when they actually consumed a chocolate milkshake, the food addicts actually showed
reduced activity in reward related areas.
Now these results are consistent with the idea that compulsive eaters are hypersensitive
to food related cues, but actually derive less than normal pleasure from real food consumption.
And of course that's just the kind of behavior that we've seen in drug addicts.
They crave drugs more despite deriving less and less pleasure from them.
Simone Kuhn and Jürgen Gallinat reported a similar finding in a neuroimaging study
of pornography.
Sixty-four German men were asked how much pornography they watched on average each week
and their neural activity was also measured while they viewed pornographic images.
The men who watched the most pornography each week actually exhibited the least neural activity
in the reward circuit, consistent with the idea that they had developed a tolerance to
sexually provocative images and a numbed reward response.
Finally, what about the kind of neural rewiring that we discussed when we talked about drugs
of abuse?
Recall drug addiction is associated with stronger neural associations between drug related cues
and drug taking behavior.
So for the drug addict, the cues might be things like a needle or a crack pipe and these
stimuli become so strongly associated with drug taking that the mere sight of them immediately
triggers thoughts of getting high.
Well, environmental cues can also get strongly associated with consuming junk food and viewing
porn or playing video games.
For example, many people have developed very strong associations between watching TV and
eating high calorie food.
Or maybe it's tough to walk by the vending machine at work or to check out at the grocery
store without having an impulse to buy a candy bar.
Stress is also a very common trigger to eat.
In the case of pornography, cues could include a specific computer or sexually provocative
stimuli on TV or in magazines.
And for video games, it might be the sight of the game console or bumping into another
regular gamer.
And a few studies have now confirmed these kinds of effects at a neural level.
We already discussed Dr. Gearhart's fMRI study, which found that food related cues activated
the reward circuit more strongly in food addicts than in controls.
Chi-Hung Koh and colleagues at the Kaohsiung Medical University in Taiwan reported a similar
finding in the neural activity of compulsive video gamers.
They found that game related cues, specifically screenshots from video games, produced significantly
greater reward circuit activity in the gamers than it did in the controls.
And furthermore, participants who exhibited the most neural activity were also the ones
who reported the most craving to play after viewing the pictures.
The bottom line is that modern-day supernormal stimuli affect the brain in some of the same
ways that drugs of abuse do.
Finally, let's talk about approaches to overcoming behavioral addictions.
Now there aren't many scientific studies on how to treat behavioral addictions yet, but
let me draw a few general principles from studies of addiction more generally that might
be helpful.
First, and perhaps foremost, someone with a behavioral addiction has to recognize that
they have a problem and they have to be committed to trying to overcome it.
Notice, the motivation really has to come from within, it can't come from someone else.
In fact, addicts often react defensively when confronted by others about their problem behavior,
and they might even become more resistant to change because they don't want to be told
what to do.
It's often helpful to approach the addict with empathy and compassion rather than with
judgment and anger, but ultimately the addict has to want to change.
Second, it's important to understand the cognitive and emotional motivations that lead
to the behavior.
What thoughts and feelings trigger a desire to eat junk food, to view porn, to play video
games, or to engage in any other harmful behavior?
Is it a response to boredom or to stress?
Are there particular environmental stimuli that tend to trigger the problem behavior?
Once those triggers have been identified, the addict can develop a strategy for avoiding
them or coping with them when they do arise.
For example, they might make a conscious decision to participate in some distracting physical
activity whenever they experience craving.
Third, developing a network of people to provide support and accountability can be very beneficial.
Breaking an addiction requires hard work, but having a social support network can make
it somewhat easier.
Well, we've arrived at the end of our course on the addictive brain.
Let's conclude by reviewing three of the main takeaway points that we've discovered
along the way.
First, when scientists refer to addiction, they mean something pretty specific, namely
compulsive continuation of a behavior despite truly significant negative consequences.
The term is meant to refer to situations like the alcoholic who can't stop drinking even
though they know it's costing them their family and livelihood, or the smoker who
keeps smoking even after they've been diagnosed with emphysema.
But it can also refer to behavioral addictions, like gambling, when it's compulsive and continuous
despite tragic financial consequences.
Now, many people use the word addiction in a more lighthearted way.
For example, people often say that they're addicted to coffee or addicted to golf, even
though those habits don't lead to significant negative consequences.
But a true addictive disorder would only be diagnosed based on evidence of abuse, of physical
dependence, and of pathological craving.
A second take on point is that some people are genetically more susceptible to addiction
than others.
Virtually all aspects of addiction are significantly heritable.
Nevertheless, there is no single addiction gene.
Rather, a large number of genes can increase the risk of addiction.
And just because someone is genetically susceptible, that doesn't necessarily mean that they'll
become an addict.
Finally, a third take on point is that all addictions have a biological basis.
There is literally something different in the brains of addicts.
All addictions hijack the brain's reward system, rewiring it to produce pathological
craving, numbing the pleasure response, and weakening inhibitory self-control.
And understanding that biological basis of addiction can help us make sense of the seemingly
incomprehensible behaviors that addicts often exhibit.
Well that concludes our journey through the addictive brain.
I hope this course has provided you with some tools to understand the many complicated issues
associated with addiction, and to think more critically about how we should deal with them.
Thanks for taking the course.
