Back in 1987, the partnership for a drug-free America released a televised public service
announcement that TV Guide later named one of the top 100 TV advertisements of all time.
In it, a middle-aged man picks up an egg and says, this is your brain.
He then points to a hot frying pan on a stove and says, this is drugs.
Finally, he cracks the egg in the frying pan, shows the sizzling egg to the camera and finishes
with the immortal words, this is your brain on drugs.
Any questions?
Well yes, actually, I do have some questions.
I mean, this ad was certainly very effective and it did a great job of symbolizing the
dangers of drug use.
But I think we can agree that it left a few unanswered questions about how drugs affect
the brain.
And in this lecture, I want to answer some of them.
First, we'll talk about the psychological effects of psychoactive drugs.
How can chemicals make us feel relaxed or elevate our mood or increase our focus?
Not surprisingly, they do so by interacting with the brain and influencing its function.
And we'll talk about how that works.
A second question we'll address is this.
What determines the strength of a drug's effects?
For example, why is morphine a stronger painkiller than codeine?
A number of factors play a role, but again, the way the drug interacts with the brain
is crucial, so we'll explore that in some depth.
Finally, we'll talk about how we can become dependent on drugs.
In a previous lecture, we pointed out that drug addicts often need to use their drug
just to feel normal, and that without it, they experience unpleasant withdrawal symptoms.
What's going on in the brain that leads to those symptoms?
Answering all these questions requires understanding how drugs affect the brain, and specifically
how drugs affect individual brain cells, which are called neurons.
So, let's begin by talking about how neurons work and how they communicate.
Neurons typically communicate using chemicals called neurotransmitters.
You may be familiar with some of these chemicals.
Dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine are all examples of neurotransmitters that brain
cells use to communicate with each other.
And this communication takes place in the very small spaces called synapses between neurons.
Here's how it works.
When a brain cell is activated, it generates an electrical potential that travels down
the neuron to the synapses between it and neighboring neurons.
When the electrical potential reaches the synapses, it causes the cell to release a bunch
of neurotransmitter molecules.
These molecules then move across the synapses, and they may come into contact with neighboring
neurons, perhaps exciting them and causing them to fire as well.
In this way, a neural signal can travel from neuron to neuron through a brain circuit.
But how exactly do neurotransmitters cause a neighboring neuron to fire?
They do so by binding to receptor molecules on the surface of the next neuron.
Receptors are like little machines in the cell.
When they're turned on, they can make the neuron more likely to fire.
If enough receptors are turned on at the same time, that can trigger the neuron to become
active itself and release its own neurotransmitters in downstream synapses.
Some receptors are also inhibitory, and if they get turned on, they actually try to prevent
the neuron from firing.
Now, when a neurotransmitter binds to a receptor, it's like a key being slid into a machine
and turning it on.
And just like a key only fits certain locks, a neurotransmitter only fits certain receptors,
and it will only bind to them.
Dopamine binds to dopamine receptors, serotonin binds to serotonin receptors, and so on.
Now we're in a position to answer our first question.
How do psychoactive drugs produce psychological effects?
Well, one way they do so is by binding to and turning on the same receptors that natural
neurotransmitters do.
So in a very real sense, psychoactive drugs imitate natural brain chemicals.
So then why do they produce different effects than the natural neurotransmitters themselves?
Well, one reason is that psychoactive drugs may activate the receptors more or less strongly
than the natural neurotransmitters do.
For example, a drug might bind to the receptors and cause them to operate in overdrive, leading
to abnormally high levels of neural activity.
Conversely, it might produce abnormally low levels of receptor activity.
So even though the receptors are doing what they normally do, the level of activity may
be abnormal, and that can lead to observable psychological effects.
Now let's turn to our second question.
What determines the strength of a drug's psychological effects?
Well, one very important factor that we're not going to discuss is how much of the drug
actually gets to the brain.
For example, how much of the drug gets into the bloodstream, how much is metabolized and
converted to something else, and so on.
In fact, there's an entire field called pharmacokinetics devoted to these kinds of issues.
But we're going to be focusing instead on what happens after the drug reaches the brain
and how that can affect a drug's strength.
One of the first ideas we need to understand is what's called the law of mass action.
The law of mass action is actually a very general chemical principle.
But in our context, it basically means that the more molecules there are in a synapse,
the more receptors will be active.
When a neurotransmitter or a psychoactive drug binds to a receptor, it doesn't stay
there forever.
Rather, most molecules bind reversibly.
That is, they bind for an instant, turn on the receptor, and then unbind or dissociate
from the receptor, turning the receptor off.
Then another neurotransmitter molecule might come along and bind to that receptor and turn
it on for a moment again before it too dissociates.
And this same process happens over and over and over again.
And this process is random or stochastic.
That is, the neurotransmitter or drug molecules are moving around the synapse in random directions.
Some of them happen to run into some receptors and turn them on, and then they dissociate.
Then some others come along and happen to run into some other receptors, and the process
repeats.
Now if there are a lot of neurotransmitter molecules or drug molecules in the synapse,
then there's obviously a high probability that one of them will run into a receptor
and turn it on.
And even after that molecule dissociates from the receptor, another molecule is likely to
run into that receptor and turn it on right away.
On the other hand, if there aren't many molecules in the synapse, then there's a lower probability
that one of them will run into a receptor.
And if one does, there's a lower probability that another one will take its place after
it dissociates.
The bottom line is that the more neurotransmitter or drug molecules you have in the synapse,
the more receptors will be turned on.
That's the law of mass action.
And that's also why larger drug doses have larger effects.
Larger doses mean more drug molecules in the synapses, and the more molecules in the
synapses, the larger the effect.
But it turns out that's only true up to a point.
As you add more and more of the drug, you eventually reach a point where virtually all
the receptors are bound by drug molecules.
As soon as one molecule dissociates from a receptor, there's another molecule right
there to immediately take its place.
Now at that point, adding more of the drug can no longer increase the drug's effect because
all the receptors are already active all the time.
This relationship between the dose of a drug and the response to the drug can be represented
graphically in what's called a dose-response curve.
So imagine a two-dimensional graph where the dose of the drug is on the horizontal axis
and the response to the drug is on the vertical axis.
So when no drug is present, there's no response.
So we're in the bottom left corner of the graph.
But as the dose of the drug increases, more receptors are active, and some users will
begin to notice the effects.
And the dose that produces an effect in 50% of users is sometimes called the median effective
dose, or ED50.
Well as we continue to increase the dose, we'll eventually reach the maximum response
to the drug, and that occurs when all the receptors are continuously bound.
And at that point, the dose-response curve flattens out or reaches an asymptote.
So the overall dose-response curve is therefore S-shaped, or what's sometimes called a sigmoid
curve.
OK, so then why do some drugs have stronger effects than others?
Well, one key difference lies in what's called the affinity of the drug for the receptors.
Let's go back to our lock and key analogy.
Imagine a key that's sticky, and that you have to jiggle to get out of the lock, versus
a key that slides in and out very easily.
The sticky key has high affinity.
It tends to stay in the lock, and it's harder to get it out.
Likewise, a drug that has high affinity for a receptor tends to bind strongly, and it's
harder to get it out.
It therefore doesn't dissociate as quickly, but rather it stays bound to the receptors
longer and it keeps them active.
On the other hand, a molecule that has low affinity is like a key that slides in and
out of the lock very easily.
It may bind to a receptor, but it's a loose fit, and so it dissociates very quickly.
Now imagine that you give a low dose of two different drugs, one that has high affinity
for the receptors, like a sticky key, and one that has low affinity, like a loose key.
For example, morphine and codeine both bind to the same receptors to provide pain relief,
but morphine has much higher affinity.
In the case of a high affinity drug, like morphine, once those molecules bind, they'll
stick and keep the receptors active longer, and so the effect on pain relief will be stronger.
Conversely, with a lower affinity drug, like codeine, the molecules may bind to the same
receptors just as frequently, but they'll rapidly dissociate, so the receptors won't
stay active as long, and the effect will be smaller.
The bottom line is that a low dose of a high affinity drug will lead to a larger response
than a low dose of a low affinity drug.
Put another way, drugs with high affinity are more potent than drugs with low affinity.
Here, potency refers to the amount of drug you need to get a specific level of response.
For example, morphine is considered a more potent pain reliever than codeine, because
low doses of morphine provide the same level of pain relief as much higher doses of codeine.
Now surprisingly, the affinity of a drug does not actually determine its maximum possible
effect, or what's often called a drug's efficacy.
If you think about it, at high doses, even a drug with low affinity will tend to be continuously
bound to all the receptors.
Basically, if there's enough of the drug around, all the receptors will be occupied,
no matter what.
Even if the drug binds and rapidly dissociates, there's another molecule right behind it,
waiting to bind.
The receptors stay bound all the time, and the maximum effect is achieved, even though
the drug has low affinity.
So even though affinity affects potency, it doesn't determine the maximum possible effect
of the drug, its efficacy.
So then, what does determine the efficacy of a drug?
For example, why is the maximum possible level of pain relief so much higher for morphine
than it is for, say, aspirin?
Well, one reason that two drugs could have different efficacies is because they act in
different ways.
For example, if two drugs bind to different types of receptors, and one of those receptors
is more related to pain relief than the other one, then it wouldn't be surprising if the
drugs differ in how much pain relief they can provide.
But even if two drugs bind to the same type of receptor, they could still have different
efficacies if they drive the receptors to different degrees.
And the degree to which a molecule drives a receptor is referred to as its intrinsic
activity, and it can differ for different molecules.
And differences in intrinsic activity lead to differences in the maximum effect that
a drug can have.
Do you remember what's happening at the receptors when a drug is having its maximum effect?
All the receptors are continuously bound, and so they're all turned on all the time.
But even if all the receptors are active, they may not be active to the same degree.
You see, a drug with high intrinsic activity produces a strong response from the receptor,
whereas a drug with low intrinsic activity produces a weak response, even though it's
bound to the same receptor.
So those two drugs could produce significantly different responses, even if all the receptors
are continuously bound.
And so the efficacy or maximum possible effect for the two drugs would be quite different.
Now we can answer our second question.
Why do some drugs have stronger psychological effects than others?
Well one important reason is because different drugs differ in their affinity and in the
amount of intrinsic activity that they produce.
Drugs with higher affinity are more potent, meaning that you need less of the drug to
produce an effect.
And drugs that produce higher intrinsic activity have higher efficacy, meaning that they produce
a larger maximum effect.
Now understanding how drugs affect the brain can also provide some insight into some of
the pharmacological treatments that are used to treat drug overdose.
To understand how these medications work, it's helpful to distinguish between agonists
and antagonists.
An agonist is a molecule that binds to a receptor and produces high intrinsic activity, that
is, it drives the receptor strongly.
And antagonists, on the other hand, bind to the same receptors but they produce no intrinsic
activity.
So imagine a key that fits into a lock but that won't turn.
It's occupying the lock, just like a key that works, but you can't open the door or start
the engine, even though you can slide the key into the lock.
Well that's what's happening when you have an antagonist binding to a receptor.
It's not causing any intrinsic activity itself, but what it is doing is preventing the agonists
from binding to that same receptor.
So antagonists produce their effects by blocking the action of an agonist, whether the agonist
is a natural neurotransmitter or a drug.
For example, one drug that's commonly used to treat heroin overdose is called naloxone.
Now naloxone is a competitive antagonist that binds to the same receptors as heroin.
But because it's an antagonist, it doesn't lead to the intrinsic activity in the receptor
that heroin would.
It just prevents the heroin from binding to the receptors.
Furthermore, naloxone has high receptor affinity, meaning that once it binds to a receptor,
it's sticky and it doesn't come off right away.
Well that's very effective in blocking the receptors and preventing heroin from binding
to them.
Remember the dose response curve?
When you give someone a competitive antagonist, it shifts the whole curve to the right.
That is, now you need a higher dose of the drug to produce the same effect.
For example, if you pretreat a heroin addict with naloxone and that person subsequently
takes heroin, the heroin won't have the same effect that it normally would.
And the risk of overdose could be reduced substantially.
Unfortunately, not all antagonists are beneficial.
In fact, some snake venoms actually contain competitive antagonists.
Consider the venom of the many-banded crate, which is a deadly snake that's found in Southeast
Asia.
Crate venom contains a competitive antagonist that binds to the same receptors as acetylcholine,
an extremely important neurotransmitter in the nervous system.
Acetylcholine is the chemical that tells your muscles to contract.
All the muscle contractions in your body depend on acetylcholine binding to acetylcholine receptors
on the muscle cells, and that includes the muscles that you use to breathe.
Well, crate venom also binds to those acetylcholine receptors on muscle cells, but it doesn't
activate those receptors.
It just prevents acetylcholine from activating them.
And so, crate venom can cause paralysis and suppress breathing, potentially killing the
victim.
Worse yet, crate venom binds virtually irreversibly to acetylcholine receptors.
Remember that for real neurotransmitters and all the standard psychoactive drugs, binding
is reversible, like a key that slides into the ignition and turns on the receptor for
an instant, but then slides back out, making the receptor available for another molecule.
But crate venom stays bound, like a key that breaks off in the ignition, and because it's
an antagonist, it doesn't even turn the engine on.
Now, think about the implications of that for a second.
It means that those acetylcholine receptors might never be activated again.
Now, your body's capable of making new acetylcholine receptors, but that can take a couple of days.
And in the meantime, the bite victim's nervous system wouldn't be able to control the affected
muscles.
And if those muscles include the muscles used for breathing, then the patient would need
to be kept on life support until their body could make new receptors, otherwise they'd
suffocate.
Okay, so far we've talked about competitive antagonists, like naloxone and the toxin in
crate venom.
But chemicals can also serve as partial agonists, and some of those chemicals are also used
in treating drug addicts.
Partial agonists bind to the same receptors as a drug of abuse, but they produce a reduced
level of intrinsic activity, compared to the drug.
If you didn't have any of the drug in your system, then a partial agonist would behave
like a weak version of that drug.
However, in the presence of the drug itself, the partial agonist will work as an antagonist,
because it competes with the drug for the receptor binding.
And rather than letting the drug, which is a full agonist, bind to the receptors, the
partial agonist binds.
And although it does produce a moderate level of intrinsic activity in the receptor, that
activity level is significantly reduced compared to the drug of abuse.
One example of a partial agonist is buprenorphine.
This drug can be used for pain relief itself, but it can also be used in the treatment of
addiction to heroin or morphine.
Buprenorphine is actually more potent than morphine, because it has very high affinity.
So you don't need very much of it to get some pain relief.
Less than morphine, in fact.
But buprenorphine produces less intrinsic activity than morphine does.
So its maximum effect, or efficacy, is significantly smaller than morphine.
As a result, you're much less likely to overdose on buprenorphine than you are on morphine.
Finally, let's turn to our third question, which is the one most directly related to
addiction.
How can someone become dependent on a drug?
And specifically, what are some of the neural mechanisms underlying the symptoms of tolerance
and withdrawal?
For repeated drug use, people often need more of the drug to get the same effect.
That is, they become tolerant to the effects of the drug.
In fact, chronic drug users often report not feeling the same high as they used to, but
that they still need to take their drug just to feel normal again.
Well, what's happening is that the body has begun to compensate for the presence of the
drug.
That is, the body has gotten used to the drug, and it's trying to compensate for this abnormal
chemical by adapting in specific ways.
Essentially, it's the body's attempt to return to normal despite the drug.
And the body can do this in many ways, and some of these changes happen outside the brain.
For example, chronic alcoholics produce more of the enzyme that breaks down alcohol than
non-alcoholics do.
So less alcohol will get to the blood and the brain than in non-alcoholics.
So as a result, alcoholics become tolerant to alcohol, and they need to drink more to
have the same effect.
But there are also changes that are occurring within the brain itself.
And in particular, over time, the brain will often reduce the number of receptors that
the drug is binding to.
This is called receptor down regulation.
Essentially, the body is expecting large quantities of the drug, and in order to reduce the effect
of that drug, it reduces the number of receptors that respond to it.
You remember our discussion of homeostasis in a previous lecture?
That's what's happening here.
The body's trying to maintain a stable level of receptor activity, and it's doing that
by reducing the number of receptors.
Now, naturally, if there are fewer receptors, then the same amount of drug will produce
a smaller effect, and so tolerance develops.
Receptor down regulation can also help explain why people experience withdrawal or abstinence
syndrome.
Suppose you've gotten used to taking a drug, and the number of receptors that the drug
binds to has been reduced.
Well, what's going to happen when the drug is removed?
Well, typically what happens is you get symptoms that are the opposite of those produced by
the drug itself.
For example, opioids like morphine and heroin tend to relieve pain.
They also tend to produce a feeling of warmth and well-being.
They even make you constipated because there are many opioid receptors in the gut.
Now, if you stop using the drug, rather than experiencing pain relief, you start feeling
aches and pains.
Rather than feeling warm, you start getting chills.
Rather than having a sense of well-being, you might start feeling anxious and uncomfortable.
And rather than being constipated, you may experience diarrhea.
So you can see that the withdrawal symptoms are in some sense the mirror image of the
effects that the drug itself produces.
You see, what's happened is that the body has gotten used to a large quantity of the
drug in the system, and it's compensated by down-regulating receptors.
And now, when the drug is removed, those few receptors that are left aren't being activated
as much as they previously were.
And so you actually get the opposite effects of the drug itself.
So when we talk about dependence on a drug, one of the things we mean is that tolerance
has developed.
That is, there have been some physical changes in the body which have led to tolerance in
the presence of the drug.
And now, quitting the drug will result in withdrawal symptoms.
These could be physical symptoms like diarrhea, or they could be psychological symptoms like
anxiety.
Let's finish up.
Today's lecture gave you a basic understanding of how psychoactive drugs work and produce
their effects.
One take-home point is that all psychoactive drugs work by binding to the same receptors
as real neurotransmitters.
But despite this similarity, different psychoactive drugs obviously have very different effects.
Why is that?
Why is cocaine energizing while alcohol is relaxing?
Why does marijuana increase appetite while heroin produces a dream-like euphoria?
Well, to answer these kinds of questions, we need to dive into the details of specific
drugs and how each works at a neural level.
And that's what we'll do in the next few lectures.
Next time, we'll talk about two of the most widely used psychoactive drugs in the world,
caffeine and nicotine.
