You've probably heard the phrase drugs and alcohol many times before, perhaps in the
context of drug and alcohol education programs in schools, or social programs that target
the abuse of drugs and alcohol by adults.
But the phrase underscores a very interesting phenomenon.
People often consider alcohol to be fundamentally different than less socially acceptable substances
like cocaine or heroin.
And if you think about it, modern society also often treats alcohol differently.
Alcohol is kind of like a social lubricant in our society, and the vast majority of adults
drink alcohol occasionally, not to mention a large number of teenagers.
It's actually kind of rare to attend a party or significant social event without drinks.
In fact, it's not uncommon for people to feel some obligation to drink in certain contexts,
even if they don't want to.
So many people probably find it strange to think of alcohol as a drug and to group it
with substances like cocaine and heroin.
But is alcohol fundamentally different than these other drugs of abuse?
Well, clearly in some superficial ways it is.
First and foremost, alcohol is legal, and cocaine isn't.
And that's obviously a very important difference.
But what about in other ways?
Specifically, is the way that alcohol affects the human body similar to the way that other
addictive drugs affect the body?
That's what we're going to think about today.
We'll apply what we've learned so far about drugs of abuse, and we'll see if alcohol
affects the brain in the same way.
So how does alcohol affect the brain?
Well, as you've learned, neurons in the brain typically communicate using special chemicals
called neurotransmitters.
One neuron releases a bunch of neurotransmitter molecules, and these molecules bind to receptors
on neighboring neurons, potentially activating those receptors and producing specific biological
effects.
And we saw that drugs of abuse typically bind to the same receptors as natural neurotransmitters,
but then they produce abnormal levels of activity in those receptors.
And that abnormal activity is what makes the drugs psychoactive, making the user experience
particular feelings like euphoria or excitement or contentment.
So does alcohol also bind to natural receptors and produce abnormal receptor activity?
The answer is yes.
In fact, alcohol affects receptors for multiple neurotransmitters, and two of the most important
are called glutamate and GABA.
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain.
It's the chemical that many neurons use to try to make neighboring neurons fire.
Glutamate has a few different receptors, but the one that's most influenced by alcohol
is the NMDA receptor.
These receptors have been found to play a major role in learning and memory.
Alcohol binds to NMDA receptors, and it makes them less active, and the way it does this
is kind of interesting.
You see, NMDA receptors have multiple binding sites.
And alcohol actually binds to a different site on the receptor than glutamate.
And when alcohol binds, it actually changes the receptor, and it makes it less responsive
to glutamate.
This is called allosteric modulation.
The alcohol is modulating the effects of glutamate by binding to a different site on
the NMDA receptors.
The bottom line is that alcohol reduces the effects that glutamate normally has.
And as we mentioned, what glutamate normally does is to excite neurons and make them fire.
So by inhibiting or antagonizing glutamate, alcohol suppresses neural activity in the
brain.
And that's why it produces a sedative and hypnotic effect.
Also, the fact that NMDA receptors play an important role in learning and memory may
explain why large doses of alcohol can produce blackouts and amnesia.
The other major neurotransmitter that alcohol affects is GABA.
While glutamate is the brain's major excitatory neurotransmitter, GABA is its excitatory neurotransmitter.
GABA is its major inhibitory neurotransmitter.
So when GABA receptors on a neuron are activated, they try to prevent the neuron from firing.
So increasing the activity of GABA actually suppresses neural activity.
Now scientists have not yet found a particular site on the GABA receptors where alcohol binds.
Nevertheless, most still believe that alcohol is again acting as an allosteric modulator,
but this time making GABA receptors more responsive to GABA and therefore suppressing
neural activity.
The reason they believe this is because the effects of alcohol are so similar to drugs
that DO bind to GABA receptors.
In particular, barbiturate drugs.
Barbiturates are known to bind to GABA receptors and they have very similar effects to alcohol.
They also inhibit neural activity and they produce sedative, hypnotic effects.
Furthermore, there is cross-tolerance between alcohol and barbiturates.
What that means is that a long-time user of barbiturates who has developed a tolerance
to those drugs may also be tolerant to alcohol.
In other words, it would take an unusually large number of drinks to make that person
drunk, even if they never drank before.
So that suggests that alcohol must be working on the brain in the same way barbiturates do.
And since barbiturates bind to GABA receptors and make them more active, scientists assume
alcohol must do that too.
So alcohol shares at least one important characteristic with drugs of abuse.
They both bind to natural receptors in the brain and lead to abnormal levels of activity.
A second characteristic of drugs of abuse is that repeated use can lead to compensatory
changes in the body that produce physical dependence characterized by tolerance to the
drug's effects and withdrawal symptoms when the drug is stopped.
So does chronic alcohol use produce similar compensatory changes and physical dependence?
Definitely.
As you probably know, people who drink a lot for an extended period of time will typically
become less sensitive to alcohol's effects over time.
They develop a tolerance for alcohol.
There are actually a number of changes that happen in the body that contribute to alcohol
tolerance.
One change occurs in the digestive system.
It turns out that if someone drinks heavily for years, their body will begin to produce
more of the enzymes that break down alcohol in the stomach and liver.
And having more of these enzymes means they can break down alcohol faster than they could
originally.
Consequently, less of the alcohol they drink actually gets to the brain.
And so they need to drink more to have the same effect.
Well, that's tolerance.
Compensatory changes also occur in the brain.
In particular, there's evidence for an up-regulation of NMDA receptors and a down-regulation of
GABA receptors in the brains of heavy drinkers.
So what do I mean by that?
Well, recall that alcohol binds to NMDA receptors and it inhibits the activity of glutamate.
Well, if you continuously and chronically use alcohol, the brain will try to compensate
for that by producing more NMDA receptors.
That's what we mean by up-regulation.
Conversely, chronic alcohol use leads to down-regulation of GABA receptors.
In this case, the brain is compensating for the over-stimulation of these GABA receptors
by producing fewer of them.
And these compensatory changes contribute to alcohol tolerance.
In most people, alcohol produces sedative and hypnotic effects because of the way it
inhibits neural processing.
But the brain of the chronic alcohol drinker has reduced its ability to produce inhibition.
Consequently, alcoholics won't experience the same amount of sedation.
They become tolerant to the effects of alcohol, a clear sign of physical dependence.
What about withdrawal?
Do heavy drinkers who quit experience withdrawal symptoms?
Absolutely.
Withdrawal symptoms from heavy drinking are actually worse than withdrawal symptoms from
most drugs of abuse.
In fact, withdrawal from alcohol can be quite dangerous, even fatal.
Standard symptoms of alcohol withdrawal include tremors and shakes, high anxiety, high blood
pressure, increased heart rate, sweating, and nausea.
And in severe cases, alcoholics in withdrawal may experience delirium tremens, or DTs, characterized
by convulsions and hallucinations or delirium.
It's therefore important for a heavy drinker who wants to quit to do so under a doctor's
supervision.
So what's causing these severe withdrawal symptoms?
Well, what do you think would happen if alcohol is discontinued after the upregulation and
downregulation of brain receptors that we talked about?
There are more NMDA receptors than normal, but now the alcohol isn't there to inhibit
the excitatory actions of glutamate, so you get abnormally high levels of neural activity.
Worse yet, the downregulation of GABA receptors means that there are fewer of them to inhibit
neural processing and keep it in check.
The end result is substantial overstimulation when alcohol is stopped.
And it's that overstimulation that's thought to give rise to the seizures and anxiety that
are associated with alcohol withdrawal.
Clearly, the alcoholic is now physically dependent on alcohol and needs to drink just to feel
normal.
Now let's turn to a third characteristic of drugs of abuse.
Their addictiveness.
Is alcohol also addictive?
And if so, is the mechanism of addiction similar to drugs of abuse?
Well, I'm sure you already know the answer to the first question.
Of course alcohol is addictive.
Just ask any alcoholic who's trying to quit.
In fact, the World Health Organization estimated that there are approximately 140 million people
addicted to alcohol worldwide.
These are people who are physically dependent on alcohol and who continue to use it despite
significant negative consequences.
This makes alcohol the single most abused substance on the planet.
But are the mechanisms underlying alcohol addiction similar to the mechanisms underlying
addiction to drugs of abuse?
Well, do you remember what some of those mechanisms are?
First, remember that drugs of abuse over stimulate the brain's reward circuit.
They tend to excite or activate the nucleus accumbens, which is associated with feelings
of pleasure.
They also tend to lead to a release of dopamine by neurons in the ventral tegmental area,
or VTA.
And that dopamine release is associated with craving or wanting.
And we also talked about how that dopamine release will back up to cues that are associated
with the drug taking.
So now when the drug user encounters those cues, dopamine's released and they may experience
strong craving to use the drug.
So are these same mechanisms at work in the brains of alcoholics?
Yes, they are.
First, consider the brain's pleasure center, the nucleus accumbens.
It turns out that drugs that block the response of the nucleus accumbens also reduce the desire
to drink alcohol.
For example, animals can also become addicted to alcohol.
And once they're addicted, they will self-administer alcohol just like human alcoholics will.
And even their pattern of alcoholic use is similar.
Specifically, like many human alcoholics, they often drink in binges.
Well, if these alcoholic animals are then given a drug that blocks or antagonizes receptors
in the nucleus accumbens, the level of self-administration drops significantly.
And the same thing has been found in humans.
As we'll discuss a little later in the lecture, these kinds of drugs are now regularly used
to help treat alcoholism.
Now these findings imply that alcohol must be activating the nucleus accumbens and producing
a reward response, just like drugs of abuse do.
I mean, after all, if alcohol didn't activate the nucleus accumbens, then why would a drug
that antagonizes receptors on the nucleus accumbens affect alcohol use?
But it does.
Second, like drugs of abuse, alcohol has also been shown to lead to increased dopamine
release in the reward circuit.
Now this might seem strange since alcohol tends to inhibit neural activity.
So why would alcohol lead to increased activity in dopamine neurons?
Well most scientists believe that alcohol is producing a disinhibition effect in the
reward circuit.
Here's the idea.
A bunch of neurons normally inhibit the dopamine neurons in the VTA.
But alcohol inhibits those inhibitors.
It therefore disinhibits the VTA dopamine neurons.
And the end result is greater activity in the VTA and a greater release of dopamine.
Alcoholics also have very strong triggers associated with alcohol use, just like drug
addicts have triggers associated with drug use.
So when an alcoholic walks by a bar or sees a bottle, those cues can trigger strong cravings
to drink, consistent with the idea that the heavy drinker has learned strong associations
between those cues and drug taking behavior.
Just like a crack addict has strong associations with the sight of a crack pipe, and a heroin
addict has strong associations with the sight of a needle.
Furthermore, just like other addictions, there's very good evidence for genetic susceptibility
to alcohol addiction.
For example, you remember when we talked about inbred mouse strains in our lecture on the
genetics of addiction?
All the mice within one strain are genetically virtually identical, but different strains
are different.
And you may recall that some strains tend to prefer drinking alcohol compared to drinking
water, while other strains prefer drinking water.
So apparently your genetic makeup can influence your desire to drink.
Genetics can also protect you from alcoholism.
For example, most of us have two enzymes in our digestive system that break down alcohol.
But it turns out that many East Asians have a genetic variation that produces an inactive
form of one of those enzymes.
And as a result, these people can have a fairly severe reaction to alcohol, which is sometimes
referred to as the Asian flush reaction, or just Asian glow.
The symptoms can include a red flushing of the skin, nausea, and even vomiting.
Well, as you might imagine, people with this genetic variation tend not to drink much alcohol
because it's very unpleasant for them.
And as a result, they're almost completely protected from ever becoming alcoholics.
Okay, we've seen that alcohol shares at least four similarities with drugs of abuse.
First, its mechanism of action on the brain is similar.
First, like drugs of abuse, alcohol binds to natural brain receptors and produces abnormal
levels of activity.
Second, like drugs of abuse, heavy drinking leads to compensatory changes in the body,
which produce tolerance and withdrawal symptoms.
Third, the mechanisms of addiction to alcohol seem to be similar to the mechanisms of addiction
to other drugs.
For example, alcohol leads to the release of dopamine, and it also activates the nucleus
accumbens, the brain's reward center.
And finally, genetic factors play an important role in addiction to alcohol, just like they
do in addiction to other drugs.
Now, despite these similarities, you could still argue that alcohol is different from
drugs of abuse on other grounds.
For example, alcohol is legal, while some other drugs aren't.
It's also much more socially acceptable than so-called harder drugs.
More importantly, though, there's some evidence that although alcohol is addictive, it's not
as addictive as cocaine or heroin, or nicotine for that matter.
This evidence comes from animal self-administration studies.
Animals typically won't drink alcohol voluntarily, presumably because they don't like the taste.
Furthermore, absorption of alcohol from the digestive system is relatively slow, and so
the reinforcing effects take a while to have an impact.
However, if animals are forced to drink alcohol, then they will indeed become addicted, and
they'll voluntarily drink alcohol later.
They'll also self-administer alcohol via an intravenous line without prompting.
Now, I'll leave it up to you to decide whether these differences are big enough to say that
alcohol is fundamentally different than other addictive drugs.
Personally, I don't think so.
But at the very least, I think we can agree that alcohol does share a number of similarities
with drugs of abuse.
Like alcohol use is also associated with a number of significant negative consequences,
just like the chronic use of other drugs.
So let's talk about some of those consequences.
First, it's important to point out at the outset that most of the negative consequences
we'll be discussing are associated with excessive alcohol use, not moderate use.
In fact, moderate drinking can actually have some positive impacts on health.
Low doses of alcohol dilate blood vessels, which produces good oxygen supply to the brain,
and that may protect you from later dementia.
Moderate drinking also increases levels of good cholesterol and decreases levels of bad
cholesterol, thus reducing your risk of heart disease.
But excessive drinking and drinking at inappropriate times is associated with some very significant
health risks.
For example, as you may know, long-term heavy drinking can lead to cirrhosis of the liver.
It can also cause brain damage and shrinkage of the cerebral cortex.
And of course, drinking and driving can have fatal consequences.
In fact, alcohol is estimated to be involved in about 50% of all highway deaths.
Heavy alcohol use can even lead to malnutrition.
It turns out that alcoholic drinks are relatively high in calories, but they don't provide
protein or vitamins or minerals.
And so, alcoholics often don't eat enough, because they're getting a lot of calories
from alcohol.
As a result, they often develop a vitamin deficiency, and specifically a deficiency in
the B1 vitamin, thiamine.
And this vitamin deficiency can actually lead to brain damage and a severe amnesia.
This is called Korsakov syndrome, and it's one of the leading causes of amnesia.
Okay, well as I mentioned in the last lecture, I don't want these lectures to come across
as purely intellectual exercises, especially to people who are struggling with an addiction
themselves.
So, I'd like to spend the last few minutes talking about potential treatment options
for alcoholism.
And now remember, I'm not a medical doctor, and so people who want to try to break an
addiction to alcohol should talk with their physician about their options.
And doing so is particularly important in the case of alcohol, because withdrawal from alcohol
can be so dangerous.
But with that caveat in mind, let's talk about approaches to treating an addiction to alcohol.
The first step is usually detoxification.
That means weaning the person off of alcohol for a long enough period of time that their
physical dependence has subsided, and they aren't experiencing severe withdrawal symptoms
anymore.
In particular, physicians will often prescribe benzodiazepines, like Valium, during detoxification.
Benzodiazepines activate the inhibitory GABA receptors, like alcohol does.
So taking them when you're quitting alcohol helps to prevent the dangerous symptoms, like
seizures and DTs that are associated with alcohol withdrawal.
So taking them when you're quitting alcohol helps to prevent the dangerous symptoms, like
seizures and DTs that are associated with alcohol withdrawal.
After detox, the next step is often some kind of psychosocial rehabilitation.
This could be individual or group therapy, or it could be a self-help group, like alcoholic
synonymous, rational recovery, or the community reinforcement approach.
All of these psychosocial methods do seem to help, in the sense that people who participate
are more likely to quit drinking than people who don't.
However, they don't work for everyone.
In fact, roughly 40 to 70 percent of people in the programs are drinking again after one
year.
Nevertheless, as we mentioned when we were talking about quitting smoking, it's often
helpful to see failures as learning opportunities and as normal steps in the road to complete
abstinence.
There are also some pharmacological interventions that have proven to be helpful in helping
drinkers quit.
One common approach is a drug called disulfiram.
Disulfiram inhibits one of the enzymes that breaks down alcohol, and by inhibiting this
enzyme, people aren't able to break down alcohol as efficiently as they normally do.
As a result, they have a very unpleasant reaction to alcohol, similar to the Asian flush reaction
that we discussed.
In particular, when people drink alcohol while they're taking disulfiram, they'll typically
experience intense, unpleasant, hangover-like symptoms, and the hope is that these symptoms
will make drinking aversive, and people will feel less of an urge to drink.
Now, one problem with this approach is that you have to be very determined to quit drinking
for it to work, because otherwise you'll simply stop taking the drug.
A second pharmacological approach is to try to eliminate the rewarding effects of alcohol.
Remember, we pointed out that alcohol activates the nucleus accumbens, the brain's pleasure
center.
Well, a drug called naltrexone tries to help alcoholics quit by inhibiting that pleasure
response.
Naltrexone is what's called an opioid antagonist.
It competes with natural painkillers in the brain called opioids that normally activate
the nucleus accumbens, and leads to feelings of pleasure.
When naltrexone is taken, it competes with those opioids, and it makes it harder for
them to activate their receptors.
As a result, people feel less pleasure or less reward from drinking alcohol than they
normally would, and reducing the pleasure associated with drinking can help alcoholics
quit, especially when naltrexone is combined with behavioral therapy.
In fact, quit rates double after three months of such a treatment combination.
Finally, a third medication that has proven somewhat effective in helping alcoholics
is called a campersate.
Now, recall that alcohol is an allosteric modulator of NMDA receptors.
That is, it binds to NMDA receptors but at a different site than glutamate, and when
it binds, it changes the NMDA receptors and makes them less responsive to glutamate.
Well, a campersate is also thought to make NMDA receptors less responsive to glutamate,
probably via the same kind of allosteric modulation mechanism.
A campersate also reduces the sensitivity of other non-NMDA receptors.
Now remember, glutamate is an excitatory neurotransmitter, and one of the problems with alcohol withdrawal
is that the glutamate system goes into overdrive, leading to too much neural activity and to
tremors, anxiety, and even seizures.
Well, if you're taking a campersate, then the receptors will be less responsive to glutamate,
which helps to keep the excitatory glutamate system under control, and that can reduce
those unpleasant side effects and hopefully help the recovering alcoholics stay abstinent.
Okay, let's finish up.
In the last couple of lectures, we focused on common and socially accepted psychoactive
drugs, caffeine, nicotine, and alcohol.
In the next part of the course, we'll turn to some drugs that are more controversial and
less accepted, and we'll start with what might be the most controversial of all.
Marijuana.
How does marijuana affect the brain?
How addictive is it?
Does it really have any legitimate medical applications?
These are the kinds of questions we'll answer in our next lecture, all about the science of pot.
