In March of 2011, federal agents simultaneously raided dozens of locations in Montana where
marijuana was being grown and distributed.
The raids were the culmination of a two-year federal drug trafficking investigation, and
they resulted in the convictions of 33 people.
But the raids were controversial.
You see, the growers were medical marijuana providers, and using marijuana for medical
purposes was legal according to Montana state law.
In fact, many of the growers often consulted with Montana state officials to get input
on their operation.
Some even gave regular tours to police and politicians, including the head of the state
narcotics control office.
The problem was that federal law at the time didn't recognize any currently accepted medical
use of marijuana in treatment, and it outlawed its production and distribution.
The growers in Montana assumed that the federal authorities would leave them alone as long
as they complied with state laws.
Obviously, they were wrong, and some of them went to prison as a result.
Your reaction to this case probably depends a lot on how you feel about marijuana itself.
Some people see marijuana as a dangerous addictive drug, and they often think of medical marijuana
as a loophole that drug dealers and addicts use to skirt the law.
They may see the Montana raids as a far too infrequent success story in the nation's
war on drugs.
But other people see marijuana as a relatively harmless drug, and one that has some beneficial
properties that could help patients suffering from a number of illnesses.
And obviously, those people might view the Montana raids in a very different light.
Well, what does science have to say about marijuana?
What does marijuana do to the brain, and what kinds of effects does it have?
Does it have any demonstrated medical benefits?
How addictive is it?
These are the kinds of questions we're going to talk about today.
Let's begin by providing some background on marijuana, including where it comes from
and how it's used.
marijuana comes from the hemp plant, which is called cannabis sativa in Latin.
Historically, the hemp plant has had a wide variety of uses, including making fiber, clothing,
rope, and canvas.
In fact, the word canvas is derived from the word cannabis.
Canvas literally means made of hemp.
Now as you might imagine, given all these uses, hemp has been cultivated for thousands
of years, all over the world, including in the U.S.
None other than George Washington himself grew hemp on his farm.
Marijuana, hashish, and hash oil are all derived from hemp.
Marijuana is basically dried pieces of the hemp plant, hashish is dried resin from the
plant, and hash oil is a more concentrated form of the resin.
All three forms are usually smoked and inhaled, although they're also sometimes eaten, for
example, being baked into brownies.
Now, I'll mainly use the term marijuana throughout today's talk, but what I really mean is any
of these forms of cannabis.
What all of these forms of cannabis have in common is that they contain chemicals called
cannabinoids, and many cannabinoids are psychoactive.
So when they enter the bloodstream and get to the brain, they can produce psychological
and behavioral effects.
In 1964, scientists identified one particular cannabinoid that seems to be responsible for
the major effects associated with marijuana use.
It's called Delta-9 tetrahydrocanabinol, or THC for short, and it's the THC in hemp
that produces many of the psychoactive effects associated with marijuana.
So how do cannabinoids like THC affect the brain?
Well, for a long time, the answer was, we don't know.
But that changed in 1988, when William Devane, Alan Howlett, and their colleagues at the
St. Louis University Medical School found evidence for cannabinoid receptors in the brain.
Do you remember how neurotransmitters bind to specific molecules called receptors in
the brain?
Recall that most psychoactive drugs produce their effects by mimicking neurotransmitters
and binding to natural brain receptors.
Well, cannabinoids like THC are no exception to that rule, and the receptors that they
bind to were even named after them.
That's why they're called cannabinoid receptors.
There are two major types of cannabinoid receptors in the body, the CB1 receptors and the CB2
receptors.
The CB2 receptors play an important role in the immune system and are not thought to
be involved in the psychological effects produced by marijuana.
It's the CB1 receptors in the brain that underlie those effects, and so those are the ones
that we'll be focusing on.
Now, presumably the brain doesn't have receptors that were specifically designed to respond
to marijuana.
Rather, scientists assumed that there must be some natural brain chemicals that bind
to cannabinoid receptors.
So after discovering the receptors, scientists went looking for the chemicals, and in 1992
they found one, a natural brain chemical called anandamide, and subsequent studies have found
a few others.
Now these natural chemicals that are produced in the brain itself are sometimes called endogenous
cannabinoids, or just endocannabinoids for short.
These are different from exogenous cannabinoids that come from outside the body.
Endogenous literally means produced from within, while exogenous means produced from outside.
Endocannandamide is an endocannabinoid because it's made within the body, while THC is an
exogenous cannabinoid because it comes from outside, specifically from cannabis.
And when scientists investigated the properties of endogenous cannabinoids more deeply, they
discovered something pretty interesting.
Endocannabinoids are actually quite different from most other neurotransmitters in the brain.
The most neurotransmitters are stored in neurons, and then they're released when the neuron
fires.
But endocannabinoids appear to be made only when they're needed, rather than being stored.
What's more important is that cannabinoids seem to work largely as retrograde messengers.
Recall that when neurons communicate, what usually happens is one of them fires and releases
a bunch of neurotransmitter molecules into the synapse, or the small gap between the
cells.
The neurotransmitter molecules then move across the synapse and bind to receptors on
another neuron, perhaps causing that neuron to fire too.
The cell that fires and releases the neurotransmitter is called the presynaptic cell, and the cell
that the neurotransmitter binds to is called the postsynaptic cell.
So normally, brain chemicals move from the presynaptic cell and bind to receptors on
the postsynaptic cell.
But cannabinoid receptors are not usually found on the postsynaptic cell.
They're usually on the presynaptic cells, and that led scientists to hypothesize that
cannabinoids are typically used to send messages back from the postsynaptic cell to the presynaptic
cell.
And that's what it means to be a retrograde messenger.
And subsequent evidence has confirmed that hypothesis.
In particular, endocannabinoids like anandamide are typically released by the postsynaptic
cell and then they move back to the presynaptic cell, where they bind to the CB1 receptors.
But why?
What function could retrograde messaging serve?
Well most scientists believe that it's used to regulate neurotransmission.
Specifically, retrograde messaging can turn off the presynaptic cell once it's released
enough neurotransmitter molecules, and therefore prevent it from releasing too much.
And this mechanism has been found in both excitatory and inhibitory synapses, suggesting
that cannabinoids can prevent too much excitation, as well as too much inhibition.
Furthermore, some recent evidence suggests that the regulatory functions of cannabinoids
may be important in helping us forget things that we need to forget.
For example, suppose you park in the same structure that you parked in yesterday.
Well, sometimes your memory of yesterday's parking spot can interfere with your ability
to remember where you parked today.
That's called proactive interference, and there's evidence that endocannabinoids can
reduce this kind of interference.
In one experiment, mice were placed in a tank of water, and at one location in the tank
there was a platform hidden just below the surface.
The mice swam around the tank until they happened to bump into the platform, which allowed them
to rest without having to swim.
After a few trials like this, mice will learn where the platform is and swim straight to
it.
But what happens if you move the platform after they've learned its location?
Well, naturally at first, they swim around the old location, looking for the platform.
But eventually they start exploring the rest of the tank, and ultimately they find the
new location.
Well, after a few more trials, they overcome the interference from the previous location,
and they swim straight to the new one.
But it turns out this ability to forget the previous location actually depends on cannabinoid
receptors.
In particular, knockout mice that are missing the CB1 receptors will repeatedly swim to
the original location, as if they can't forget it.
Likewise, cannabinoid receptors are critical in unlearning fear, a phenomenon called fear
extinction.
So suppose rats are repeatedly shocked whenever they hear a particular tone.
Pretty soon, they'll associate the tone with the shock, and they'll freeze whenever they
hear the tone.
This is kind of like Pavlov's Dogs, which we've discussed in lecture two.
But in this case, the rats are getting a shock instead of getting food.
Now, suppose that you repeatedly present the tone, but you don't shock the animals anymore.
Well, at first, of course, they'll still freeze.
But over time, they'll gradually unlearn the association, and they'll stop freezing.
In other words, their fear is extinguished over time.
And this kind of fear extinction depends on endocannabinoids.
We know this because blocking the action of cannabinoids using CB1 receptor antagonist
drugs also blocks fear extinction.
So when cannabinoids are blocked, the rats will remain afraid of the tone, and they'll
continue freezing, even though the tone is no longer associated with the shock.
These findings have led scientists in some interesting directions, like using exogenous
cannabinoids to treat post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD.
After significant trauma, some people experience recurring flashbacks, nightmares, and significant
fear, even though the trauma may be long over.
It's as if these people have trouble extinguishing their fear, similar to the rats in whom the
action of cannabinoids had been blocked.
In fact, some studies have found that people experiencing PTSD have lower than normal levels
of the endocannabinoid anandamide.
So scientists are becoming more interested in using exogenous cannabinoids, including
medical marijuana, as a potential treatment for PTSD.
These findings may also explain why marijuana users often report memory problems.
Hyperactivating the endocannabinoid system with an exogenous cannabinoid, like marijuana,
may lead to forgetting information that you actually want to remember.
And consistent with that hypothesis, cannabinoid receptors are found in high concentration
in the hippocampus, a brain area that's known to be crucially important for long-term memory.
But the receptors aren't just found there.
In fact, cannabinoid receptors have been found all over the brain.
They're found in areas involved in motor control and in areas that process fear and anxiety.
And perhaps most relevant for this course, they're also found in the midbrain dopamine
system and the reward circuit.
Now the fact that cannabinoid receptors are found in so many areas suggests that cannabinoids
like THC might have a broad range of effects.
And in fact, they do.
So marijuana users report a variety of effects that can differ substantially depending on
the person and the situation.
Many users report a feeling of euphoria and exhilaration, as well as lowered inhibitions.
For example, users will often laugh at things that they wouldn't normally find funny.
And they might not even be able to stop themselves from laughing, even if they try.
Users also often report feeling relaxed and calm and many experience enhanced visual and
auditory perception.
Food might taste unusually good, music might sound remarkably beautiful, and natural scenery
might look breathtaking.
Some people also report a sense that time is slowing down substantially.
At higher doses, marijuana can produce less pleasant symptoms, such as disorganized thoughts
and feelings of paranoia and anxiety.
Higher doses are also associated with impaired judgment and agitation.
However, there are no reported cases of death as a result of marijuana overdose.
So in that sense, the margin of safety for marijuana seems to be much larger than the
margin of safety for other drugs of abuse, like heroin or cocaine.
But besides these psychological effects, cannabinoids have other effects that have played an important
role in their medicinal use.
In particular, they can be quite effective in reducing nausea and vomiting and in increasing
appetite, what is often referred to as the munchies.
Well, as you can imagine, reducing nausea and increasing appetite are quite desirable
in a number of circumstances, including treating many chronic illnesses.
For example, cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy often experience severe nausea and reduced
appetite and they may have a hard time keeping down what little food they do manage to eat.
But a number of studies have now demonstrated that chemotherapy patients who take cannabinoids
under a doctor's supervision experience significantly less nausea and vomiting than patients who
don't.
Likewise, AIDS patients frequently suffer from a severe lack of appetite and they may
lose dangerous amounts of weight as a result.
These patients also eat more and keep more weight on when taking cannabinoids than when
they are not.
There are other benefits as well.
Cannabinoids have been shown to help relieve pain, particularly when traditional painkillers
are insufficient, and there is even evidence from animal studies that cannabinoids may inhibit
the development of certain types of tumors.
The bottom line is that there are some legitimate medical uses of cannabinoids, and indeed there
are now cannabinoid-based pills that are approved for use in the treatment of both chemotherapy-induced
nausea and AIDS.
In many states, medical marijuana itself has been legalized and is being used to treat
patients, and in fact in several states recreational use of marijuana is now legal.
On the other hand, there are often alternative drugs that can treat the same symptoms without
the psychoactive effects of cannabinoids.
For example, synthetic derivatives of the hormone progesterone also increase appetite,
and some studies suggest that they actually do so more effectively than cannabinoids.
So in short, the debate over medical marijuana isn't over yet.
Now let's turn to the issue of marijuana addiction and abuse.
Marijuana is the most widely used illegal drug in the world.
More than 17 million Americans use marijuana in a typical month, and there are more than
3 million daily users.
Marijuana use typically starts during adolescence.
In fact, it's fairly rare to find regular marijuana users who started after age 25.
Among high school seniors, about one-third have used marijuana during the past year,
and about a fifth are current users.
And believe it or not, about 1 in 8 eighth graders have reported trying marijuana in
the past year.
But does trying marijuana lead to chronic use?
Well, a 1994 survey conducted by the National Institute on Drug Abuse found that about 9
percent of people who tried marijuana at least once eventually became addicted, so roughly
1 in 10 people.
Now, clearly this number is significant, but it's also lower than the addiction rates
for other drugs that were evaluated in the survey.
So for example, about 15 percent of people who tried alcohol became addicted to alcohol,
and about 17 percent of people who tried cocaine became addicted to cocaine.
The addiction rate for nicotine was the highest of all, 32 percent of people who tried nicotine
eventually became addicted.
So the bottom line is that marijuana is indeed somewhat addictive, but it's not as addictive
as most other drugs of abuse.
Work with animals also suggests that marijuana and exogenous cannabinoids in general are
moderately addictive.
For example, monkeys will self-administer doses of THC that are comparable to the level that
would be found in a marijuana cigarette.
Furthermore, if you block the effects of cannabinoids with antagonist drugs, then THC
is no longer addictive.
That suggests that the addiction depends in part on the action of THC on cannabinoid
receptors in the brain.
Now, one question you might be asking yourself is whether the familiar neural mechanisms
of addiction that we've encountered before are also at work with marijuana?
And the answer is yes.
Specifically, like other drugs of abuse, marijuana has been shown to lead to enhanced activity
in the reward circuit and to stimulate the firing of dopamine neurons in the ventral
tegmental area.
Furthermore, injections of the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide have been shown to produce pleasurable
reactions in animals.
What about dependence and tolerance?
Well there is some evidence that chronic marijuana users do develop a physical dependence on
the drug.
Specifically, when they stop using marijuana, they often exhibit withdrawal symptoms, including
craving, irritability, anxiety, depression, and reduced appetite.
In general, they exhibit symptoms that are similar to the symptoms of nicotine withdrawal.
Likewise, animals that have been chronically exposed to cannabinoids will exhibit withdrawal
symptoms if they receive an antagonist that blocks the drug's effects.
So they'll exhibit wet dog shakes, increased grooming, and hyperactivity, for example.
All this evidence suggests that the chronic user's body has gotten used to the presence
of exogenous cannabinoids, and it has compensated.
So now, when those exogenous cannabinoids are removed, the user experiences withdrawal.
In short, they're dependent on marijuana to feel normal.
On the other hand, the evidence for the development of tolerance is actually mixed.
On the one hand, there's evidence of significant down-regulation of CB1 receptors in animals
that are injected with THC on a regular basis.
That is, their brain compensates for the regular presence of this exogenous cannabinoid by reducing
the number of cannabinoid receptors.
So you might expect that regular users would experience tolerance, and that it would require
more of the drug to experience the same effects.
But it turns out a number of reports have actually found that regular marijuana users
still report the same high as they experienced the first few times they used marijuana.
And the amount of marijuana that gets used actually doesn't rapidly escalate like it
does for most other drugs of abuse.
So on the one hand, we have evidence for tolerance at a physiological level in terms of a reduction
in the number of receptors, but on the other hand, the evidence for behavioral tolerance
is actually much weaker.
OK, so marijuana does appear to be somewhat addictive, and the underlying neural mechanisms
of addiction seem similar to other drugs of abuse.
But does chronic use of marijuana constitute abuse?
In particular, does it lead to significant negative consequences for the user?
Well, there are some negative consequences associated with chronic marijuana use.
For example, compared with non-smoking peers, students who regularly smoke marijuana tend
to get lower grades, and they're also more likely to drop out of high school.
In fact, a review of 48 different scientific studies found that marijuana use was consistently
associated with worse grades and lower chances of graduation.
Now there's a problem in knowing how to interpret these studies, because they're correlational
in nature.
That is, scientists didn't randomly assign some people to the marijuana group and other
people to the control group, and then look at the effects of that manipulation.
Rather, they found students who were already using and compared their academic performance
with students who were not.
And as any scientist can tell you, correlational studies like that don't support claims
about causality.
In other words, just because marijuana use is correlated with poor academic performance,
that doesn't mean that marijuana use caused the poor grades.
It could be that poor academic performance led to discouragement and disillusionment,
which in turn led to marijuana use rather than the other way around.
Or maybe some other factor like stress at home or socioeconomic status contributed to
both marijuana use and poor academic performance.
The bottom line is that there is an association, but we don't know why.
There's also good evidence for a correlation between marijuana use and what is sometimes
called an amotivational syndrome.
That is, chronic marijuana users are often more apathetic or aimless than non-users,
and they may lack motivation and exhibit decreased productivity in general.
Again, we have a correlation between marijuana use and these behaviors, but we haven't established
causation.
And it could be that people who have low motivation to begin with also tend to smoke marijuana,
rather than the other way around.
And one of the most popular current theories among scientists is that use of marijuana
at a young age is associated with the adoption of an unconventional outlook on success.
So regular marijuana users may put less value on getting good grades and on succeeding in
the eyes of the world compared with non-users.
And that difference in outlook may be one reason for the lower grades and lower graduation
rate.
There's also controversy about whether marijuana might be a gateway to harder drugs.
The Gateway theory claims that marijuana use primes the pump and puts one at risk for
the use of more dangerous drugs like cocaine and heroin later in life.
Well, it is true that a correlation is present.
Early marijuana use is indeed associated with later use of harder drugs.
But once again, that correlation doesn't necessarily imply causation.
In fact, I think most scientists today believe that people end up using hard drugs for reasons
other than previous marijuana use.
Perhaps they have a genetic susceptibility or a risk-seeking personality.
But the same factors that led them to use harder drugs also led them to use marijuana.
And maybe the main reason they used marijuana first is simply because it's easier to obtain.
One other potential negative consequence that we should discuss is your health.
Is prolonged use of marijuana bad for you?
Well, maybe surprisingly, the health effects of marijuana don't seem to be as bad as the
health effects of alcohol and cigarettes.
Long-term use does seem to be associated with bronchitis, and marijuana smoke actually contains
higher concentrations of some carcinogens than cigarette smoke does.
But the link between chronic marijuana use and lung cancer has not yet been conclusively
demonstrated, and one reason could be that marijuana users tend to smoke far less than
tobacco smokers.
Finally, let's say a few words about treatment.
If someone feels addicted to marijuana and would like to quit, what approaches have been
demonstrated to be effective?
Well, most current treatments for marijuana addiction use behavioral therapy.
In particular, many techniques combine cognitive behavioral therapy with motivational incentives.
Cognitive behavioral therapy trains patients to recognize and avoid the triggers associated
with cravings, and it teaches them strategies to cope with those cravings without using.
Many therapies also include a motivational component in which patients are rewarded,
sometimes even with real money, for abstinence.
And there is evidence that these techniques can help.
For example, in one study, 37% of people who received cognitive behavioral therapy along
with motivational incentives remained abstinent after one year.
In comparison, only 17% of people who received motivational incentives alone managed to remain
abstinent.
Likewise, only 23% of people who received cognitive behavioral therapy alone remained
abstinent.
Now, of course, a 37% success rate means that more than half the participants went back
to using marijuana, despite the therapy.
So like most other addictions, we don't yet have particularly effective approaches to
treating marijuana addiction.
Well, in the previous two lectures, we talked about the legal drugs, caffeine, nicotine,
and alcohol.
And today, we stepped into the pool of illegal drugs by discussing marijuana.
But I think it's fair to say that marijuana represents the shallow end of that pool.
And next time, we'll dive into the deep end and talk about stimulant drugs, like cocaine
and methamphetamine, that are associated with significantly more severe negative consequences,
sometimes even death.
But as we'll see, this class of drugs also includes compounds that are often prescribed
to children, which makes for an interesting discussion.
See you then.
