In the mid-19th century, German scientists working with a South American plant isolated
a chemical that seemed to be a medical breakthrough.
It worked well as a local anesthetic, and so it was used to relieve teething pain in
infants, and as a topical anesthetic in eye and nasal surgery.
It also seemed to increase endurance, and so explorers trying to reach the South Pole
used it as a pill that they called forced march.
Taking it helped them overcome fatigue, and it allowed them to travel long distances without
rest.
And Freud even wrote a paper about the beneficial effects of this new drug, and recommended
using it to treat a number of disorders ranging from depression to alcoholism.
This chemical also formed the basis for an elixir that went on to become the most popular
soft drink in the world, Coca-Cola.
So what was this wonder drug?
Cocaine.
The name Coca-Cola actually reflects the fact that the original elixir contained cocaine
from cocoa leaves and caffeine from cola nuts.
As you might imagine, the modern formula for Coca-Cola has changed somewhat.
Cocaine is what's called a psychomotor stimulant, or just a stimulant for short.
And it's stimulant drugs like cocaine that we're going to talk about today.
That drugs are sometimes colloquially referred to as uppers, because they produce a feeling
of excitement and euphoria.
They increase alertness and focus, and they decrease fatigue and appetite.
In addition to cocaine, we'll talk about amphetamine and methamphetamine, which are
also psychomotor stimulants.
As you probably know, these drugs are often considered among the most dangerous drugs
of abuse available, and today we'll see why.
We'll begin by providing some background on these drugs.
Where did they come from?
How have they been used?
And how have they been abused?
Then we'll talk about how they work.
What kinds of effects do they have, and how do they affect the brain?
And finally, we'll turn to the issue of addiction and abuse.
How addictive are these stimulant drugs?
Do they hijack the brain's reward circuit like other addictive drugs?
What treatments are available to help addicts, and how effective are those treatments?
Along the way, we'll encounter other stimulant drugs, like Ritalin and Adderall, that are
often prescribed to both children and adults as a treatment for attention deficit disorder.
Why do physicians prescribe these drugs?
Are they safe?
Do they help?
Like many other drugs of abuse, cocaine comes from a plant, specifically it comes from the
coca plant, which is prevalent in the countries of Colombia, Peru, and Bolivia in South America.
And just like caffeine and nicotine, cocaine is thought to act as a natural insecticide
for the coca plant to prevent bugs from eating it.
It's kind of interesting how many addictive drugs are actually natural pesticides.
Well, the people living in the regions where the coca plant grows have known that the plant
has stimulating effects for thousands of years.
And many people in these regions regularly chew coca leaves for these effects.
Cocaine ingested in this way reaches the brain slowly over a long period of time, so the effects
are much milder than snorting cocaine powder or smoking cocaine in the form of crack.
Many South Americans chew coca leaves in much the same way people in the US drink coffee.
It's just a normal and accepted part of their culture, and it helps people stay alert and
productive.
It may even help with altitude sickness.
But in the mid-1800s, German chemists isolated cocaine in its pure form, and its use and
its abuse really took off.
By the beginning of the 20th century, people began to realize that cocaine was both addictive
and potentially very harmful.
And in 1914, the US Congress passed legislation imposing restrictions on its use and sale.
Cocaine comes in a number of different forms.
The most familiar is probably cocaine powder, which is a water-soluble salt called cocaine
hydrochloride.
This form of cocaine is often snorted.
In the 1970s, some users began treating cocaine powder with chemicals and freeing the cocaine
base from the hydrochloride salt in a process called free-basing.
The resulting free-base cocaine melts at a lower temperature, which means it can be
smoked, and that gets the cocaine to the brain faster and therefore it produces a more intense
high.
However, free-basing involves the use of highly flammable solvents, and so it can be dangerous.
For example, the comedian Richard Pryor accidentally set himself on fire while free-basing cocaine
in 1980.
Well, around that same time, a dried, hardened version of cocaine called crack cocaine appeared.
Crack cocaine can also be smoked, leading to a similar very intense high and a strong
potential for abuse.
But its production doesn't involve the use of flammable solvents, so there's less risk
of an accident.
What about amphetamine and methamphetamine?
Well, their history is actually kind of similar to the history of cocaine.
Like cocaine, amphetamines are also derived from a plant, in this case the ephedra cynica
plant.
Ephedra grows mainly in Mongolia, Russia, and northeast China.
And like the coca plant, the ephedra plant has been used for thousands of years by people
who recognized its effects.
Specifically, it's played an important role in traditional Chinese medicine as a treatment
for colds and asthma.
In the late 1800s, chemists synthesized amphetamine from the ephedra plant, and about 30 years
later they synthesized methamphetamine.
Both are potent and addictive psychostimulants, but as we'll discuss in a few minutes, methamphetamine
tends to have stronger effects because of a slight change in chemical structure.
For a long time, amphetamine was used to treat nasal congestion and head colds under
the trade name Benzadrine.
In 1937, the American Medical Association sanctioned the use of amphetamine for the
treatment of mild depression and sleep disorders.
Amphetamine was even a common diet pill in the 1940s.
Stimulants also played an important role during World War II, when many soldiers took them
in order to stay awake and alert.
For example, Japanese kamikaze pilots often took amphetamines before taking off on their
suicide missions, and Nazi leaders distributed millions of doses of methamphetamine to German
troops during the war.
Even the U.S. military issued amphetamine to some of their troops.
In fact, there's a fairly long history of the use of so-called go-pills by the Air Force
– fighter pilots who need to stay alert on long missions.
Some of you may remember a friendly fire incident in Afghanistan in 2002, when an Illinois National
Guard pilot mistakenly bombed friendly troops and killed four Canadian soldiers.
The pilot claimed that he was pressured to take amphetamine pills and that the pills
impaired his judgment.
After World War II, the use of amphetamines in the general population really grew.
For example, in 1970, over 10 billion amphetamine tablets were legally made in the United States.
Other users included truckers who needed to stay awake in order to drive long distances,
and even housewives who wanted more energy so that they could accomplish everything they
needed to get done.
But probably the most widespread legal use of amphetamines in the U.S. has been in the
treatment of a Tension Deficit Disorder and a Tension Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
– ADD and ADHD.
The two most common drugs used in the treatment of these disorders are Adderall and Ritalin,
both of which are psychostimulants.
Adderall is just a low dose of amphetamine in pill form, and Ritalin is a closely related
psychostimulant called methylphenidate, whose behavioral effects are almost indistinguishable
from amphetamine.
By 2014, roughly 3 million children in the U.S. were taking one of these medications
to treat ADD or ADHD.
Now it might seem odd to prescribe a stimulant to a child who is already hyperactive, but
because low doses of psychostimulants improve focus, these drugs have actually been found
to help sufferers stay on task and get their work done.
It's also important to note that when used as directed, these medications are quite safe.
Using a pill means that the stimulant reaches the brain slowly over a period of time at
a relatively low dose, and it therefore doesn't produce the euphoric high associated with
many drugs of abuse.
And studies have found that when used as directed, the potential for addiction and
abuse is actually quite low.
Unfortunately, these drugs aren't always used as directed.
For example, many college students use psychostimulants in an attempt to improve their academic performance,
even if they don't have a diagnosis of ADD or ADHD.
One recent survey at a Midwestern University found that 44% of those surveyed new students
who used stimulants without a prescription.
The students said that they used the drugs in order to increase their alertness and energy
so that they could meet the many time pressures associated with college life.
Okay, let's turn to meth amphetamine, which is perhaps the most dangerous of all the psychostimulant
drugs.
The meth amphetamine molecule is just an amphetamine molecule with an additional methyl
group consisting of a carbon atom and three hydrogen atoms.
Now that change may seem minor, but the additional methyl group makes meth amphetamine much
more likely to be abused.
One reason is that the extra methyl group makes it easier for meth amphetamine to get
to the brain compared with standard amphetamine.
You see, the brain is actually protected by a barrier of cells between the blood vessels
supplying the brain and the brain itself.
This blood-brain barrier prevents potentially harmful molecules in the blood from entering
the brain.
But the additional methyl group allows meth amphetamine to cross that blood-brain barrier
relatively easily, and as a result, more of it can reach the brain and it can produce
a larger effect that lasts much longer.
Another reason meth amphetamine has become popular among recreational drug users is that
it's relatively easy to make using widely available chemicals.
For example, you remember the ephedra plant?
The plant contains two active components, ephedrine and pseudo-ephedrine.
These compounds are actually very effective decongestants, and they used to be widely
available over the counter.
In fact, pseudo-ephedrine is the active ingredient in pseudo-ephed.
Well, ephedrine and pseudo-ephedrine can be used as chemical precursors in the manufacture
of meth amphetamine.
As a result, meth amphetamine cooks started buying large quantities of decongestants for
use in their meth labs.
If you watch the show Breaking Bad, you may remember the meth cooks' elaborate efforts
to obtain the precursors that they needed.
In an attempt to slow down the illegal manufacture of meth amphetamine, the U.S. Congress passed
an act called the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005.
This act required that cold medicines containing pseudo-ephedrine be kept behind the counter.
Anyone buying those medicines had to present a photo ID, and the amount that they could
buy was limited and tracked.
Drug companies have tried developing new decongestants that don't contain pseudo-ephedrine,
but so far they don't seem to work as well.
The most potent form of meth amphetamine is crystal meth, which users often call glass
or ice.
Like crack cocaine, it's usually smoked, and it produces a very intense high.
But that high typically lasts much longer than the high from other stimulants.
In fact, the effects of smoking crystal meth can last 12 hours or more.
Users therefore see it as a very cost-effective drug because a small dose can go a long way.
Now let's turn to the effects of psychostimulants, both on behavior and on the brain.
Well as their name suggests, stimulant drugs stimulate the nervous system, and that stimulation
has some positive effects.
It reduces fatigue, increases alertness, and produces feelings of excitement and euphoria.
Unfortunately, the negative consequences of these drugs can be disastrous.
For example, in addition to its stimulating psychological effects, cocaine also constricts
blood vessels, meaning less blood can reach critical organs, like the brain.
As a result, even young, healthy cocaine users sometimes experience strokes and associated
brain damage.
Cocaine also constricts the blood vessels to the heart, which substantially increases
the risk of a heart attack.
Some of you may remember the talented basketball player Len Bias.
Bias played basketball for the University of Maryland from 1982 to 1986, and he was one
of the most highly touted players in the nation.
For example, he was the Atlantic Coast Conference Player of the Year in both his junior and
senior years.
It's kind of hard to imagine a healthier young man than Len Bias.
Well on June 17th, 1986, Bias was selected second overall in the NBA draft by the Boston
Celtics.
Two days later, he was back in his dorm room with some friends, and at about three in the
morning they started using cocaine.
A little over three hours later, Bias had a seizure, and he collapsed while talking with
one of his teammates.
He lost consciousness and stopped breathing.
Paramedics were unable to resuscitate him, and they took him to the Leland Memorial Hospital
in Riverdale, where he was pronounced dead of a cardiac arrhythmia related to cocaine
use.
No other drugs or alcohol were found in his system.
Well, in addition to posing a serious health risk, high doses of psychostimulants also
sometimes lead to stereotypic behavior.
Stereotypic behaviors are repetitive movements, such as body rocking, crossing and uncrossing
the legs, or marching in place.
For example, rats and mice, given high doses of psychostimulants, will sometimes sit in
a corner of their cage and repeatedly perform the same action over and over, like specific
head movements or sniffing and licking.
Human users might also exhibit repetitive behaviors, although they're typically more
sophisticated than the animal behaviors.
So human methodics have been known to compulsively disassemble and reassemble small machines,
repeatedly draw the same patterns or sort objects into different categories over and
over.
This kind of behavior is sometimes referred to as punding or tweaking.
Chronic stimulant use can also sometimes lead to psychosis, including vivid hallucinations
and delusions.
One study found that roughly one in five methamphetamine addicts experienced clinical level
psychosis within the past year.
The user might develop extreme paranoia and experience delusions of being followed or
persecuted.
Users also commonly claim that they feel imaginary insects burrowing under their skin, and so
they compulsively pick and scratch at themselves, and as a result, they often have scars and
lesions all over their body.
Dentalists will also often develop what's sometimes called meth mouth, which is characterized
by severe tooth decay and even loss of teeth.
There's still debate about what causes meth mouth, but many dentists believe that a combination
of factors plays a role.
First, meth use leads to reduced salivation and dry mouth, which may contribute to bacterial
growth.
Second, the stimulating effects of meth lead to grinding of the teeth.
And third, meth users often stop visiting the dentist and may even give up brushing their
teeth entirely.
Well, as you can imagine, this combination can lead to severe dental problems in a fairly
short period of time.
Now, let's turn to the brain.
How do psychostimulants like cocaine and methamphetamine affect the brain?
Well, all psychostimulants directly increase dopamine levels in the brain.
Now, by this point in the course, I'm sure you remember the central role that the neurotransmitter
dopamine plays in craving and in addiction.
As we've seen, nicotine, alcohol, and marijuana all lead to the release of dopamine, but these
other drugs do so indirectly.
Dopamine binds to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, which indirectly leads to dopamine
release.
Likewise, alcohol affects GABA and glutamate receptors, and marijuana binds to cannabinoid
receptors.
But psychostimulants increase dopamine levels directly, so perhaps it's no surprise that
they're among the most abused drugs in the world.
The way they work is also somewhat different from the other drugs we've discussed.
Remember how neurons communicate using neurotransmitter molecules?
When the pre-synaptic neuron fires, it releases neurotransmitter molecules into the synapse,
and those molecules then bind to receptors on the post-synaptic neuron, like a key fitting
into a lock.
Well, one thing we haven't yet talked about is what happens to those neurotransmitter
molecules after they've done their work.
One thing that happens is that they can be sucked back into the pre-synaptic cell by
molecules called transporters.
You can think of these transporters like little vacuum cleaners.
They suck up the neurotransmitter molecules back into the pre-synaptic neuron so that
they can be used again when the neuron fires again.
This process is called reuptake, because the neurotransmitter molecules are taken back
up into the pre-synaptic neuron.
Now, most of the drugs of abuse that we've talked about so far mimic the actions of
neurotransmitters, and they bind to receptors.
So they may activate those receptors if they're agonists, or they may block those receptors
if they're antagonists.
But psychostimulants work differently.
Rather than binding to receptors, psychostimulants typically affect the cell's vacuum cleaners,
the transporters.
For example, cocaine blocks the dopamine transporters.
It's what's sometimes called a dopamine reuptake inhibitor.
It inhibits the reuptake of dopamine from the synapse.
And the result is that dopamine stays in the synapse longer than it normally would.
And so dopamine levels are abnormally high, and dopamine receptor activity is increased.
And it's this increase in dopamine that produces many of the behavioral effects that we've
been talking about.
Injecting dopamine directly into the brains of rats and mice leads to stimulation and
increased movement, as well as stereotypic behaviors.
Furthermore, when the dopamine neurons are destroyed using a toxic chemical, then psychostimulant
drugs no longer have their normal stimulating effects.
Cocaine also blocks the reuptake of two other neurotransmitters, norepinephrine and serotonin.
So the levels of those neurotransmitters are also higher than normal when using cocaine.
However, as we'll see a little later, it appears that it's the effect on dopamine that
makes cocaine so addictive.
Methamphetamine also affects the dopamine transporters.
But instead of blocking the transporter like cocaine, meth actually causes the transporters
to allow dopamine molecules to flow in the reverse direction, that is, from the pre-synaptic
cell into the synapse.
So rather than sucking the dopamine molecules from the synapse back into the pre-synaptic
cell, methamphetamine causes the transporter to release dopamine molecules out of the pre-synaptic
cell and into the synapse.
So think of reversing the direction of flow of a vacuum cleaner.
Rather than sucking the dopamine out of the synapse, the transporter molecules are now
spraying dopamine back into the synapse.
Well as you can imagine, both mechanisms lead to much higher levels of dopamine than
normal.
In fact, some studies have found that cocaine can lead to double the normal amount of dopamine
in the synapse.
And methamphetamine can produce a tenfold increase in dopamine levels.
Okay, let's turn to the issue of addiction.
How addictive are psychostimulants?
How do they change the brain to produce addiction?
And what treatments are available to addicts?
Well I'm sure I don't need to tell you that cocaine and methamphetamine are among the
most addictive drugs in the world, especially when they're smoked or injected.
All animal species that have been tested will self-administer these drugs intravenously,
and they'll do so compulsively.
With a little training, monkeys will even smoke cocaine freebase compulsively.
Human addicts often exhibit binging behavior with psychostimulants, especially crack cocaine
and crystal meth.
So after taking an initial dose, they experience an intense high and euphoria.
But as soon as that high starts to wear off, they administer another dose to try to keep
the high going and avoid coming down.
They might repeat this cycle for days on end without eating or sleeping until they
finally run out of the drug or crash from exhaustion.
And like most other drugs of abuse that we've discussed, repeated use of psychostimulants
leads to changes in the brain that make it harder and harder to resist the drug.
We saw how the brain compensates for chronically high levels of dopamine by producing the chemical
dinorphin, which then inhibits the dopamine neurons from firing.
The result is tolerance.
It takes more of the drug to produce the same effect.
Well, repeated use of psychostimulants does indeed lead to tolerance.
When rats are initially administered cocaine, they'll move around a lot.
But if the administration continues, the rats will get used to the drug, and they'll stop
moving around so much.
Rats also exhibit tolerance.
In particular, the initial dose of the drug is often reported to produce a much stronger
high than subsequent doses.
And psychostimulants are thought to be addictive for the same reasons we've now seen a number
of times.
The drugs produce a large release of dopamine, and they overstimulate the brain's reward
circuit.
And that dopamine produces craving, and it signals a reward prediction error, which backs
up to the cues associated with the drug taking, so things like drug paraphernalia or locations
where drugs can be obtained or used.
So with repeated use, many environmental cues become extremely strong triggers that can
lead to irresistible cravings for the drug, and an addiction is born.
But how do we know that dopamine is playing a central role in addictions to cocaine and
methamphetamine?
Well actually, a number of studies have now confirmed this hypothesis.
For example, when dopamine neurons are destroyed, then animals will no longer self-administer
the drugs.
So apparently, the high levels of dopamine are crucial to the development of addiction.
Furthermore, other drugs that block the reuptake of dopamine, in the same way that cocaine does,
are also typically addictive.
And these effects are specific to dopamine.
For example, the antidepressant drug Prozac is also a reuptake inhibitor.
But it inhibits the reuptake of serotonin, not dopamine.
And serotonin reuptake inhibitors, like Prozac, are not self-administered by animals, and humans
don't get addicted to them.
And the same goes for norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors.
Apparently, it's the high level of dopamine that psychostimulants produce that makes them
so addictive.
Now let's spend a few minutes talking about treatments for psychostimulant addictions.
Currently, behavioral approaches are the treatment of choice.
One approach is called contingency management, or motivational incentives.
In these kinds of programs, addicts receive points or chips for each drug-free urine test,
and they can then redeem these points for rewards like movie tickets or dinner at a restaurant.
This kind of approach has been found to be effective in achieving initial abstinence and
in sticking with treatment.
Another approach, called cognitive behavioral therapy, is helpful in preventing relapse.
Essentially, addicts are taught to recognize risky situations that could trigger relapse
and to avoid those situations as much as possible.
For example, an addict who usually buys cocaine in a particular part of town might be taught
to take different routes through town in order to avoid that area.
They're also taught coping skills to help them deal with cravings when they arise.
So therapists might ask addicts to prepare a list of activities that could distract them
from their cravings.
Physical activities, like walking or riding a bike or playing basketball, are often particularly
effective distractions.
Many addicts also find community-based recovery groups, like cocaine anonymous, to be helpful
as a support system when trying to remain abstinent, or to get back on the wagon after
a relapse.
Other addicts benefit from residential programs, where they live in a community of recovering
addicts for six months or more.
Unfortunately, as we've now seen time and time again, relapse rates are quite high.
For example, around 90% of methamphetamine addicts have been estimated to return to using
after treatment.
90%.
It's therefore particularly important for stimulant addicts to keep trying and to view
relapses as learning opportunities in their journey to achieve complete abstinence eventually.
There are currently no pharmacological treatments that are approved to treat psychostimulant
addiction.
However, scientists have been working on vaccines that could potentially help addicts avoid
relapse.
The idea is to train the body's own immune system to recognize and attack cocaine and
methamphetamine before they reach the brain.
So even if an addict who's in recovery falls off the wagon, much less of the drug would
reach the brain, and they wouldn't experience the normal high.
Well, that concludes our tour through the world of psychostimulants.
Next time, we'll dive into another class of drugs that are also very addictive, but that
are nevertheless very effective painkillers and are widely used in medicine.
These are the opioid drugs, and they include familiar medicines like codeine as well as
dangerous drugs of abuse like heroin.
See you then.
