Let's begin today's lecture with a true story about a woman I'll call Samantha.
Samantha was a lawyer in western Canada and in 1994 she played a nickel slot machine for
the first time during a visit to Reno, Nevada and she won $25.
She found the experience exhilarating and when she got back to Canada she started visiting
nearby casinos.
Pretty soon she was a regular and she would often play until she couldn't get any more
money out of the ATM, often losing $2,000 or $3,000 during a single visit.
She got to the point that she used almost all of her earnings to support her gambling
habit and sometimes she would wait at the bank machine around midnight when her paycheck
would become accessible, immediately withdraw it and head to the casino.
She started borrowing money from friends and she'd lie about where she was going and what
she was doing.
Once when she was house sitting for her best friend's parents she cashed about $4,000
worth of checks that they had left behind to pay the household bills and she lost it
all gambling.
Driving back from the casino she said she thought about driving into the oncoming traffic
and ending it all.
Well, in many ways Samantha's experience sounds a lot like the experience of a serious drug
addict.
What started as a pleasurable diversion eventually took over her life.
She also developed strong cravings that became almost irresistible and she kept gambling despite
very significant negative consequences that she was suffering.
Well, in this lecture we'll discuss scientific evidence of similarities in the behavior,
the brain and even the genes of compulsive gamblers and drug addicts.
As we'll see, scientists are starting to see problem gambling as another type of addiction.
But in this case, it's an addiction to a behavior rather than a drug.
Gambling is sometimes defined as putting something of value at risk in the hopes of getting something
of greater value.
Now, obviously the something of value is usually money and people spend a lot of it when they're
gambling.
For example, according to the American Gaming Association's statistics, commercial casinos
in America earn over $35 billion every year.
Likewise, revenue in gaming facilities on Indian reservations exceeds $25 billion every
year and those numbers don't even include internet gambling, which is the fastest growing
part of the industry.
Now, about 85% of U.S. adults have gambled occasionally in their lives and the vast majority
don't experience any significant problems.
However, Samantha's story is unfortunately not that unusual.
In fact, it's estimated that 4 to 6 million people in the U.S. experience problems as
a result of their gambling.
And about 2 million meet the criteria for pathological gambling or gambling disorder,
which the American Psychiatric Association characterizes as persistent and recurrent
gambling behavior leading to clinically significant impairment or distress.
Now, for a long time, psychiatrists considered pathological gambling to be primarily a problem
with impulse control rather than an addiction.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, or DSM, which is sometimes called
the Bible of Psychiatry, used to classify pathological gambling with kleptomania and
pyromania rather than with substance abuse and addiction.
But that changed in the fifth edition of the DSM, which was published in 2013.
Now, gambling disorder is classified as a behavioral addiction based on studies demonstrating
that pathological gambling and drug addiction share a number of similarities ranging from
similar behavioral symptoms to similar neural substrates and even similar genetic profiles.
Let's begin by talking about some of the behavioral similarities.
The DSM provides lists of symptoms that psychiatrists have identified as robust behavioral features
that should be considered when diagnosing a disorder.
And if you look at this list of behavioral symptoms associated with drug addiction and
with gambling disorder, you'll find that the lists are remarkably similar.
For example, one of the behavioral symptoms associated with drug addiction is recurrent
substance use resulting in a failure to fulfill major role obligations at work, school, or
home.
Well, likewise, one of the behavioral criteria for diagnosing gambling disorder is whether
the person has jeopardized or lost a significant relationship, job, or educational or career
opportunity because of gambling.
Those sound pretty similar, don't you think?
Another behavioral symptom of drug addiction is persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts
to cut down or control substance use.
That sounds a lot like another one of the symptoms associated with gambling disorder,
which reads, has made repeated unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop gambling.
So both drug addiction and pathological gambling are characterized by persistence in the behavior
despite negative consequences and an inability to stop.
But what about the classic symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal?
Do compulsive gamblers experience those symptoms too?
I mean, it might seem odd to think that they would given that their problem is behavioral
and they're not actually putting any kind of drug in their system, but the evidence
suggests that they do.
For example, Dr. Mark Griffiths measured the heart rate of 30 young men at the University
of Plymouth while they played slot machines or fruit machines as they're called in England.
Half the men were regular gamblers and the other half were not.
Well Griffiths found that everyone's heart rate increased when they started playing the
game, suggesting that they were experiencing a rush of excitement.
But after they stopped playing, there was a significant difference between the groups.
The heart rate of the gamblers quickly dropped back down while the heart rate of the non-gamblers
stayed high.
And Griffiths suggested that the rush associated with gambling wore off more quickly in these
experienced gamblers, reflecting tolerance to the rewarding aspects of the behavior.
Consistent with this interpretation, chronic gamblers often need to gamble larger amounts
of money to feel the same rush of excitement, much like drug addicts need more of the drug
to feel high.
Many chronic gamblers also appear to experience withdrawal when they stop gambling.
Richard Rosenthal at the UCLA Gambling Studies program, along with Henry Lesour, asked 222
pathological gamblers about symptoms that they experienced when they tried to slow down
or stop gambling.
91% said that they experienced cravings and 87% felt restless and irritable.
Two-thirds even reported physical symptoms, such as headaches, insomnia, sweating, and
shaking.
As you can see, there are a number of striking similarities in the behavioral symptoms of
drug addiction and pathological gambling.
Now let's turn to the brain and compare the neural mechanisms underlying pathological
gambling with those underlying drug addiction.
Do you remember some of the major brain changes in drug addiction that we've discussed?
First, remember, chronic drug use tends to lead to a numbing of response in the brain's
pleasure center, the nucleus accumbens.
Second, remember, drugs of abuse trigger a large release of dopamine into the reward
circuit, and over time that can lead to strong associations between drug-related cues and
drug-taking, which results in strong craving.
Third, chronic drug use is associated with reduced self-control as a result of weakened
inhibitory input from the prefrontal cortex.
Now let's consider whether chronic gambling produces similar brain changes.
First, does it lead to numbing of the brain's reward response?
Jan Reuter, Christian Buchel, and their colleagues at the University of Hamburg, examined this
question using a technique called functional magnetic resonance imaging, or just fMRI,
for short.
Now, you're probably familiar with conventional MRI.
It works by detecting differences in the magnetic properties of different tissues.
So muscle has different magnetic properties than bone, which has different magnetic properties
than skin, and so on.
And MRI detects those differences to create an image of different structures in the body.
Well, it turns out that blood that is carrying oxygen has different magnetic properties than
blood that is not carrying oxygen.
And so, with a few tweaks, an MRI scanner can be used to detect where the oxygen is
being sent.
And because our vascular system sends oxygenated blood to parts of the brain that are active,
we can estimate neural activity, and that's what functional MRI does.
The Hamburg group used this technique to estimate neural activity in pathological gamblers
and in control subjects while they performed a very simple gambling task.
Specifically, people had to repeatedly choose one of two face-down cards while they were
in the MRI scanner.
One of the two cards was a red suit, and if they guessed which one it was, they won money.
If they guessed the wrong card, then they lost money.
Well, unbeknownst to them, the game was actually rigged so that everyone experienced the same
sequence of wins and losses.
So, what was happening in the brain?
Well, as you might expect, the brain's pleasure center, the nucleus accumbens, was more active
after wins than it was after losses.
And this was true in both pathological gamblers and non-gamblers.
However, the size of the effect was different.
Specifically, the reward response was significantly smaller in the gamblers than it was in the
controls.
So here's some direct evidence that the reward response is indeed numbed in pathological
gamblers, just like it is in drug addicts.
But there's more.
The authors also asked all of the gamblers to fill out a questionnaire to assess the
severity of their gambling problem.
How often do you gamble?
How much do you gamble?
How long have you been gambling?
And they found that the most severe gamblers also had the most numbed reward response.
The take-home message is that chronic gambling is indeed associated with reduced activation
of the nucleus accumbens and a numbed reward response, just like drug addiction.
Furthermore, as the reward response gets more and more numb, the gambling problem gets worse,
perhaps because the gamblers need to gamble more to feel the same level of excitement and
reward.
Okay, the second brain change that we talked about with drug addiction was the large dopamine
burst in response to drug-related cues and an associated craving whenever those cues were
encountered.
Well, is there any evidence for a similar brain change in chronic gambling?
Anna Gudrian and colleagues at the University of Amsterdam investigated this question in
an experiment in 2010.
They also used functional MRI to estimate neural activity in pathological gamblers and
control subjects while they viewed different kinds of pictures.
Some of the pictures were gambling-related cues, like pictures of slot machines or of
gamblers at a blackjack table in a casino.
Other pictures were neutral and they weren't related to gambling.
Then they compared the brain activity in the gamblers and the non-gamblers when they saw
these different categories of pictures.
Can you guess what they found?
The pathological gamblers had significantly stronger neural responses to the gambling-related
cues compared with the control subjects.
They also found that gamblers who were craving the most exhibited the strongest neural response
to the gambling cues.
In short, they found neural evidence that the gamblers were sensitized to the gambling-related
cues.
Furthermore, that increased sensitivity was associated with craving.
Well, that's exactly what's assumed to be happening in drug addiction too.
Now, one thing this study doesn't tell us is whether dopamine is involved.
Functional MRI really only tells you about neural activity, so it's actually impossible
to know whether dopamine was actually being released when the gambling-related cues were
presented.
There is some evidence for this hypothesis, but it comes from a different group of subjects,
namely people suffering from Parkinson's disease.
Now, you might be asking, how can Parkinson's disease tell us anything about pathological
gambling?
Well, as you may know, Parkinson's disease is characterized by the death of neurons
that release dopamine, leading to lower than normal levels and associated movement problems.
And a central goal in treatment is therefore to increase dopamine levels.
So why not just give dopamine itself?
Well, remember the blood-brain barrier that protects the brain from potentially harmful
molecules in blood?
Dopamine can't cross that barrier.
But certain dopamine-agonist drugs can, and they're sometimes used as a treatment.
So these drugs bind to dopamine receptors, whether the pre-synaptic neurons are active
or not.
And so they actually produce abnormally high levels of receptor activity.
Okay, suppose you're taking one of these dopamine-agonist drugs, and so your dopamine receptors are
more active than normal.
And suppose you happen to go gambling.
What do you think would happen?
Well, if increased levels of dopamine activity trigger stronger than normal associations between
cues and the act of gambling, then patients taking dopamine-agonists might develop unusually
strong associations.
And so when they encounter those cues in the future, they might experience strong cravings
to gamble, and therefore be particularly susceptible to pathological gambling.
It turns out that they are.
In fact, patients taking dopamine-agonists are roughly three times more likely to become
pathological gamblers than people who aren't taking these drugs.
So it looks like dopamine really is playing a role in the development of gambling addiction.
A recent positron emission tomography, or PET study, also supports this hypothesis.
That can be used to estimate neurotransmitter levels by measuring how many receptors are
already occupied by a neurotransmitter versus how many are available to bind to a radioactive
tracer.
Well using this technique, Thomas Steves and his colleagues at Toronto Western Hospital
compared dopamine levels in Parkinson's patients who were pathological gamblers versus Parkinson's
patients who were not.
Sure enough, they found that the gamblers exhibit significantly greater dopamine activity
when viewing gambling-related cues compared with the non-gamblers.
So such a dopamine burst would presumably lead to strong cravings in the gamblers whenever
they encounter those cues.
Okay, let's turn to the third brain change associated with drug addiction, namely reduced
inhibitory control from prefrontal cortex.
Due pathological gamblers also exhibit reduced prefrontal activity and an associated deficit
in the ability to inhibit inappropriate behavior.
The evidence suggests that they do.
One task that's commonly used to assess prefrontal function is called the Iowa Gambling Task,
so named because it was developed by researchers at the University of Iowa, including Antoine
Bachara and Antonio de Massio.
The Iowa Gambling Task involves repeatedly selecting cards from any of four decks.
When you turn a card over, it could reveal that you won money or that you lost money,
and the goal is to win as much money as possible.
Well two of the decks are disadvantageous decks, or bad decks.
Although they produce bigger wins initially, they have bigger losses down the road, and
so people need to learn to avoid those decks.
The other two decks are advantageous decks, or good decks.
Although they produce smaller wins initially, the losses are smaller too, and so you're
better off sticking with the good decks.
Now most people eventually figure this out.
After sampling the different decks, they might initially start drawing from the bad decks
because of the higher wins, but after they get burned a few times, they switch to the
good decks, and they avoid picking from those bad decks.
In fact, they even begin to exhibit an unconscious stress response when they're thinking about
the bad decks.
But many patients with damage to prefrontal cortex don't behave this way.
They don't exhibit the same unconscious stress response when considering the bad decks,
and they often keep picking from those bad decks even after getting burned repeatedly.
It's as if they can't inhibit the urge to go for that bigger win, even if they know
the potential negative consequences.
That's exactly the kind of self-control that prefrontal cortex makes possible, and it's
also exactly the kind of self-control that drug addicts have a hard time with.
It turns out that pathological gamblers also have a hard time resisting the urge to choose
from the bad decks, even though they know that they might get burned.
So they end up losing money overall.
In short, the gamblers behave a lot like patients with damage to prefrontal cortex.
Mark Patenza and colleagues at the Yale University School of Medicine have actually found direct
evidence for reduced prefrontal activity in pathological gamblers.
They used functional MRI to estimate neural activity while pathological gamblers and
control subjects exerted self-control.
So subjects had to name the ink color that a color word was printed in while ignoring
the word itself.
So if they saw the word blue printed in red ink, they had to resist the tendency to say
blue and respond red instead.
Now, of course, reading is a very automated task, and so inhibiting the tendency to read
the words requires self-control.
And previous studies have found that the task activates the prefrontal cortex.
The Yale group found that activation of prefrontal cortex was significantly reduced in the pathological
gamblers compared with non-gamblers, and they interpreted this result as evidence for an
impairment in prefrontal inhibitory control, and that's just the kind of impairment that's
present in drug addicts.
So in short, all three of the major brain changes that we talked about in drug addiction
also appear to be present in pathological gambling.
The reward response in the nucleus accumbens is numbed, dopamine gets released in response
to gambling-related cues producing strong craving, and inhibitory self-control from the
prefrontal cortex is diminished.
Now let's turn to genetics.
We talked about the genetics of addiction earlier in the course, and we pointed out
that drug addiction and the traits associated with drug addiction are all significantly
heritable.
Well, it turns out the same is true of pathological gambling.
Recall that the heritability of a trait is typically estimated by comparing the similarity
of that trait in identical twins with the similarity in fraternal twins.
For example, if all identical twins share a trait, but not all fraternal twins do, then
that trait is 100 percent heritable.
And conversely, if that trait isn't any more similar in identical twins than it is in fraternal
twins, then that trait isn't heritable at all.
Dr. Seth Eisen at the Washington University School of Medicine and his colleagues used
this approach to estimate the heritability of pathological gambling.
So they examined symptoms of pathological gambling in about 1,900 identical twin pairs
and about 1,500 fraternal twin pairs.
And they found that identical twins were much more likely to be similar in terms of pathological
gambling than were the fraternal twins.
And in fact, they estimated pathological gambling to be 62 percent heritable, meaning
that more than half of the variation in gambling diagnosis was based on genetics rather than
environment.
The bottom line is that both drug addiction and pathological gambling are heritable.
But are any of the same genes involved?
The answer again appears to be yes.
Some of the evidence comes from investigating the so-called comorbidity or co-occurrence
of pathological gambling with drug addiction.
So do pathological gambling and drug addiction tend to co-occur in the same people?
If so, it suggests that some of the same genetic factors are at work.
And it turns out the pathological gambling and drug addiction do co-occur surprisingly
often.
This co-morbidity is particularly high for gambling and alcoholism.
In a number of studies, 45 to 63 percent of pathological gamblers also have a history
of alcohol abuse or dependence.
In contrast, only 15 percent of the general population have such a history.
Dr. Wendy Slutsky at the University of Missouri, along with a number of colleagues, analyzed
the data from thousands of twins to assess this relationship between pathological gambling
and alcoholism.
And they concluded that there must be at least one shared genetic factor that increases susceptibility
for both pathological gambling and alcoholism.
Now, what might that genetic factor be?
Well, there's a lot more that scientists don't yet know about that question than they
do know.
But there are a few candidate genes that have been discovered, and perhaps the most promising
is one of the dopamine receptor genes.
Now, you may remember from our lecture on genetics that genes code for specific proteins,
and that different versions of the same gene lead to different versions of those proteins.
Well, a variation in the gene that codes for one type of dopamine receptor has been found
to be associated with pathological gambling, as well as many types of drug addiction.
This gene is typically called the DRD2 gene, which just means that it codes for the D2 type
of dopamine receptor.
So why would one form of this gene increase risk for addiction?
Well, it turns out that the risky form is associated with what's sometimes called a reward deficiency
syndrome.
The idea is that people who have this genetic variant need more stimulation to experience
the same level of reward and satisfaction as people who don't have it.
It's as if their reward system has been numb from birth, and just like chronic drug users
take higher doses of drugs in order to stimulate their numbed reward center, people with this
genetic variant might be particularly drawn to drugs, because drugs are one of the only
things that can stimulate their numbed reward circuit.
So these people are more susceptible to addiction than other people.
Different with this theory, people with this genetic variant are more likely to get addicted
to cigarettes, to alcohol, and to other drugs of abuse.
And it turns out they're also more likely to become pathological gamblers.
That is, the same gene that confers risk for alcoholism, for nicotine dependence, and for
cocaine addiction also confers risk for pathological gambling.
So even considering genetics, pathological gambling and drug addiction seem quite similar.
Let's finish up by spending a few minutes talking about treatment options.
Well, it turns out that some of the same approaches that are used in the treatment of drug addictions
are also used in the treatment of pathological gambling, which may not be surprising given
all the similarities that we've just discussed.
For example, many people find 12-step programs like Gambler's Anonymous to be helpful, because
they provide social support and accountability from people who can understand and relate.
Another approach is cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT, which we've also encountered before.
The basic idea behind CBT is that our behavior is a result of our thoughts.
So if we can identify the thoughts and motivations that give rise to gambling, then we can begin
to control it.
For example, if someone gambles because they're bored, maybe they could take up a healthier
hobby like basketball or bowling that provides an alternative source of excitement.
If someone else gambles as an escape from stress, maybe going to the gym would be a better
way to relieve that stress.
But once the gambler has developed an explicit strategy, then they're much better equipped
to cope with the urges to gamble when they do arise.
Somewhat surprisingly, certain medical treatments that have been used for drug and alcohol addiction
have also proved helpful in treating gambling addiction.
In particular, a number of studies have found that the opioid antagonist Naltrexone, which
we discussed as a treatment for alcoholism, is also effective in reducing gambling behavior.
So why would an opioid antagonist help reduce gambling and gambling urges?
Well recall that opioids activate the nucleus accumbens and produce feelings of euphoria.
Well being an opioid antagonist, Naltrexone competes with endogenous opioids and it therefore
blocks the high associated with gambling.
And blocking that high makes gambling less appealing and therefore easier to resist.
The major takeaway message from today's lecture is simple.
Addiction to gambling is quite similar to addiction to drugs.
But think about the implications of that.
It means that we can no longer think of addiction simply as dependence on a particular chemical.
Instead, any activity that hyper stimulates the brain's reward circuit could potentially
be addictive.
And of course, in today's society there are a lot of activities that could potentially
hyper stimulate the brain's reward circuit.
And that raises a host of other questions.
What other behaviors are potentially addictive?
Can someone get addicted to video games?
What about pornography or even junk food?
Where should we draw the line?
Those are some of the questions we'll address in our next lecture.
