You
You
Your lecture is dr Thad A. Polk dr. Polk is an Arthur F.
Thurnau Professor in the Departments of Psychology and Electrical Engineering and Computer Science
at the University of Michigan. He received an interdisciplinary Ph.D. in Computer Science
and Psychology from Carnegie Mellon University. Dr. Polk's research combines functional imaging
of the human brain with computational modeling and behavioral methods to investigate the neural
architecture underlying cognition. He regularly collaborates with scientists at the University
of Texas at Dallas and at the Max Plunk Institute for Human Development in Berlin. Dr. Polk's
teaching has been recognized by numerous awards at the University of Michigan and he has been
named to the Princeton Reviews List of the Best 300 Professors in the United States.
I suspect most of you know people who have struggled with an addiction. You may even know
a few people whose lives have really been ruined by an addiction. And if so, the following
stories may sound familiar. Consider Mary. Mary was raised in what could be described
as a normal middle class environment. She worked hard, never really got in trouble and
was accepted into a good college. Like many people, Mary started drinking in college. But
unlike most people, it quickly escalated and she began drinking every day. In her sophomore
year she got pregnant and she resolved to quit drinking for her baby's health. But soon
after her daughter's birth, she began drinking again. She loved her daughter very much and
she was motivated to be a good mother so she tried to restrict her drinking to the evening.
But she still often found herself starting to drink before noon. She would try to hide
her drinking as best she could, but she confessed that she needed to drink just to feel normal.
She had a hard time being effective at work because she often had a hangover and so she'd
often drink to feel better. And ultimately she lost her job. After that her drinking only
got worse. She would often binge to the point of getting sick. Her relationship with her
boyfriend ended and her daughter said she wanted to live with her dad. He applied for
custody and that request was granted by the courts. And naturally Mary was heartbroken.
Or consider Bill. Bill was a mechanic his entire life. Getting his first job at age
16, he worked hard and he had a successful career. He was also a lifelong smoker and
by age 58 he had developed asthma, emphysema and lung cancer. In 2010 he had surgery and
he vowed never to smoke again. But after just a few weeks he started up again. Back at his
old job in the garage where he worked his whole life, his cravings were so intense that everything
from his first cup of coffee in the morning to locking the shop door in the evening reminded
him of cigarettes and made him want to smoke. He tried hypnosis, nicotine patches, group
meetings and acupuncture. But nothing worked. He went through three rounds of chemotherapy
and radiation for his lung cancer and he was still smoking every day. Finally consider
Jim, a 16 year old who started drinking and doing drugs at age 12. Both his parents struggled
with alcoholism for much of their lives and although they finally managed to stop drinking,
their earlier problems significantly hurt their careers. Now it's difficult for them
to keep up with their bills and they often have to rely on government assistance. In
seventh grade Jim was arrested for possession and use of marijuana and he got expelled from
school but he still didn't stop. In fact he found that he needed to use harder and harder
drugs in larger and larger doses to get the high and the escape that he was looking for.
Eventually he got kicked out of his own home and he began living on the streets. Now stories
like these are common, frighteningly common. In fact a national survey in 2012 estimated
that 23 million Americans need treatment for problems related to alcohol and drug use.
And roughly 57 million Americans are regular smokers, most of whom would like to quit but
haven't been able to. Overall about 80 million Americans might be considered addicts. That's
more than the population of Texas and California combined, or roughly one out of every four
people in the country. Now given these statistics most of you undoubtedly can tell similar tragic
stories about people that you know or maybe you yourself are struggling with an addiction that
you just haven't been able to kick. The truth is addiction touches virtually all of us directly
or indirectly. Now for people who have never struggled with an addiction themselves the
behaviors of Mary, Bill, Jim and the millions of other people like them might seem completely
incomprehensible. How could Mary keep drinking to the point that it cost her not only her job
and the relationship with her boyfriend but even her daughter? Why would Bill continue
smoking cigarettes even after he had been diagnosed with lung cancer and emphysema?
And why would Jim keep using drugs even when it cost him his education and his home? I mean why
can't these people just buckle down and quit? Well historically addiction has been attributed to a
variety of causes including a weak or flawed character, poor parenting, or just bad personal
choices. But in this course we're going to take a new look at addiction. We're going to look through
the eyes of neuroscience to see what we can learn. We're going to look beyond the seemingly bizarre
behavior of addicts to see what's going on inside their brain and as we'll see understanding the
brains of addicts has led scientists to view addiction in a whole new way. In particular
we'll see that addiction is associated with specific changes in the brain and when we understand
those changes behaviors that at first seem incomprehensible actually begin to make sense.
For example, neuroscientists have identified specific neural structures in the brain's reward
system that play a crucial role in addiction. The reward system is what motivates us to engage
in behavior that we find pleasurable from eating to sex to playing sports and games.
And as we'll see recent evidence suggests that all addictions hijack this system rewiring it to
produce abnormally strong motivations to pursue the addiction to the exclusion of almost anything else.
But we'll learn a lot more as we delve deeper into the brain and how it works. As surprising as it may
sound the addict's brain is actually doing the same thing human brains have always done
and in fact must do in order to survive. It's learning. The problem is that the addict's brain
is being tricked into learning behavior that's actually harmful rather than helpful.
But before we get into that we need to provide some background on drugs and on addiction.
What is a drug exactly and what constitutes a real addiction? I mean these are words that
we use and we hear quite frequently but what do they actually mean? And how do we distinguish drug
use from drug abuse and drug dependence? Well let's begin by talking about what we mean
by a drug. A drug is typically considered to be a substance other than food
that changes biological functioning when it's introduced into the body from outside.
Cocaine, heroin and marijuana all satisfy this definition and they're often some of the first
things that come to mind when people think about drugs. But other things like antacids and antibiotics
also fit this definition. So what's the difference? Well one of the key differences is that cocaine
and heroin are psychoactive while antacids and antibiotics are not. Psychoactive drugs affect
the function of the brain and they produce psychological effects like changes in mood,
in perception and in cognition and it's psychoactive drugs that are often addictive. So those are the
drugs that we're going to be focusing on in this course. And psychoactive drugs are not limited
to the hard drugs like cocaine and heroin. Nicotine is also a psychoactive drug. It also
affects brain function and produces psychological effects. So does alcohol. Even caffeine is a
psychoactive drug. And we'll talk about all three of these drugs in this course as well as many others.
Now obviously using a psychoactive drug is different than being addicted to a psychoactive drug.
In fact many potentially addictive psychoactive drugs are used in modern medicine every day
without any problems. For example stimulant drugs like Ritalin and Adderall are very commonly used
in the treatment of ADHD despite the fact that they're potentially addictive when used inappropriately.
Likewise opioid drugs like morphine and codeine can be very addictive but they're still the
drugs of choice in the management of pain. And when implemented as directed by a physician
these treatments don't usually lead to addiction. Furthermore millions of people use
psychoactive drugs recreationally from time to time and the vast majority of them aren't addicted
either nor do they become addicted. Consider the huge number of people who drink alcohol
on a regular basis without becoming alcoholics for example. So this leads us to our next question.
What constitutes a real addiction? Well it turns out that answering that question
is trickier than you might think. In fact many scientists try to avoid using the term entirely
because the word addiction can mean different things to different people. In everyday language
people often use the word addiction quite loosely to refer to anything that they're passionate about.
For example people might say they're addicted to golf or working out even if those behaviors
are normal and actually good for them. As a result psychiatrists often prefer the term
substance use disorder rather than just addiction to make clear that the behavior in question is
actually abnormal and unhealthy. We'll still often use the term addiction in this course
because it's so familiar but we'll define it in the same way that psychiatrists define substance
use disorders. So let's talk about substance use disorders. These disorders are diagnosed
based on the presence of a subset of 11 characteristic features. If two or three of the
characteristic features are present then a mild addiction is diagnosed. If four or five
features are present then a moderate addiction is diagnosed and the presence of six or more
features indicates a severe addiction. But what are those characteristic features?
Well they can be divided into three main groups. Features related to abuse,
dependence and craving. First consider abuse. For behavior to be considered an addiction
it has to lead to significant negative consequences for the addict. That's what we mean by abuse.
Some of those consequences might be physical. For example addicted smokers often continue
smoking despite the very significant health problems associated with cigarettes.
Recall Bill's story from the beginning of the lecture. Bill kept smoking while going through
the chemotherapy that his smoking probably made necessary in the first place. Now this
behavior would certainly qualify as abuse. Likewise, alcoholics often continue drinking
despite significant liver damage. Or the negative consequences might be social and interpersonal.
One of the 11 characteristic features of addiction is continuing to use even when it causes problems
in relationships. And many addicts certainly do continue in their addictive behavior to the
point that it alienates friends and family. And tragically many addicts end up losing
the personal relationships that they value most in their lives including relationships with their
spouse, their parents or their children. Remember what happened to Mary and Jim? Mary drank to the
point of losing her boyfriend and daughter. And Jim was kicked out of his school and out of his home.
Well these kinds of situations are textbook cases of drug abuse. Another abuse related
characteristic is not managing to do what you should at work or at home or school because
of substance use. Put simply addicts often end up neglecting major responsibilities as a result
of their habit. They might start missing deadlines or begin skipping school or work.
They might even end up losing their job as a result of their addiction. And we saw these
kinds of consequences in Mary and Jim as well. When Mary lost her job and Jim got kicked out of school.
In all of these cases the drug isn't just being used. It's being abused. Abused to the point that
it causes significant even tragic consequences for the user. And that abuse is a hallmark feature
of addiction. Another hallmark feature is dependence. Drug addicts often get to the point that they
depend on their drug both psychologically and even physically. One of the main characteristics of
physical dependence is the development of tolerance to the effects of a drug.
Addicts often need more of the drug to get the effect that they want. Their body becomes tolerant
to the drug and a dose that used to produce a euphoric high when they started using might no
longer do so. And as a result addicts will typically use larger and larger amounts of the drug
to try to achieve the same high. Another symptom of physical dependence is withdrawal.
If a drug addict abruptly quits taking their drug they'll often experience very unpleasant
physical and psychological symptoms. For example, alcoholics who quit often experience shakes and
tremors and heroin addicts who quit often experience anxiety and diarrhea. In fact many
addicts will tell you that they actually need to take their drugs just to feel normal. They just
don't function properly without them. Well that's a key feature of physical dependence.
As we'll discuss in detail later in the course there's actually a physical basis for these
kinds of symptoms. What's happening is that the body and brain have changed to compensate for the
chronic presence of the drug. For example a regular heroin user's brain might come to expect
the presence of heroin and make changes to counteract heroin's effects. Well as a result
tolerance develops and the user won't experience the same high that they once did.
And if the addict abruptly stops taking the drug after the brain has already changed to
compensate for its presence then the brain needs to change back. But that can take some time
and during that time the addict will experience withdrawal symptoms.
Okay that's abuse and dependence. The third hallmark feature of addiction is craving.
When they're not using drug addicts often report an extremely strong desire or urge to use their
drug. This craving can be so strong that the addict may find it hard to think about anything else.
They become completely obsessed with getting more of the drug.
Furthermore environmental cues that are associated with drug use become very
strong triggers for craving. For example when a crack addict sees a crack pipe that may trigger
an irresistible craving to obtain and smoke crack. A heroin addict's cravings might be triggered by
seeing a needle and an alcoholic's cravings might be triggered by walking by a bar.
This is what Bill was talking about when he said that everything at work made him want to smoke.
He was a mechanic and he worked in a garage so it was very easy for him to smoke in that environment.
But he also made associations between smoking and just about every aspect of his work environment.
And as you can imagine the constant reminders of smoking in his work environment made quitting
extremely difficult. So addiction is characterized by abuse by dependence and by craving.
Addicts continue in their compulsive persistent drug use despite significant negative consequences.
That's abuse. They also develop a strong dependence on their drug that's characterized by tolerance
and by withdrawal. And they experience almost irresistible cravings or urges to use their drug.
Now here's a question that you may have already asked yourself. Is it possible to be addicted
to something other than a drug? After all we hear stories about people being so consumed by gambling
that they lose all the possessions they work their entire lives to earn. We even hear about
things like video game addiction and internet addiction even junk food addiction. So is it
possible to get addicted to eating cheeseburgers or playing a video game? Well this is an important
question in the field today and it turns out that scientists have discovered some fascinating
evidence that suggests that it is actually possible to be addicted to something other than a drug.
For example pathological gambling satisfies many of the major criteria of addiction.
It too is characterized by craving and by persistent compulsive behavior despite
significant negative consequences. And so many scientists now consider so-called behavioral
or process addictions like gambling to be the same kind of addictive disorder as chronic drug abuse.
We'll actually explore these issues in detail in the last two lectures of the course
but it'll be a good idea to keep them in mind as we go along because it turns out that a lot
of the same mechanisms are at play. So how has addiction become such a major issue today?
As I mentioned roughly 80 million Americans could be considered addicts. Now I don't need
to tell you that's not a small number. It's an astonishing number but what's interesting is that
while addiction has only recently become a major threat drugs are not new. The truth is that drug
use is not a modern development. Most of the drugs that people commonly use and abuse today
are derived from plants and people have recognized the psychological and physiological
effects of those plants for thousands of years. There's evidence that by the year 3400 B.C.
the Sumerians were aware of the psychological effects of the opium poppy from which opium
and heroin are derived. Likewise South Americans have chewed cocoa leaves containing cocaine
for millennia and evidence from pottery jars in China suggests that people have been drinking alcohol
since at least 7000 B.C. Nevertheless it's definitely true that drug addiction has become
much more of a problem in the last 150 years than it ever was before and one possible reason
is that about 200 years ago people began isolating the active ingredients that produced
the psychological and physiological effects associated with these plants and they were
therefore able to make much more potent forms of the drugs than had ever existed before.
For example in the early 1800s scientists isolated morphine from opium and a few decades
decades later they synthesized heroin from morphine. In 1859 cocaine was isolated from
cocoa leaves and alcohol has long been produced in more potent forms by the process of distillation.
Now some of these developments actually represented major medical breakthroughs. In particular
physicians finally had relatively pure drugs that were much more effective than anything they had
before. For example morphine provided very effective pain relief for soldiers injured
in the Civil War and in fact morphine is still the gold standard painkiller in medicine today.
Now when these addictive drugs first became widely available in the 1800s they were completely
unregulated. They were sold as miracle cures by traveling salesmen and they could be purchased
from catalogs through the mail. Morphine based syrups were often used to treat teething pain
in infants. Heroin was sold as a cough suppressant and cocaine was used as a core ingredient in a
popular elixir. In the early 20th century the first skirmishes in the war on drugs began in the
United States. In 1906 Theodore Roosevelt signed into law the Pure Food and Drug Act the first
federal law regulating drugs and food. Although drugs like cocaine and heroin could still be sold
as ingredients in products the law required truth in labeling. The products containing these kinds
of drugs had to be labeled as such and improperly labeled products could be seized and destroyed
at the manufacturer's expense. In 1914 the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act required anyone
selling or giving away products containing substantial doses of cocaine or opium to register
with what today we would call the Internal Revenue Service. It also made opium itself available
only by prescription and then came prohibition. In 1917 the U.S. Senate proposed the 18th
Amendment to the Constitution which banned the sale and production of alcoholic drinks.
The amendment was ratified in 1919 and it went into effect on January 17th 1920.
But prohibition was extremely controversial and a huge number of people continued drinking in spite
of the law and in 1933 the 18th Amendment became the only constitutional amendment ever to be repealed.
In 1934 the Uniform State Narcotics Act brought the ever-growing number of state
laws restricting narcotics into alignment. It also included measures to strengthen their
enforcement though that remained the responsibility of the states. The 1960s saw a revolution in
social norms and the rise of new anti-establishment countercultures in the United States. This was
the era of the hippie movement of psychedelic rock and of the sexual revolution and a very
significant part of this counterculture was the free use of recreational drugs particularly
marijuana, LSD and psychedelic mushrooms. In the early 1970s President Richard Nixon described
drug abuse as public enemy number one and he signed into law the Controlled Substances Act
which was part of an attempt to create a unified and comprehensive federal drug policy.
This act strictly classified which types of drugs were to be regulated restricted or
banned outright and it created two federal agencies the Food and Drug Administration
and the Drug Enforcement Administration to implement these regulations. So it was at this
point that the United States openly declared an official war on drugs and that war rages on
although with roughly 80 million addicts in the U.S. alone it appears that we're losing
and the consequences are quite grave economically medically and personally.
Consider the economic impact that drug addiction has in the U.S. for example. The National
Institute on Drug Abuse estimates that the abuse of tobacco alcohol and illicit drugs
costs the United States about 600 billion dollars a year in costs related to crime,
lost work productivity and health care. That's over half a trillion dollars every year.
Now in terms of overall costs alcohol abuse is the worst offender. It's estimated to cost about
235 billion dollars per year. That's roughly 750 dollars per person and nearly two dollars per
drink. That total includes increased costs of health care due to the treatment of alcoholism,
significant productivity losses in jobs and property damage due to crimes and automobile
crashes among many other consequences. Now the abuse of tobacco and of illicit drugs
are each estimated to cost nearly 200 billion dollars each year. Now for tobacco about half
of that cost is due to the substantial price of health care for tobacco related illnesses
and for illicit drugs a large proportion of the cost is related to crime and the criminal
justice system. Well of course those are just the economic costs. The costs in terms of human
lives are much more tragic. For example smoking related illnesses are estimated to kill over
five million people worldwide each year. That's over 500 people every hour. Alcohol is involved in
about half of all highway deaths and the number of deaths due to drug overdose now exceeds the
number of vehicle related deaths in 29 states. Furthermore about a quarter of intravenous drug
users in the U.S. are infected with the AIDS virus typically due to sharing dirty needles.
Drug use is also associated with a significantly higher incidence of other sexually transmitted
diseases such as syphilis and gonorrhea. More personally most of us know people whose lives
have been touched by an addiction. Perhaps you know an alcoholic whose family has fallen apart
or maybe you know a chronic smoker who has developed significant health problems as a
result of their smoking. Maybe you know a teenager who got hooked on drugs and whose life got off
track. We also undoubtedly have some people taking this course who are struggling with an addiction
themselves that they'd like to kick. Addiction affects almost all of us and my hope is that this
course will help you develop a better understanding of addiction how it works and how it manages to
take hold of so many people around the world. Throughout the course I'll still steer clear of
any moral judgments about drug use and drug addiction. I also won't make any recommendations
about how we as a society should deal with the problem of addiction. I mean after all my expertise
is in science not in politics or ethics. My intention is simply to provide a relatively
objective presentation of scientific findings about addiction. I'll then leave it to you
to draw your own conclusions but hopefully those conclusions will be much more informed
than they would have been without taking the course. Next time we'll dive into the brain's
reward system. This is the neural system that gets hijacked during addiction so understanding
how it works will be an important step in understanding the neuroscience of addiction. See you then.
you
