For a long time, many scientists favored a negative reinforcement model of addiction.
The basic idea is if you become physically dependent on an addictive substance like alcohol
or heroin and you stop taking it, then you'll experience negative symptoms of withdrawal.
Maybe you'll get the chills or tremors or other negative symptoms.
So in order to relieve those negative symptoms, you take more of the drug.
The unpleasant withdrawal symptoms provide negative reinforcement that leads you to take
more of the drug and an addiction is born.
But recently, scientists have identified some problems with the negative reinforcement
model of addiction.
One problem is that the withdrawal symptoms of some of the most addictive drugs are actually
less severe than the withdrawal symptoms of less addictive drugs.
For example, chronic methamphetamine users who abruptly stop taking the drug don't usually
experience severe physical symptoms.
They might experience some anxiety and irritability, and they might sleep more than usual, but they're
not usually in significant physical discomfort.
In contrast, withdrawal from alcohol is potentially life-threatening.
Chronic alcoholics who suddenly stop drinking can experience very severe physical symptoms
including seizures and delirium.
So if addiction is fundamentally about avoiding negative withdrawal symptoms, as the negative
reinforcement model assumes, then alcohol should be significantly more addictive than
methamphetamine.
But it isn't.
In fact, methamphetamine is more addictive than alcohol.
So that's obviously a problem for the negative reinforcement model of addiction.
D withdrawal symptoms also usually go away once a user has stopped taking a drug for
a week or so.
So if compulsive drug use is primarily about avoiding negative withdrawal symptoms, then
the addiction should go away when the withdrawal symptoms do.
But it doesn't.
In fact, drug addicts are often susceptible to relapse for years after they've quit.
Furthermore, studies with rats have shown that developing a physical dependence to alcohol
isn't enough to cause rats to continue to self-administer it.
That is, you can get a rat who will clearly exhibit physical dependence to alcohol and
will show signs of withdrawal when the alcohol is stopped, but who nevertheless will not
self-administer alcohol when it's available.
Now again, according to the negative reinforcement model, that doesn't make sense.
The negative reinforcement of unpleasant withdrawal symptoms should drive the rat to self-administer
more alcohol.
But it doesn't.
For these kinds of reasons, many scientists today favor a positive reinforcement model
of addiction.
The idea here is that addictive substances like cocaine and alcohol over-stimulate the
brain's reward circuit and provide very strong positive reinforcement.
And repeated over-stimulation leads to specific changes in the brain that give birth to addiction.
Today, we're going to learn how that works at a neural level.
We're going to dive into what's going on in the brain's reward circuit following chronic
drug use and how that can lead to addiction.
Along the way, we'll link what we've learned so far about addiction with what we've learned
so far about the brain.
We'll see how behavioral symptoms like tolerance, withdrawal, and dependence develop as a result
of changes that occur in the brain.
So what does repeated use of addictive drugs like cocaine and alcohol do to the brain that
makes them addictive?
How does the brain change?
Well, I want to talk about three major changes that contribute to addiction.
First, repeated over-stimulation of the brain's reward circuit numbs the response in the brain's
pleasure center, the nucleus accumbens.
Second, repeated over-stimulation also strengthens associations with addiction-related cues which
increases cravings.
And third, it weakens inhibition from the prefrontal cortex, which undermines self-control.
Let's begin by talking about the numbing of the pleasure response in the nucleus accumbens.
Many scientists believe that tolerance reflects the brain's attempt to compensate for repeated
over-stimulation of the reward circuit, and that it does so by inhibiting the stimulation
of the nucleus accumbens, thereby numbing the pleasure response.
Remember from our last lecture that the nucleus accumbens is often considered to be the pleasure
center of the brain.
It's associated with liking or enjoyment.
And recall that experiments found rats would rather stimulate the nucleus accumbens than
do anything else, including eating or having sex.
They're even willing to endure intense pain to keep stimulating it.
Direct stimulation of this area is so pleasurable that both rats and humans will self-stimulate
it over and over and over for hours on end, if given the opportunity.
Well, it turns out that addictive drugs stimulate this area much more than normal everyday rewards
do.
So, while eating or reading or seeing a friend indirectly stimulate the nucleus accumbens
and lead to normal feelings of pleasure and reward, heroin and other addictive drugs stimulate
the nucleus accumbens much more directly, which produces the extremely rewarding high
associated with these drugs.
In a very real sense, addictive drugs over-stimulate the nucleus accumbens, meaning that they produce
activity levels that are well beyond the normal range.
And it turns out that if this kind of over-stimulation happens a lot, it can eventually lead to a
numbed pleasure response, because the nucleus accumbens will begin to inhibit the brain regions
that are stimulating it.
But how does that work?
Well, the body has mechanisms that maintain an internal equilibrium.
This is called homeostasis.
For example, our body has mechanisms that maintain our temperature at a relatively constant level,
whether we're on a hot beach in August or in a freezing snowstorm in January.
Think of it like a thermostat in your house that's trying to keep the temperature relatively
constant.
If it starts to get too hot, then the thermostat will turn on the air conditioner to cool things
down.
That's exactly what's going on in the nucleus accumbens.
If the nucleus accumbens gets repeatedly overstimulated, it'll turn down the stimulation
that it's receiving.
It does this by producing a molecule called Kreb.
Kreb is what's known as a genetic transcription factor.
What that means is that it can turn on the cell's genetic machinery and cause it to make
specific chemicals.
And when Kreb is produced, it turns on the machinery that makes a chemical called dynorphin.
Dynorphin is like a natural painkiller that's produced by the brain itself.
And the dynorphin then inhibits stimulation of the nucleus accumbens.
So this is a kind of homeostatic feedback loop in the brain.
When the nucleus accumbens gets repeatedly overstimulated, it produces Kreb.
Kreb triggers the production of dynorphin, and the dynorphin inhibits the stimulation
of the nucleus accumbens.
Now consider what happens in a drug addict who is repeatedly overstimulating the nucleus
accumbens with their particular drug of choice.
The dynorphin will keep turning down the stimulation, and over time the addict will feel less pleasure
from the drug.
The high won't be as rewarding, and the addict will require more and more stimulation to get
the same level of reward.
And of course, that's exactly what drug addicts report.
They need more and more of the drug to feel the same high.
And eventually, they need to take the drug just to feel normal.
That's what I mean by a numbing of the pleasure response.
It takes more stimulation to feel the same level of pleasure and reward.
Note, the nucleus accumbens is becoming less sensitive to all types of stimulation, not
just stimulation from addictive drugs.
Everyday pleasures, like seeing a friend, or reading a book, or playing a sport, might
also begin to feel numb.
They won't provide the same level of pleasure that they once did.
And in fact, since everyday pleasures don't activate the nucleus accumbens as directly
or as strongly as drugs do, addicts can eventually reach a point where the drug is the only way
that they can feel good.
Okay, so we've talked about the numbing of the pleasure response in the nucleus accumbens,
and how that might play a role in tolerance to the rewarding effects of drugs.
Now I want to talk about a second major brain change that contributes to addiction, namely
the strengthening of associations between drug taking and drug related cues, resulting
in increased craving.
As we discussed in lecture one, addiction is characterized by very strong cravings and
by compulsive use, despite negative consequences.
Alcoholics will often keep drinking, and drug addicts will often keep using, despite losing
family and friends, despite losing their job, and despite other significant emotional and
financial costs.
They're often painfully aware of these negative consequences, but they just can't stop themselves.
So where do these overwhelming cravings come from?
Well, first it's important to point out that craving, or wanting, is different from liking.
The distinction is often particularly clear in drug addicts.
Remember, liking occurs in the nucleus accumbens, and the nucleus accumbens is getting numb,
and as this process occurs, how much drug addicts like the drugs actually declines over time.
But how much they want the drugs doesn't.
In fact, drug cravings tend to increase, even though the pleasure derived from the drug
is declining.
So if activity in the nucleus accumbens is associated with liking, what's the neural
basis of wanting or craving?
Well, to answer that question, we need to turn to the ventral-tegmental area, the VTA.
In our last lecture, we pointed out that activity in the VTA is associated with reward prediction,
and more specifically with reward prediction error.
Neurons in the VTA fire when a reward is unexpected.
Now, when VTA neurons fire, they release a chemical neurotransmitter called dopamine.
Dopamine plays an absolutely central role in addiction.
In fact, dopamine is so important that it's been called the addiction molecule.
It's earned that name because studies have repeatedly found that all drugs of abuse
lead to a significant increase in dopamine when they're taken.
Dopamine seems to play a role in every addiction that's been studied, whether it's addiction
to alcohol, cocaine, cigarettes, or even gambling.
Now, for a long time, scientists assumed that dopamine was associated with pleasure and
liking, and they believed this for good reasons.
VTA neurons do in fact release dopamine in the nucleus accumbens, the brain's pleasure
center.
Also, as we've seen, dopamine release is associated with all the addictive substances.
So, it makes sense that dopamine might be playing a role in the pleasure associated
with taking those substances.
But recent evidence has suggested that view is wrong.
For example, think about that monkey experiment with the light, the lever, and the juice that
we talked about in our last lecture.
In that experiment, the VTA neurons did respond to the rewarding juice initially, but they
only did so when it was unexpected.
Once the monkeys could predict that the juice was coming, those neurons no longer fired
when it arrived.
Instead, they started firing when the light came on.
Now, the monkeys presumably still liked and enjoyed the juice more than the light.
That is, it seems very unlikely that these thirsty monkeys started driving more pleasure
or reward from the flash of a light than they did from a squirt of good-tasting juice.
And yet, the dopamine release came to be associated with the light instead of the juice.
So that suggests that dopamine really isn't about reward or pleasure.
Similar evidence comes from patients with Parkinson's disease.
As you may know, Parkinson's disease is associated with damage to cells in the midbrain that
produce dopamine.
And so Parkinson's patients have abnormally low levels of dopamine.
In fact, the most common treatment for Parkinson's disease is dopamine replacement therapy in
which patients take drugs that increase their abnormally low dopamine supply.
And since dopamine also plays a major role in motor control, Parkinson's patients typically
exhibit movement-related problems like tremors, slowness of movement, and difficulty with
walking and gait.
But here's the interesting thing.
Even though these patients have low levels of dopamine and associated motor problems,
they still experience normal levels of pleasure.
So again, it appears that dopamine is not about pleasure or liking.
So if dopamine is central to addiction, but it isn't associated with liking or pleasure,
then what does it do?
Well many scientists now believe that dopamine release is associated with wanting or craving
rather than liking.
Now the kind of wanting that we're talking about here is an impulsive urge, not a thoughtful
long-term goal.
So dopamine is the chemical that makes you want to get the candy bar when you see it
in the checkout lane at the grocery store.
It's a primitive, impulsive kind of wanting.
That kind of wanting is different from thoughtful, cognitive desires like wanting to graduate
from college or to remodel the kitchen.
A great example of this distinction can be seen in smokers.
Most smokers don't want to smoke at a cognitive level, and the vast majority have repeatedly
tried to quit, but they have a very strong, primitive urge to light up, which overcomes
their cognitive goals.
That's the kind of wanting that dopamine produces.
My colleagues Kent Barrage and Terry Robinson at the University of Michigan refer to this
kind of craving as incentive salience.
That is, the incentive or the motivation or the wanting becomes particularly salient and
strong, and the dopamine signal conveys that strong incentive.
So what's the evidence that dopamine is associated with incentive salience or this primitive
kind of wanting?
The most compelling evidence comes from studies with mice that have been genetically engineered
to have abnormally high levels of dopamine.
These dopamine-rich mice exhibit signs of very strong craving.
For example, they move much more quickly towards rewarding stimuli, like food, than normal
mice do.
However, once they get the reward, they don't seem to enjoy it any more than other mice.
We actually know this from carefully observing their facial expressions.
You see, mice, rats, humans, even monkeys all share characteristic facial expressions
when they experience pleasure.
And so, scientists can actually estimate the liking or pleasure response, even though the
animals can't talk.
And when dopamine-rich mice eat good-tasting food, their facial expressions are no different
than normal mice.
Other experiments have injected amphetamine into the reward circuit, which also causes
dopamine levels to rise.
That, too, causes animals to be more motivated to obtain rewards, so they'll press a lever
more often or move through a cage more quickly in order to obtain the reward.
But once again, once they get the reward, there's no evidence that they like it any
more than the control animals.
Even more interesting is the behavior of animals that have been genetically engineered not
to produce dopamine.
These animals don't show any motivation to try to obtain food or other rewards.
In fact, they'll actually starve to death rather than taking the trouble to walk to
food.
They actually have to be nursed in order to eat.
And yet, even though they don't show any signs of wanting the food, if the food is
fed to them, they show all the normal facial expressions associated with liking the food.
Now, let me take just a minute to address a question I hear a lot, and that some of
you might be asking.
Can you really study how addiction works in humans by studying mice, rats, and monkeys?
Well, it turns out that animal studies often provide much more insight than human studies
ever could.
Consider comparing human addicts to non-addicts.
I think we can agree that the addicts differ from the non-addicts in many ways that have
nothing to do with their addiction.
But that means it can be very difficult to know whether any of the observed differences
are due to the addiction or are due to something else.
So one of the great things about studying rats and mice is that you can take animals
that were raised together in very similar environments and are genetically virtually
identical, and you can then randomly expose some of them to an addictive substance while
leaving others as control subjects.
And then any differences that you observe between the groups must be due to the addictive
substance.
In short, animal studies of addiction actually provide much better experimental control than
do human studies.
And it turns out that addictive behaviors in animals are actually pretty similar to
addictive behaviors in humans.
So like humans, animals develop tolerance, and they tend to increase the dosages that
they self-administer.
We also see evidence of withdrawal through shaking, through the loss of appetite, weight
loss, and changes in body temperature, just like humans.
We'll be referring to animal studies throughout this course, so I thought a brief aside would
be useful.
But now, back to wanting.
So dopamine seems to be more about wanting than it is about liking.
But how does it contribute to addiction?
Does repeated use of addictive drugs actually lead to changes in the dopamine system that
contribute to addiction?
The answer is yes.
There are actually at least two changes in the dopamine system that can contribute to
addiction.
The first change is what Terry Robinson and Kent Barrage call incentive sensitization.
And the second change is related to dopamine's effect on associative learning.
Let's start with incentive sensitization.
Robinson and Barrage proposed that with repeated use of addictive drugs, the brain's dopamine
system becomes sensitized.
That is, it becomes even more sensitive and easier to activate than it was before.
Sensitization is kind of the opposite of tolerance.
So with repeated use of addictive drugs, the dopamine system actually responds more and
more strongly.
Now, remember, dopamine is associated with craving or wanting.
So as the dopamine system becomes more and more sensitized, what that means is that the
cravings are getting stronger and stronger.
So after the first few times trying an addictive drug, the user might feel some urge to do
it again, but those urges may not be particularly strong, and they can be resisted.
But with repeated use, the dopamine system gets sensitized, and so the cravings get stronger
and stronger.
And pretty soon, the urges are so strong that they're virtually irresistible.
The other change involves dopamine's effect on associative learning.
Remember in our last lecture, when we talked about the importance of prediction error in
learning?
The Riscorla-Wagner model of classical conditioning is based on learning from prediction errors.
Likewise, the temporal difference learning algorithm in artificial intelligence is based
on reward prediction errors.
Well many scientists believe that dopamine is that reward prediction error, and as such,
it triggers learning, just like prediction errors trigger learning in the Riscorla-Wagner
model and in the temporal difference algorithm.
Essentially, when dopamine is released, it means that an unexpected reward has arrived
or soon will arrive, and that means we should pay attention and learn so that we'll be able
to predict when such rewards might show up again in the future.
Now this makes a lot of sense, and normally works really well.
So suppose you're a thirsty animal in new environment, and you run across a source of
water unexpectedly, then you want to be able to remember where that water is located.
Likewise, if you unexpectedly run across a good source of berries or a great hiding
place, it's useful to store those memories for future reference.
Well in all these cases, the release of dopamine signals that something important has happened,
which leads to learning.
And addictive drugs also trigger the release of dopamine, and so they trigger learning too.
In fact, they trigger larger than normal releases of dopamine, and therefore produce particularly
strong learning.
Unfortunately what gets learned is more harmful than helpful.
For example, each time a heroin addict shoots up, a big shot of dopamine will be released,
and that dopamine will trigger the learning of strong associations between the drug use
and all the stimuli in the environment.
For example, the people who are there, the drug paraphernalia, the particular location,
all of these stimuli will get strongly associated with drug use.
Consequently, those stimuli can become powerful triggers that remind the addict about the
drug and induce cravings.
Over time, the dopamine release will back up from the drug use to all the cues that
are associated with it.
So now if the addict sees another regular user, or sees a needle, or walks by a location
associated with drugs, any of those cues could lead to a burst of dopamine and a strong craving
to use the drug.
And of course the same mechanism as it works in any addict, whether the addiction is to
alcohol, or cocaine, or nicotine, or any other addictive substance.
Certain environmental cues become very strongly associated with the use of the drug and turn
into triggers that lead to craving and continued use.
So we've talked about how repeated use of addictive substances can lead to a numbing
of the pleasure response in the nucleus accumbens, and we've also talked about how it can lead
to increased cravings and strong associations between drug-related cues and drug taking
by sensitizing the dopamine system.
Now let's turn to a third type of brain change that happens in addiction, namely reduced
self-control as a result of weaker inhibitory control from the prefrontal cortex.
In our last lecture, we pointed out that the prefrontal cortex plays an important role
in inhibiting undesirable behavior and in exerting self-control.
While the reward circuit is mainly about processing primitive urges, the prefrontal cortex is
the thinking part of the brain that can consider future consequences and make rational decisions
about what actions we should take, not just what actions we feel like taking.
And the prefrontal cortex plays a major role in inhibiting behavior suggested by the more
primitive reward circuit, whenever we decide that that behavior wouldn't be appropriate.
Now unfortunately, chronic use of addictive drugs can lead to abnormalities in the prefrontal
cortex that undermine our ability to exhibit this kind of self-control.
For example, studies with rats have found that using cocaine for a month changes the
structure of prefrontal neurons.
In particular, the dendrites of the neurons which receive inputs to the neuron were misshapen
in those animals compared with control animals.
Likewise, neuroimaging studies in human beings have found reduced activity in prefrontal
cortex in chronic drug users compared with controls.
In fact, even the volume of prefrontal cortex is reduced in drug addicts.
Drug addicts also exhibit many of the same cognitive impairments that patients with damage
to prefrontal cortex exhibit.
For example, prefrontal patients typically perform poorly on tasks of working memory,
decision making, and on tasks that require sustained attention.
Well, chronic drug users have been found to exhibit these same cognitive impairments.
In short, there's now quite a bit of evidence that chronic drug use impairs prefrontal cortex
function.
Now here's the problem.
The prefrontal cortex is the logical, rational circuit that understands consequences and
that inhibits inappropriate behavior.
But with repeated drug use, it doesn't work as well as it normally does.
And so it has a hard time overcoming the increasingly powerful urges coming from the reward circuit.
Essentially, the drug addict's ability to exhibit self-control and override their drug
craving gets weaker and weaker.
The alcoholic or heroin addict may know that drinking a bottle of whiskey or shooting up
isn't the best idea, but they've begun to lose their self-control.
It's like the rational prefrontal cortex is in a battle with the impulsive reward circuit.
And with repeated drug use, the prefrontal cortex gets progressively weaker and loses
those battles more and more frequently.
And each time the prefrontal cortex loses a battle, it becomes more likely to lose the
next one.
Let's conclude by summarizing some of the main points we've made in today's lecture.
First of all, we pointed out that addiction is more about hijacking the brain's reward
system via positive reinforcement than it is about negative reinforcement and avoiding
withdrawal symptoms.
And we explained how the repeated use of addictive substances overstimulates that reward circuit
and causes specific changes to the brain that contribute to addiction.
First, chronic drug use can lead to a numbing of the reward processing in the nucleus accumbens.
Second, it can sensitize the dopamine system, leading to increased craving and to stronger
associations between drug-related triggers and drug use.
And third, it can lead to reduced self-control as a result of impaired prefrontal cortex
function.
Now one question we didn't address is why do some people who drink or take drugs become
addicts while others don't?
Are some people genetically more susceptible to addiction than other people?
That's the domain of the genetics of addiction, and that's what we'll talk about next time.
