Welcome to the history of mathematics, the queen of the sciences.
My name is David Beresu. I'm a mathematician and a teacher and I have a real passion for
the history of mathematics because mathematics is really about ideas and I think one of the
most effective ways of understanding these ideas is to look at how they have developed.
Where did they come from? What were people trying to do as they looked at these ideas?
What did the ideas arise from many different civilizations and cultures? How did they interact?
What were the difficulties that people encountered in developing them? And how do they play out
in our world today? I'm also interested in the history of mathematics because I'm interested
in it as a teacher. As I try to explain these ideas to my students, I want to look back
and be able to motivate the ideas by showing them where they came from, but also and sometimes
even more important to look back and see where the difficulties have been. Where did people
have trouble in coming up with a particular idea? What were the ideas that came naturally
that were easy to find? What were the ideas that were very difficult and took a long time
to develop? Those places where the mathematicians and scientists had difficulty with the mathematics,
I can expect are going to be places where my own students are going to have difficulty.
And it greatly encourages them. If I can say, look, this great mathematician Augustin-Louis
Cauchy, the greatest French mathematician of the 1820s, was struggling with this idea.
If you're struggling with it too, that's just to be expected.
I also enjoy the history of mathematics just because it's full of great stories. We're
going to be looking at a lot of interesting people. We're going to be studying people
like Leonard Euler, probably the greatest mathematician who ever lived, who would continue
to be incredibly productive even after he was completely blind. We'll look at people
who died extremely young, the young Everiste Galois who would solve one of the most fundamental
problems in mathematics at the age of 17 and die before his 21st birthday. We're going
to look at the self-taught mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan. And we're going to see how despite
the obstacles of growing up in southern India without access to much of the mathematics
of Western Europe at the time, he was able to get his hand on mathematics textbooks and
learn from those and become one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century.
But before I get into the history of mathematics, I want to back up and look at the topic of
this particular lecture, which is, what is mathematics? To me, the essence of mathematics
is the abstraction of pattern. What mathematicians do is to look at the world around us and see
the patterns that are out there and then abstract those patterns in order to be able to work
with them and manipulate them and use them then to tell us more about this world that
we see around us. Some of the simple examples of this abstraction of pattern come from numbers,
they come from geometry. And most people, when they think of mathematics, they think
of number and to some extent that is appropriate. I hope by the end of these lectures you'll
have a much richer sense of the kinds of patterns that mathematicians work with. But the beginning
of understanding these patterns really is with number. So we look initially at number
simply as a qualifier. We have five people. We have five loaves of bread. We are looking
at five stars in the sky. And from that we abstract the number five. And that's very
useful as we begin to combine objects. If I have five people in a room and three more
people come in, I now have eight people. If I have five loaves of bread and add to those
three more loaves of bread, I now have eight loaves of bread. And the fact that we've got
in essence a five and a three that combine to become an eight is something that goes
beyond the people or the loaves of bread. It's a mathematical abstraction. And once
we take those patterns and begin to abstract them, we can begin to play with them. The
same thing happens in geometry. And the basic geometric objects are things like lines and
circles. And they're really expressing spatial relationships. So we look at five stars in
the sky and we see that they seem to be in a certain pattern that we describe as a circle.
Or we might look at a ring of stones on the ground and we describe that as a circle. Or
we might simply have three points that we're interested in. There's the tree over there
and the house that's here and myself standing somewhere between them. And I consider those
three points and I begin to think of them as a triangle. And so we get this geometry that
comes out of abstracting these these patterns. And one of the interesting questions that
comes up as you begin to think about these abstractions that mathematicians are working
with is what is the reality behind them? Is five something that actually exists? Is a
circle a pure platonic circle something that really exists? And of course I use the adjective
platonic because this gets back to Plato's view that in fact these ideal abstractions
really do exist that there is a reality beyond ourselves that we are tapping into as we make
these abstractions. And this gets to a more fundamental question that is often debated
by mathematicians and philosophers of mathematics and philosophers of science. And that is whether
mathematics is discovered or whether mathematics is created. Are we simply revealing something
that is out there as we put together mathematics or are we creating something? I actually come
down between those people who believe that mathematics is discovered and mathematics
is created. I am at heart a Platonist. I do believe that there is an ideal world out there
that we are trying to understand that we are trying to tap into. And as we develop these
abstractions of patterns that mathematicians work with, we're really trying to explain
a deeper reality that is out there. But it is also a very subtle reality. And most mathematicians,
most scientists realize that we can never really describe what's out there. What we
are doing with mathematics is creating a language, a set of symbols that enables us to work with
some aspect of that deeper reality that is out there. But in most cases we cannot claim
that we really fully understand that, we really fully comprehend it. And that's one of the
things that makes mathematics so exciting. Because as we abstract these patterns, we begin
to try to look beyond what we've been working with. What a mathematician does is to take
an abstraction of a pattern that she or he sees over here and another pattern that's
observed someplace else. And you look for points of similarity between these two patterns.
And as you overlay the patterns, as you begin to look for these points of similarity, you
see that they suggest ways in which the pattern might extend. And so you begin to explore
that. Is this really going on? This is what makes mathematics so very exciting is this
kind of exploration, knowing that there is a world out there that we understand very
imperfectly and we're exploring it in the mathematics, taking what we know, trying to
find ways of combining what we know in order to be able to go further into the unknown
and to understand that. Now the patterns of mathematics come from many different sources
and I'll talk about many of these sources through this series of lectures. One of the
most important sources comes to us out of commerce and civil administration. And this
certainly is where we get basic arithmetic. This is where we get our fundamental operations
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, and also simple fractions as
well as the whole numbers or integers. And we can see ways in which fractions come up
quite naturally. If I have five loaves of bread and I want to share them among three
people, then each person is going to get a loaf of bread and something left over. And
to be quite precise, each person, if they are shared equally, will get one and two-thirds
loaves of bread. So fractions come in fairly naturally. Commerce and civil administration
also give rise to rates. What's the rate at which someone can accomplish a certain job.
You want to know how long it will take to build a wall or dig a canal. And so you need
to know the rate at which people are working. You want to know what the yield is on a given
plot of land, and so you want to know how much barley is produced on each acre. Commerce
and civil administration will also be the origins of much of the work in algebra. We're
going to see how algebra comes out of these problems in arithmetic, but also how algebra
comes out of problems in geometry. And this will be one of the threads in some of the
early lectures. Another source of the patterns of mathematics comes from problems of navigation.
And problems of surveying. So we're trying to do land measurements. This gives rise to
geometry, which literally comes from the words geo-earth and metric measurement. So we are
measuring the earth. And geometry then arises from these problems of trying to determine
distances, trying to determine areas, trying to determine volumes. As I said, we'll be
using geometry to motivate what much of what goes on in algebra. And we'll also be using
geometry to motivate much of the number theory that I'll be talking about. Number theory
is really about understanding the structure of the integers. If I've got an integer like
20, how can I represent it? Can I write it as the sum of two squares? How can I decompose
20 into a product of primes? These kinds of questions are the questions that we're going
to see addressed as we look at number theory. A third source of the patterns of mathematics
comes to us from astronomy or astrology. And in the ancient world, there really is no clear
distinction between astronomy and astrology. And in fact, right up well into the 17th century,
people would not make a distinction between these two. You studied the heavens in order
to try to understand what was likely to happen on earth. But you really were doing astronomy,
but it was done for astrological purposes. And we're going to see how some of the greatest
astronomers also were astrologers, in particular people like Johann Kepler at the very early
years of the 1600s, whose work in both astronomy and astrology would lay the foundations for
much of the work that would be done in developing the calculus. This distinction between or
lack of distinction between astronomers and astrologers also carries over into mathematicians.
And in fact, if you look at the ancient world or even the medieval world or even the Renaissance
world, the words mathematician, astronomer and astrologer were used interchangeably.
And one of the stories that I like very much is of the emperor Tiberius, who it is recorded
banished all mathematicians from the city of Rome. Now he was not banishing the accountants.
He was banishing the astrologers. The astrologers were predicting his downfall problems for
his empire. He didn't like that fact. And so he was banning the astrologers. But to
Tiberius and for many hundreds of years after Tiberius, astronomy, astrology and mathematics
were all bound up in the same package. And largely that's because some of the most important
advances in mathematics came directly to us out of astronomy because we're trying to
understand the patterns of the world around us. And most of the world around us is too
messy to be able to pick out these patterns. What we need to do is to take a look at a
place where the patterns are much simpler and astronomy would turn out to be one of
those places. By looking at the heavens, we saw these patterns in a much purer form.
But it's not just astronomy. We're going to continue that into a general viewpoint of
the physical phenomena of the world and how we've pulled patterns from them. We will also
be looking at optics. And eventually we're going to be looking at electricity and magnetism.
And even the study of subatomic particles and see how mathematics was influenced and
how mathematics often was created from trying to explain these physical phenomena of the
world around us. Yet another source of mathematical patterns that will be very important is art
and architecture. Especially as we get into the later lectures, we're going to see how the
ideas of symmetry would come to play an absolutely fundamental role in the mathematics that would
be developed in the 19th and the 20th centuries. And that's one of the reasons why I'm standing
in front of a picture of the Lion Court at Alhambra in Granada because that particular
palace is a wonderful example of symmetry in art. And it's actually through the symmetry
at Alhambra that many mathematicians have come to a realization of the kinds of patterns
that they then could apply to other problems, both in geometry and also in algebra.
I want to say a little bit more about number and distance. We've talked about number as
abstraction from actual units. So we're counting the number of people or the number of loaves
of bread. And sometime in far antiquity, somebody decided to take this idea of number and apply
it to distance. And you run into a problem there when you try to apply number to distance
because the difficulty is there is no natural unit when you're looking at distances. If
I want to know how far is it from here to there? Well, today I might measure that off
in feet or meters or yards. But those are simply human constructs. What are we going
to use as the unit to measure off distance? And even once we decide what the unit is going
to be, there's no reason why the unit we've chosen is really going to be appropriate for
the distance that I'm looking at. So if I've got my unit, say a stick, and I'm going to
measure off the distance to some point, almost inevitably, as I get close to that point,
I see that the distance that's left is less than the length of my stick. But I'm not able
to take a whole number of sticks and measure that distance. One way of solving this problem
of this little piece that's left over is to take my stick and mark it off into smaller
intervals. I might mark it off into tenths, or I might follow the Babylonians and mark
it off into sixty small pieces, or I might follow the Romans and mark it off into twelve
small pieces. This is where we get our foot divided into twelve inches. And I'm now going
to take these smaller pieces and try to measure off the remaining distance. But almost inevitably,
the smaller pieces are not going to measure the remaining distance exactly, and so I'm
going to need smaller units still. Take each of those inches, take each of those small pieces,
and subdivide them. And as I do that, again, it won't exactly match. And eventually the
scientists, or in the case of early mathematics, the bureaucrats began to realize that in fact
this was a process that would never end. And now the question is, does it make sense to
talk about the distance between here to there as a number, if we can never express that number
exactly, if the best we can do is get these approximations using smaller and smaller units?
This is a question that the Greek mathematicians would really wrestle with, but we're also going
to see it in the Babylonian mathematics of four thousand years ago. Trying to apply number to
time introduces other problems that are going to be very important to our story, because unlike
distance where there is no natural unit, when I look at time we've got too many units. We've got
the day, we've got the lunar month, and we've got the solar year. And each of these units is
incommensurable with the other. You cannot measure off a lunar month in a precise number of days.
It's going to be a number of days plus a bit left over. And you cannot measure off a solar year in an
exact number of lunar months or an exact number of days. Whichever of these two units you use,
there's going to be a little bit left over. And as you subdivide these units, there's always going
to be a little bit left over. But even more importantly, what's happening is we've got
different units traveling in different cycles. And this would present fascinating problems for
mathematicians to wrestle with, is how to figure out when all of these cycles would line up. A very
important question in astronomy and astrology, as people look not just at the cycles of the day,
the month, and the year, but also the period that it would take Mars to circle the earth, or the time
it would take Venus to circle the earth, or the time it would take Saturn to circle the earth,
and then trying to find out when different planets would actually be in alignment in the future.
As we explore this question of the nature of mathematics, it's going to be very useful to refer
to two papers that I'd like to talk about now, the first of which was written by the physicist
Eugene Wigner, who taught at Princeton University. And he published the paper in 1960. It's called
The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences. And one of the things
that Wigner observed as a physicist was that physicists look at the world around them, and they
try to understand the patterns that they see, and then they turn to mathematics. And they ask,
are there similar kinds of patterns that the mathematicians have been working with? Can I
take this pattern in mathematics and apply it to the physical phenomena? And Wigner remarked that
amazingly, most of the time when physicists see a pattern in the natural world, and they pick up a
pattern from mathematics, that pattern in mathematics actually fits what's going on in the
natural world with amazing accuracy. And not just amazing accuracy, it also often has excess
content. It is possible to take that mathematical model and see beyond what we were trying to explain.
So not only does the mathematical model enable us to do the predictions of what we already saw, it
suggests a deeper reality that is out there. I will return to this theme periodically as I talk
about the work of Newton, and also especially in the second to last lecture, when I'm going to show
how mathematics really does represent the ultimate physical reality, showing us things that we never
would have expected without the mathematical models. And Wigner asks the question, why is mathematics
so good at this? He defines mathematics as the science of skillful operations with concepts and
rules invented just for this purpose. Now that suggests that there's an arbitrary nature to
mathematics that I don't quite buy. I do not believe that mathematicians just sit at their desks and
try to think up interesting patterns that they can play around with. As I said, mathematicians really
get their ideas for the patterns that they will study by looking at the world around them. And so in
some respects, we should not be surprised that if we look at the world around us, and we extract a
pattern, and then we try to apply this pattern to the world around us, it often will fit. But what is
surprising is that the patterns that are pulled out of one area. So for example, we're going to see how
astronomical phenomena gave rise to the trigonometric functions. We can then take those trigonometric
functions and apply them to something that seems to be totally unrelated to the heavens, namely a
vibrating string, and see that exactly these trigonometric functions that came out of our study of
astronomy are going to be applicable to problems in mechanics, problems of vibrating strings, and
actually eventually applicable to problems like heat flow and electricity and magnetism. There was a
second article that I want to talk about. This is really a response to Wigner's article. It was written by
Richard Hamming in 1980, and it's called simply the Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics. Richard
Hamming was a very prominent applied mathematician. He worked at Bell Labs, and he did a lot of work in
signal processing. And he was also interested in this question of why mathematics seems to be so useful, so
effective. And he did raise that point that I did, that after all, mathematics is extracted from the world
around us, so we shouldn't be too surprised that it's applicable when we try to apply it back to the world. He
was actually less surprised, though, that it could be applied to other areas than I am. But I want to raise
Hamming's article because he does a nice job of clarifying what mathematics is. He describes the four
faces of mathematics. And the first two I've already talked about. The first face of mathematics is
number. The second face of mathematics is geometry. The third face of mathematics is close reasoning. And this
is extremely important. Because, as I said, as we're looking at mathematics, we're taking these patterns, we're
overlaying patterns, and very often we're extracting patterns from the overlay of patterns. And as we build
these abstractions of the patterns that we saw, they create new patterns and we abstract from them. And
mathematicians are often working with abstractions of abstractions of abstractions of abstractions of
abstractions. And to keep track of what's going on and to really have a reliance on the results that you
get, to have some confidence that you really have found something that really is there, that really will be
useful, you need tools in order to keep track of these abstractions of abstractions and how they work
together. And what are the legitimate conclusions that can be drawn and what are not the legitimate
conclusions? Now, one of the ways of doing this is through formal logic, the logic that was developed in
Greece, that comes to us from the Greek mathematical tradition. But I like the fact that Hamin uses the
words close reasoning rather than logic. Because I think the picture is much broader than just the kind of
formal logic that we know from Euclid's elements, the Euclidean geometry. As we look at many different
cultures, many civilizations, and the way that they have developed mathematics, we're going to see that they
came up with different ways of maintaining this close reasoning. It did not have to be the kind of formal
logic developed in Greece. And the fourth of the faces that Hamin talks about his artistic taste, and I
really like this, because there is something about mathematics that is very aesthetically appealing. And as
we're looking for these patterns, there almost inevitably has to be an aesthetic appeal if we're on the right track.
When we see the kinds of symmetries that we want, when we see these kinds of patterns coming together and just
clicking perfectly, perhaps in an unexpected way, but in a very satisfying way, that's what tells us that we are
working with real mathematics and with important mathematics. And it's very difficult to define this aha moment when
things come together, but it's incredibly exciting when it does. And there is this real feeling of the need for
artistic taste and the artistic appreciation that comes from it.
I believe that mathematics is far less arbitrary than Wigner talked about it. I believe that it's much more surprising than Hamin
claimed it was. And I hope to be able to communicate that to you in this series of lectures.
My lectures are going to cover 4000 years of the history of mathematics. And there's no way I can do this in any kind of
detail. I want to bring you right up to the 21st century. I want to share with you some of the exciting things that mathematicians
are doing today. And so I'm going to have to treat much of this history of mathematics in a very superficial way. But I hope to be able
to communicate some of the really big ideas. In looking at how to structure these 4000 years going all the way back to the
ancient Babylonians and Egyptians, I decided that the real pivot point occurs in the 17th century. And that's when we get five
different threads coming together. And the threads are algebra and geometry and astronomy and mechanics, the way that physical
systems interact with each other. And then the last of these is going to be the mathematics of motion. And we're going to see how
different ancient civilizations develop these threads until by around the year 1600, they come together. We're going to see these
threads coming out of the ancient Mesopotamians, the Egyptians, the Greeks. We're going to go to South Asia and see how the Indian
mathematicians of the first millennium AD developed the ideas. We're going to turn to China and see how these ideas were further
developed there, how the Islamic world took all of the different threads of mathematics that had been developed up until that
time, and really pushed them much, much further and laid the foundation on which Western Europe would be able to pick up these
threads and continue to develop them until by 1600, they were ready to be woven together. And I'm actually going to spend five
entire lectures just on the 17th century, because this is such an exciting time. As these mathematical ideas came to maturity, and
people began to see how they could interact, how you could weave them together. And the great master of weaving these threads
together was Isaac Newton. He saw how to combine them in new and very important ways. And Newton's mathematical principles of natural
philosophy, not truly a work of mathematics, it's really a work of physics or of science, it is explaining celestial mechanics. But in it,
he shows how all of the mathematics that had been developed up to that point could be brought together and united into very exciting
new mathematical ideas. And then beyond the 17th century, I will follow the development of mathematics, treating it very superficially
now, just touching on a few of the points that I find most interesting, some of the people that I enjoy talking about the most. So the
mathematics after the 17th century is going to be extremely personal. I'm going to share with you my own enthusiasms, my own
excitements, and hopefully bring you up to the point where you have some idea of why it is so exciting to be a mathematician today.
