In the last lecture, we looked at the early developments of mathematics in Mesopotamia
and in Egypt. With this lecture, I'm beginning a series of three lectures that look at Greek
mathematics. And of the Greek world, the Hellenic and Hellenistic worlds would dominate mathematical
development for basically a thousand years, from about 600 BC until around 400 AD. I'm
going to focus in this lecture on the first 300 years, from about 600 right up until around
300, and something very important happens around the year 300, and that is when Euclid
of Alexandria writes his great books. He's best known for the elements, which is often
considered to be a work of geometry. It actually has much more than geometry. It really covers
much of the mathematics that was known at that time. And between the elements and the
other books that Euclid wrote, they really cover everything that was known in the Greek
world. And for that reason, nobody bothered to keep any of the earlier Greek texts in
mathematics. Euclid was so successful in summarizing what everybody else had done that there was
no point in keeping what anybody else had done. Incidentally, it's not clear how much
of the mathematics in the writing of Euclid really was his own. There are some people
who believe that he did not discover any mathematics by himself that none of the theorems in Euclid's
work really are original to him. There are other people who do argue that certain pieces
of it he must have been the first to come up with. But what is significant about Euclid's
elements written around 300 BC is that they do summarize what was known before, and they
set the foundation for everything that would come afterwards. The earliest of the Greek
mathematicians that we know something about is Thales of Miletus. He was born in the late
7th century, and then would go into the 6th century. Thales was interested in a number
of problems related to finding distances between objects. We know that the Thales was
studied with the Egyptian mathematicians that he picked up much of their mathematics.
He did learn astronomy from them, and it's been recorded that he predicted the eclipse
that occurred in the year 585. It's also been recorded that he was able to calculate the
height of the pyramids. He would have used similar triangles in some way. It's also been
recorded by Plato that Thales came up with a way of determining the distance that a ship
is offshore. If you've got two different points on the shoreline and you're able to observe
the ship from both of these points, you can then do a geometric argument that enables
you to determine the distance out to the ship. Plato also records one of the events that
apparently happened to Thales, and it illustrates the concept of the absent-minded mathematician.
Thales apparently one night was walking along, studying the stars, when he fell into a ditch,
and a young servant girl who happened to be nearby pulled him out and asked him, how
is it possible for you to understand what is going on up in the sky if you do not even
see what is at your feet? Thales of Melida sets an important example for Greek mathematics
because of his fascination with the idea of distance, calculating the heights of the
pyramids, figuring distances out to a far ship. You're using geometric ideas, and certainly
the other kinds of ideas of mathematics will appear within the Greek tradition. There is
a lot that is built on problems of commerce, problems of taxation, as well as astronomy,
but it's these geometric problems that really will come to dominate Greek mathematics, and
we're going to see that in a very large dependence on the idea of ratio and proportion. So ratio
taking the ratio of two integers, so one integer divided by another, and working with those
ratios of numbers, very often instead of working with pure numbers, what the Greek mathematicians
would do is to work with ratios. And we see this particularly strongly in the work of
Pythagoras of Samos. Pythagoras was born sometime around 580 BC. Samos is just a stone's throw
for Miletus, and it is believed that at the very least he probably met Thales. There is
a tradition that he may actually have studied with Thales, but we do know that Pythagoras
learned much of his mathematics by traveling to Egypt, and he actually was indoctrinated
into many of the mystic practices of the Egyptian astrologer priests. He learned a lot of the
Egyptian astrology, or astronomy, or mathematics at this time. He happened to be in Egypt at
the time that Cambesus of Persia conquered Egypt, and Pythagoras was taken back to Babylon
by Cambesus, and he took advantage of this. There was still a very strong mathematical
tradition in Babylon at this time, and according to the tradition, Pythagoras learned a great
deal of the Babylonian mathematics, the Babylonian astrology, or astronomy at this time.
After leaving Mesopotamia, after leaving Babylon, Pythagoras went to Italy, and there he founded
his own school, what became known as the Pythagorean school, or sometimes the Pythagorean cult,
because he really adopted many of the cult practices, both of the Egyptian and also of
the Babylonian or Mesopotamian mathematicians. He set up a group that was very mystical,
very secretive. We don't have many details of exactly what was going on in this group,
but we do know, certainly according to tradition, that Pythagoras believed that mathematics
lay at the core of all nature. The quote that Pythagoras scribes to him is that, at its
deepest level, reality is mathematical in nature. There certainly were cultish aspects
of the Pythagoreans. They followed the Egyptian priest's practice of never eating beans, never
wearing leather, but they also were clearly interested in developing the mathematics,
and in particular developing mathematics built around ratio and proportion. And so music
and the musical scale, which is very much built on ratios, is something that is generally
attributed to the Pythagorean. The Pythagoreans, there are developments in architecture and
the kind of proportions that you should have as you design buildings that is often attributed
to the Pythagoreans. And of course the Pythagorean theorem is often attributed to them. As we
know, the Pythagorean theorem is much older than the Pythagoreans, but in fact they appear
to have been the first people to actually come up with a proof of the Pythagorean theorem.
This is more than an observation that the areas of those two squares on the legs is equal
to, when you add those two areas it's equal to the area of the square on the hypotenuse,
that according to tradition it's the Pythagoreans who actually came up with a proof of this
fact. The Pythagoreans are also credited with coming up with the idea of an irrational
number, that there are numbers that cannot be represented using fractions, they cannot
be represented using a ratio of two integers. And the first example that we know of of this
case is the square root of two. The square root of two is about seven-fifths, but it's
not exactly seven-fifths, and in fact you cannot find a fraction that's exactly equal
to the square root of two. We don't know when this was first proven, it is often attributed
to Pythagoras himself, and one of the stories that is out there is Pythagoras discovered
this fact, and there was a great feast among the Pythagoreans. Another one of the traditions
is that it was one of Pythagoras' disciples who discovered this fact, and there was a
great celebration that was experienced around this. And the third tradition is that it was
one of Pythagoras' disciples who discovered that the square root of two was not a ratio,
and it could not be represented as a ratio of two integers. And Pythagoras was so disappointed
and upset at this revelation that he banished this disciple from among the Pythagoreans.
The next mathematician I want to look at is Zeno of Alea. This is in what today is Italy.
He's a fifth century mathematician, and he's best known for his paradoxes. He was interested
in this whole question of what it means to consider all possible distances and assign
a number to any possible distance. It's what today we refer to as the continuum. Does every
single point between here and over there actually correspond to some number? If it does, then
you start to get some paradoxes coming in. I want to focus on just one of them because
it's going to be important later on when we get to calculus. And that is the problem if
you consider an arrow in flight and you look at how fast it's traveling. That's its velocity,
and you can determine the velocity by looking at how far it travels and how long it takes
to get there. So the distance that it travels divided by the time that it takes to get there
is its velocity. Well, if every single point between here and the endpoint of the arrows
trajectory is a number, we can think about what's happening to the arrow when it reaches
a specific point. When it reaches a specific point in time or in distance, what's going
on there? Can we assign a velocity? Well, it seems to Zeno that we can't possibly assign
a velocity because if we're looking at the arrow at one instant, it doesn't travel any
distance. And if it doesn't travel any distance, it can't possibly have a velocity. So at any
instant in time, the arrow is not moving. But to get from here to there, we've got to
pass over the continuum. We've got to pass over every single point. And at each point,
the arrow is not moving. And if at each point, the arrow is not moving, how does it succeed
in getting from where I shoot it to where it lands? That's one of Zeno's paradoxes and
it would take a long time to really begin to grapple with this. Aristotle, in the fourth
century BC, would be one of the people who attempted to work with Zeno's paradoxes by
essentially banishing them. What Aristotle did was to separate mathematics into those
numbers that are proportions and deciding that we could work with them. And then the
continuum that also contains these strange numbers like the square root of two that cannot
be represented by a ratio and simply put them into a whole other category. There are other
separations that Aristotle makes that turn out to be very significant for the development
of mathematics. And one of those is the difference between arithmos and logos. Arithmos is the
origin of our word arithmetic. And so Aristotle is looking at basic arithmetical calculations,
the kinds of calculations that would be used by people doing commerce or that would be
used by the scribes and the civil servants, versus the kind of logical mathematical argument,
the close reasoning that I talked about in the very first lecture, and that he referred
to as logos. And logos is an interesting word. It literally means word. And in the ancient
Greek world, this word logos carried many, many different meanings. And in fact, in the
opening lines of St. John's Gospel, we have the word logos used in Archeino logos. In
the beginning was the word, but you could interpret that to refer to Aristotle's sense
of logos. In the beginning was logical mathematical reasoning. I don't think that's quite what
St. John had in mind when he wrote this, but it's interesting food for thought, and it
certainly fits into much of the Greek tradition, and especially the tradition of the Pythagoreans.
The next mathematician that I want to look at is Theotetus of Athens, born around 417
BC, died around 369 BC. He was a friend of Plato. He was at the Academy in Athens. Theotetus
did a number of important things that would be reflected in the work of Euclid. In particular,
Theotetus is considered to have been the mathematician who finished the description of what today
we call the platonic solids. They are named for Plato, but they certainly do not come
from Plato. So these are solids that have faces that are flat, and the faces are all
regular polygons. So for example, a cube is a simple example of a platonic solid. So each
of the sides of a square, each of the sides of a cube is a square. So a regular four-sided
polygon. There are other examples of platonic solids. There is the tetrahedron that has four
sides. Each of the sides of a tetrahedron is an equilateral triangle. Another example
is the octahedron that is made up of eight triangles. And there is the dodecahedron that
is made up of 12 pentagons. There is another platonic solid. The tradition in Greek mathematics
was that the platonic solids came from the Pythagoreans, but almost certainly the last
of these was not known to the Pythagoreans. Almost certainly it was originally discovered
by Theotetus, and that's the icosahedron. And this is a solid that is made up of 20
triangles. So the faces of this solid are made up of equilateral triangles. Something else
that Theotetus did was to work with the question of how do you recognize a rational number.
One of the problems that we have when we're working with rational numbers is that you
can have two very different appearances to the same rational number. Thus, three-quarters
is the same as six-eighths, which is the same as twelve-sixteenths. Now in those cases it's
easy to see that they are all the same fraction. But what if you've got a more complicated
fraction like a hundred and nineteen divided by ninety-one? What's the simplest way of
expressing that? And it's not clear if this idea originally comes from Theotetus, but
he certainly exploited this. And this is the idea, if we're thinking about the fraction
a hundred and nineteen divided by ninety-one, to first look at what's the largest integer
in that. The largest integer in that is one. How much is left over? Twenty-eight over ninety-one.
Now once you take out the largest integer, whatever is left over is going to have to
be a number between zero and one. Let's take its reciprocal. Instead of twenty-eight over
ninety-one, we look at ninety-one over twenty-eight, and find the largest integer in that. Twenty-eight
goes into ninety-one three times. What's left over is seven over twenty-eight. Let's repeat
that process and take the reciprocal of seven over twenty-eight, that's twenty-eight over
seven, and seven goes exactly into twenty-eight four times. If you start out with a rational
number and you do this process, take out the largest integer, look at what's left, take
its reciprocal, take out the largest integer. That's going to stop after a finite number
of times, and you can now redo this process. The integers that we got were one, three and
four, and we can back up. Start with four, take its reciprocal and add three to that,
that gives us thirteen-fourths. Take its reciprocal, four-thirteenths, and add one to that, that
gives us seventeen-thirteenths, and that gives us the original pair in their reduced form.
A hundred and nineteen over ninety-one is equal to seventeen over thirteen. This is
what would come to be known as the Euclidean Algorithm. And what Theotitas realized was
that he could prove that the square root of two was not equal to a rational number by
showing, and this is a geometric argument that unfortunately I don't have time to go
into, but he used a geometric argument in which he showed that if you take the side
of a square plus its diagonal and ask how many times does the side of the square go
into that, well it goes into with a little bit left over. And geometrically Theotitas
was able to show that if you take that little bit that's left over and you look at its reciprocal,
that's exactly the number of times that the side of a square goes into the side of the
square plus its diagonal. So that if we're trying to take the side of a square plus its
diagonal, one plus the square root of two, that's equal to two plus a number whose reciprocal
is what you started with. Two plus one over, two plus one over, two plus one over, two
plus one over, and so on. This continues forever. It never terminates. This cannot be a rational
number. Incidentally, this gives you a very accurate way of approximating the square root
of two is to work this process backwards. Start with two, take its reciprocal and add
two. Two plus a half is five halves. Take that reciprocal and add two to it. That gives
you 12 fifths. Take its reciprocal five twelfths and add two to that. That gives you 29 twelfths.
Take its reciprocal and add two to that. That gives you 70 29ths. Take its reciprocal
and add two to that. You get 169 over 70, and I hope you see how you can continue this
as long as you want and get as accurate as you want. But if I take 169 over 70, that
accurately measures one plus the square root of two to an accuracy within one in 34,000.
You can quickly get whatever accuracy actually is needed.
The next Greek mathematician I want to look at is Eudoxus of Canetus, also someone who
was at the academy in Athens. He was born sometime between 395 and 390 BC. Eudoxus of
Canetus was interested in this question of how do you define an irrational number? If
you've got a number like the square root of two, we've seen how Theotetus was able to
take the problem of when are two rational numbers equivalent to each other and working
out a procedure for deciding that. And what we're looking at here with Eudoxus of Canetus
is how do you decide if two irrational numbers are the same? And he came up with a brilliant
idea, a brilliant idea that actually would be adopted in the 19th century of the modern
era by Richard Dedekind, that we'll be talking about much later. The way to compare two irrational
numbers and decide if they really are the same number is to look at the rational numbers
that are larger than each of them. And if every rational number that's larger than this
irrational is also larger than the other one, and if every irrational number that's smaller
than this is also smaller than the other one, then the two irrational numbers have to be
the same. This is an idea that Euclid would pick up and he would use as an important foundational
aspect for studying all numbers, whether they are rational numbers, in which case he would
explain what we call the Euclidean algorithm for deciding when two rational numbers are
the same or for comparing the size of irrational numbers. Eudoxus of Canetus is also important
for his work on areas and volumes, and he is credited with being the first mathematician
to really work out how to take this problem of finding the area of an irregular region
or taking the volume of something that's not just a rectangular solid and approximating
the area by chopping it up into little rectangles or little rectangular blocks. And so this
is a method that would come to be known as the method of exhaustion. Euclid describes
it in his writings, and in the next lecture I'm going to talk about how Archimedes of
Syracuse really refined this idea and turned it into a very powerful way of working with
the problem of finding areas and volumes. Euclid of Alexandria is a shadowy figure.
It's generally believed that he lived roughly from 325 to 265 BC, but the fact is not only
do we not know when he was born or when he died, we don't even have any definitive proof
that he ever existed. There is no contemporary who wrote about him. There is a reference
in one of the works of Archimedes, but a lot of the scholars believe that that was a later
addition. We don't get the first biography of Euclid until 750 years after he lived.
However, there is a body of mathematical work that was written around the year 300 BC that
clearly was all written by the same person. It's in the same voice with the same kinds
of ideas and the same logical development. Somebody must have done this writing, and we
might as well believe that it is the person to whom it's attributed, this Euclid of Alexandria.
Now, Alexandria is a city that had been founded after the death of Alexander, the first ruler
of Egypt following the death of Alexander, was Ptolemy I, and he built a center for scholars,
what was known as the Musean. This was a temple to the Muses. It's the origin of our word
today, museum, and the museum was set up by Ptolemy I in the last years of the fourth
century BC to be a center for scientific work, for scholarly work. And there was a group
of mathematicians who were pulled together at the museum, and Euclid almost certainly
was the person who was leading this group, and his job was to take the mathematics that
was around him and condense it, explain it. And while we're not sure how much of this
mathematics was original to Euclid, what was very original to Euclid was the way in which
he was able to explain the mathematics and put it on a very logical foundation. Euclid
clearly made important choices about what needed to be defined and how it would be defined,
what needed to be taken as a postulate or assumption or axiom, and how these then would
be structured into proofs. Euclid was one of the greatest teachers to have ever existed.
Euclid should be thought of as a great textbook writer, and that's really what's going on
here. He is taking ideas, most of which existed in Greek mathematics before his time, and he
is organizing them in an incredibly effective way. Euclid's Elements is still a textbook
that is used today. It has gone through well over a thousand additions in many, many
translations, and it's made up of many books. It's usually when you think of Euclid's
Elements, you think of geometry, and the first four books of Euclid's Elements really are
devoted to geometry, but there's much other mathematics that's going on here in addition
to that. Books five and six deal with ratio and proportion. Those books are also looking
at similarities in geometry. Books seven through nine look at number theory, and here is where
Euclid explains this Euclidean algorithm that really comes to us from Theotidas, or possibly
even earlier than that. Euclid looks at sums of geometric progressions. This is where Euclid
proves that there are infinitely many prime numbers. So a prime number is one that is only
divisible by one and itself among the positive integers, and Euclid proves that in fact there
are infinitely many such primes, two, three, five, seven, eleven, seventeen, and so on.
Book ten of the Elements looks at the meaning of irrational numbers, and here is where he
picks up this idea of Eudoxus of Canetus on how to define an irrational number, and book
ten talks about how to compare various kinds of magnitudes. In chapters eleven through thirteen
look at solid geometry. He explains Eudoxus's method of exhaustion, how to find areas and
volumes of irregular objects. He explains how to construct the platonic solids, and he
goes well beyond that. He doesn't just explain what the platonic solids are. He actually proves
that these are the only ways that you can construct a solid so that all of the faces look
exactly the same, and that all of the faces are in fact regular polygons, polygons in
which all of the sides have exactly the same length. There's much else that Euclid wrote.
He also wrote two other books on geometry. We still have some pieces of those, one called
data, one called on divisions. He wrote one of the first books on optics, and in that
book we find the very first recorded treatment of the question of perspective. Another one
of Euclid's books is a book on astronomy called Phenomena, and there are several other
books that people recorded that Euclid had written, but unfortunately which no longer
exist. There is one book on surface loci, so this would be two-dimensional curves. There's
another book with an intriguing title, Porisms, and people are not quite sure what is meant
by a porism, but from some of the examples that other people make of the kinds of results
that Euclid stated in this book, these appear to be results that can easily be deduced from
other theorems that he proved. Most of the porisms are geometric results that follow
from the main theorems that Euclid proved in the elements. There is also a book on conics.
There is a book that's called the book of fallacies, and he had at least one book on music.
For the next time, we're going to look at the following 700 years of Greek mathematics.
From the time of Euclid right up until about 400 AD, we're going to focus in, in particular,
on Archimedes. We'll also be looking at Apollonius, Diophantus, and the first recorded woman in
mathematics, Hepatia of Alexandria.
