In this lecture, we're going to be looking at Hellenistic mathematics. The last lecture
ended with Euclid of Alexandria, sometime early in the third century BC. We're going
to pick up there and continue right through until 400 AD. This lecture and the next lecture
are going to be separated. In the next lecture, I want to put all of the work on astronomy.
And so this lecture is going to focus on 700 years of Hellenistic mathematics, but without
any mention of the astronomical work that would be done. As I mentioned, in the last
lecture, it was Ptolemy the first to establish the museum in Alexandria in what today is
Egypt. And this would become a center for mathematical work actually for the next 700
years. Aside from Ujjain in India, there probably is no other place on earth that has been a
center of important mathematical activity for such a long stretch of time. Ptolemy's
successor, Ptolemy II, would go on to build a great library that would be there to support the
museum. And his successor, Ptolemy III, then would make a point of really building that library up
into the greatest repository of books anywhere in the world. And in fact, there are many stories
of people being pressed into loaning copies of their manuscripts so that they could be
recopied. Anyone who traveled to Alexandria and was taking a book, a scroll with them, was
required to loan this scroll to the library. And sometimes if it was a very valuable scroll,
the scroll would not be returned to the person that it was taken from. Rather, they would have to
leave with a copy of the book that they arrived with. We also know that Ptolemy III did get in
contact with many of the other of the rulers of the Eastern Mediterranean and aggressively went
after books from other sources. One of the first mathematicians to follow Euclid in the museum
was Eratosthenes, originally from Cyrene, born around 276 BC. He would die around 194 BC. In
addition to being a mathematician, he was the third librarian of the Great Library in Alexandria.
And he did a number of very interesting mathematical accomplishments, one of which is to find a
general method for finding all of the primes below a given number. So for example, if you want a list
of all of the primes, less than a million, there are about 78,000 of them. There is an algorithm or
procedure that Eratosthenes came up with called the sieve of Eratosthenes, which is a method of
generating all of the primes. And even today with our powerful computers, the kind of procedure that
these computers use in order to find all of the primes below a given number, such as the primes
less than a million, rely on the idea behind Eratosthenes' sieve. Something else that Eratosthenes
accomplished was to measure the circumference of the earth. Now, it was known in ancient times that
in fact the earth is round. It's a common myth that people right up into the Middle Ages believed
that the earth was flat. In fact, they were quite aware of the fact that it was round.
One of the arguments for knowing that it was round is the fact that as a ship sails out to sea,
you see the bottom of the ship disappear first, and the mast is the last part of the ship to
disappear, because it's disappearing over the curve of the horizon. But there's an even more
immediate way of seeing that the earth must be round, and that's by looking at a lunar eclipse.
A lunar eclipse happens when the earth comes between the sun and the moon, and so the shadow
of the earth is projected onto the moon, and you only have to look at that shadow to see
that it's round. The earth has to be round. And if it is round, then the question comes up,
how large is the earth? And this is a question that Eratosthenes wrestled with, and he came up
with a very ingenious way of figuring it out. It's known that the sun is so far away from the
earth that the rays of the sun hit the earth essentially as parallel lines. And so what you
can do is find a place where the sun is directly overhead at a certain time of year, and then
find another place a certain distance north of that, and figure out the angle that the sun's
ray makes at that northernmost point, at that more northern point, and compare that angle to
figure out that distance, what angle of the total circumference of the earth is being measured here,
and use that to extrapolate the circumference of the earth. Eratosthenes actually did this.
What he did was to dig wells, one in southern Egypt and another one near Alexandria. He chose
a time when the sun was directly above the well in southern Egypt and looked at the shadow,
the angle that the sun made with the well near Alexandria. He was very lucky in being able to
accurately measure the distance between the two wells, and came up with a measurement of the
circumference of the earth that essentially is right on. He came up with something between 24
and 25,000 miles, or the equivalent in the units of that time, of something between 24 and 25,000
miles, which is what the circumference of the earth actually is. One of the problems, of course,
is that there were lots of people who were estimating the circumference of the earth at this time.
Eratosthenes' estimate was one of many estimates that were out there, and an independent observer
didn't have any good way of knowing which one was correct. It wouldn't be known until much later
that, in fact, Eratosthenes had been correct. I want to spend most of my time in this lecture at
looking at one of the friends and colleagues and contemporaries of Eratosthenes. This is Archimedes
of Syracuse, certainly the greatest of all of the mathematicians of the Greek world. He was born
around 287 BC, died in 212. He was noted as an engineer. He is credited with inventing the
hydraulic screw. We know that he went to Egypt, that he did spend some time in Alexandria, and
the tradition there is that he invented the hydraulic screw. So this is a screw mechanism
that can be used to lift water, and he invented it for use in Egypt.
He probably did not invent the block and tackle, but he certainly understood the principles behind
the block and tackle, and was very instrumental in developing this idea. He also discovered the
power of levers, and he is famous for his quote, give me a place to stand and I will move the earth.
If you've got a fulcrum point and you've got a long enough lever, somebody who is as puny as a mere
human being actually is capable of moving an object as large as the earth through the mechanical
advantage of using a lever. Archimedes also turned his attention to vehicles, to machines of war,
catapults in particular. Burning mirrors are something that he is credited with inventing.
Certainly Archimedes was very much involved with optics, with the properties of mirrors.
The tradition is that in 214 when Marcellus, the Roman general, was attacking Syracuse,
one of the defenses of the city that Archimedes came up with was to line up soldiers with polished
mirrors that he would focus on the ships and set them ablaze. Almost certainly this didn't happen,
and an interesting item of debate today is whether this is even possible.
Some people argue that it is not possible, others argue that if he got things just right,
there are ways in which he might have been able to succeed. But one of the important points is that
Archimedes was well known to the Romans as somebody who was extremely inventive,
and it is said that the Roman soldiers were so terrified of these engines of war that Archimedes
was inventing that all the defenders of Syracuse had to do was to drape a little piece of rope over
the parapet and the Roman soldiers would assume that Archimedes was about to unleash some terrible
new weapon and they would flee in terror. The Romans would eventually conquer Syracuse in 212
and it was again the Roman general Marcellus who was leading the Romans when they did conquer
Syracuse. Marcellus was well aware of Archimedes and he greatly valued the contributions that
Archimedes was making even if he was working for the people in Syracuse who were his enemy.
And the story is that Marcellus sent one of the soldiers to go and find Archimedes and bring
him safely back to the Roman camp and that the Roman soldier misunderstood the order simply
that he was supposed to bring Archimedes back. And the story is told that the soldier came to
the house of Archimedes. General chaos going on in the streets around him as the soldiers were
entering the city and pillaging and burning the city and the soldier came up and he discovered
Archimedes deep in a in a mathematical piece of work. Archimedes and there is a mosaic that
shows this. Archimedes was doing his calculations on a sand board which is probably the way he
really was doing calculations at that time. So you wouldn't want to waste valuable papyrus or other
writing surface in order to put something indelible if you were just doing mathematical
calculations. So you would write them with your finger on a board that was covered with fine sand
and once you found your answer then you could wipe it out and reuse the sand board again.
And so the soldier finds Archimedes deep in his mathematical calculations. He orders him to follow
him. Archimedes says no let me finish these calculations first and the soldier who believes
that he must get Archimedes back without delay kills him on the spot rather unfortunately and so
that is the the death of Archimedes. I've described Archimedes as a great engineer and certainly
that is where he made most of his or much of his reputation at the time but he has also left a
very important mathematical legacy and in fact we've got an indication that it was the mathematics
that was most important to Archimedes because Archimedes had asked that on his tomb there be
erected a sphere contained within a cylinder and this refers to Archimedes calculation of the
volume of a sphere which he considered to be his greatest work and in fact we do have independent
confirmation. Cicero visited Syracuse in the year 75 BC and he found the cemetery where Archimedes
was supposed to be buried and in fact he did find this tomb of a sphere inside a cylinder.
The result that Archimedes found is not the usual way we have of stating the formula for the volume
of a sphere. We remember that formula if you've been taught it in grade school as four thirds pi
r cubed so four thirds times pi times the cube of the radius. The way Archimedes stated this was
that the volume of the sphere is two-thirds the volume of the cylinder so if we put a sphere inside
a cylinder so that the circumference of the sphere exactly matches up with the circumference of the
cylinder and the height of the sphere is equal to the height of the cylinder it's easy to work out
the volume of the cylinder the volume of the cylinder is the area of the base which is pi r
squared times the height of the cylinder which is the diameter of the sphere which is two times r
so you take the base pi r squared times two r and you get two pi r cubed for the volume of the
cylinder if the sphere is two-thirds the volume of the cylinder then the sphere is two-thirds times
two pi r cubed which is four-thirds pi r cubed but the way the ancients thought about the volume of
the sphere is that it was two-thirds the volume of the cylinder. Archimedes worked this out he
worked it out using the method of eudoxus of Canetus this method of exhaustion that Euclid had
talked about taking this volume and breaking it down into thin slices you can find the volume of
each of the thin slices and then approximate the volume of the entire sphere by adding up the volumes
of the thin slices and seeing what that number approaches as you take progressively thinner
slices of the sphere this is the idea behind integral calculus integral calculus really at its
heart has the problem of finding areas and volumes and it works by precisely this kind of slicing
mechanism that was first introduced by eudoxus later developed by euclid and really perfected by
Archimedes and it's not too much of a stretch to say that Archimedes understood integral calculus
now when we get to the 17th century we will see that all of calculus involves much more than being
able to find areas and volumes but this basic idea is something that Archimedes really understood
something else that he was able to do is to find a way of approximating pi
essentially to arbitrarily high accuracy so remember that pi is the number of times that
the diameter of a circle is used to measure off the circumference of a circle the diameter goes
around the circumference three and a little bit and the number of times the diameter goes around
the circumference is this number we refer to as pi incidentally the use of that particular
letter the Greek letter p for perimetros is something that would be introduced in the 18th
century of the modern era before then people did not use this Greek letter pi to represent the
ratio of the circumference to the diameter of a circle but nevertheless people were interested
in this ratio and Archimedes began by considering a hexagon a six-sided figure that fits precisely
into a circle and if I've got a hexagon a six-sided figure it's made up of six
equilateral triangles and that means that the circumference of the hexagon is six times the
radius of the circle or in other words it is three times the diameter if I start out with a six-sided
figure a regular hexagon in my circle its circumference is going to be exactly three
and what Archimedes succeeded in doing is figuring out if I've got a polygon that sits inside a
circle a regular polygon all of the sides have the same length he figured out how to take that
polygon and double the number of sides and find the relationship between the new circumference
and the old circumference so once he knew that a hexagon inside this circle has a circumference
of exactly three he was able to work out the circumference of a 12-sided regular polygon
and from there to 24 sides and from there to 48 sides and from there to 96 sides and he was able
to measure pi accurately to about three digits about 3.14 comes out of recognizing that that pi
can be approximated with this 96-sided regular polygon Archimedes could have gone further with
that but he chose to stop at that point the next mathematician I want to talk about is Apollonius
of Perga born sometime around 260 BC and the big contribution that I'm going to talk about today
from Apollonius is his work on conic sections as I mentioned in the last lecture we know that Euclid
wrote a book on conic sections but we don't know what he said about them and all of our evidence
of what was developed in Hellenistic times about conic sections comes from Apollonius
incidentally we're going to encounter Apollonius again in the next lecture because he also has
important contributions that he made to astronomy but what he was looking at is conic sections
so these are curves that can be obtained by slicing a pair of cones so I take a pair of
cones that meet point to point and I consider what happens as I slice through these cones
if I make a horizontal slice through one of the cones I'm going to get a circle if I tip
that plane that slices through the cone slightly it's going to elongate my circle and I'm going to
get an ellipse so a circle that's simply elongated along the axis in the direction in which I'm
slicing by this plane as I move the plane up to an ever steeper angle my ellipse gets longer and
longer and longer until finally I take a plane which is actually parallel to one of the sides of
the cone so that the plane comes in hits the cone and then never leaves and what happens is that my
ellipse stretches out so far and then suddenly it opens up at one end and I get a parabola
if I now continue tipping that slicing plane if I tip it just a little bit more it's now going to
intersect the other cone and as it intersects the other cone I'm going to get two pieces
I'm going to get one piece on the bottom cone and another piece on the upper cone and those two
pieces together give us the curve that is called a hyperbola and so we've got the circle the ellipse
the parabola the hyperbola all of these basic curves are united in this idea of slicing cones
and what Apollonius of Perga is able to do is to explain properties of these conic sections
these various curves that are all related in this way and find the things that are common among them
Apollonius's work on conic sections would eventually become an important part of analytic
geometry when geometry and algebra get merged in the 17th century and today when we study these
conic sections we usually think about them algebraically it makes it much much easier
to understand conic sections if you think about them algebraically Apollonius did not have this
kind of algebraic representation at hand he had to think of them purely geometrically and it's
incredible how much he was able to do we know that Isaac Newton as he was writing the mathematical
principles of natural philosophy explaining the motion of the planets around the sun he needed
to use conic sections because as was discovered by Kepler the planets move in conic sections
they move in ellipses or parabolas or hyperbolas and we know that Newton directly drew on this
work of Apollonius of Perga in order to do his work in the mathematical principles of natural
philosophy in the late 17th century of the modern era another important mathematician of this time
now jumping ahead several hundred years because i'm going to jump over some important astronomers
who will figure in the next lecture the next mathematician i want to look at is Diophontus
of Alexandria born sometime around 200 AD died about 284 AD certainly a mathematician in Alexandria
of the third century AD a number of important innovations that come to us from Diophontus
he is the first person known to use a single letter to stand in for an unknown quantity
so today in algebra we use x all the time or t or some other letter to represent the unknown
it was Diophontus of Alexandria who so far as we know was the first person to come up with this
idea that does not mean that he invented algebra as we'll see especially when we get to the lecture
on Islamic mathematics there is much more to algebra than just having a single letter that
represents an unknown or even working with things like quadratic polynomials which we saw that the
Babylonians were able to do but Diophontus did help set the stage for the later development
of algebra he was very well known to the Islamic mathematicians he is responsible for a very
compact notation to represent quadratic polynomials so polynomials that involve the the unknown squared
plus a linear term plus a constant also cubic polynomials Diophontus studied so these are
polynomials that go up to a cubed term something raised to the third power and Diophontus of
Alexandria is best known for his book Arithmetica in which he studies problems where he is only
looking for solutions that only involve integers what today we call Diophantine equations in honor
of Diophontus and a classic example of this are the Pythagorean triples that I talked about in
connection with Babylonian mathematics so you've got an equation like x squared plus y squared
equals z squared you can let x and y be any positive numbers and there will be a positive value for z
but the more interesting question is can you find integers for mech for x and y that lead to an
integer value for z so examples like 3 4 5 5 12 13 and so on and it was Diophontus who studied this
question and Diophontus is the first person who actually recorded a method for generating arbitrarily
many of these in fact all of the possible Pythagorean triples now going back to the Babylonian work
from almost 2000 BC we have seen that they were able to generate literally dozens of these Pythagorean
triples they probably knew the method that Diophontus explained in the third century AD
but nobody actually wrote it down until we got to Diophontus the last mathematician that I want to
talk about is the first woman to appear in the history of mathematics and that is Hepatia of
Alexandria she was born around 370 AD we know quite precisely when she died she died in 415 AD
she was not alone in being a woman who was doing mathematics we all we do have accounts of the
mathematical community surrounding the museum at this time in Alexandria where the end of the
fourth century AD and we know that the museum itself was made up of a group of scholars
and many people would come from around the Hellenistic world in order to study mathematics
study mechanics study optics study the other sciences there at the museum with these great
scholars the great scholars incidentally so far as we know were not paid but they were fed
and that was good enough to get them all to come together and we also know that the museum had a
number of lecture halls where the members of the museum could lecture about their topic so people
would come they would listen to these lectures they probably would pay the scholars independently
for further lessons and there was a group of people who gathered around the museum who would
also offer private tutoring or other lessons in mathematics and Hepatia was one of them she was
actually the daughter of a member of the museum Pheon of Alexandria she was quite accomplished
we know that while there is no original mathematics that is directly attributable
to Hepatia we know that she wrote commentaries on the work of Archimedes the work of Ptolemy the
astronomer who i'll be talking about in the next lecture she wrote commentary on the work of Diofantis
and in fact just recently we discovered a work that is believed to have come from Hepatia
in 1968 there was an arabic translation of commentaries written on Diofantis's Arathmetica
and it is generally believed from looking at the contextual evidence that these commentaries
that were rediscovered in 1968 probably were written by Hepatia and so if there was no
original mathematics and sometimes that's hard to tell because the commentaries often would
elaborate on the mathematical themes and develop them further certainly she was someone who understood
the classic texts so well that she could write commentaries that would be used for hundreds
in fact well over a thousand years later it's under Hepatia that the museum comes to an end
and we do not know the exact date or the exact circumstances but the last references to the
museum occur in the late fourth century and they probably coincide with an event that happened
in 391 AD that's the year in which the roman emperor Theodosius the first who was a christian
emperor banned all of the pagan temples he ordered all pagan temples to be closed throughout the
roman empire the museum was a center for scholarship but remember that it was founded as a temple to
the muses and as such it fell under this ban of Theodosius the first and so almost certainly at
this point the museum is suppressed and the scholars who would have gathered in this temple
to the muses were disbanded. Hepatia continued to live in Alexandria and to work in Alexandria
but the coming of the Christians to Alexandria would really mark an end to this great period of
mathematical achievement. For 15 AD there is a great political fight between two leaders
on the one hand we have Arestes who was the pre fact of Alexandria the the emperor's
right hand man running Alexandria and on the other side we have Cyril who was bishop of Alexandria
the leader of the Christians in Alexandria and since the emperor himself was a christian
to be the bishop of Alexandria was to have a great deal of power and Cyril and Arestes were
engaged in a battle to see who could really control the city of Alexandria and with control of the
city of Alexandria would really come control of Egypt and we know that Hepatial was a strong
supporter of Arestes against the Christian bishop Cyril and in the year 415 she was walking through
the city of Alexandria when a Christian mob spotted her and attacked her and she was literally torn
to pieces and that marks the last of the great Hellenistic mathematicians and really the end
of the Hellenistic period in mathematics we're going to be looking at the development of astronomy
in the Hellenistic world and then in the following lecture we're going to move to India South Asia
and we're going to see how they were able to pick up the Hellenistic tradition and further develop it.
