In my very first lecture I talked about the 17th century as a pivot point and I also talked
about the five strands that would come together in the 17th century. Algebra, geometry, astronomy
or astrology, mechanics and the mathematics of motion. And the first figure in which we
really see these five strands coming together is the great scientist Galileo Galilei born in
1564. He would die in 1642. And he's a controversial figure in so far as knowing what it was that
he really accomplished. There's a quote that I really love from E. J. Dixterhuis. Dixterhuis was
one of the great historians of science in the 20th century. And he wrote about Galileo. The whole
history of science perhaps cannot point to a single figure about whom opinions differ so widely as
about Galileo. No one indeed is prepared to challenge his scientific greatness. But on the
question of what precisely his contribution was and wherein his greatness essentially lay, there
seems to be no unanimity at all. And in fact, as we look at what Galileo accomplished, we see that
virtually everything that he did, we can find foreshadowed in the work of earlier scientists and
often not merely foreshadowed, but often quite, quite fully worked out. And many of the important
contributions that he made, he never got quite right. It would fall to later scientists in order
to complete them. But for myself, where I see Galileo's greatness is that he knew the right
questions to ask. He knew what was important. And he had a good sense of where to look for the
solutions. Most particularly, he realized that if we wanted to understand the motions of the planets,
if we wanted to understand celestial mechanics, we really needed to look at mathematical modeling.
And it's this very important emphasis on the mathematics that really sets Galileo apart
from others. He didn't work out the techniques, but he showed us how to approach the problems.
And his work then would lead on into the eventual development of the calculus.
Galileo was really trained as an algebraist, as a mathematician. He got his first job in 1585
in Florence. He would then hold a succession of positions in Siena, in Valembrosa, in Pisa.
And in 1592, he was appointed to a position in Padua. And this is where he would have been in 1594
when John Napier visited Italy. And we know that Napier probably got to Padua, which makes
it very likely that the two of them actually met each other. In 1610, Galileo would return to Pisa.
And there was a very important book that he published in 1610 called The Starry Messenger.
Some years earlier, Galileo had gotten a hold of one of the first telescopes.
This originally had been built in the Netherlands, in the Lowlands, of Belgium and Holland.
And what Galileo did was to use it, not just in order to see objects that are far away on the earth,
but actually to look at the heavens, and to look at the moon, and to look at the planets,
and to observe what was out there. And to observe the first moons of other planets that were known
to exist, thus showing that not everything went around the earth because there were moons that
go around the other planets. And to see things like the mountains on the moon, thus showing
that the moon was not ethereal and perfect, that the moon in fact had imperfections on it.
And The Starry Messenger of 1610 was a popular book that he wrote, explaining what he understood
about the heavens and the arguments for the fact that it is the earth that travels around the sun
rather than the sun that travels around the earth. And this was made quite explicit in a book
published in 1616, Letter to the Grand Duchess, in which he lays out this point of view quite clearly.
And this was the first time that he was pulled before the inquisition in Rome,
and he was warned at this point that he should not state that he knew categorically that the
earth traveled around the sun. It was fine for him to put that out as a possible basis for a model,
but he was not allowed to say that this in fact is what was happening. Because there are passages
in the Old Testament, most especially in the Psalms, that talk about the earth being on a firm
foundation and the earth never moving. And so the Catholic Church believed that it was important
not to state that in fact the earth could move. But Galileo was convinced that in fact the earth
moved, and he realized that if he was going to support that point of view, he had to be able
to explain how it was possible for the earth to move and for us not to be aware of its motion.
And so he began trying to model gravity and inertia and all of the physics that would go behind
explaining how we could be on a moving earth without being aware of its motion. And the great book
that he wrote that explains his physical understanding of the universe would finally appear in 1632,
called the Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief Systems of the World. And he was very careful,
or he thought he was being very careful, not to put this out, the idea that the earth is moving
around the sun as something that he actually believed. He wrote the book with three protagonists
who were debating this issue of whether the earth goes around the sun or it is the sun that goes
around the earth. His three protagonists were Salviati, Sagredo and Simplicio, one of whom was
an intelligent layman, one of whom was a person who believed that in fact it is the earth that goes
around the sun, and one who argued that in fact the earth is stationary and the sun goes around the
earth. The person who held to the position that it is the earth that is stationary was given
the name Simplicio, which perhaps suggests that Galileo's sympathies were not with him,
and he's somewhat portrayed as the simpleton of the group. And certainly the Inquisition
was very much aware of the fact that while this book claimed to be impartial, there was a very
clear argument in favor of the earth traveling around the sun. And so for this reason Galileo
was called before the Inquisition in Rome, and many of us know that this story, how he recanted,
he agreed that it must be the earth that is stationary, and he was forbidden from publishing
this work, the dialogue concerning the two chief systems of the world, and he was restrained,
restricted to house arrest at his home in Archetry for the rest of his life.
But I want to look at the mathematics that he did, and especially the mathematics that appears in
the dialogue. One of the things that Galileo realized is that the key to understanding
what is happening, why we don't sense the motion of the earth, has got to be gravity. And to understand
gravity we must go back to the Aristotelian viewpoint of what gravity is, and what Galileo
was changing about our understanding of gravity. To Aristotle and the later scientists, philosophers,
gravity gravitas was a property inherent in certain bodies. It's a tendency of certain
objects to move toward the center of the universe. And if the earth is at the center of the universe,
that's because it has more gravity than anything else. And if you drop an object,
if I take a book and let go of it and it falls, that's because the book has gravity,
it is trying to get to the center of the universe. As opposed to gravity, an object can have levity,
which is a tendency to move away from the center of the earth. So fire rises because it has levity.
Now one of the problems that you encounter as you try to explain what's happening in terms of
gravity and levity is the problem of what happens when you throw an object. If I take a ball and I
throw it, as long as the ball is in my hand, because it's in contact with my hand, it can move away
from the center of the earth. But as soon as it leaves my hand, it continues moving away from
the center of the earth. I can throw it up in the air and it continues moving away from the earth.
Why doesn't it immediately start moving toward the center of the universe?
And the explanation that eventually would be found is the theory of impetus. The idea that
as I'm moving this object, it begins to accumulate an impetus, a tendency to keep moving in a given
direction. And so to the medieval philosophers, they were able to explain this motion of a
thrown object as something that acquires a certain impetus from the hand. And they expected
that this impetus would gradually dissipate as the object traveled through the air until finally
the impetus ran out and the object would then fall to the ground. And early explanations of the
motion of cannonballs use this idea. People drew illustrations of the motions of cannonballs
that showed a cannonball being fired straight out of the cannon, traveling in a straight line until
it ran out of impetus, and then falling vertically down to the ground. And hopefully it was above
the target at the moment that it began falling. But it was pretty clear that this is not really
the way in which a cannonball travels. A cannonball travels along an arc. And so trying to explain
that arc and what is going on with this gravity, with this tendency to move toward the center of
the earth was one of the important problems, not just for Galileo, but also for the scientists of
the 16th century. Now, as Galileo tested the ideas behind gravity, one of the ideas that he tested
is this idea that if you've got a heavy object, it's going to fall faster than a lighter object.
And there is a common story told that Galileo went up to a tall tower, and perhaps the leaning
tower of Pisa, and took two balls of unequal weight and dropped them and observed that they
hit the ground at the same time. There actually is absolutely no evidence that Galileo ever
conducted this experiment. But we do know somebody who did. The Belgian and then later
Dutch scientist Simon Steven, who lived 1548 to 1620, it is known that in 1586 he went up to the
top of a church tower and actually performed this experiment of dropping two balls and observing
that even though they have very unequal weights, they both hit the ground essentially at the same time.
Steven is an important figure for a number of reasons. There are a number of things that Galileo
did that were prefigured in Steven, and I'll come back to him a little later this lecture.
But I just want to mention a very influential book that he wrote in 1585 called La Tiende,
which advocates for the adoption of decimal fractions. If you'll recall when I was talking
about the Islamic mathematicians, I said that they adopted the idea of decimal fractions,
tenths and hundreds and thousands, using the decimal system. They also continued to use the
system that had been inherited from the Babylonians, that used sixtieths and sixtieths of sixtieths,
as we get now in an hour is divided into 60 minutes and a minute is divided into 60 seconds.
And what happened in the Islamic world and in the early Italian world was
two systems that existed side by side. For most of the merchants, they found tenths and hundreds
decimal fractions to be very easy to work with. In scientific work, especially astronomical work,
but also more general scientific work, they would use sixtieths and sixtieths of sixtieths.
And it was Simon Steven who argued that you really want to use the decimal fractions, tenths,
hundreds, thousands and so on. And he wrote this little book to argue for this point.
And we happen to know that Thomas Jefferson had an English translation of Simon Steven's book.
And that Jefferson was so impressed by this argument that when the new United States government
set up its own money, so the dollar, one of the questions that came up is how should we
subdivide the dollar? The British system, of course, was to divide a pound into 240 pence.
Rather than dividing a dollar into 240 pennies, Jefferson took this work of Simon Steven and
argued that we should divide the dollar up into 100 pennies, that we should work with a decimal
system for our dollar. And so Simon Steven had a direct influence on American currency.
Simon Steven also wrote very influential books on arithmetic and on algebra.
There is another experiment, this time a thought experiment, that Galileo is credited with doing
on falling objects, again with whether two objects of different weights should hit at the same time
or whether the heavier object should hit first. And that involves the question, what if I take
two balls and I connect them by some kind of a bar? Now suddenly they weigh at least twice as much,
they should fall twice as fast. But what if that's a very thin bar? Is that still one object?
What if instead of being a bar, it's simply a piece of string that connects the two balls?
Does that now make them one object? What if it's just the lightest gossamer thread that connects
the two balls? Does that now make them one object? And obviously, once you get a very
thin connection, you need to think of them as two objects. This whole question raises the
realization that in fact the rate at which something falls cannot be dependent on its weight.
And that was something that is often credited to Galileo. In fact, that goes back also into the
16th century to Giovanni Benedetti, who also studied this question of falling objects.
Galileo looked at this question of falling objects, and one of the questions that was still
out there that was still undecided is whether the velocity, which increases as an object falls,
whether that velocity is increasing as a function of time or as a function of distance.
Now actually, you can express the velocity either as a function of time or as a function of distance.
The real question is, is it easier to express it as a function of distance or a function of time?
And the scientists, up until the early 1600s, had debated this, and we see in Galileo's own
writings that he himself went back and forth on this, taking different points of view,
and eventually coming to the conclusion that you've got to look at the velocity as increasing
at the same rate over each interval of time. And in fact, we do know that Galileo conducted
experiments with balls rolling down inclined planes that showed that in each unit of time,
the ball picks up the same increase in velocity. So velocity is most easily expressed as a function
of time, and this would be a very important insight. That now raises the question,
if you've got an object that is falling, such as a ball falling under the influence of gravity,
we let go of that ball, its velocity is increasing. So for each unit of time, the velocity increases
by the same amount. How far does the ball fall over a given period of time? And Galileo did
something very important here that would be a precursor to calculus, to integration.
And that was to represent the velocity at each piece of time by a small line. So we would take the
velocity as initially zero, and then a short line that would represent the velocity a short time later,
and then a slightly longer line that would represent the velocity slightly later, and a slightly longer
line that would represent the velocity later. And you put all of these lines together, and you get a
triangle. And what Galileo realized was that the distance that the object would travel is precisely
the area of this triangle. It can be represented by the area of this triangle. And the area of the
triangle is the base, which is the time that is elapsed times half of the height. So you take the
final velocity and take half of that, so that the distance traveled under uniform acceleration,
the velocity changes by the same amount in each unit of time. The total distance traveled is the
amount of time it takes multiplied by half of the final velocity. And this idea of representing the
velocity as little vertical lines would really be the key leading into the development of analytic
geometry that I will be talking about in the next lecture. Something else that Galileo did that would
be extremely important is the idea of the vector decomposition of velocities. So I'm going to
take a ball, and I'm going to throw it. And what Galileo did was to take the velocity of the ball
and break it down into two parts, a horizontal component and a vertical component. And what
Galileo assumed is that the horizontal component is not going to change. It's certainly not going
to change very much. But the vertical component of the velocity is going to change. We can treat the
vertical component of the velocity as if we're working with a falling object. So what we can do
is to take this ball that is being thrown and decompose the motion into a horizontal motion
at a constant velocity plus a vertical motion that initially is going up and then is is coming back
down. And the vertical component is decreasing by exactly the same amount in each unit of time.
And by doing this kind of decomposition of the velocities, the horizontal component does not
change. The vertical component decreases by the same amount in each unit of time.
Galileo was able to show that the path is going to have to be a parabola. And this is the first
time we get the description of the trajectory of a thrown object or the trajectory of a cannonball
being shown to be modeled by a parabola.
Now this idea of decomposing a velocity into two orthogonal components,
two pieces that are at right angles to each other, had some precursors and ideas of Simon Stephen.
Now Stephen was not decomposing velocities. What Stephen did was to consider
decomposing forces. And one of his important works was elements of the art of weighing.
And one of the things that he looked at there was the problem of an object that is sitting on an
inclined plane. So I've got a slanted plane and I've got an object sitting on it. And I've got the
force of gravity that is pulling this object down. We assume that there's no friction on this surface.
And the question is how much force do we need to apply in order to keep that object stationary on
the plane? Now the actual force that is acting on this object is a force that is straight down.
But the object would have to move parallel to the surface of this inclined plane.
And what Simon Stephen realized is you could figure out the amount of force that was needed
to counteract the tendency of the object to slide by taking that vertical force
and decomposing that into two pieces. One force that ran parallel to the plane and another force
that was at right angles to the plane. And you simply construct a rectangle so that the vertical
force due to gravity becomes the diagonal of a rectangle. And the side of the rectangle that
is parallel to the plane, that's the component of the force that is pushing this object down the
plane. That's the force that is needed in order to keep the object stationary. So this idea of
taking a force and decomposing it is something that we get from Simon Stephen. Galileo took
Stephen's idea and he then applied it to a decomposition of velocities which turned out
to be a very useful way of understanding trajectories. Something else that Galileo
looked at was the question of inertia. And as Galileo realized inertia really would be the
key to understanding why we don't have this sense of moving on or of being on a moving earth,
of moving around the sun at such incredible speeds. Now inertia initially was very closely
connected to this idea of impetus, this belief that inertia is something that is a tendency
for bodies to remain at rest and to get something going, to keep it going, you've got to overcome
inertia. Galileo is the first scientist to really realize that inertia is a tendency to keep going
the way you have been going. And so if you're in motion, you're going to tend to stay in motion
unless there's a force that acts on you. If you are stationary, you're going to tend to remain
stationary unless there is a force that is acting on you. But Galileo didn't quite get inertia
correct. He was trying to explain why we're able to stand on an earth that's spinning at such an
incredible speed without any sense that we are spinning on this earth. And he tried to explain
this in terms of inertia. He believed in a circular inertia that if you're moving in a circular pattern,
you're going to tend to stay in a circular motion. And that that's why we don't sense this motion of
the earth, that we have this circular inertia that is tending to take us around the earth.
And also that we have this circular inertia that is moving us around the sun and we're not aware
of that motion. Well, he was wrong. As would later be discovered, there is no such thing as a circular
inertia. There is only an inertia in straight lines. It's been suggested that one of the reasons that
Galileo was not able to realize this idea of a tendency to keep moving in a straight line
at the same velocity forever is because that really assumes that space goes on forever.
And Galileo was not prepared to accept space that was infinite. To him, he still believed in a
universe that was enclosed within a sphere. And in fact, circles were extremely important to his
understanding of the workings of the universe. Galileo was someone who never accepted Kepler's
law that in fact the planets moved in ellipses. Galileo always held to his belief that somehow
everything really was moving in circles.
But as I said at the beginning of the lecture and I want to come back to now, Galileo's real insight,
his real contribution, was the realization that if you want to understand the world around us,
you need to use mathematics. You need to look at mathematical modeling. And I'd like to close with a quote
from Galileo that really says this very clearly and would really set the stage for the mathematics
that would follow in the 17th century. He wrote, philosophy is written in this grand book,
the universe, which stands continually open to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood unless
one first learns to comprehend the language and read the characters in which it is written.
It is written in the language of mathematics. And its characters are triangles, circles,
and other geometric figures without which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of
it. Without these, one is wandering in a dark labyrinth. The key to understanding the universe
is to know the language of mathematics. And Galileo then would set the stage for this.
In our next lecture, we will continue with Fermat and Descartes, taking Galileo's idea of
representing velocity as a sequence of vertical lines and turning that into analytic geometry,
and so setting the stage for the development of calculus.
