We have reached the eighteenth century, and there is one mathematician who truly dominates
this century, and that is Leonard Euler.
He dominates it so thoroughly that by the time he dies in 1783, his contemporaries will
believe that he has solved all of the important mathematics problems that are out there, that
there really is nothing left for mathematicians to do except to do some cleaning up, but the
great ideas have all been found by Euler.
In fact, fortunately they were very wrong, mathematics was just about to enter a very
new and exciting and dynamic age, but the promise of calculus, the kinds of problems
that calculus should be able to solve, were almost all solved by Euler in the eighteenth
century.
Euler was born in 1707 near Basel, the son of a preacher.
He would go to the University of Basel with the intention of studying theology, but Johann
Bernoulli quickly spied this young man as a man with incredible mathematical talent and
encouraged him to pursue the mathematics.
Euler would actually spend most of his life in the two capital cities of St. Petersburg
in Russia and Berlin in Germany, and he was incredibly prolific.
He wrote over 860 research papers.
His collected publications run to over 25,000 pages.
He worked in all areas of mathematics.
You find a lot of work on analysis or calculus, geometry and number theory.
He also worked in mechanics and really laid out a systematic approach to mechanics using
the foundational ideas of calculus in order to understand the important mechanical problems
that are out there.
He worked in optics.
He worked in astronomy.
One of the important questions of the eighteenth century was predicting the exact position
of the moon.
Very complicated because the moon is pulled not just by the earth but also by the sun.
And Euler did a lot of the important breakthrough work in showing how to find the position
of the moon.
Euler also set up the science of fluid dynamics, understanding how, say, an airplane wing goes
through the air or how a ship goes through water.
Of course, Euler wasn't studying airplane wings, but the kind of fluid dynamics he was
doing would enable later scientists, later engineers to model airplane wings.
He actually was interested in shipbuilding, not just the fluid dynamics, but actually
designing ships.
He did work in navigation and ballistics and cartography.
He was also interested in science education.
And he wrote the first arithmetic books for use in the Russian school system.
And in fact, much of the Russian school system in mathematics can trace its lineage directly
back to the innovations of Euler during his years in St. Petersburg.
In Berlin, he would become director of the Astronomical Observatory.
And working for the Emperor Frederick the Great, he would do many other things that
one would not expect a great mathematician to do.
Apparently, he designed spectacles for Frederick the Great and also designed water fountains
for Frederick's pleasure.
He was not only a scientist with great scientific insight, he was really interested in exposition.
And Euler would publish 25 expository books on mathematics, on science, on philosophy,
on music.
One of the most popular books of the 18th century was a book written by Euler called
Letters to a German Princess, in which he explained to a general audience of lay people
basic ideas of science and astronomy.
Euler is also remarkable in that for the last 12 years of his life he was totally blind.
His eyesight was bad throughout much of his life, but he was blind for the last 12 years
and yet this did not slow down his production.
He would produce papers, turning them still out at the rate of almost one a week for much
of the time after he was blind, and at his death there were still 3,000 pages of scientific
articles that were waiting to be published.
Clifford Truesdell, one of the great historians of mathematics, someone who has studied Euler
and his period quite closely, has stated that over the 75 years from 1725 to 1800, Euler
accounted for one third of all of the published research in mathematics, mathematical physics,
and engineering mechanics.
It's not a stretch to say this was the greatest mathematician who ever lived, this certainly
was a man who dominated his century.
Some of his most important mathematical work was in applying the ideas of calculus to dynamical
systems, systems that are in change or in flux.
And to do this you set up differential equations, equations that relate derivatives to the function
that you want to actually study.
Euler also showed how the use of power series, these polynomials of infinite degree, were
absolutely essential to studying these problems in dynamical systems.
And there was a very important work that Euler published in 1748 that talked about these
power series and how to get them.
It was called Introduction to Analysis of the Infinite.
And if you take a look at the most important books in mathematics that have ever been published,
certainly Euclid's element stands there as the most important.
That absolutely is foundational.
But if you look for the second most important book, there is some controversy.
One of the candidates is Al-Quarizmi's book on Algebra, on Al-Jabra and Al-Mukabala, in
which he sets out the basis for Algebra.
Another candidate is certainly Newton's Principia, that is not a work specifically on mathematics,
although just the mathematical portion of it is so important that it might be considered
the second most important book in mathematics.
But a very real candidate for the second most important book in mathematics is Euler's
Introduction to Analysis of the Infinite.
And in that book, Euler finds the power series for the exponential function.
Recall when I talked about Napier, we've got this idea of the exponent as a variable.
So we can think of 2 raised to the x power, where x can be any real number whatsoever.
Or what was found in the 17th century, the base that you want to use in an exponential
function is actually the base of the natural logarithm.
If we take this number E, it's about 2.71, and raise that to the x power, we get a remarkable
function whose derivative, that is to say the slope of the tangent line at any point,
is again equal to E to the x.
This is the remarkable function whose derivative is actually equal to itself.
In this book, Euler talks about the power series expansion of E to the x, the power
series expansion of the trigonometric functions, the sine and the cosine.
And in order to do this, he has to make some assumptions about the sine and cosine, and
I need to back up here to my earlier discussion about these two functions.
Remember that the sine is actually the half-chord, so you take an arc of a circle, you consider
the chord that connects the two endpoints of that arc, and then you take just half of
that chord and half of the arc.
So the sine is a function of that half arc, and it returns the value of the half-chord.
Now the value of the half-chord is going to depend on the size of the circle that we
start with.
But in Newton's Principia, when he uses trigonometric functions and he uses them quite often, he
is using the sine in this sense.
For him, the sine of a given arc does not have a single value.
The value of the sine depends on the size of the radius.
And of course, this is part of the reason why when we go back to the ancient astronomers,
people like Ptolemy and the Indian astronomers who followed him, they would use that circle
with a very strange sounding radius of a little bit more than 57 degrees, because if the circumference
is 360 degrees, the radius is going to be a little bit more than 57 degrees.
What Euler does is to instead of working with a radius that is designed to match to a circumference
of 360 degrees, he decides to work with a radius of 1.
And if the radius is 1, that means that the circumference is 2 pi.
And so the argument in Euler's trigonometric functions is going to be a fraction of 2 pi.
If we want an arc that is a quarter of a circle, that's going to be a quarter of 2 pi, or pi
over 2.
And if we want an eighth of a circle, what we would think of as 45 degrees, that's going
to be pi over 4, 1 eighth of the full circumference of the circle of radius 1, 1 eighth of 2
pi.
Now setting up the power series in this way, Euler then observes in this groundbreaking
work that you can take the exponential function with an exponent that is not just any real
number, but an exponent that is actually any complex number, any number made up of a sum
of a real number and a square root of a negative number.
And it's Euler who really has the fundamental insight into the importance of these complex
numbers, these combinations of real numbers and imaginary numbers.
And he shows how to take an exponent with an imaginary number in the exponent.
And the result that he gets is that E raised to a power i times x, i is the square root
of minus 1.
So i times x is the square root of negative x squared.
So he's taking E and he is raising that to an imaginary power.
And Euler realizes that that is equal to a complex number where the real part is the
cosine of x and the imaginary part is i times the sine of x.
And Euler now begins a process that would not be laid out clearly until we get to Gauss
in the 19th century.
And he begins this process of understanding complex numbers as legitimate, honest numbers
that represent positions in a two-dimensional plane.
If I've got a complex number like 2 plus 3i, what that means is that I've got a horizontal
axis that tells me what my real number is.
And I've got a vertical axis that tells me what my imaginary number is.
And 2 plus 3i is found by going two units to the right along the horizontal axis and
then three units up parallel to the imaginary axis.
So that every complex number like 2 plus 3i represents some point in this complex plane.
And all we're doing is extending the idea of numbers along a real line to numbers that
exist in the complex plane.
Now what if I take E and I raise it to a complex power?
Let's consider E raised to the power 2 plus 3i.
Well remember that any exponent where you've got a sum of two things in the exponent, 2
to the 4 plus 7 is the same as 2 to the 4th times 2 to the 7th.
So E to the 2 plus 3i is E squared times E to the 3i.
E to the 3i now is this point in the plane.
It's the cosine of 3 plus i times the sine of 3.
So E to the 3i is a point in the plane, cosine of 3 plus i times the sine of 3.
If I take the real part of that number, square it, and the imaginary part of that number,
square it.
So I take cosine squared of 3 plus sine squared of 3.
That's going to equal 1.
That's really the Pythagorean theorem.
And it doesn't matter what x I put in there, the cosine of x squared plus the sine of x
squared is always 1.
So if I take E to the ix, in this case E to the 3i, that's always going to be a point
that lies exactly one unit away from the origin.
The E squared tells me the magnitude of that line.
So E to the 2 plus 3i says that I want to move in a direction that corresponds to an
arc of length 3 on a unit circle.
And then E squared tells me how far out to move along that particular line.
So for example, if I want the point in the complex plane that is exactly E units away
from the origin, and is it an angle of 45 degrees above the horizontal line, well 45
degrees corresponds to an arc length of pi over 4.
And so this is going to be, E is the distance, so I take E to the 1 plus pi over 4i is going
to take me out to that point in the complex plane, that is E units from the origin.
And it's at an angle, at an elevation of pi over 4, what today we call radians, that actually
is a 19th century term, but this idea of going an arc length of pi over 4 in order to find
the elevation at which you want to move out from the origin.
And we're going to see in the following lectures that this idea of understanding the complex
plane in terms of exponentials of complex numbers is absolutely foundational to almost
everything that's going to happen in the 19th and 20th and 21st centuries.
When Euler was growing up, his father actually was a friend of the Bernoullis.
Euler as I mentioned first went to the University of Basel with the intention of studying theology.
In 1726, at the age of 19, Euler published his first paper.
He actually took the isochrone problem that the Bernoullis had solved, and he considered
what would happen if you've got this ramp and these sliding balls, but instead of sliding
in the absence of any kind of friction, you've got some kind of resisting medium through
which the balls are going.
So you might be looking at a ramp submerged in water, or you might be considering the
effective air resistance on the motion of these balls.
That's going to change the shape of the ramp so that it's the same time to the end of the
ramp no matter where you start.
And this was the first result that Euler actually published.
And this was the beginning of his very important work on fluid dynamics.
Fluid dynamics turns out to be an extremely difficult area.
It would not really be understood until the 19th century, but the foundations of fluid
dynamics were laid by Euler in the 18th century.
But he graduated from Basel and he needed a job, and it happened at that time that Peter
the Great in St. Petersburg was establishing his own Academy of Science.
And he invited two of the Bernoulli's to go there.
This was actually Johann's son, Danielle, who I mentioned briefly in the previous lecture,
and also an older son, Nicholas.
Johann Bernoulli had hoped that Nicholas would become a mathematician, but he did not want
Danielle to also become a mathematician.
As he told his son, Danielle, there is no money to be made in mathematics.
Johann had originally intended to be a doctor, and so he greatly encouraged Danielle to go
off and learn medicine.
Danielle in fact did go to Italy in order to study medicine, but while he was at university
he snuck in some math classes, and that convinced him that mathematics was what he really wanted
to do.
And despite his father's wishes, he began publishing in mathematics, made his reputation
as a mathematician.
Eventually his father, Johann Bernoulli, had to admit that he was capable.
But Johann always thought of Nicholas as the greater mathematician, but when Peter the
Great set up the Academy, he invited both Nicholas and Danielle to come and be members
of this new Academy of Science.
Unfortunately, shortly after they arrived, Nicholas suffered appendicitis, his appendix
burst, and he died shortly after he got there.
Danielle seriously considered going back to Switzerland at this point, but another option
opened up because Euler was looking for a job, and Danielle managed to convince the
Russian court.
At this point it was Catherine who had succeeded Peter the Great.
He convinced Catherine in order to invite Euler to come and join him, and the two of
them would then work together on incredible work in dynamics.
Danielle Bernoulli and Leonard Euler actually would live together in St. Petersburg for
a number of years, and together publish many, many important joint papers developing the
ideas of the calculus.
They would look at a lot of dynamic systems, things like springs, vibrating strings, drum
heads, the vibration of drum heads and modeling that, also fluid dynamics and aerodynamics.
Euler would originally go as a professor of physics.
In 1733 Danielle finally got tired of St. Petersburg and left, and Euler took over his position
as chair of mathematics at the Institute.
At same year of 1733 Euler married Katharina Gizel.
She was the daughter of a Swiss painter who was working for the Russian court.
And in 1735 Euler really made his reputation as a mathematician by solving one of the great
open problems that was out there at the time, which is summing the reciprocals of the squares.
If we consider 1 plus 1 over 4 plus 1 over 9 plus 1 over 16 plus 1 over 25 and continue
forever, the Bernoullis had shown that this in fact does approach a fixed value, but they
couldn't figure out what that value was.
And it was Euler who showed that this particular infinite summation approaches the quantity
the square of pi divided by 6.
And brilliant mathematical work that really made Euler's reputation as somebody to watch
out for.
It was in 1738 that Euler picked up an infection in one of his eyes.
He fairly quickly lost sight in that eye, and his eyesight was never good in the remaining
eye throughout the remainder of his life.
In 1741 he was invited by Frederick the Great to go to Berlin as director of the astronomical
observatory there.
In Berlin he was in the company of the great philosophers, French philosophers of the age
of enlightenment.
Voltaire was there, Mopersius, Diderot, Montesquieu.
Frederick loved the company of these great conversationalists.
Euler was a brilliant scientist, he was not a great conversationalist, he had little time
for that.
And Frederick was quite disappointed in this mathematician that he had hired, and in fact
he is quoted as having referred to him as that huge cyclops of a mathematician.
Euler was never really very happy in Berlin, he did wind up staying there for 25 years.
He really had enjoyed St. Petersburg and the kind of scientists and other mathematicians
he'd been able to work with there.
And finally in 1766 he was able to return to St. Petersburg, and he would spend the
rest of his life there.
He contracted a cataract in his remaining good eye.
In 1771 he underwent cataract surgery, and I hate to think of what cataract surgery was
like in 1771, unfortunately the operation was not successful, and at that time he completely
lost the sight of his remaining good eye.
Two years later his wife, Katharina, died, and Euler married her half-sister, and I think
this was probably a marriage of convenience.
He needed somebody who could help him, who could take dictation, and since he was totally
blind help him get through the day, but he was still a brilliant mathematician doing brilliant
work.
And he died what has got to be a happy death.
He died in 1783, he died very suddenly of a brain hemorrhage.
It's known that he was at home, he was playing with his grandchildren at the time that the
hemorrhage hit.
Not to say just a little bit more about some of the other things that Euler studied.
He was also very interested in the harmonic series, the sum of the reciprocals of the
integers, one plus a half plus a third plus a quarter, and so on.
This does not approach any finite number, it gets arbitrarily large, but one of the things
that Euler realized is that it grows like the logarithm of the largest number whose
reciprocal we take.
So if I take this sum of reciprocals up to one over n, that's about equal to the natural
logarithm of n, this is Napier's logarithm, with the base that's about 2.71.
But Euler went beyond that, he was interested in how big is that error, how close are we?
And he was able to show that the difference between the sum of the harmonic series and
this natural logarithm is about 0.577.
It's a number that today we refer to by the Greek letter gamma, and it's usually called
Euler's gamma, for Euler was the first person defined this particular constant.
Euler was also interested in Fermat's work in number theory, and many of the problems
that Fermat had put out there, results that Fermat had stated, without proof Euler then
went through and proved them, or showed that in fact they were not true.
Euler took a look at Fermat's last theorem, the very first case is the case of x cubed
plus y cubed equals z cubed, and Euler published a proof that you could not find three positive
integers that satisfy this equation.
In fact his proof was not quite correct, there are some gaps in his proof, although if you
look at all that Euler did understand about number theory there is enough in his corpus
of work that you can take other pieces of what Euler knew and fill in those missing gaps.
And so in some sense it is still appropriate to credit the proof of this first case of Fermat's
last theorem to Leonard Euler.
In the brief time I have left I want to say just a little bit about some of the other
mathematicians of the 18th century, because in the next lecture I'm going to start moving
into the 19th century.
One of the greatest of the 18th century mathematicians was Jean-Leon D'Alembert.
He worked with Euler on many projects, there also was some competition between him and
Euler.
D'Alembert worked on many of the same problems in dynamical systems that Euler would work
on, vibrating strings, vibrating drum heads.
Another great mathematician of this era is Joseph-Louis Lagrange, born in 1736, he would
die in 1813.
He actually was an Italian mathematician who adopted a French form of his name and he would
succeed Euler to Euler's position at the Science Academy in Berlin when Euler went
back to St. Petersburg.
In fact it was Euler who had recommended Lagrange for this particular position.
In 1787 Lagrange moved from Berlin to Paris.
He began to work at the Academy of Sciences in Paris.
He managed to survive the French Revolution and in 1794 one of the first acts of the new
French Republic was the establishment of a technical university.
The very first institute of technology in the world, the École Polytechnique, founded
in 1794, Lagrange was appointed as one of the first professors at this technical university
and he would be one of those who was very much responsible for setting it out there as
one of the great institutes of learning and especially learning in technical subjects
in the world.
Another mathematician that I want to say a little bit about is another woman mathematician,
Maria Agnesi, born in 1718, she would die in 1799.
She was an Italian as the name suggests and she was the first person to write a calculus
text in Italian, was a two volume work explaining the ideas of calculus and really going into
a great deal of depth in how to use these ideas and what they meant.
Her book was insightful enough that it was fairly quickly translated into French and
to many other languages and used quite widely and because of her reputation that she managed
to establish with the publication of this calculus text.
She was actually offered the chair of mathematics at the University of Bologna.
This was in 1750.
Maria Agnesi's father had died at about the same time that the chair was offered to her
and at that point she decided to enter a convent and devote the remainder of her life to good
works and so she turned down the chair.
She had the chance to be the first woman chair of mathematics in a European university.
She would not be that because she turned it down.
That honor would go to Sonia Kovalevskaya at the end of the 19th century.
As I said at the beginning of this lecture, by the end of the 18th century there was this
feeling that Euler had solved all the really important problems that were out there and
there was no more really important mathematics to be done.
In fact, that's not at all true.
There was a whole new way of looking at mathematics, of mathematics based on geometry and transformation
and this will be the subject of my next lecture.
