In lecture 15, I talked about Leonard Euler, the greatest of all mathematicians, but if
there is one person who might challenge him for that title, it's Carl Friedrich Gauss,
about whom I'm going to talk in this particular lecture.
Gauss is responsible for referring to mathematics as the queen of the sciences, and largely
because of that later mathematicians and historians of mathematics would refer to Gauss himself
as the prince of mathematics.
Gauss was born in 1777.
He was born in Brunswick, the son of a laborer, and eventually the Duke of Brunswick would
become his patron and support him through his early work in mathematics and the sciences.
The Duke of Brunswick, unfortunately, was killed during the Napoleonic Wars, and so
Gauss would need to seek employment, and he would become director of the astronomical
observatory in Göttingen, and eventually he would take a position as chair of mathematics
at the University of Göttingen.
He did absolutely groundbreaking work in a number of areas of mathematics, including
algebra, geometry, and number theory.
He also did very important work in astronomy, and one of the important results that he did,
one of the things that really made his mark as an astronomer, was when the asteroid Ceres
was spotted in the heavens in 1801, it was spotted just before it passed behind the sun.
And only a few observations had been made, and astronomers tried to figure out where
the asteroid would reappear as it came out from the other side of the sun.
And Gauss was among those who did those calculations, and Gauss's calculations were the most accurate.
He was able to, just from a few observations before the asteroid disappeared, he was able
to predict the exact location and the exact time when Ceres would reappear.
Gauss is also noted for his work in electricity and magnetism, the unit, the Gauss, that is
common in this field, is named directly for him.
One of his important books early in his career was a book on number theory called Investigations
of Arithmetic, published in 1801, and this is arithmetic in the sense of Diophantus'
Arithmetica, so he calls it arithmetic, but what he really means is what today we refer
to as number theory, the study of the integers.
And this received a lot of attention throughout Europe, and one of the people who became fascinated
by this book and began to study it was a woman by the name of Sophie Germain.
Sophie Germain had been born in 1776.
She was interested in questions in algebra and questions in number theory, and she corresponded
with a number of the great mathematicians of the time, including Lagrange and also Gauss.
And she went under the pseudonym of Monsieur Leblanc.
She was afraid that if she admitted the fact that she was a woman in her correspondence,
people would not take her seriously.
Eventually, both Lagrange and Gauss realized that they were corresponding with a woman,
and we know that Gauss was quite delighted to discover that there was a woman who was
doing such important work in mathematics.
We're going to be returning to Sophie Germain later on when I talk about Fermat's Last
Theorem, because she will be one of the many players in the story of the eventual proof
of Fermat's Last Theorem.
And in this lecture, I want to focus on Gauss' work in geometry, and I'm going to back up
a bit right back to Euclid's Elements.
Euclid's Elements include five postulates, five axioms, five things that he assumed in
order to be able to proceed with the development of geometry.
The first of these is that if you have two points in a plane, they determine a line, and
there is only one line that goes through these two points.
If you've got a point and a length that denotes the radius that uniquely determines a circle,
all right angles are equivalent.
And the fifth postulate is a rather strange sounding one.
It says that if you've got two lines, and you've got another line that cuts across it,
and you take a look at the two interior angles of the line that cuts across, if both of those
angles are less than right angles, then the original two lines must meet some place on
that side of the transversal.
This is known as the parallel postulate, and it's a little bit easier to state what's
going on if it's put in an equivalent form.
You'll fairly quickly realize that this fifth postulate is equivalent to saying that if
we've got a line, and if we've got a point that is not on that line, we're working in
a plane, then there is exactly one line that passes through that point and never intersects
the given line.
So there is one parallel line through this other point.
This was a postulate that a lot of people wondered whether it was really needed.
Is it possible simply to take these natural assumptions about geometry and show that
the parallel postulate must follow from those?
There seems something arbitrary about the parallel postulate.
And a number of people tried to do this to find a way of proving the parallel postulate
or at least reducing it to something that seemed obvious, where it was clear that there
had to be one line through this point and only one line through this point.
One of the people who made progress on this was Hirolamo Sakeri, born in 1667.
He died in 1733, and he looked at what would happen if there was no line through this point
that did not intersect the given line.
In other words, there's no parallel line.
Every line through the point must intersect at some point.
Or what would happen if there's more than one line through this point that never intersects
the given line?
And what Sakeri was able to show is that if there is no parallel line, then the sum of
the angles in any triangle must be greater than 180 degrees.
If there is more than one parallel line through this point, then the sum of the angles in
any triangle must be strictly less than 180 degrees.
Now we all know that the sum of the angles in any triangle is 180 degrees, so that seems
to settle it.
But in fact, all that shows us is that the parallel postulate and this result about the
sum of the angles in any triangle are actually equivalent statements.
If you know the sum of the angles in any triangle, you can derive the parallel postulate from
that.
If you know the parallel postulate, you can derive the formula for the sum of the angles
in any triangle.
But you can't really say that one is more obvious than the other.
They simply are equivalent statements.
The next person to really make progress on this is Johann Lambert, born in 1728.
He would die in 1777, and he fairly quickly dismissed the possibility that you might have
no parallel line through that point.
But he was really concerned about this question of more than one line through the point that
never intersects the given line, and how could you show that that could not happen?
And he explored the kind of geometry that would follow if you could have more than one
parallel line, and he came up with something that seemed totally impossible.
He was able to show that if you've got more than one parallel line through the point,
then if you look at the sum of the angles in a triangle, not only is that less than
180 degrees, but the sum of the angles in a triangle is going to depend on the area
of the triangle.
And that seems totally counterintuitive.
Why should the sum of the angles in a triangle depend on the size of the triangle?
We're used to Euclidean geometry where you can scale things up, and that does not change
the sum of the angles in the triangle.
But what Lambert showed is that if you've got this strange kind of geometry with multiple
parallels when you try to scale things up, that necessarily forces the sum of the angles
to change.
Well, real progress on this question really now begins to happen with Gauss, who studied
geometry.
He did not set out to study this problem of whether or not the parallel postulate is correct.
He was interested in geometry on various kinds of surfaces.
So considering the geometry on the surface of a sphere, or considering geometry on the
surface of a cone, or some other two-dimensional surface.
And he explored the idea of distance, so curves that trace the shortest distance between
two points, or areas of pieces of these surfaces and how to do that.
And he realized that the key to finding distances or finding areas was really to use the key
ideas of calculus.
To go back to Leibniz's idea of the differential, this infinitesimal little change, and build
up your distance by piecing together little straight lines, even though you might have
a very curving surface.
Build up your distance by these little straight lines, the infinitesimals, and use the techniques
of calculus in order to define distance in the same sort of way you can use the techniques
of calculus to define the idea of areas.
Now when we're working on a surface, say the surface of a sphere, there is something that
corresponds to a straight line, but it doesn't look like a straight line in the normal sense.
I live in Minneapolis, St. Paul, and there is non-stop service from there to Amsterdam.
When I fly from Minneapolis to Amsterdam, though, I do not fly mostly east.
Amsterdam is a little bit north of Minneapolis, St. Paul, but only a little bit.
It's mostly east.
Yet when my plane takes off from Minneapolis, I start out going almost to do north.
What I'm doing is traveling on a great circle.
If we're on the surface of a sphere, the shortest distance between two points is given by what's
called the great circle.
The great circle is defined by taking the plane that goes through the two points that
I want to travel between and that goes through the center of the earth.
I take a plane that includes my starting point, my ending point, and the center of the earth.
That plane is going to slice the earth along an arc, and that arc is the great circle.
That arc gives you the shortest distance between the two points that you want to work with.
Straight lines now correspond to, on a surface, straight lines become these great circles.
You can begin to build triangles on a surface out of these great circles.
For example, one of the triangles that you can get is the triangle that goes from the
north pole down along a line of longitude to the equator.
Then you take another great circle that goes from the north pole along another line of
longitude down to the equator, and then as the third great circle, you simply follow
along the equator.
This gives you a triangle on the surface of the earth, a triangle on the sphere.
If you think about it, each of these lines of longitude hit the equator at a right angle.
What I've got is a triangle that has two right angles plus another angle at the top.
I've got a triangle where the sum of the angles is strictly greater than 180 degrees.
If you think about it, if your lines are great circles, then if I take any great circle on
the surface of the earth, a complete circle, and I take any point that's not on it, and
I look at any great circle that goes through that point, it must intersect the other great
circle.
There is no such thing as a pair of parallel lines when we're working on the surface of
the earth.
This exactly agrees with Sacheri's prediction that if you don't have parallel lines, then
the sum of the angles has got to be strictly greater than 180 degrees.
Now Gauss was also interested in something that is called curvature.
So he looked at these surfaces, and a surface that is flat is said to have curvature zero.
If I take a sphere whose radius is one, Gauss said that that has curvature equal to one,
and as the radius gets smaller, as the surface turns more abruptly, the curvature is going
to get larger.
So as I take smaller spheres, the curvature is actually going to be the reciprocal of
the radius.
So the curvature is going to get greater as the surface bends more sharply.
The curvature gets closer to zero as the surface begins to flatten out.
Not every surface is the surface of a sphere, and so the general way that you have of trying
to determine the curvature is to look at a piece of the surface and try to find that
sphere that most closely approximates the way that surface is bending at that point.
So a surface might have different curvatures at different points, and you can also have
a surface that is bending in two different ways.
Consider a saddle where if you travel along it from the front to the back of the saddle,
it curves upward, but if you travel over the saddle from side to side, it bends downward.
And so what Gauss said in this case, we have something that he called negative curvature,
where in one direction it curves down, while at right angles to that, it's curving upward.
And so every surface has a curvature.
If it's a flat surface, the curvature is zero, and otherwise it has either a positive curvature
if it looks like a piece of the surface of a sphere, or a negative curvature if it looks
like a piece of the surface of a saddle.
And a nice example of a surface that has negative curvature every place is the Annapurse surface,
and I have a nice picture of a snow sculpture that was created by a colleague of mine at
McAllister, Stan Wagon, and a team that he put together for a snow sculpting competition
at Breckenridge.
This Annapurse surface stands about eight feet tall, stood about eight feet tall, and
of course no longer exists.
It did win second place in the Breckenridge snow competition, and they called it Rhapsody
in White.
And one of the things that Stan Wagon has pointed out is that surfaces of negative curvature
are ideal for trying to do snow sculptures, because if you've got two different ways in
which the surface is bending, that really tends to strengthen the surface.
And so this is an idea that is often used in architecture.
If you want interesting curved surfaces, do surfaces of negative curvature, they not
only are aesthetically appealing, but they also tend to have greater strength than a
surface that has positive curvature.
Now as I said, on the surface of a sphere we've got positive curvature, and we also
have the fact that the sum of the angles is greater than 180 degrees.
And if you'll remember what Lambert said was that the sum of the angles is going to depend
on the area, and Gauss actually found a relationship between the curvature, the area of a triangle,
and the sum of the angles.
This today is known as Gauss's theorem, and what he proved was that if you take a look
at your triangle, and you figure out the total curvature of the triangle.
So what you do is at each point on that triangle you look at the curvature of that point, and
you find a small area around that particular point and multiply the curvature times the
area.
So we subdivide this triangle into little pieces, we take curvature times area on each
of these little pieces, add those up, and then let the little pieces become smaller and smaller.
It's exactly the idea behind calculus, and we look at the limit of curvature times area
as we sum these up over the entire triangle, and the value that we're approaching then
becomes the total curvature of the triangle.
And what Gauss was able to prove is that the sum of the angles in any triangle on any surface
is 180 degrees plus the total curvature.
In the case of a sphere of radius one, the curvature never changes, that's always equal
to one, and so the sum of the angles of any triangle on a sphere is going to be 180 degrees
plus the area of that triangle times the curvature, which is one.
In other words, the sum of the angles is always 180 degrees plus the area of the triangle.
Now Gauss was working with surfaces, and he clearly saw that surfaces could be non-Euclidean,
but all of the surfaces that he looked at existed within Euclidean space.
We're looking at the surface of a sphere, but it still rests inside normal three-dimensional
Euclidean space.
And so a question that was still out there was could space itself be non-Euclidean?
And there are two mathematicians in the early 19th century who really explored this, and
I want to say a little bit about them.
The first is Janos Boljai, born in 1802.
His father, Farkas Boljai, had actually been a schoolmate of Gauss, and they maintained
a close friendship throughout their lives, and the son Janos began working on this possibility
that space itself might not be Euclidean, and began to explore what that would mean.
And in 1832, he wrote up what he had done on this, and he included it in a mathematics
book that his father was publishing.
It was included as an appendix to that book, and the father, Farkas, sent a copy to Gauss
thinking that Gauss might be interested in this.
And Gauss wrote back with an interesting quote, if I commenced by saying that I am unable
to praise this work, you would certainly be surprised for a moment.
But I cannot say otherwise.
To praise it would be to praise myself.
Indeed, the whole contents of the work, the path taken by your son, the results to which
he is led, coincide almost entirely with my meditations, which have occupied my mind partly
for the last 30 or 35 years.
So far as my own work is concerned, of which up till now I have put little on paper, my
intention was not to let it be published during my lifetime.
This was a real put down, and Janos actually would not publish anything more or very little
more about his idea of non-Euclidean geometry, and it points to one of the real flaws of
Gauss.
Gauss was brilliant.
Gauss's motto, though, was few but ripe.
He didn't want to publish anything until he felt that he had perfected it, and the time
was right to put it out there.
And while he understood a lot of what was going on with non-Euclidean geometry, and
almost certainly his investigations of what happens on surfaces led him into exploring
non-Euclidean geometry in general, he felt that the time was not right to publish.
And because Gauss had already done all of these things, it really put a damper on what
other people were interested in doing.
And unfortunately, this did not just happen with geometry, it happened with many of the
areas in which Gauss worked.
It was not until after Gauss died and people were able to go through his manuscripts that
they found that he had indeed discovered many of the things that other people discovered
in the early 19th century, but often decades before the others had, and often in a much
better and more complete form.
And mathematics certainly would have benefited if Gauss had been more aggressive in getting
his results out there and distributing what he knew, because he really was incredibly
talented.
Another person who worked on the question of non-Euclidean geometries was Nikolay Ivanovich
Lobachevsky.
Tom Lair has made this mathematician famous in his song about plagiarism, and there really
is no connection between Lobachevsky and plagiarism.
Lair simply liked the name and it fit into the song very well.
Lobachevsky was a Russian from Kazan, born in 1792.
He also had a connection to Gauss.
His teacher was Martin Bartels, who earlier had taught in Germany and had been Gauss's
teacher of mathematics.
And so when Lobachevsky came up with his ideas on non-Euclidean geometry, he also corresponded
with Gauss.
Gauss would eventually share these with Boljai, and there was some thought, especially on
the part of Boljai, of perhaps pulling together what he and Lobachevsky had accomplished,
but nothing ever really came of this.
And it would not be until geometers much later in the 19th century that non-Euclidean
geometry would finally be accepted and fully worked out.
I want to close this lecture talking about something else that Gauss did that's going
to be important for later work in later lectures, and that's his study of elliptic functions.
If we go back to the trigonometric functions, the sine function, I talked about how Euler
looked at the sine function and thought about this as a function of a variable, which is
the arc length, the arc length of a circle of radius one, and so we can easily define
the sine for any number from zero up to two pi, but there's no reason that we need to
stop at two pi.
Once we get beyond two pi, we just start repeating the values of the sine function, and we repeat
the values up to four pi and then repeat them again up to six pi and so on, and we can also
continue in the negative direction, and so we can build up the sine function as a periodic
function, a function that keeps repeating, and the same is true of the cosine function.
We can do the same thing with the exponential function in the imaginary direction, because
we recall that the exponential function, e to the i times x, is the cosine of x plus
i times the sine of x, so once we get up to e to the i times two pi, we are back to one,
and so we can continue it beyond that, and if I think of the exponential function as
I take imaginary values, as I travel up along the imaginary axis, taking the exponential
function, that's going to continually repeat its values, and one of the questions that
then comes up, once you start working with functions of complex numbers, and Gauss was
the one who really pushed this idea of working with functions of complex numbers, you realize
that you've got the trigonometric functions that repeat as you move in the real direction,
and you've got the exponential function that repeats as you move in the imaginary direction.
Can you get a doubly periodic function, a function that repeats both in the real direction
and also in the imaginary direction?
This is a kind of function that actually had been studied earlier by the French mathematician
Adrien-Marie Legendre, Gauss became fascinated by these doubly periodic functions, what today
we call elliptic functions, and he studied them in a great deal of detail.
They're called elliptic functions for a strange reason, there is a connection with the ellipse,
but it's rather obscure.
One of the ways of building elliptic functions is out of certain definite integrals, so they
come up in working with the integral calculus, and one of the definite integrals that gives
rise to the elliptic functions is an integral that is related to the problem of finding
the length of the arc of an ellipse, and so all of this type of definite integral got
the name elliptic integrals, because one of them was useful in finding an arc length
on an ellipse, and then these elliptic integrals became one of the ways of finding these doubly
periodic functions, and so the doubly periodic functions became known as elliptic functions.
We will also see them sometimes referred to as abelian functions, it's Niels Henrich
Abel, who I'll be talking about in the next lecture, who did a lot of important work on
these functions, and so his name, especially in the 19th century, was often associated
with them.
Now if we think about a doubly periodic function, we've got a function that's going to be repeating
as we move horizontally, and repeating as we move vertically, and so we can look at
a fundamental domain for this function.
We can look at a rectangular region, and as we translate that rectangular region, the
function is taking on exactly the same values.
We can translate it horizontally, we can translate it vertically.
If I know all of the values of the function within this fundamental domain, I know the
values of the function every place else in the complex plane.
Now if I think about this fundamental domain, this rectangle that determines the value of
the function everywhere, and I think about what happens as I move off the right side
of that fundamental domain, I'm really coming back in on the left side.
I'm moving into the next copy of that fundamental domain, and the values that I'm taking on
are exactly the same as the values that I would get coming in on the left side of that
fundamental domain.
So one of the ways of thinking of that fundamental domain is to wrap it around in a cylinder.
So I take this rectangle, and I simply wrap it around to reflect this fact that as I move
off one side, I'm coming back around onto the opposite side.
But the same kind of thing happens if I go off the top of this fundamental domain.
I come back in on the bottom of the fundamental domain.
So I don't just want to wrap the left and right side around into a cylinder, I want to
take the top and the bottom and wrap them around, and what I'm going to get is a donut
or a torus.
And so these elliptic functions naturally live on a torus, on a donut.
And this is the beginning of the realization that interesting functions, especially functions
defined on the complex values, often really exist on some other kind of surface.
And we begin here to get a connection between geometry and interesting sorts of surfaces
and problems in analysis and calculus and the study of functions.
For the next lecture, we're going to be turning to algebra and seeing how this idea of transformations
will come to play a fundamental role in the development of algebra in the 19th century.
