In this lecture, I'm going to talk about two of my favorite mathematicians, James Joseph
Sylvester and Srinivasa Romanogen.
They are people whose mathematical work laid much of the foundation for the work that I
have done in mathematics.
In particular, they were both interested in the problem of counting partitions, the number
of ways of taking an integer like 5 and writing it as a sum of positive integers.
So 5 can be written as just 5, or 4 plus 1, or 3 plus 2, or 3 plus 1 plus 1, or 2 twos
in a 1, or a 2 in 3 ones, or 5 ones.
There are seven different ways of writing 5 as a sum of positive integers, and that
may seem like a rather uninteresting problem, but it turns out to have some very deep repercussions,
and there are extensions of this idea that play out in modern physics today.
Not only did Sylvester and Romanogen do work that I find personally relevant, but also
they led fascinating lives.
James Joseph Sylvester was born in 1814.
He was born as James Joseph.
Joseph originally was his family name, and when he became an adult, he decided to change
his last name to Sylvester.
James Joseph Sylvester was Jewish, and just like Jacob Jacobi, he ran into a lot of difficulties
both getting into university and then getting a university position because he was Jewish.
He was from England.
He went to Cambridge, but he was never allowed to officially matriculate at Cambridge.
At that time, you had to belong to the Church of England in order to be officially enrolled
as a student, either at Cambridge or at Oxford.
So not only could Jews not enroll at Cambridge or Oxford, if you were Roman Catholic, you
could not enroll there.
If you were Unitarian, you could not enroll there.
You had to be Church of England.
What Sylvester did was to go ahead and attend classes at Cambridge, and he even took the
great examination that followed a normal Cambridge undergraduate career in mathematics, the tripose
exam, which was a very extensive examination, took place over several days and was designed
to identify the very best mathematicians who were coming out of Cambridge.
Sylvester took that examination, but he never actually got a degree from Cambridge, and after
taking the examination, even though he came in second, he was not able to turn that into
an academic position at either Cambridge or Oxford.
That simply was out of the question since he was Jewish.
He did wind up going to University College in London, where he got a position teaching
natural philosophy or physics, and he would eventually go to Trinity College in Dublin.
Trinity College in Dublin is also a university that's affiliated with the Church of England,
the Anglican Church, but because it was in Ireland, it was willing to open its doors
to people who were not members of the Church of England.
And so Sylvester did go there, and he wound up getting a master's degree from Trinity
College, Dublin.
Back in London, he was not entirely happy being at University College.
It was a fine place.
It had actually been started a few years earlier as a university where people who did not belong
to the Church of England could go and get a college education.
But Sylvester really wanted to teach mathematics, and so he began to look for a place that would
accept him as a professor of mathematics, and not finding such a place in England he
looked to the United States.
And he got himself a job teaching at the University of Virginia.
This is 1841.
At that time, the University of Virginia was really out in the wilderness, out in Western
Virginia, and so it was very far from the kind of civilization that Sylvester was used
to.
Also, the University of Virginia had been founded just a few years earlier, the University
of Virginia was founded in 1819, and it was really a place that was established for the
sons of the plantation owners.
This is a place where they would go, and these were young men of privilege, and these were
young men who were very conscious of their social position, and the fact that the faculty
at the University of Virginia did not share that particular social position.
And so we know from many accounts of the time, and also from what Sylvester himself talked
about his very short stay at the University of Virginia, that the students there treated
the faculty despicably.
It was very difficult to be a faculty member at the University of Virginia in those days.
Sylvester lasted about three months, and then finally got so disgusted with the way the University
of Virginia was being run that he left.
He stayed in the United States for about another year and a half trying to find another
academic position.
He knew some of the mathematicians at both Columbia University and at Harvard University,
and he spent time in Boston and New York trying to arrange for a teaching position at one
of those universities.
He was unsuccessful, and so eventually he went back to England, and he decided to get
a job as an actuary working for one of the new life insurance companies that were just
then beginning to come into existence.
And so he would work as an actuary, and then eventually he realized that he would be even
more useful for his employers if he got a law degree.
And so he studied law and passed the bar.
But he was really interested in mathematics, and what he wanted to do was to find a position
teaching mathematics.
And finally in 1855 this became possible, a teaching position opened up at the new Royal
Military Academy in Woolwich.
Sylvester went there, and Sylvester now was engaged in conflict with the administration
at the Royal Military Academy because he wanted to do mathematics.
And he found himself with a very full teaching schedule that left him very little time to
do the kind of research mathematics that he wanted to do.
And he actually became one of the important people in the 19th century who would argue
for the right of faculty at universities to have time to do research.
In many respects this position has been exactly reversed now at the major universities it
is expected that the faculty will spend most of their time on research and also do teaching.
But back in the 19th century research was not something that was expected of any of
the faculty and wasn't even allowed for as the time was being apportioned.
And so Sylvester really had to work at this and he would go down and he would talk with
members of parliament and try to arrange for pressure to be put on the Royal Military Academy
to give him more time to conduct mathematical research.
Sylvester also had problems at the Royal Military Academy because in 1870 when he reached the
age of 55 he was forced into retirement.
He was by no means ready to retire.
He was at the peak of his powers but at that time the regulation was that you had to retire
at age 55.
Fortunately for James Joseph Sylvester somebody else would realize his potential and hire
him and that was the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.
In 1877 James Joseph Sylvester was brought in and began teaching at the Johns Hopkins
University which began its first classes in that year.
They hired Sylvester in order to set up a graduate program in mathematics.
Sylvester came to the United States and now he had the kind of good experience that he
had always really been looking for.
A chance to work with excellent graduate students to really spend time doing the research and
using the research in order to influence what he was doing in his classes, to begin to
build a research mathematical community in the United States and at the same time he
also founded the first journal devoted exclusively to mathematics in the United States, the American
Journal of Mathematics.
And the seminars that Sylvester led were fascinating seminars and one of his students
wrote about it, any unsolved difficulty, any suggested extension such would have been
passed by with a mention by other lecturers became inevitably with him the occasion of
a digression which was sure to consume many weeks if indeed it did not take him away from
the original object permanently.
So Sylvester would find something in the lecture that was interesting and he just take the
whole class away and begin to pursue that.
And he would get the class involved in his research so he would introduce a topic such
as partitions and look at the various ways this could be extended and various students
would work on pieces of these and then at the end of the semester he would take all of this
work and get it published in the American Journal.
So one of my favorite papers from this journal is one entitled A Constructive Theory of Partitions
arranged in three acts and interact and an exodian which gives you some idea of the kind
of flowery language that Sylvester loved and what this was was an article in which Sylvester
begins to explain this theory of partitions and then after he's done some explanation
he turns the paper over to one of his students who then explains a particular result that
he or she had found because this graduate seminar contained not just men but they're
also was a woman in this seminar and so they would explain what they had been doing and
then Sylvester's voice would come back in and he would continue for a while and then
he would turn the paper over to another one of his students and so it's fascinating to
read this just for the way the paper is put together and draws on the work of his students
and in fact Sylvester would be very successful in training research mathematicians who would
go on to work in the other great universities of the United States and help to build up
the graduate programs there.
In 1883 Sylvester was finally recognized by the British universities for the great mathematician
that he was.
By this time the restriction against Jews in Oxford and Cambridge had been lifted and
Sylvester came back and was appointed to the position of civilian professor at Oxford.
This is the same chair of mathematics that John Wallace had held back in the 17th century.
The next mathematician I want to talk about is Srinivasa Ramanujan.
Ramanujan was born in southern India in Tamil Nadu in 1887.
He grew up in Kumbhakonam.
He was a Brahman so he was of the highest caste, he was of the priestly caste.
Even though his family was of high caste this did not mean that they had much money.
His father was a clerk in a store and in order to supplement their income they took in borders.
In Kumbhakonam there is a government college and they would take some of the students from
that college and board them at their home in order to get this extra source of income.
Ramanujan was extremely talented in mathematics from a very early age and he was fascinated
by the mathematics that these borders were studying in the government college.
He began to look at their textbooks and began to learn mathematics on his own even before
he was ready to go on and enter college.
One of the books that he read that had a profound influence on him was a book by GS Carr called
A Synopsis of Elementary Results in Pure Mathematics.
And this is an incredible book, it's 935 pages of dense formulas and equations.
It was really written in order to help prepare students for this tripose exam, the exam given
at Cambridge that would run over several days and decide who was ready for a research career.
And the idea was you were supposed to memorize everything in these 935 pages and they are
really dense.
There's some indication of where these results come from and how they're connected but basically
it's just a listing of results.
And Ramanujan was fascinated by these and he began to play around with these ideas.
Some of the kinds of things that he discovered are the Bernoulli numbers that I mentioned
earlier coming from Yaakov Bernoulli's book, Ars Conjectandi, that his brother Johann had
managed to get published after Yaakov had died.
And so Ramanujan began to play with these ideas and see how he could build on them and
he began keeping notebooks in which he wrote down the things that he had found.
Even though the family was very poor, being high-caste Brahman education was extremely
important to them.
So Ramanujan's family decided that they would make the sacrifice and see that he could go
to college and in 1904 he entered the Government Arts College in Kumbakonam.
Unfortunately for Ramanujan he was only really interested in mathematics and he failed his
examinations in every subject except mathematics and so he was expelled from the college.
Two years later he tried again to enter college.
He went to a private college in Madras, Pachayapas College and again he failed his examinations
in the first year and was forced to leave.
But one of the nice things that his family did for him at this point was allow him to
continue working on his mathematics.
And so for the next several years he traveled around southern India staying with family
members, staying with friends, carrying his notebooks with him.
He had no source of income but he was willing to find people who were going to put him up
for a few weeks or perhaps a few months, let him work on his mathematics and just do what
was of great interest to him.
But eventually he realized that he did need some kind of source of income and he also
needed to connect with the wider mathematical community.
And fortunately for Ramanujan he got connected with Ramachandra Rao.
This was a civil servant, a very prominent civil servant in Madras and also a very active
mathematician.
He was the secretary of the local section of the Indian Mathematical Society and eventually
Ramachandra Rao would go on to become president of the Indian Mathematical Society.
And he became Ramanujan's patron.
He gave Ramanujan a little bit of spending money but even more important than that he
gave Ramanujan an entry into the mathematical community at Madras.
So Ramanujan began interacting with those mathematicians and he also began going to
the university library at the University of Madras and reading the mathematical books
that were there and learning mathematics on his own from the mathematical books in that
great library.
Now as he shared his results in mathematics with the other mathematicians in Madras they
began to realize that he was doing things that they couldn't fully appreciate.
And so the mathematicians of Madras suggested that Ramanujan contact some of the mathematicians
in England to see how important it was, how important his mathematics really was and how
it tied into what other people are doing.
And we know that Ramanujan wrote to several mathematicians.
Mathematicians always get letters from people who think they've accomplished great things
and most of the time we pay very little attention to those letters that come in.
But one of the people to whom Ramanujan wrote was G.H. Hardy, probably the greatest mathematician
of the time in England.
Hardy had worked on problems similar to those that Ramanujan was working on and Hardy later
wrote about receiving this letter from Ramanujan.
He opened it one morning, he usually would open his mail in the morning and do some mathematics
and then go off to lunch and then perhaps play tennis and watch a game of cricket, go
for a walk in the afternoon and then after supper he would go back and work on his mathematics.
And he had read the letter and he'd seen many letters that were kind of of that sort.
Dear sir, I've discovered something remarkable that I'm sure you'll find very impressive.
He put it aside, he glanced at some of the results that Ramanujan had found but during
the day these results began to nag at him.
Some of them looked familiar enough that he thought there was some real mathematics there.
And after supper he went back and he looked over the letter more closely and as he looked
through it he saw some things that he already knew, results that were known to him and to
other mathematicians who worked in this area.
He found some results that he didn't recognize but he figured out that he could do them and
some of them he actually worked through and was surprised that they were a little bit
more difficult to do than he had thought they might be.
And then there were other results in this letter that just totally astounded him.
They were unlike any mathematics he'd ever seen before.
And he came to the conclusion that this could not be pure bunk, that nobody would have the
genius just to invent these out of whole cloth.
There had to be some method behind them, there had to be some real understanding of mathematics
behind these results that were truly new to Hardy.
Well, what Hardy did was then to share this letter with his colleague at Cambridge, Littlewood,
and the two of them came to the conclusion that Ramanujan really had done something
outstanding.
And so they wrote back to Ramanujan, asked him to explain some of his methods.
Ramanujan had not gone through a traditional training in mathematics and so he didn't have
proofs in the usual sense that mathematicians look for these proofs.
He understood the patterns, he understood what was going on in the structure of the mathematics
and used that in order to predict the formulas that he came up with.
In some cases he was wrong.
He simply misunderstood what was going on and Hardy and Littlewood were able to pick
up some of those errors.
But in other places he had very deep insight that nobody else had been able to find.
And so a long distance correspondence of trying to explain Ramanujan's ideas to Hardy and
Littlewood became very difficult and fairly quickly Hardy and Littlewood realized that
they needed to bring Ramanujan to England, hopefully to help fill in some of the gaps
in his education, but also to be able to work with him directly in order to understand what
he was doing and help him fully develop his talents.
Well one of the problems is that Ramanujan was Brahman.
And to be Brahman is not to hold a set of beliefs, it is to be embedded in a community.
And for this reason to leave the community is to cease to be a Brahman.
To leave India and to go to England would be to lose caste.
And so this would be a momentous decision and initially Ramanujan was reluctant to
make this decision to go to England and certainly his family was reluctant to let him go.
But there's a wonderful story of Ramanujan and his mother making a pilgrimage to the
shrine of the goddess Namagiri, which was the family goddess.
And for several days they fasted and prayed for a sense of whether or not Ramanujan should
accept this invitation to go to England.
In their various accounts of what happened, it's not clear if it was a vision or a dream,
there also are conflicting reports whether it came to Ramanujan or it came to his mother.
But eventually after several days of prayer and fasting it was revealed that Ramanujan's
fate in fact was to go to England, that is what the goddess wanted him to do.
And so he traveled to England in the summer of 1914, he went there with the decision that
he would try to live as best he could as a Brahman and maintain the dietary restrictions.
This became very difficult because at the end of the summer of 1914 the First World
War broke out and it would have been difficult for Ramanujan in any case, he was used to
having someone else cook his meals, suddenly he had to cook them himself.
He was only used to eating the food of South India and that was very difficult to find
in England, it was even difficult during the war to find fresh fruit and vegetables.
And so he was under a great deal of stress, he was unused to the cold climate and his
years in England became very, very difficult.
He did brilliant mathematics, his collaboration with Hardy was very important, he did incredible
things during that time, one of them deals with the partition function.
So I talked about this problem of taking the number five and asking how many ways we can
write it as a sum of positive integers and there are seven of them, well what if I want
to take a hundred, well you can actually list the number of ways of writing a hundred as
a sum of positive integers, but what if I've got a hundred thousand or a million or ten
million or a billion, well one of the amazing things that Ramanujan and Hardy were able
to do together is to find a precise formula that enables you to find the number of partitions
of a billion very, very quickly, very efficiently.
And it's something that nobody else would have suspected was possible, certainly Hardy
didn't expect it was possible and the collaboration really worked beautifully here because Ramanujan
got the insights, he got the ideas and then Hardy filled in the details that were needed
in order to turn this into a mathematical paper that could actually be published and
accepted by the rest of the mathematical community.
In 1918 Ramanujan was elected as a fellow of the Royal Society and there are a number
of stories of his mathematical prowess, one of them that I just want to mention, in the
latter years that Ramanujan was in England as his health deteriorated he spent a lot
of time in hospital.
One of the times that Hardy visited him in hospital he arrived and trying to think of
something to say remarked to Ramanujan, I came in cab number 1729 and I've been thinking
about that number and you know it's not really very interesting.
And Ramanujan replied to him, no Hardy, that is a very interesting number, it's the smallest
integer that can be written as a sum of two cubes in two different ways, we can write
it as 12 cubed plus 1 cubed or we can write it as 10 cubed plus 9 cubed.
And one of the things that people have said about Ramanujan that's very true is that every
number was a personal friend to Ramanujan, he knew the numbers intimately, he knew the
properties of these numbers and what could be done with them.
In 1919 Ramanujan returned to India really as soon as the sea routes were open and it
was possible to go back, it was hoped that going back to India would restore him to health,
in fact it didn't.
His health continued to deteriorate and within a year he was dead, he died in 1920 at the
age of 32.
But in the last year of his life he was working feverishly on his mathematics and he wrote
back to Hardy with a few intriguing descriptions of the kinds of things he was working on,
he was working on something that he called Mach theta functions.
Now I described the theta functions that Jacobi came up with in the 1820s, so these were functions
that were used in order to find elliptic functions with a particular period and the theta functions
have this transformation invariance that's connected with that picture that you see in
the Escher graphic circle limit 3.
So this is connected to the theta functions and it's this kind of transformation invariance
that gives the theta functions so much of their power.
What Ramanujan was doing was looking at functions that have many of the same kinds of properties
that were discovered for the theta functions but did not have the same transformation invariance
that we have for theta functions.
In fact what he was showing is many of the properties that people thought came from transformation
invariance in fact came from other properties that applied to a much larger class of functions.
But unfortunately nobody knew very much about what Ramanujan had been doing in this last
year.
In the early 1960s at the University of Pennsylvania a young graduate student by the name of George
Andrews was given the task for his doctoral thesis of looking at what people had been
able to figure out about these Mach theta functions and see what he could do with them.
George Andrews would go on to be a very prominent research mathematician and in 1976 he was visiting
in England talking with a mathematician in London who said you know you're interested
in Ramanujan you should go up to the Cambridge library they've got some papers of Ramanujans
that nobody has ever looked at very carefully.
And so George went up there and periodically there had been Ramanujan papers that had surfaced.
These were usually manuscripts from Ramanujan's time in Cambridge so he had produced a lot
of scraps of paper that different people had collected and put away and eventually they
would find themselves in the library at either Cambridge or Oxford and Ramanujan and Andrews
expected that he would find these papers there.
When he opened up this box he was amazed at what he found because what he saw in one of
the first pages that he pulled out of the box were precisely the Mach theta functions
that Ramanujan only looked at during the last year of his life.
What George Andrews had found were Ramanujan's work on the Mach theta functions from his
year after he had returned to India.
This collection of papers would become known as the Lost Notebook which is a double misnomer.
It was never lost certainly the librarians at Cambridge always knew it existed.
It was in a box that was labeled as papers of Ramanujan although what had been lost was
the fact that this was work from Ramanujan's last year of life and it was never a notebook
it's simply a pile of loose sheets of paper.
But one of the fascinating things is that this is work that Ramanujan had done between
1919 and 1920 and when it was rediscovered in 1976 it was fresh and important.
It turned out to have direct applications to questions that people like Rodney Baxter
were then looking at in physics in the area of statistical mechanics.
And George Andrews Bruce Berndt at the University of Illinois myself many other mathematicians
have looked at these papers and tried to understand what Ramanujan was doing trying to put them
into the broader context of what we know about mathematics what we know about theta functions
what we know about modular functions and elliptic functions and there are a lot of fantastic
insights and in the decade since 1976 there's been a whole industry mathematicians building
on these results of Ramanujan.
It is absolutely incredible that this man was so far ahead of what the rest of the mathematical
community was doing.
For my next lecture I'm going to turn to the proof of Fermat's last theorem and get
into some of the very deep mathematics of the 20th century.
