In this lecture, we're going to look at the proof of Fermat's last theorem. The actual
result is something that mathematicians really don't have much use for. I personally don't
know of any other mathematical results that rest on Fermat's last theorem. But it's the
process of trying to find the proof of this result that would be so important and that
would open up entirely new areas of mathematics that would have important repercussions for
lots of the applications of mathematics. If you recall, Fermat's last theorem is something
that Fermat referred to in the margin of his copy of D'Affantis' Arathmetica, and he'd
been looking at the Pythagorean triples. So these, again, are triples of integers so
that the square of the first plus the square of the second is equal to the square of the
third. Examples of Pythagorean triples are 3, 4, 5, 5, 12, 13, 8, 15, 17, and so on. And
we know that there are infinitely many of these. What Fermat had considered was trying
to do the same thing for third powers or fourth powers or other higher powers. Can you find
three integers so that the first integer cubed plus the second integer cubed is equal to
the third integer cubed? Or the first integer to the fourth power is equal to the second
integer to the fourth, or the first integer to the fourth power plus the second integer
to the fourth power is equal to the third integer to the fourth power, or fifth powers,
or so on. And he wrote in the margin to D'Affantis' Arathmetica that this could not be done, but
he didn't have a proof that could fit into the margin, that he figured out how to do
it, but he couldn't fit it in there. In fact, we do know that Fermat had worked out the case
for the exponent 4, and so he actually did have that result, which was in another manuscript
that was discovered later after his death. But the other cases he almost certainly did
not know how to prove them. It was in the 18th century that Leonard Euler would take a look
at Fermat's last theorem for the exponent 3 and come up with a proof that you can't
find three integers that satisfy this equation with the exponent 3. And as I said when I
was talking about Leonard Euler, there are some gaps in his proof, but Euler himself
knew the mathematics that was needed to fill in those gaps, and so it's appropriate to
credit the n equals 3 case, the exponent 3 case of Fermat's last theorem to Leonard
Euler. So in the beginning of the 1800s, the next case that was out there was the case
of the exponent 5. And there's a nice story behind proving that there is no solution for
the exponent 5 that involves three very different mathematicians. The first of these was Sophie
Germain, and we have talked about her before. She's the person who corresponded with Gauss
about number theory. Gauss was so pleased to see a woman working in mathematics. She
is the person who discovered the young Galois and what he was trying to do and encouraged
him and helped connect him with other mathematicians who might be interested in his work. And Sophie
Germain was interested in the problem of Fermat's last theorem, and she studied this problem
of the exponent 5. And while she was not able to find a proof that it could not be done,
she was able to show that if there is a solution, then one of those three integers must be
divisible by 5. This idea was then picked up by the very young Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet.
This is in 1825 when Dirichlet began working on this problem. He was only 20 years old.
We have encountered Dirichlet at various other points later in his career. In 1829, he would
publish the very important work on Fourier analysis, and then he would go on and succeed
Gauss as chair of mathematics at the University of Göttingen in the 1850s. But this was early
in his career. He was 20 years old, and he was able to show that if there is a solution
to Fermat's last theorem with the exponent 5, then the number that is divisible by 5
must be an odd integer. Well, this then was picked up by Adrien-Marie Lejeune Dirichlet.
And we've also encountered Legendre before. He's somebody who played a role in the development
of elliptic functions, one of the first people to study these doubly periodic functions.
And after Dirichlet did his work, Legendre picked it up. This also was in 1825. Legendre
at this point was a relatively old man. He was 72, but he was still extremely sharp.
And he looked at what Sophie Germain and Gustave Lejeune Dirichlet had done. They had
shown that there must be a number that's divisible by 5 if there is a solution. Dirichlet had
shown that that number must be odd. And what Legendre was able to show is that number can't
be odd. The number divisible by 5 must be even. And since there are no integers that
are both even and odd, there can't be a solution with the exponent 5.
The next progress that was made on Fermat's last theorem was in 1832. Dirichlet went back
to this problem, and he showed that you can't get a solution when the exponent is 14. So
he's really skipped ahead quite a few. And actually, you can skip some of the exponents.
There's no reason to check the case where the exponent is 6. Because if we can't have
a solution with the exponent 3, then we also can't have a solution with the exponent 6.
Because if I know that x to the 6th plus y to the 6th is equal to z to the 6th, then
I just work with x squared, y squared, and z squared, and x squared cubed plus y squared
cubed is going to equal z squared cubed. And so if I've got a solution with 6, I will
also have a solution with 3. No solution with 3 means no solution with 6. So from here on
out, we can restrict ourselves to the prime exponents. The next case to study is 7. And
then after that, we need to consider 11 and 13 and so on through the possible primes.
The case of the exponent 7 was solved by Gabriel LeMay in 1839. And in 1847, LeMay took his
work on the exponent 7, and he announced that he now could extend this and prove Fermat's
last theorem in general. And I want to give you some idea of the approach that LeMay was
taking, because it would be very important for some of the later developments in mathematics.
If we back up to the Pythagorean triples, I want to find 3 integers x, y, and z so that
x squared plus y squared equals z squared. And one of the keys to finding all of the
possible triples of integers that give you Pythagorean triples is to take that polynomial
on the left hand side, x squared plus y squared, and factor it. Now if I had x squared minus
y squared, I could factor that. x squared minus y squared is equal to x minus y times
x plus y. x squared plus y squared doesn't seem to factor, but if I introduce the complex
integers, so these are integers that are made up of a real part and an imaginary part that
also is an integer, something like 2 plus 3i is a complex integer. I can now factor x
squared plus y squared. It's equal to x plus i times y multiplied by x minus i times y.
And we can use this factorization in order to discover all of the Pythagorean triples.
So one of the things that happens though as we begin to expand our idea of integer to
what would come to be called the Gaussian integers, because Gauss did a lot of work with these
complex integers, is that factorization changes. Some of the numbers that are prime
remain prime. Three cannot be written as a product of two smaller positive integers in
the ordinary integers, and it also can't be written as a product of two smaller positive
integers in the Gaussian integers. But two can be factored. Two is equal to 1 plus i multiplied
by 1 minus i. Five also can be factored. It's no longer a prime in the Gaussian integers.
It's 1 plus 2i times 1 minus 2i. And if you look at the proof that Fermat's last theorem
is true for the exponent 3, the best way of proving that is actually to use the same sort
of idea, you want to try to factor that polynomial x cubed plus y cubed. Now, x cubed plus y
cubed actually can be factored normally as x plus y multiplied by the quantity x squared
minus xy plus y squared. But you can't completely factor it into linear factors. But you can
factor it completely into linear factors if you extend your idea of what constitutes
an integer and introduce the cube root of 1. So the cube root of 1, which is e to the
2 pi i over 3, if you introduce that and look at the integers that are made up from ordinary
integers and then powers of this primitive cube root of 1, you can do that factorization
of x cubed plus y cubed into linear factors. It turns out to be x plus y times x plus this
cube root of 1 times y plus times x plus the cube root of 1 squared times y. And using
that you can then prove the impossibility of finding a solution to x cubed plus y cubed
equals z cubed. And the idea that LeMay was using in his work of 1847 was to try to do
this factorization in general. If I'm looking at x to the n plus y to the n, I want to factor
that into these linear factors, into n products of simple binomials. And if we introduce these
integers that use the nth roots of unity, then it is possible to do that factorization.
Now LeMay presented his result to the Academy of Science in Paris in 1847, and there was
a good deal of discussion that this engendered. Louisville was one of the mathematicians who
was present. We have encountered Louisville before. He's the person who discovered Galois
's manuscript and saw that it got publicized and saw that Galois theory would actually emerge
into the general mathematical conscience. And Louisville pointed out that there was a
basic flaw in LeMay's approach to this problem of trying to prove Fermat's last theorem.
If we think of the primes in the ordinary integers, there is only one way of taking an integer
and writing it as a product of primes. Six is equal to two times three, or it's equal
to three times two, but I can't find two completely different primes and multiply them together
in order to get six. If I want to take two primes and multiply them together to get six,
I've got to use two and three. And LeMay had assumed that this would continue to be true
for these other kinds of extended integers that involve these nth roots of one. And what
Louisville said was that he wasn't so sure that that was true, that it might in fact
be possible that at some point you would encounter cases where factorization was not unique.
There might be more than one way of choosing the primes that get multiplied together to
get one of these extended integers. Another response that was made to LeMay's assertion
of a proof was from Cauchy. We've met Cauchy in connection with his attempt to set calculus
on a firm foundation. Cauchy had also thought about the problem of Fermat's last theorem,
and Cauchy announced to LeMay that everything that LeMay said Cauchy had already thought
of first. On March 15th of that year, another mathematician by the name of Wensel announced
that he had a proof that this factorization in fact would be unique, and so LeMay's approach
should be correct. And the following week on March 22nd, both LeMay and Cauchy submitted
sealed envelopes in which they put all of their work. None of them felt neither of them, neither
LeMay nor Cauchy felt that they had a complete proof in place yet. They had an idea of a
proof, and so they wanted to write down what they thought they knew. And this was a common
practice at the Academy of Science at that time, and in many other academies of science
throughout Europe, is if somebody had a brilliant idea but had not yet worked out all the details,
they would put that idea down on paper, put it in a sealed envelope, and deposit it with
the Academy, so that if later on there was a controversy over who came up with a critical
idea first, they could go back and say, open this dated envelope, and you'll see that I
really knew that result on March 22nd of 1847. Louisville still had his suspicions that perhaps
Wensel wasn't correct in saying that factorization had to be unique, and in a series of correspondences
with another mathematician Ernst Kummer in Berlin, Louisville shared his skepticism.
Kummer wrote back and said, in fact, your skepticism is well-placed. I know for a fact
that the factorization is not always going to be unique, and as Kummer would later show,
if you look at the prime exponent, 37, and you take extended integers that involve the
37th root of 1, you are not going to get uniqueness of factorization. And so the proof that LeMay
and also Cauchy thought they had for Fermat's last theorem fell apart at this point. Kummer
continued to work on this problem, though, of the factorization. One of the things he was
able to show is that if factorization is unique, in other words, for all of the primes below 37,
you can, in fact, prove Fermat's last theorem. And so he came out with this, and he began to
study this whole question of these extended integers, these generalizations of the integers,
something that eventually would come to be called algebraic integers, and what is the
property of them? How does their factorization work? How do they differ from the ordinary integers?
And this whole work on algebraic integers would really come to its fruition in 1877, when Richard
Dedekind would publish a very influential book, The Theory of Algebraic Integers. Richard Dedekind
is also somebody that we have encountered before. He was a graduate student with Riemann. He was
Riemann's friend who traveled with him in Italy, and it was Richard Dedekind who got many of Riemann's
manuscripts published. And one of Dedekind's most important contributions to mathematics would be
this great understanding of the algebraic integers. I mentioned the Bernoulli numbers before, these
numbers that came out of Jacob Bernoulli's work in probability theory, and one of the things that
eventually would be discovered as a connection between the numerators of these rational Bernoulli
numbers and Fermat's last theorem. What eventually would be shown is that if you take the Bernoulli
numbers up to the P minus third Bernoulli number, and if P does not divide any of those numerators,
then if you look at the algebraic integers that involve the Pth root of 1, factorization is going
to be unique. So what this says is you take the numerators of the Bernoulli numbers up to P minus
three, and if P does not divide any of those numerators, then Fermat's last theorem is true for
the exponent P. And eventually people would extend this result. What if P divides one of those
numerators but only one of them, and P squared does not divide any of those numerators? Eventually it
would be possible to extend the result and show that in that case Fermat's last theorem can be proven.
Well, what if P squared divides one of the numerators but you can't divide P cubed into the
product of these numerators? Eventually it would be shown that in that case Fermat's last theorem is
true. And so mathematicians began building up cases where they knew Fermat's last theorem was true,
that you couldn't find the triple of integers, so that x to the P plus y to the P equals z to the P.
And by 1976 it had gotten to the point where it was known that Fermat's last theorem was true for all
exponents below 100,000. Well, that's quite an accomplishment, but of course the claim is that
Fermat's last theorem is true for all possible exponents. And there are a lot more exponents
that are larger than 100,000 than exponents that are less than 100,000. So a really new approach
was needed. And the first breakthrough came about in 1983. The German mathematician Gerhard
Faltings, who was born in 1954, was able to show that for each exponent greater than or
equal to 3, we have at most finitely many solutions. If you recall with the Pythagorean
triples, we actually get infinitely many solutions. And a number of people hoped that maybe this would
be the door into an ultimate proof. Maybe you could show that once there is one solution,
there have to be infinitely many solutions that can be generated from that. And Faltings now has
proven that in each case you have at most finitely many solutions. But as it turns out,
nobody was able to build directly on Faltings' result, although it was an important result.
Something else that was going on at this time, as I said, Fermat's last theorem had been proven
for all of the exponents up to 100,000. And there are many other types of exponents for which it
was known that Fermat's last theorem was true. But it was not known that there were infinitely
many exponents for which Fermat's last theorem is true. And in 1985, two mathematicians working
quite independently would show that in fact Fermat's last theorem must be true, not just for
infinitely many exponents, but in some precise mathematical sense, it must be true for most
of the exponents. There could still be infinitely many exceptions, but they would have to occur at
rather infrequent intervals. This result was found by Andrew Granville and Roger Heath Brown.
But even that result would not really lead into the ultimate proof of Fermat's last theorem. What
was needed was a totally different approach. And this would come out of the study of elliptic
functions and modular functions. And it's the reason why I talked so much about elliptic functions
and modular functions in earlier, earlier lectures. I want to go back to Weierstrass's work. I said
that Weierstrass, this high school teacher, had published a very important work on abelian functions.
And one of the things that he accomplished in that paper, and in his later work on these abelian or
elliptic functions, was to find a very efficient way of describing these elliptic functions with two
specific parameters, parameters that today we refer to as G2 and G3. You pick two numbers to take
on these values G2 and G3, and that uniquely determines your elliptic function. And he denoted
these elliptic functions by the German letter P, a script P. And so they are known as P functions
today very often, instead of elliptic functions, especially if they are in Weierstrass's form.
And Weierstrass found the differential equation that these P functions satisfied. He was able to
show that if you take the derivative of the P function and square it, that is equal to a cubic
polynomial in the P function, it's equal to four times the cube of the P function minus this constant
G2 times the P function minus the constant G3. Now as succeeding mathematicians studied these
elliptic functions, they found that it was very useful to actually look at a surface in which
they could be analyzed, and the surface that you want to look at is a surface that corresponds to
this exact equation. Namely, it's the surface y squared equals 4x cubed minus G2 times x minus G3.
Now I said surface, normally that would be a curve, because what I have is an algebraic
equation between two variables, an x variable and a y variable, and so that defines a curve
on the plane, but in this case the input is going to be a complex number and the output is going to be a complex
number. And so what you're really looking at as you look at the space of all solutions to this equation is a two-dimensional
surface that sits in four-dimensional space. This two-dimensional surface in four-dimensional space is what is
known as the elliptic curve. It's called a curve because if we restricted it to one input variable and one
output variable, a simple real variable in and a real variable out, we would in fact get a curve, but it really is a
surface sitting in four-dimensional space. And more than that, we want to include the point out at infinity.
And so we really want to look at this elliptic curve and take its projection in much the same way that I looked at
projective space before when I took all of the lines through the origin and took each of these lines and replaced them by
a single point. The same kind of idea can be used with this elliptic curve in order to include the point at infinity in
this surface that you're looking at. So you get a very strange surface that you can't actually visualize. It's a
two-dimensional surface sitting in four-dimensional space to which you've applied this projective operator so that you
get the point at infinity included in this particular space. It's called the elliptic curve, which is a bit deceptive
because it really doesn't have much to do with ellipses. If you'll recall, I was able to trace that adjective
elliptic that's applied to elliptic functions back to something that was connected with the arc length of an ellipse, but the
name has stayed there and elliptic curve doesn't look at all like an ellipse. But these elliptic curves turned out to be
very useful in many questions in mathematics, in analysis, and people began to study these. And you have the elliptic curves that
come out of the elliptic functions, but there also are other elliptic curves out there. And during the 1950s, a number of
mathematicians looked at elliptic curves that come from modular functions. So these modular functions are the generalizations
of theta functions. The modular functions are the functions that are invariant under the kinds of transformations that we see represented
in Escher's print, the circle limit 3. And each modular function gives rise to an elliptic curve. And what the
mathematicians of the 1950s began to suspect was that every elliptic curve also corresponds to one of these modular
functions. If that's true, that would be a very powerful statement because it connects two very different areas of mathematics.
The geometry of elliptic curves and the analysis of these modular functions. The statement that was made, the conjecture
that was made was that every elliptic curve is modular. And this is a conjecture that would be made by two Japanese
mathematicians who were working together, Utaka Tanayama and Goro Shimura, and also by a French mathematician who was working in
the same area, Andrei V. And they independently came up with this conjecture that every elliptic curve is modular. And that would be
very powerful if we think back to analytic geometry that provides this correspondence between geometry and algebra. Every
algebraic equation gives rise to a geometric curve. Not every geometric curve comes from an algebraic expression, but what if we did
know that every algebraic curve or every curve that had sufficiently nice geometric properties in fact corresponded to an
algebraic equation. That kind of correspondence would be very useful to know. And what Tanayama, Shimura and V. conjectured
is that that precisely is what is going on with the elliptic curves. That every elliptic curve corresponds to a modular
function. So if you've got a question about modular functions, you can translate that over into the geometry. And it may be
obvious what's going on in the geometry, and you can use that for insight into modular functions. Or if you've got a question about
the geometry, you can translate that into the modular functions. And it may be that there's a property of modular functions that
enables you to say something important about the geometry. Now the next progress was made around 1980 when Jean-Pierre
Seyer and Gerhard Frey were able to show that if Fermat's last theorem is false, that has to give us three particular integers,
some x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n, that can be used to construct a very strange elliptic curve. A curve that is so
strange that in fact it is not modular. It does not correspond to a modular function. And while they conjectured that this would
be the case, it was not until 1986 that Ken Ribet was actually able to show that this curve that can be constructed, this geometric
object that can be constructed out of a counter example to Fermat's last theorem, actually could not be something that can be
constructed, something that corresponds to a modular function. So if Fermat's last theorem is false, that says that not every
elliptic curve is modular. On the other hand, if we know that every elliptic curve in fact is modular, that tells us that
Fermat's last theorem must be true. And in 1993, Andrew Wiles at Princeton announced that he was able to prove this
in a conjecture. He actually was not able to prove it in its full generality, but he was able to prove it in the case of the
elliptic curves that included this Sear-Fray curve that was built on a counter example to Fermat's last theorem. And so it was
Andrew Wiles, who announced in 1993 that in fact Fermat's last theorem is true because every elliptic curve of the appropriate
kind is modular. There were some flaws in the original proof in 1994, Richard Taylor, one of Andrew Wiles' students was brought in to
help with cleaning up the proof. And then in 1995, this proof of Fermat's last theorem was finally published.
Initially, Fermat's last theorem was done as a special case of the Tanayama-Shamura-Vey conjecture. The full Tanayama-Shamura-Vey
conjecture would be proven in 1999 by a group of mathematicians, including Christoph Breuer, Brian Conrad, Fred Diamond, and Richard Taylor.
Thus closing one of the most important stories in the history of mathematics, a result that was not important in and of itself, but
important because of all the mathematics to which it gave rise.
