In this lecture, we're going to look at mathematics as the ultimate physical reality.
Our intuition serves us very well when we're looking at things on the scale of a meter
or a few tens or hundreds or thousands of meters or a centimeter or a millimeter.
Those are the scales at which we understand how the world works and we can rely on our
intuition.
But as soon as we try to extend our understanding to the cosmic scale, to speeds that approach
the speed of light, or to the subatomic scale, our intuition fails us.
And what scientists have learned is that in these realms that are outside of our intuition,
we need to rely on mathematics in order to tell us what is going on.
And so in this lecture, beginning with Maxwell's equations and continuing through general relativity,
quantum mechanics, and modern string theory, we're going to see how mathematics enables
us to work with physical realities for which our experience fails us.
If you'll recall, we've already seen some of the ways in which mathematics suggests
excess content.
This was certainly true of Fourier and his work with heat, the transfer of heat.
What he saw was that there was a connection between the transfer of heat and the mathematics
of a vibrating string.
There's no reason why anyone would have expected this before, but the mathematics shows us this
connection and this connection would turn out to be very powerful.
And it's precisely these kinds of connections, these unexpected excess content that comes
out of applying the mathematics to the physical reality that is what makes mathematics so
important in understanding the fundamental nature of reality that is out there.
I want to start with the story of electricity and magnetism.
Initially, the study of electricity was the study of static electricity.
But in the late 1700s, the voltaic pile, or what today we would call a battery, was invented
and it became possible to actually generate a current.
So electricity that was not simply discharged as a spark in a single instant, but the ability
to produce a continual discharge of electricity, thus creating a current.
People were also interested in magnetism at this time.
And in 1820, the Danish scientist Hans Christian Ersted realized that there was a connection
between electricity and magnetism.
The story is that he was giving a lecture and he had an electrical apparatus set up
on his table and there also was a compass there and he noticed that as he closed the
circuit, the needle on the compass would move.
It was clear that the electric current was creating some kind of magnetic field.
And Ersted actually sat on this result for several months.
He was trying to work out what exactly was happening, what was the mathematics behind
it.
But eventually he realized that he needed to share this result with the rest of the
scientific world.
And his announcement came out on July 21st of 1820 and immediately all of the great
scientists of Europe dropped whatever they were doing.
And they started working on this question of what is the relationship between electricity
and magnetism.
And the work was really feverish on pair in Paris.
By September of that same year, just two months later, would announce an entire series
of lectures on the mathematics explaining the connection between electricity and magnetism.
Actually the first important mathematical model of the connection between electricity
and magnetism would come in that year of 1820.
But from other French scientists, it was Jean-Baptiste Biot and Félix Savard who would
come up with an equation that would relate the electric current to the magnetic field.
And so we have the Biot-Savard equation.
Several years later in 1831, Michael Faraday would realize that not only does an electric
current create a magnetic field, but a magnetic field can be used to create an electric current.
So that if we take a magnet and we simply move it around a wire, that's going to induce
an electric current.
And this is the idea behind our modern generation of electricity.
It's done by dynamos which basically have rotating magnets which in turn then induce
this current.
And out of Faraday's work, it became possible to come up with an equation that explains
how this magnetic field interacts with the electrical current.
And now we get an equation that actually depends not just on three spatial dimensions, but it
also depends on the dimension of time because it's the change in the magnetic field that
turns out to be critical in generating the electric current.
Now another important piece of our understanding of electricity and magnetism will come from
Carl Friedrich Gauss who did a lot of work in electricity and magnetism.
He actually created one of the very first telegraphs to be created.
And he was interested in the question of electrostatic potential.
And so I need to back up a little bit and talk about potential and potential energy.
When we were looking at Newton, Newton explained gravitational attraction through the forces.
Gravity exerts a force which is proportional to the rate at which the velocity is changing.
And all of Newton's celestial mechanics was stated in terms of these forces.
By the late 1700s, scientists working in astronomy realized that life would be much easier if
instead of working with the forces, we worked at potential energy.
So you think about a book that's lying on the floor.
If you lift that book up and hold it high in the air, it now has a much higher potential
energy.
We can let go of it and it has the potential to develop energy as it falls.
So its potential energy level is much higher.
That potential energy can then be translated into kinetic energy as it falls.
And it turns out to be much easier to work with potential energy rather than forces.
Because the way the force of gravity works is it tends to move an object from an area
of high potential energy to an area of low potential energy.
And the advantage of working with a potential energy is that that is a single number.
It's not a vector.
It doesn't have direction.
But once you know what the energy level is at each point in space, you know that an object
is always going to be pulled in the direction of the greatest change, the greatest decrease
in its potential energy.
So if you know the energy levels, you can use that to determine the forces.
But it's much easier to work with the energy.
And what Gauss did was to take a look at electrostatics.
So these are the kinds of attractive or repellent forces that you get with something that is
electrostatically charged.
And he set up a model for the way in which electrostatic potential energy works.
And so this is known as the electrostatic potential.
In the 1860s, the British scientist James Clark Maxwell decided to try to take this
idea that Gauss had done for electrostatics and apply it to electrodynamics.
So we've got this interaction between electricity and magnetism, and it's a dynamical system.
It's something that's changing over time.
The magnetic field changes over time.
The electric current can change over time.
What Maxwell wanted to do was to find an electrodynamic potential that could be used in order to simplify
the various equations that were out there that related electricity and magnetism.
And in 1864, he succeeded in this, and he published his results as the groundbreaking paper,
A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field.
Now Maxwell's equations are often stated as four separate equations, but in fact you
can unite all four of these equations if you think about the electromagnetic potential.
And Maxwell then took a look at this electromagnetic potential, and he began to explore its properties.
And one of the curious things that he discovered about the electromagnetic potential is that
just like Fourier's heat flow, the electromagnetic potential is related to the problem of a vibrating
string.
That this idea of the vibrations is happening in the electromagnetic potential, and the best
way of understanding the electromagnetic potential is in terms of vibrations that are happening.
Now in the case of a string, those vibrations only happen in one direction.
The string vibrates up and down, and as I said, Euler and others in the 1700s extended
this to the idea of a drum head, where the drum head now is a two-dimensional surface
that's going to vibrate in the third dimension.
One of the strange things that happens with Maxwell's electromagnetic potential is that
we are actually looking at a three-dimensional object that is vibrating.
Now it's not clear what direction it vibrates in because there aren't any dimensions left
over for it to vibrate in, but it clearly is vibrating.
And one of the things that happens if you pluck a string is that this disturbance in
the string is going to spread out, or if you take a pool of water and you disturb that,
you see the waves that spread out.
And what Maxwell realized was exactly the same sort of thing should happen with this
electromagnetic potential.
So mathematically, he was able to establish that this electromagnetic potential that is
three-dimensional should spread out in all three dimensions, in all possible directions.
The electromagnetic potential should spread out, and experimentally, he discovered that
the electromagnetic potential should travel at the speed of light, thus suggesting that
there is a fundamental connection between light and the electromagnetic potential.
But the electromagnetic potential is a very strange thing.
At this point, it was only a mathematical construct.
And a question for the scientists who were studying electricity and magnetism at this
time was, is there any reality to this mathematical thing that we're calling the electromagnetic
potential?
You couldn't touch it, you couldn't see it, there wasn't any way of measuring it.
It was just the mathematics that suggested that it was there.
And so a number of scientists began exploring this question, can we actually get a handle
on the electromagnetic potential?
Can we show that it's real in some way?
It took a long time.
But finally in 1887, the German scientist Heinrich Rudolf Hertz found a way of actually
detecting electromagnetic potential and showing that in fact there was something there that
could be detected.
And a number of people realized at this point that that suggested the possibility of something
that nobody had thought of before, which is communication over long distances without
any physical connection, without the use of telegraph wires, because if it is possible
to detect these changes in the electromagnetic potential, then a person in one place could
do some kind of manipulation with an electric current to cause certain changes in the electromagnetic
potential, which should then travel at the speed of light, and somebody in a distant
room might be able then to detect these changes in the electromagnetic potential and decode
them in a way that would actually communicate a message.
So it looked like it might be possible to communicate over substantial distances, perhaps
even hundreds of yards, at the speed of light.
Well, eventually two scientists would figure out a means of actually doing this communication
that would happen independently in 1895 by the Russian scientist Alexander Aspopov and
the Italian scientist Guglielmo Marconi, and what they invented of course was the radio.
And what the radio does is it simply picks up these changes in the electromagnetic potential
and the electromagnetic potential as it is traveling is what today we refer to as radio
waves.
And what I love about this story is that nobody would have suspected the existence of radio
waves had it not been for the fact that Maxwell did this mathematical work, came up with a
purely mathematical construct that suggested that there was something called an electromagnetic
potential that had to be traveling at the speed of light and that could actually be
used to communicate over large distances without any physical connection.
A lot of scientists then at this point began studying this electromagnetic potential in
a great deal more detail and there were two of them, the Irish scientist Fitzgerald and
the Dutch scientist Lorenz, who both realized that there is a kind of basic transformation
of space-time, a transformation of the four dimensions of space and time that leave electromagnetic
potential unchanged.
And so there's something about electromagnetic potential that as we do this transformation
that's a bit difficult to explain, but it's a transformation that in some way twists space
and time that doesn't change the basic equation of electromagnetic potential and that suggests
that electromagnetic phenomena in fact are invariant themselves under this transformation
that would come to be known as the Lorenz transformation. And one of the consequences of this is that
for an electromagnetic phenomena, distances actually contract as it is moving very close
to the speed of light. The distances contract by a factor that's equal to the square root
of one minus the square of the velocity of the electromagnetic phenomena divided by the
square of the speed of light. It was Albert Einstein in 1905 who suggested that maybe
this kind of contraction, this kind of invariance under Lorenz transformations doesn't just
happen for electromagnetic phenomena, but in fact it happens for everything. And this
then would give rise to Einstein's special relativity, this idea that if you take any
object and you move it at a speed that is near the speed of light, that object is actually
going to contract spatially and more important something else that he realized was that time
itself is going to contract. So that this gives rise to the apparent paradox that if
you've got two people who are standing on earth and one of them gets into a rocket ship
and travels near the speed of light out to a distant galaxy and then travels near the
speed of light back home, the person who has traveled when they're back together again
will have experienced less change in time than the person who had stayed stationary.
And in fact this is a phenomena that has been verified, it has been possible to take extremely
accurate clocks, put them up in orbit where the velocity is great enough, it's nowhere
near the speed of light, but the velocity is actually great enough to be able to measure
the fact that time progresses differently when you're moving very fast than it does
when you're not moving. And so this became part of the excess content of this mathematics
of the Lorenz transformation, actually predicting things that would happen when you travel near
the speed of light that nobody would have expected. Einstein then took this idea of
invariance under these Lorenz transformations and he applied this idea to the geometry of
space itself. I've been talking about geometry, I mentioned Riemann's contributions to geometry
and how Riemann showed that the basis to understanding geometry is to begin with this idea of distances,
these differentials that define distances and you can define the distances any way you
want, have any kinds of properties and that in turn determines the geometry of the space
that you're working in. And Felix Klein further developed this idea and he showed that you
don't have to start with the distances, you can actually start with the transformations
that leave the geometry unchanged. And following mathematicians Schwarz, Minkowski, other mathematicians
then would build on these ideas and really develop the tools needed in order to see what
transformations left space unchanged and show what that told us about the nature of space
itself, the nature of the geometry. Einstein then drew on this mathematics of geometry and
he was able to postulate that all of the universe is invariant under the Lorenz transformations.
He looked at the geometry that would preserve these Lorenz transformations and he said what
if the universe has this kind of geometry? And there are amazing predictions that came
out of it, predictions that a massive gravitational body actually would distort the shape of space
and so this was Einstein's prediction coming out of general relativity that light itself
would be bent as it came near a massive body just because space itself was being distorted
and the way space was being distorted was understood by creating this geometry invariant
under the Lorenz transformations. I want to look at another area of physics
and this is quantum mechanics and it goes back to the basic idea what is an electron
and we usually think of an electron as a little subatomic particle that goes whizzing around
the nucleus and as scientists realized very early in the 20th century that's not quite
accurate electrons are much more complex than that. And in 1922 Louis de Broglie was able
to show that this electron is not just a particle but we can also think of it as a wave. This
actually goes back to earlier work controversy on light is light a particle or is light a
wave? I mentioned just very briefly in passing that Newton when he studied his optics had
explained light as something that is transmitted by particles what today we might call photons.
In the 19th century it was shown absolutely that in fact light has to be a wave. Well
in the same year that Einstein published his work on special relativity he also published
a groundbreaking work on optics and on light in which he showed that light must be both
a wave and a particle. If you try to study it as if it is a wave it will look like a wave
and if you try to study it as if it is a particle it will look like a particle. And what de Broglie
said is that that's not just true for light it's also true for electrons. If you want
to look at an electron as if it's a particle it will look like a particle. If you want to
look at it as if it's a wave it will look like a wave. Four years later in 1926 Erwin Schrodinger
would find a way of actually getting a handle on this wave. He found the differential equations
of the equation involving derivatives that actually explained the behavior of this particular
wave. And in the same year Max Born then took a look at Schrodinger's equation and he realized
that the kind of function that satisfies this equation is actually a probability distribution.
I talked about a probability distribution in the very first lecture when I was talking
about Wigner's article and there's a reason why physicists are very interested in probability
distributions because electrons can be thought of as probability distributions. It's a function
that tells you the likelihood that something will be in a particular position. So you take
a piece of space and you ask what's the probability that my electron will be there. Well what
actually happens what Born was able to show is that the electron is the probability distribution.
You don't really have a particle, all you have is a mathematical function that tells
you that the particle is likely to be there. Well that's a very difficult idea to wrap
your head around and again intuition simply breaks down when we try to work at this subatomic
level. What you have to do is simply rely on the mathematics that has been created and
decide that an electron is this mathematical function, this probability distribution and
work with that. Werner Heisenberg began working with this idea of the electron as a probability
distribution and in fact all subatomic particles really are best understood as mathematical
functions as some kind of probability distribution and this led Heisenberg to his uncertainty
principle that this kind of probability function that you've got has the strange property that
if you try to pin down how fast your particle is moving you necessarily are going to lose
certainty about where it is and if you try to pin down more precisely where it's located
you're going to lose certainty about how fast it's moving in the direction that it's moving
in and so you can never know with precise accuracy, actually you can never know with precise accuracy
either the position or the velocity but to try to narrow your knowledge of the position
necessarily expands the realm of uncertainty and the velocity narrowing down what the velocity
is necessarily expands the uncertainty in your understanding of the position. So we
have electrons and subatomic particles being explained by Schrodinger's equation. So this
is the mathematics that enables us to figure out what's going on at the subatomic level
but there's a basic problem with Schrodinger's equation. It is not invariant under the Lorentz
transformation. Now Einstein saw quite clearly that all of the universe must be invariant
under this transformation of four dimensional space time. So there's something wrong with
Schrodinger's equation. It somehow is not grasping all of the reality that is out there.
What we really want to do is find a way of expanding our understanding of Schrodinger's
equation so that it's really a special case of something more general that is in fact
invariant under the Lorentz transformations. And so this would become the great goal of
scientists in the 20th century and it still is the goal of scientists in the 21st century
of physicists in the 21st century to try to figure out how to combine Lorentz invariance
with the Schrodinger equation because if we really want to understand the nature of subatomic
physics we've got somehow to bring these together. And so the question that can be asked is what
kinds of transformations necessarily preserve Lorentz invariance and at the same time also
preserve all of the symmetries that are inherent in Schrodinger's equation. And so the physicists
were looking for a mathematical model that combined all of the different kinds of symmetries
that they were seeing. And one of the models that they eventually came up with is what
today we refer to as string theory. And many people are amazed that string theory is not
a theory of objects living in four dimensional space time. String theory, depending on the
version that you look at, either is about objects that live in ten dimensional space
or eleven dimensional space or for some versions of string theory you are looking at twenty-six
dimensional space. Where do all these extra dimensions come from? Well they come from
the fact that we've got all these symmetries, all these transformations that need to be
preserved. And in order to pack all of these symmetries in, we can't do it in four dimensions.
We need extra dimensions. Now physicists have a hard time explaining what's happened to
these other dimensions, why we don't experience them, and there have been some suggestions
that maybe the extra dimensions kind of curl up so we're not aware of them. The explanation
doesn't really matter. What does matter is that if we want to preserve all the symmetries
we know about, we need this many dimensions. And string theory is interesting because string
theory is built on modular functions. And so string theory is really saying that at
the heart of all of the universe, the basic building block of all matter of everything
that is in the universe, that basic building block is the modular function. This strange
function with this kind of invariance that was represented by Escher's circle limit three.
That beautiful graphic of these fish in this circle that kind of disappear off to nothing
as they approach the edge, that somehow that encodes some of the mathematical properties
of the mathematics that sits at the foundation of the universe. And at its very foundation,
the universe has got to be mathematical. We can only understand it mathematically.
Now there is a good deal of controversy about string theory. When I talked in the first
lecture about Wigner's article, Wigner had said that what physics does is to see patterns
in the world around us and to look for mathematics that seems to fit those patterns. And that's
exactly what's going on in string theory. We see the patterns, the Lorentz invariance,
the transformations that are preserved by Schrodinger's equations. And we're trying
to find the mathematics that fits those. And string theory with its use of modular functions
does seem to fit the patterns that we're seeing. But as Wigner said, there's no reason to believe
that when I pull mathematics out of one area, it really is relevant. In fact, he said it's
quite surprising that so often the mathematics that we pull in because we see some similarities
to the patterns of nature that that mathematics actually is appropriate and useful. And one
of the unfortunate things about string theory is that we do not have a way of testing it.
We do not have a way of knowing whether this particular mathematics is the right mathematics
to understand subatomic particles. And there are a number of other ways of explaining the
subatomic world, other mathematical models that other people have suggested. But string
theory is beautiful mathematics. And I like the point of view of Freeman Dyson. Dyson
is skeptical about string theory, whether it really will prove to be the foundation
of all of the subatomic world. But he has said that string theory is so beautiful that
it must be useful for something. And so it's not a waste of time to pursue it. Maybe that's
not the right pattern to apply to the subatomic world to understand it. But mathematics as
beautiful as aesthetically appealing as the string theory must tell us something important
about something in the real world. And in the next lecture, I'm going to continue and
bring you up into the 21st century and give you some idea of the exciting mathematics
that is happening right now within my community.
