We've reached the last lecture, and my job in this lecture now is to try to give you
some idea of what mathematicians are doing today, what are the big problems that mathematicians
are working with, and obviously I'm not going to be able to give you much of an idea, but
I hope to touch on a few things that'll communicate the excitement and the richness of mathematics
today and why people like myself are so excited about working in mathematics.
I started out talking about where mathematics comes from.
Mathematics really comes from working with the world around us, looking at the patterns
around us, looking at the problems that come out of those problems and trying to build
on those, and we've looked at how mathematics was created by questions in commerce and in
civil administration.
We've looked at how mathematics was developed from problems of navigation and surveying.
We've looked at how mathematics came about from questions about astronomy and by extension
other questions about the physical world around us, trying to understand electricity
and magnetism, trying to understand the subatomic world.
Those also give rise to two mathematics.
We've seen how mathematics comes out of art and our understanding of symmetries and transformations
and how that came to play such an important role in the 19th century and right up until
the present age.
And today we have even new sources of patterns that suggest problems for mathematicians to
work on, and I want to say just a little bit about those two important sources of patterns
for mathematicians today.
The first of them comes from information technology, that there are lots of patterns in information
technology, lots of problems that mathematicians can really get their hooks into, and they're
problems where we cannot just use traditional mathematics, we actually need to explore these
patterns and create new mathematics in order to deal with the problems that are coming
to us.
One of the good examples of this is the public key crypto system developed by Rivest, Shamir,
an Adelman at MIT in the 1970s.
So this is a way of encrypting information so that it can be sent securely over the internet,
where you've got the problem that whenever you send the key for the encryption, somebody
might look in on that transmission of the key.
And so it's got to be a key that is created in such a way that seeing how to encode the
information does not help you with the decoding.
And actually the process that sits behind the RSA public key crypto system is the basic
mathematical fact that if I've got two very large primes, it's relatively easy to multiply
them together.
But it's very difficult to take that product and undo this process, find out what the two
primes were that needed to be multiplied together in order to get that number.
And this whole public key crypto system has given rise to lots of interesting mathematics
and explorations of properties of the integers.
There also is the internet, and the internet can be thought of as a graph with billions
of nodes, and in fact as the internet continues to develop, as each individual item in a grocery
store becomes a transmitter of information, letting the store computer know where it is
and who's picked it up, or whether it's in somebody's shopping cart or whether it's
being purchased at that time, the internet is going to explode out to trillions and quadrillions
and quintillions of nodes.
And how do you deal with all of this information that is out there?
How do you make sense of it?
If you've only got a few million nodes, then you can actually keep track of them all.
But once you're talking about numbers of nodes on this kind of scale, you need some deeper
structure.
And there are people who are doing fascinating mathematical research into the deep structure
of something like the internet.
There's a very good team at Microsoft right now, led by Jennifer Torechase and her husband
Christian Borgs.
It's the theory group at Microsoft.
And they've been modeling the internet, also looking at problems of social networking and
the spread of worms and viruses.
And they've been drawing on very deep mathematical techniques, pulling in some of the ideas I've
talked about from geometry and algebra and analysis and seeing how they interact and
how you can build new tools to understand what's going on in information technology.
And another area that's giving rise to new and exciting problems in mathematics is biology.
And especially genomics, now that we can actually take the human genome and write it out as
the billions of letters, the billions of these A, C, Gs and Ts that make up the menu for how
to construct a given individual.
The problem is to interpret this now.
We've got this huge book that we need to figure out how to read it.
And the reason that this is called a genome is because it contains the genes, it contains
the templates for constructing the proteins that are used in the way the body works.
And the problem before biologists is to look at this string of letters and try to figure
out what pieces of it are doing what.
And a given gene is not just a single sequence of letters.
A given gene will often be made up of a sequence here and another sequence someplace else.
And the problem is to figure out how these different pieces of the sequence combine.
Here's part of the gene, where is the rest of it, how are these related, what is it that
they're doing.
And this is really a problem about understanding the information that's there, understanding
the deep patterns that lie on the genome, and that's a mathematical problem.
And so we have brilliant mathematicians now who are looking at this problem of genomics
not just the human genome, but the genome for all sorts of plants and animals and trying
to figure out what's going on.
And these are people who are applying techniques from algebra and geometry and analysis and
statistics in order to do this.
One of the mathematicians who's done a lot of important work in this area is Eric Lander.
Eric Lander teaches at Harvard, he has his PhD in mathematics, but he became interested
in the mathematical problems behind the genomics.
And so after getting his PhD in mathematics, he went back to school and learned the biology
that he needed.
And then he became involved in the human genome project in its very early days, he would become
one of the leaders of it, and in fact he is the first author on the human genome project
on this final classification of the human genome that now is out there.
Another person who is working in genomics is Bernsturmfels, and he's found very inventive
ways of combining ideas from statistics and algebra and geometry in order to identify
genes, understand what they're doing, understanding how they are changing over time.
Because one of the interesting things about the human genome is it isn't just a list
of instructions for how to create a person, or how to create a mouse, or how to create
a plant, but it also is a record of all the different experiments that nature has carried
out on the creatures that eventually have become this man, or this mouse, or this plant.
And so contained within the human genome is this record of different experiments.
Eric Lander has talked beautifully about this, that once we can decode this, we are going
to have millions of years of experiments that nature has been trying out, and we can see
what experiments nature has tried, and figure out what experiments have succeeded and what
experiments have failed, and as we begin to read the genome, we're going to get an incredible
wealth of information that will greatly advance our understanding of biology.
One of the small results that Bernsturmfeld's and his team has come up with is a particular
gene that happens to be 42 letters long that is actually common to all vertebrates.
Every single vertebrate has this particular gene, and because it's a gene that is common
to all vertebrates, and somehow seems to be essential to being a vertebrate animal,
they have dubbed it the meaning of life, with an obvious reference to the Hitchhiker's Guide
to the Galaxy.
It's a letter, it's a word that happens to be 42 letters long, certainly that must
be coincidence, but 42 does seem to be fundamental in some basic way.
Mathematics is not only looking at questions that come from the world around us from information
and biology, but mathematics continues to generate many of its own questions, and I want to say
a little bit about the seven millennium problems of the Clay Institute.
The Clay Institute, which exists in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in the year 2000, decided to
put out what it saw as the greatest unsolved problems in mathematics in order to spur work
of mathematicians.
I mentioned that in the year 1900, David Hilbert stated what he saw as the 23 most important
problems in mathematics, and they really helped to shape the development of mathematics in
the 20th century.
The Clay Institute is trying to do the same thing now at the beginning of the 21st century,
and I'll say a little bit about the problems and then focus in on one of them that has
already been solved.
The Clay Institute, incidentally, has offered a $1 million prize for the solution of each
of these problems.
This requires a good deal of vetting.
It is built into the prize that several years will elapse in order to verify that the solution
really is correct.
So the one problem that has been solved, the $1 million prize, at least at the moment
that I am speaking now, has not yet been offered.
One of the problems is what's called the Birch and Swinerton Dyer Conjecture.
I can't go into any detail, but it is a conjecture about elliptic curves.
I talked about their role in the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.
There is a lot we now know about elliptic curves.
We know that they are all modular, but there's much else that we do not know about elliptic
curves.
Another important open problem is what is called the Hodge Conjecture.
This is a problem in algebraic geometry.
I talked about how geometry underwent a fundamental change in the late 19th century when people
realized that you could understand all of the different geometries just by understanding
the transformations that left the geometry unchanged.
And so geometry really is tied up with algebra, modern algebra being the study of transformations,
the algebraic geometry is looking at the algebra that enables us to say things about
geometric spaces.
And the Hodge Conjecture is something that is tied up in this particular area of algebraic
geometry.
The third problem deals with the existence and smoothness of solutions to the Navier-Stokes
equations.
The Navier-Stokes equations are the mathematical equations that describe fluid dynamics.
So you've got a boat moving through water, or you've got an airplane wing moving through
air.
And the Navier-Stokes equations developed in the 19th century are the way of predicting
what is going to happen.
They build on the much earlier work of Leonard Euler.
And though we know a lot about fluid dynamics, there still are many fundamental questions
that are unanswered about fluid dynamics, and especially this whole area of turbulence.
Again we understand a lot about it, and yet there is a lot that we do not understand,
and this is tied up in the third problem.
The fourth problem is the Poincare conjecture that I'll come back to.
The fifth problem is a problem really from computational complexity related to developing
algorithms to work with computers.
It's what's called the P versus NP problem.
And so you're interested in algorithms for which the time that it takes to complete this
algorithm or procedure is a polynomial in the input variable.
In other words, to figure out how long it's going to take, you might take the input variable
and square it, or cube it, or take its fourth power, but you're not going to take the input
variable and put it in an exponent.
So polynomial time really means it's less than exponential time.
Certainly it excludes the possibility of something that grows exponentially, where doubling the
input squares the amount of time that it takes.
Tripling the input is going to raise the amount of time that it takes by a power of three.
That would be exponential time.
Polinomial time means that doubling the input is going to at most double or perhaps multiply
by two squared or two cubed, but some finite power of two.
And the question is whether something that can be done in polynomial time is the same
as something that can be done in non-deterministic polynomial time.
And that means that if it's possible to verify that a solution is correct in polynomial time,
is it possible to actually find a solution in polynomial time?
That's the P versus NP problem.
There is the Riemann hypothesis.
And I talked about that.
This is being able to determine the error when we approximate the prime counting function
by this logarithmic integral, and the problem comes down to finding the zeros of the Riemann
zeta function that lie within the critical strip and determining whether or not they
all lie on the single vertical line with real part equal to one half.
And the seventh problem is finding quantum Yang-Mills theory.
This is a problem from mathematical physics.
It actually is somewhat deeper than the problem that I talked about in the last lecture of
trying to find a physical model that combines Lorentz invariance with the invariance of
the Schrodinger equation.
Yang-Mills theory goes beyond this, and I'm not going to be able to go into any more detail
than that.
But I want to come back to the Poincare conjecture now, because that is the one problem that
actually has been solved.
It was solved by a Russian mathematician, Gregory Perlman, in 2002.
Perlman was born in 1966.
Speaking of a recluse, in 2006 he was offered the Fields Medal as an acknowledgement of
the important mathematics that he had done.
I've talked about the Abel Prize, an equivalent of the Nobel Prize offered by the Norwegian
government in honor of Niels Henrik Abel.
But the other great prize in mathematics is the Fields Medal.
This has been offered since 1936, and it is only given to young mathematicians.
You cannot be more than 40 years old when you receive the Fields Medal.
It also is only given out every four years, but when it's given out, it can be awarded
to up to four mathematicians.
And Perlman was offered the Fields Medal in 2006.
He declined it.
Even though this came with a very nice cash reward, as well as the honor of the Fields
Medal, he felt that people should do mathematics for the sake of doing mathematics and not
for awards or remuneration that might come from that.
I want to say a little bit about the Poincare conjecture, because that enables me to talk
about topology.
One of the huge areas of mathematics that I have said absolutely nothing about, and
I want to say at least a little.
Henri Poincare was born in 1854.
He would die in 1912.
And one of the big problems that he worked on was a problem left over from Newton's
Principia, and that is the basic stability of our solar system.
So what we have is the planets going around of the Sun, basically in elliptical orbits.
But of course, the orbits are not exactly elliptical, because not only does the Sun
pull on each planet, but each of the other planets pulls on it.
And so the actual motion of the planets is much more complicated.
They're being pulled by all of the other planets, and so they're going to be little perturbations
in the orbits.
And the question is, will these perturbations ever build up to the point where suddenly
one of the planets leaves its nice elliptical orbit and suddenly goes spiraling into the
Sun?
Well, we sincerely hope that that doesn't happen.
We especially hope that that won't happen with the Earth.
But Newton was not able to establish the fact that the orbits were essentially stable.
And in fact, Newton postulated that this was a role for God in the universe, but in fact
the orbits really aren't that stable, and what we need is a God who will occasionally
nudge the planets back into place so that they will stay in their essentially elliptical
orbits.
Well, succeeding astronomers and scientists didn't really like this role of God to keep
pushing the planets back in place.
So they tried to see if they could find an explanation that in fact, even despite all
of these perturbations, these pulls from the different planets, the orbits, though not
perfect ellipses, would remain stable.
And it's Henri Poincaré who eventually was able to show that the orbits in fact are stable.
And what he was able to do is to show that as a planet such as the Earth goes around
the Sun, we cannot predict with certainty exactly where it's going to be at each pass
because we can never pin down its exact location.
And any small change in that location is going to magnify as it continues to move around
the Sun.
But at the same time, we can put a window out there.
And we do know that the Earth will always pass through this window.
If the Earth comes along and passes through this window, it will go around and when it
comes back, it will pass through exactly the same window.
And every time it goes around, it passes through this window.
And so even though we can't say exactly where the Earth is going to be, we do know a small
window within which it stays.
And that's enough to say that the orbit is going to be stable.
And this would be the beginning of chaos theory.
Now many people know of chaos theory as this idea that if a butterfly flaps its wings in
China, that creates enough uncertainty in the air currents that eventually it will cause
a hurricane over Florida.
And in fact, we do have this kind of uncertainty in meteorological predictions.
We can never know the state of the atmosphere precisely, and small changes in one place
can magnify and have changes, very dramatic changes, someplace else.
The idea behind chaos theory is not just saying that we have this unpredictability, but it's
actually finding the stability that sits behind this unpredictability, exactly the same kind
of stability that Poincaré found, that even when you've got a system that seems to be
chaotic, there may be some deep underlying structure that you can find, and that structure
will predict something that is actually going on.
A nice example of this is a colleague of mine at McAllister College, Daniel Kaplan, who
has done a lot of work in studying heart arrhythmias.
And a heart arrhythmias is basically chaotic situation.
The heart is beating in a very irregular pattern.
And what Daniel Kaplan has been able to do is to mathematically study these irregularities
and find underlying patterns.
So he's using chaos theory to find the underlying patterns, and he has actually designed and
patented a pacemaker that finds the underlying patterns and then uses these underlying patterns
in order to bring the heart back into its regular beat.
And so this is a very immediate application of chaos theory and the mathematics to a very
practical problem.
Now in developing his chaos theory and his understanding of celestial mechanics, Poincaré
really begins the study of topology.
When I talked about the elliptic functions, I said that the elliptic function really lives
on a torus, a donut.
And what's important about the donut is that it has this periodicity as we move vertically
and it also has this periodicity as we move horizontally.
But it's not the kind of periodicity that you get on a sphere.
If you go vertically around a sphere, you repeat.
If you go horizontally around a sphere, you also repeat.
But not in the same way that you do in a donut.
And so one of the things that topology is about is what is the fundamental difference
between a donut and a sphere.
And one of the ways of thinking about this is to take a rubber band and put that rubber
band around a sphere or put it around a donut so that the rubber band passes through the
center of the donut.
If I've got this rubber band on the sphere, I can always take it off the sphere with no
trouble.
If I've got the rubber band around the donut so that it passes through the center of the
donut, then there is no way I can remove that rubber band without either cutting it
or cutting the donut itself.
And so that's the fundamental topological difference between a donut and a sphere.
And this property of a donut is something that you also have in a coffee cup with a
handle.
We've got exactly that property.
If I take a rubber band so that it goes around the handle of the coffee cup, there is no way
of removing that rubber band without either cutting it or without breaking the handle.
So a coffee cup looks very much like a donut in this particular topological sense.
Now the Poincare conjecture was actually looking at the surface of a sphere in four-dimensional
space.
Now the surface of a sphere in three-dimensional space is two-dimensional.
So the surface of a sphere in four-dimensional space is going to be a three-dimensional object.
And I apologize, but I've got to move us into four dimensions.
It's very difficult to visualize what's going on there, but I'll ask you to bear with me.
And one of the ways of characterizing a sphere in four-dimensional space is exactly the same
idea.
If we take a rubber band or we take any closed curve on this three-dimensional sphere in
four-dimensional space, it's always possible to remove it.
Or topologically what is said is that if you've got a closed curve, you can always shrink
that closed curve down to a single point and then the closed curve disappears at that point.
Now the question that Poincare asked was, are there any other kinds of objects in four-dimensional
space that have this property that every closed curve can be shrunk down to a point without
being topologically equivalent to this sphere?
Topologically equivalent means kind of a rubber geometry, some way of stretching and bending
it so that you can turn this other object into a sphere.
Can you have another object with the property that every closed curve can be shrunk to a
point, but it is not in a fundamental way equivalent to a sphere?
This is the Poincare conjecture that in fact this uniquely determines the sphere in four-dimensional
space, and this was the big problem that was out there that Perlman eventually was able
to prove.
The Poincare conjecture itself is interesting, but of course what's most important in Perlman's
work are the tools that he developed, some very deep geometric and topological tools
that other people are now going to be able to apply to many other questions in topology
and geometry.
I've been talking about mathematics as linking the patterns that are inherent in the world
around us.
You've gotten a picture of mathematics as taking patterns from one area and patterns
from another area and beginning to see how they overlap and how you can extrapolate from
them, bringing together algebra and geometry and seeing what comes out of that, bringing
together questions in algebra and this idea of symmetries and transformations laying them
over each other and seeing what comes out of that.
Looking problems in analysis or calculus and looking at them from a geometric point
of view, looking at these elliptic functions as living on elliptic curves or living on
this particular tourist that I had talked about.
So mathematics is all about seeing how these patterns interrelate with each other.
And the problems of mathematics are something that people from outside of mathematics often
see as the focus of mathematics.
But in fact, for people like myself who are working in mathematics, it's all about exploring
these patterns.
And when I take two patterns and I manage to combine them and see something that nobody
else has seen, that's the great aha moment when you realize that you really are exploring
something very deep about the nature of the universe that nobody else has found.
And that's what convinces somebody to be a mathematician and to continue to be a mathematician.
I want to conclude by talking a little bit about one of the great mathematicians in the
world today, Sir Michael Atia.
His father was Lebanese, his mother was Scottish.
He was born in 1929.
He would go on to hold the civilian chair at Oxford.
Again, this is the chair that was once held by John Wallace and eventually would be held
by James Joseph Sylvester.
Atia then would go on and become master of Trinity College in Cambridge.
And he would also become the first director of the Isaac Newton Institute for the Mathematical
Sciences at Cambridge.
He's somebody who won a Fields Medal, he won the Abel Prize in 2004.
He's done important work in geometry, in algebra, analysis, and physics.
And I'd like to close with a quote.
Back in the 1980s, he was interviewed and was asked, how do you select a problem to study?
And his point in response was, I don't really look for problems, I look for patterns.
He responded, I think that presupposes an answer.
I don't think that's the way I work at all.
Some people may sit back and say, how do I solve this problem?
I don't.
I just move around in the mathematical waters, thinking about things, being curious, interested,
talking to people, stirring things up.
Things emerge and I follow them up.
Or I see something which connects up with something else I know about.
And I try to put them together and things develop.
I have practically never started off with any idea of what I'm going to be doing or
where it's going to go.
I'm interested in mathematics.
I talk, I learn, I discuss, and then interesting questions simply emerge.
I have never started off with a particular goal except the goal of understanding mathematics.
And I know that you cannot understand mathematics from these few lectures, but I hope I've communicated
some of the excitement of this field and why it's so engaging.
Thank you.
