Okay. When you make progress towards a valued goal, let's say we inhabit a shared narrative
and we're making progress towards our mutual stated goal. And when we see ourselves making
progress, we get a bit of a dopamine hit. Could you say that the fundamental reason
for the positively rewarding effect of that movement forward is that as I move forward
towards a goal, I decrease the entropy that still remains between me and the goal. And so is even
that reward? Is even that movement forward readable as an entropy reduction?
I mean, it's almost written into the mathematical meaning of the word. So if entropy just is
uncertainty, and as I get close to resolving that uncertainty, getting my fruit juice, pleasing my
wife, or being able to watch the news, if it's an epistemic reward, it is just expected surprise,
just is the uncertainty. And the closer you get, the more and the less uncertain you are.
And all they have to suggest exactly as you say, it's dopamine.
Hello, everyone. Thank you for tuning in to watch and listen. I have the great privilege
today of being able to talk with Dr. Carl Friston as an addition, let's say,
and a signal addition to the recent conversation I had with Andrew Huberman. Dr. Carl Friston is
arguably the world's most renowned neuroscientist, a professor at University College London. He is one
of the world's leading authorities on brain imaging. 90% of the work published in fields
employing such imaging relies on methods he pioneered. Dr. Friston is also well known for his
work on many of the topics we will discuss today. Work I find even more exciting, at least
conceptually speaking, than his work on brain imaging. We will discuss the ideas that concepts
and precepts, categories, that's another way of thinking about it, bind free energy or entropy,
the idea of computation, especially the kind of computation that approximates brain function
as hierarchical, the theory of predictive coding and active inference.
Welcome, Dr. Friston. It's very good of you to agree to talk to me on this podcast. I'm really
looking forward to it. That's a great pleasure to be here. Thank you. So let me start maybe by
helping people understand this idea of hierarchical computation and the binding of entropy.
And so if you could walk through that briefly, then I'll ask some questions if that seems appropriate.
Yeah, sure. The binding of free energy and entropy, that sounds delightfully Freudian,
and I don't mean that in a sort of disparaging sense. I think that some of the truisms and the
insights of that era have now proved themselves in modern formulations of computation, information,
processing, sense making in the brain. And one nice link there is to think of free energy
as surprise. So one way of looking at the way that we make sense of our world, bringing explanations,
concepts, categories, notions to the table that provide the best explanation for the
myriad of sensations to which we are exposed, is to see that process as a process of minimizing
surprise. So binding free energy, I think, can be read very simply as minimizing surprise.
But of course, to be surprised, you have to have something you predicted. You have to have a violation
of predictions. So immediately, you're in the game now of predictive processing,
predicting, what would I see if the world out there was like this, and then using the ensuing
prediction errors to adjust your beliefs and update your beliefs in the service of minimizing
those prediction errors or minimizing that surprise or minimizing that free energy.
And you artfully introduced the notion of hierarchy in that question, which I think speaks to
another fundamental point that in making sense of the world, in making those good predictions,
we have to have an internal model, sometimes called a world model, a model that can generate
what I would have seen if this was the state of affairs out there. And that notion of a
generative model, I think, is quite key and holds the attribute of hierarchy, simply in the sense
that we live in a deeply structured world, very dynamic world, a world composed largely of creatures
like ourselves that has this sort of hierarchical nested structure that has to be part of the
models that we bring to the table to understand it. Postmodernism is tearing our world apart.
The one thing that may be able to unite us is a mass return to our Judeo-Christian roots. At the
individual level, that means developing our prayer life. There's a ton of literature out there on
the benefits of secular New Age mindfulness meditation, but what isn't talked about nearly
enough is the power of a consistent prayer life. That's where Hallow comes into play. Hallow is
the number one Christian prayer app in the US and the number one Catholic app in the world.
Hallow features over 5,000 prayers and meditations, including daily prayers to help you build a
habit of prayer and gratitude, Bible reflections with Jeff Cavins and Father Mike Schmitz to help
you grow in knowledge and understanding, meditations to help you prepare for sleep and rest each day,
reflections with Bishop Barron and much more. Use Hallow as a foundational tool to grow in
gratitude and character each and every day. Try it free for three months by going to
Hallow.com slash Jordan. That's Hallow.com slash Jordan. Ground yourself in fundamental truths
with Hallow today. Okay, so I encountered these ideas, I would say first reading a book back in
1982 by a man named Jeffrey Gray, who was influenced by Norbert Weiner and by General
Cybernetic Theory and he regarded the hippocampus as at least as part of the central part of the
brain involved in contrasting expectation, let's say, the way you expect the world to lay itself
out with the way the world is actually laying itself out, indicating that surprise was a,
what was the prodroma to anxiety and that anxiety in some sense was an indicator of the magnitude
between the magnitude of mismatch between expectation and reality. So I want to ask you a
couple of questions about that because I thought a lot about Gray and I thought about Gray for
like 40 years after reading his book and also as a consequence of encountering your ideas
much later. The cybernetic model of expectation is predicated on the idea that you lay out an
expectation on the world and the expectation is a model and then you have incoming sensory data
and the sensory data is the world and that now and then there's a mismatch between the sensory
data and the expectation and then you have to modify either the representation or the action
pattern to reduce that mismatch. But then I thought, well, wait a second, there's a weird
lack in that formulation that's twofold. Number one, it isn't obvious to me that it's expectation.
It seems to me that it's more likely to be desire and that's a useful transformation of conceptualization
because if you use the word desire rather than the word expectation, you can infer that the models
that are being contrasted against the real world are models of motivation rather than cold cognitive
computation. And so, for example, if I'm interacting with a woman who I'm romantically
interested in, I'm attempting to bring about the realization of my desire, not my expectation.
And that's under the pressure, let's say, of the demand for sexual reproduction.
And so, the motivational state grips the desire. The desire manifests itself as a fantasy and then
that motivation is the minimization of the discrepancy between the actual world and the fantasy.
And then, so it's not exactly an expectation because it's more dynamic and alive. And then
one more, I hate to hammer you with all of this right at the beginning, but one more issue on
that front is the error because you could imagine, and I'm interested in how this
matches your hierarchical concept. If I make a mistake such that I don't minimize the relationship
between what's happening and my fantasy, one of the mistakes I might make is a mistake of perception,
not expectation or desire because I might be seeing the situation wrong.
And so, it seems to me that it's more realistic to say that what you're doing
is minimizing the mismatch between a model of what's happening, not sensory data itself,
but a model of the unfolding present contrasted with a fantasy and that the mismatch is what
indicates surprise or entropy. Now, I know that's a lot of questions to answer at the same time,
but that whole set of objections makes up a pattern.
It does. And despite the fact you introduced a whole bunch of really important concepts there,
I think it was nicely introduced in a coherent way. So, I'm just trying to remember all the
exciting things you've brought to the table. So, yeah, Jeffrey Gray, a great thinker in my
memory, sort of famed for understanding latent inhibition and sort of how you use these
surprise or these mismatches or these prediction errors. And it's interesting that you speak to
his conceptual roots in cybernetics because there's a very, very close connection between the things
that we're talking about. And the early formulations of cybernetics by people like Ross Ashby. So,
there's this good regulator theorem, which I think if your listeners don't know about,
I think they'd like it. I think you would like a lot. It's just the notion and provable notion
that to control an environment, you have to have a model of that environment to be able to
couple with, to engage with the environment. The degrees of freedom of your model have to
match those of the kind of environment in which you are, in which you're operating. So, I think
there's a deep connection there. The other thing, well, many things you brought, you mentioned that
you use the word fantasies a lot. And I think that's quite important because very often
I sell the brain as a fantastic organ, literally, because it is in the game of generating the right
kind of fantasies. And these are the fantasies. These are the motivated expectations that drive
our behavior. But in noting that, in noting that, you've also made a big move and an important move.
I know it's a move you want to make in terms of our conversation, but just to contextualize why
that is such an important move. You're talking about motivation, how our perception and action
are all contextualized by motivation and what we desire and what we want and what
the preferred outcomes of our acts. That's, I think, sort of the cracks. And we're probably
the focus of much of what we're going to be talking about. But just to say that vanilla
predictive processing and vanilla predictive coding does not deal with that. It just deals with
sense making. So, it's usually in the moment. As soon as you bring decisions and choices and
actions to the table, you're immediately in the game now of making inferences about the future,
the future that has yet to be observed. So, there are no prediction errors. It's just your expected
surprise, your expected entropy or expected free energy or your expected discrepancies between
what you fantasize should happen or what you prefer to happen and what you anticipate,
given your best sense making at the moment. So, I think that inactive aspect, that choice
really does profoundly change the game and takes us from simple sense making into the world of
choice and decision making and motivation. So, mathematically, the way that I would
articulate that as a physicist would be, okay, if we're in the game of minimizing surprise and
this mismatch, this discrepancy that you were describing in the moment, then presumably I will
now choose the things that I do in order to minimize the expected surprise in the future.
And the nice thing about articulating that is that the expected surprise, mathematically,
is just entropy. So, entropy, uncertainty, and I'm using entropy and uncertainty synonymously here,
they are the mathematical statement of the surprise I expect when I haven't actually seen
the outcome yet. So, in many senses, what you can say is that we are motivated to resolve our
uncertainty and that can be sort of, if you like, carved into two ways of minimizing uncertainty.
It can either be through choosing those behaviors that resolve uncertainty in the sort of
folk psychological sense, you know, watching the news, looking over there to see whether,
you know, my fantasies about the cause of that visual flatter in the periphery of my vision
was what I thought it was, was it a bird or a butterfly. But I think there's another side,
well, I know there's another side to that technically an expected information gain,
or an epistemic value. And that's, of course, I will avoid putting myself in surprising situations,
being very cold physiologically, or being unloved, or being embarrassed, or anything that I would
find surprising about myself. I will minimize my expected surprise by avoiding those kinds of things.
And I think that's, you know, my reading of what you were saying touches exactly on that.
A shocking number of stocks are in the red. You may think you're doing all the things right,
but in this volatile economy, many of our portfolios are just not looking good. Why? According to the
largest banks and firms in the world, people aren't diversifying the right way. The average annual
return of a classic 60 40 portfolio is down by nearly 20% this year. Goldman Sachs just released
shocking report declaring the 60 40 doomed for the next decade and announcing a radical reallocation
from stocks entirely. Goldman will instead be investing in real tangible assets, specifically
fine art. The last time inflation was this high, some segments of the art market appreciated more
than real estate and even gold at an astounding 33% per year on average. That's why this show
has partnered with masterworks. Masterworks results have been exceptional. Six exits for an
average net return of 29% to investors, even during COVID and in a bear market. As a result,
masterworks has had to acquire and release more art on their platform to meet demand.
But you can skip the wait list by going to masterworks.com and using promo code JBP.
That's masterworks.com promo code JBP or click the link in the description.
See important disclosures at masterworks.com slash cd.
I think people hem them, people hem themselves in, in their actions even in once people you see
this clinically is once people develop a conceptualization of themselves, which is a box in some
sense to put their variability in. They'll sometimes simplify themselves in terms of their
range of action merely so they don't surprise themselves. And so they artificially constrain
the range of their potential behavior and that can become maladaptive if their conception of
themselves is too narrow. That would be a good example of a mis, in some sense of a misperception
of the self, right? It's a narrowing of possibility. And so I should maybe try to explain to people a
little bit more about this issue of entropy. And so there's this notion that's come out of
theory of perception that any set of objects or any object for that matter can is different
from any other object and the same as any other object in a multitude or even a near infinite
number of ways. And so you could think, I always think of two goblets standing on a table and you
might say, well, they're identical, but they're not. And you can tell they're not if you wanted to
paint them in a photorealistic manner, you'd find that the surface of one goblet is very much
unlike the surface of another and you'd have to render that at high resolution in order to
represent it accurately on a canvas. And then they differ in weight and they differ in the
regularity of the surface and they might differ in age. There's all sorts of differences between
them that you might not think are germane or relevant, but that's really the issue is why do
you regard some similarities as crucial and some differences as irrelevant. And so here's something
I'd like to run by you. So would it be reasonable to say, imagine a hierarchy of perception and
conception. So the idea is, well, two goblets are identical. If I can drink out of either of them
using the same pattern of perception and action. So that's kind of an indication of the entropy
constrained by the notion of wishing to drink. Any two things are substitutable as long as they
leave me with the ability to drink as an axiom of my current action set. And that's something like
maybe a computational definition of resemblance. Because I can't understand how you can bind
resemblance otherwise if any two things differ in a near infinite number of ways. They differ in
terms of the microstates that they might be composed of. That would be a way of thinking about it from
the perspective of entropy theory. So if they're substitutable within a higher hierarchical
conception, then they're identical perceptually and conceptually. So do you know the change
blindness experiments that Dan Simon managed at Harvard? Yeah, well, that's a good example.
So I'll just run through one of those experiments for the people listening. So imagine you put a
camera on a two-story building and it's looking down over a university yard. And now imagine that
you have tourists walking through the yard and an undergraduate research associate comes up to
a tourist with a map and asks the tourist to help him find his way. And while that's happening,
some other experimental compatriots walk between the person who's asking for directions and the
tourist carrying a door, two of them, and the person asking the question grabs the door hidden from
the tourist and continues walking with the door and the person who was carrying the door stands
there and continues asking the question with the map. And what Simon found was that the largest
percentage of people, the majority of people, do not notice that the student has been swapped
in the middle of the conversation. And the reason for that has to be that the perception of the
student by the tourist is something like generic student asking for directions. And any student
who's asking for directions at that point will fulfill that function or act as a player in that
story. And so there's no reason to be surprised by the transformation, even though, quote, it's a
different person. And that seems to add credence to this notion of a theory of identity or resemblance.
Does that seem reasonable to you? It seems very reasonable. So mathematically, I think you could
describe that exactly in terms of finding those latent states or categories or structures or
resemblance that are conserved over different contexts. And that enables you to have a simple
but apt for purpose model of your world. So if you can find the causal structure that is as simple
as possible, that provides an adequate explanation of your sensorium, then that is the good model.
I mean, literally, as a statistician, that would be the model with the greatest evidence,
the accuracy minus the complexity. You also brought something interesting into the conversation,
again, which was what I would read as affordance. Do you like sort of Gibsonian notions of afford?
Yeah. So you were saying that this ability to extract the latent structure, the essence,
the resemblances that are conserved over different contexts, they have at very low
levels of the hierarchy, these microscopic or detailed differences, but at higher levels of
the hierarchy, they are the same kind of thing. They have the same affordance. I sit on this,
I drink this, I love that, I don't like that. What you've done, though, again, in terms of talking
about affordances, bring action to the fore. I can perceive lots of inferences in my world.
There are categories and there are exemplars of particular categories and I can unpack that
hierarchically. Many people think that's how the visual hierarchy, the cortical hierarchy
that subtends or subserves visual perception and visual synthesis is organised. But what you're
saying is this also holds true in the way that I plan to act and the outcomes of those actions and
all of these, if I get those inferences out, then they are the right kinds of affordances
that speak to my model of the way I'm going to behave in the situation. Putting centre stage,
the self model, what kind of thing am I and what will I do in this situation and is my model good
enough? Is it too rigid? Should it be more flexible? All these are crucial questions in terms of
updating not just your beliefs about what you're doing and the context in which you're operating,
but the kind of thing you are and whether you've got the right simple explanations,
whether they should be more complex or simpler. Right. The optimal simple explanation is
the least complex affordance necessary for the operation at hand. And so then we could talk
about affordances a little bit so people who are watching and listening might think that you
see the object and infer the meaning. But the theory of affordances would suggest that you see
the meaning and infer the object or something like that. It reverses it and that what you
see first is something like functional utility. But I think you can bring both those positions
together if you think that what we see in the world are patterns that have functional utility.
Now, there's all sorts of patterns that don't have functional utility or that only have potential
functional utility. And that might be, you might consider patterns that don't have specified
functional utility as something like the infinite domain of potential empirical facts.
If a fact is something like the accurate identification of a pattern that exists
stably across contexts. But then we can't see all the set of all possible facts because it's way too
large. And so we want to reduce that further to that set of patterns that offer us a grip on the world.
And Gibson, who wrote an ecological approach to visual perception, talked a lot about
affordances, tools and obstacles in particular, if I remember correctly.
But I'm wondering as well, is the domain of affordance, here's a way of conceptualizing the
domain of affordance. It's tool, those things that you can get a grip on the world with and move
forward towards a desired goal. Obstacles, so things that get in your way of different size.
And then pathways. And the pathways, so I would say the pathways are littered with tools and
obstacles. And the description of a pathway that's littered with tools and obstacles, that's a story.
And so these, these, it looks to me like those hierarchical conceptual boxes
are best conceptualized as something like stories. If they're an amalgam of affordance and pattern,
then they're not either just an object or just the subject. They're the bringing of the two together.
And the story is where the pattern and the purpose meet. That's a, that's a way of thinking about it.
And I would think maybe even when you perceive a tool, it seems to me that what you're perceiving
is something like a micro story. You know, like if I perceive this pen, say, well, that's obviously,
it's an objective fact that this pen exists. And it is insofar as the pen is a stable pattern
in time and space. But it's the function of the pen that makes it a pen and gives the unity
that it gives the unity to the perception. Because you might ask, well, why is the pen
a pen this way and a pen this way and also a pen this way? And speak, well, because, because it's,
it's objective characteristics transform tremendously when it's moved or when it's
illuminated differently, but its function remains constant. And so I think even an affordance is
a micro story. And so a tool is a positive, it's a comedy. That's a way of thinking about it.
A tool is a comedy and an obstacle is a tragedy. And, and we lay out the world like that, even at
the levels of our fundamental, even at the level of our fundamental perceptions. Is there any,
what do you think of the idea of a concept or a percept as a, as a story? Because you see,
the reason I like that, the reason I think this is so important is that there's an entire literature
on narrative, of course, the entire literature on literature is about narrative. And if it is the
case that our fundamental concepts are narrative in, in their, in their, in their origin and their
nature, then that allows us to lay the narrative world on top of the objective world. And I think
that's a, well, it would be lovely if that was a possibility. It would alleviate the terrible
tension between them. And of course, the question comes up was, what's the best narrative? But
that's something we can also talk about in terms of hierarchical processing.
Yeah, I think there's some deep truths there. And a number of ways I could sort of paraphrase
what you've just said. So this notion of micro stories and narratives, I think that is exactly
the plans into the future that we were talking about before that, you know, choosing the right ones.
And, and mathematically, you can think of that exactly as you articulated as, as a path.
One perspective on that is that of Richard Feynman, in terms of the pathological formulation of
quantum electrodynamics, where he was playing exactly the same game, finding the path of
least action, the path with the least obstacles, the path that isn't the most fluent, the most
egos, a syntonic, leading to exactly what we talked about before, either the information gain
or avoiding surprising outcomes, which, you know, I would read as the obstacles that I don't go
there. That's not the kind of thing that I'm in. So if you, if you read our active engagement with
the world or active inference, just as a process of committing to the right paths, the right plans,
the right narratives, the right micro stories, I think that is the essence of what one could argue,
sort of sentient behavior and existence. So I, I would be put myself very much,
or I would certainly find it very easy to commit to that kind of formulation.
I think a lot, a lot of other people would as well in different fields. So what you're talking
about, you mentioned before about, you know, all the facts that are noble, and yet we only
register and recognize those that matter, essential variables, for example. Change blindness is a nice
example of that. You don't see student of a particular identity, personal identity change.
It's just a student. You only see and you only model and rehearse and sample the world using the
level, the simple level explanation that is apt for getting those right paths forward.
Yes. Well, and it would be lovely if, if your hierarchical conceptualization consisted of
micro stories, let's say, that were flexible enough so that they would apply across a very
wide range of microstate transformations, because then you can use the same simple model
in all sorts of different situations. So you might say, well, if you could extract out a universal
ethic for dealing with people, then you could apply that ethic to everyone that you met.
And then, and that idea might help us triangulate in on what might constitute a universal higher
order ethical narrative. And if you imagine that my interactions with people are generally
constrained by the necessity of iterating the interactions across time, and then you might say,
by the additional constraint of iterating the interactions across time so that they increase
in their utility. And so then you might say, well, how do you have to treat someone or everyone,
for that matter, so that that reality makes itself manifest as you move forward into the future?
And I would say, well, that looks like something like genuine altruistic reciprocity.
No, Franz De Waal, I had a chance to talk to Franz De Waal about his work with chimpanzees.
You know, and chimpanzee alpha males are often parodied as dominant in a sort of Marxist sense,
power driven. And it's the most dominant male chimps, or the one with the most physical prowess,
the biggest tyrant in some sense, who gets to dominate all the other chimps, and who in
consequence has preferential reproductive access. And so it's the theory of power and social structure
and reproduction all tangled up into one. But the problem with that is it's not true.
So De Waal has shown very, very clearly that, first of all, sometimes the alpha chimps, so to
speak, can be the smallest male in the troop. Frequently, he's allied with a powerful female,
and he is generally the most reciprocal individual in the troop, very concerned with the long-term
maintenance of social relations, and very good at making peace, not war. Now that doesn't mean he
doesn't have, let's call it, power at his disposal, especially in coalitions, if necessary. But
De Waal has shown very clearly that the alpha chimps who rely on power and force are very likely to
rule over an unstable polity and to meet an extremely violent end in the relatively short term.
And so if your fantasy about the future, let's say, is motivated by an underlying motivational
state, it could be hunger, it could be thirst, it could be sexual need, it could be rage,
it could be the desire to make anxiety decrease, then you could imagine that there are ways of
interacting in the world that satisfy multiple motivational states simultaneously, and then
you could imagine that those modes of being satisfy multiple states of motivation simultaneously
in a social context, so also for other people, and then you could say, and that make that occur
as it iterates forward into the future, and then you could say, well, you want to extract out a
representation that allows you all those advantages simultaneously, and it looks to me like something,
maybe that's marked, here's some hypotheses, it's marked by the sense of active engagement that
you might have in a good conversation, it's marked by the sense of the emergence of the spirit of
play, and Yacht-Panczep has detailed out the psychophysiological structures underlying the
play circuit, it would underlie something like maximal, no, optimized stress, so you talked about
minimizing predictive error, but here's a variant, what if you optimize predictive error so that
you lay out a fantasy on the future, and then work so that there's just enough predictive error
so that you encounter something you don't expect at a micro level, small enough that you can manage
it, but large enough so that it expands the confines of your hierarchical presuppositions,
and maybe you do that, see, I was thinking about that relationship to play because if you're on a
team and you're playing against a well-matched opponent, the opponent pushes you right to the
limit of your skill, not past it, right, so it's not too stressful, but it isn't exactly in that
situation that surprises minimize, it's more like a little entropy is allowed to enter the system
at just enough rate and intensity so that you can push your development in a manner that doesn't
stress you too badly physiologically. Yeah, so you've brought in about sort of four really
important themes here, the two key things that you've brought to the table there were sort of
putting sentient creatures together, so you're talking about social interactions now and social
hierarchism and sense making when the other, the thing I'm making sense about is also trying
to make sense of me, I think that's a really important sort of and challenging sort of move
there, you've also brought to this sort of highlighted this paradox that we might be in
the game or we might be seen as in the game of trying to minimize our surprise, minimize our
prediction errors, and yet we seek out novelty, so I think there's a fundamental paradox there
that needs resolving, I think you've, in your setting up of the issue, I think you've implicitly
resolved it, there is I think a very simple way of resolving that and it comes back to this sort of
isomorphism between expected surprise and uncertainty, and I notice you also use the
word angst and anxiety, to my mind uncertainty just is a state of, or recognize as a state of
angst or anxiety, so that sort of imperative to minimize expected surprise just is choosing or
can be complied with by choosing those plans that minimize uncertainty, and what would that look like?
It would basically look like epistemic of responding to epistemic affordances
that resolve that uncertainty, so I think that's the kind of surprise that we aspire to, it's the
novelty that affords the opportunity to resolve uncertainty and thereby resolve angst, and if
that's true then taking it to your context, how would I do that if I was in a social hierarchy of
chimpanzees or I was in any social setting, in one sense the simplest way to resolve my surprise
and make the world as predictable as possible, would initially be to resolve my uncertainty
about you by asking you the right kinds of questions that allows me to sort of put you
in a particular category in one of my narratives, my pro-social narratives about the kinds of people
that I can talk about, but also ultimately I'm going to try and make you like me or make me like
you, because the closer we are that if we can share the same narratives in the same language,
then together we're mutually predictable, so that mathematically would be sort of like a
generalized synchrony from a social neuroscience perspective on dynamic interactions, it's basically
aligning ourselves so that we come to know each other and that we can dance and synchronize and
exchange, and you know after a while I don't need to ask you any more questions and you don't need to
ask me any more questions, we are now on the same page singing from the same hymn sheet,
the same generative model, the same world model, the same kinds of narratives, having said that of
course there is also in the background the putative or potential novelty of finding out what somebody
is not like me like, so I think asking questions about the right kinds of narrative that resolve
uncertainty, responding to epistemic affordance, novelty seeking, information seeking whilst at
the same time still avoiding those surprising states of loss or physiological extremists,
put that into a social context and I think you've got some really interesting questions
and possibly a structure and a framework to understand social organization and sort of
information exchange and self-organization, not at the level of just the individual negotiating,
negotiating with his or her body, but negotiating with another individual with a very similar kind
of body. I spent a lot of time studying Jean Piaget and his description of how
cognitive structures organize themselves across time and you might imagine a two-year-old as
a collection of micro narratives, each of which are driven by a somewhat independent motivational
state and so two-year-olds will cycle between being too hot and too cold and too tired and too
playful and too enthusiastic and too anxious without any real overarching integration and
they start to manifest that ability to integrate those already integrated motivational states,
which are probably in large part hypothalamically controlled, they start to be able to integrate
those into a continuous narrative through time and in different locales at two and so then they
start to be able to play by themselves and so but it's at three or thereabouts when they can
adopt a shared narrative with someone else so a little boy and a little girl might get together
and the little boy will offer to play or the little girl and say would you like to play house
and so that specifies the goal and then the little girl has to say yes it has to be voluntary
and then the little boy might say well I'll be the dad and you be the mum
and then they can integrate their two identities within that overarching
concept and so they can develop mutual understanding that way and it's partly because
you said earlier that the best way to make someone else predictable and you to them which
is also equally useful in some sense is to be inhabited by the same conceptual structure
and that's sort of what we do when we decide to play a game together it's like here's the
game here are the principles by which we're going to operate those are the rules of the game
and if you're operating by those principles and I'm operating by those principles simultaneously
then we're going to share perceptual reality because that's instantiated in relationship to the game
and we're going to share emotional response and so I can now predict you if you're playing
the same game merely by reading off of me because the same thing and I think this is what we do
when we go to a movie and we watch the hero we adopt his hierarchy of attentional prioritization
and then we can feel the same emotions because we're in the same state and we really are like
neurophysiologically we're in an inelegant state and then the understanding comes not from me
deriving inferences about the character's motivations because of his actions but by me
adopting his goal or his story and then reading off the emotions I have which are now isomorphic with
his and I think children are doing the same thing when they play a game and I would say that you
and I in so far as we're playing the same game in this conversation are very likely to remain
predictable to one another and also to occupy the same emotional states simultaneously similar at
least similar enough so we're not jarring and off-putting to each other yes I will I wanted to
say that that's a perfect example of a shared narrative and you crucially point out that you're
talking about theory of mind and one of the easiest ways to get to theory of mind is just to
commit to the hypothesis that you are very much like me so what I would feel if I sensed what
you sensed is going to be a very good proxy for my inference about your feelings and of course
making inferences about you just is theory of mind I also wonder whether you're going to
develop that argument sort of your almost pre stages of Piagetian development just to
know how a newborn infant starts to make sense of its world and the very emergence of selfhood
that self is distinct from mum or the rest of the world getting into notions of motor babbling
you know babies that will rattle their toys to say yes I caused that as opposed to mum causing
that yeah so you know I think that what you're talking about the the Newmont being the ability
to actually recognize oh you are another that is like me and if we can share the same narrative then
there is some not only a a deep connection and a communication but also very sophisticated theory
of mind that would be the Newmont but en route you've actually described a mechanism as say a
structure learning learning the structure of this this hierarchical world model or self model
that entails the emergence of selfhood in and of itself you know in order for me for us to take
turns we both have to have this fantasy that I am me and you are you and I have to recognize I am me
and you are you and we have to take turns so now it's your turn right so those are the axiomatic
preconditions of that game and the axiomatic preconditions some of them are you exist as a
separate entity and I exist as a separate entity but we can be joined together in a shared vision
and one of the just for those of you who are watching and listening to understand is well this is true
and we establish a shared two people establish a shared narrative and that shared narrative
simplifies the world and that simplification constrains entropy then that shared narrative
constrains terror and so you might say well why is it possible to be calm in the presence of
someone else given their infinite complexity and also their almost infinite capacity for mayhem
and the answer well it is well insofar as the two of you establish and inhabit a shared narrative
then all that entropic complexity is constrained by the desire let's say to keep the shared narrative
intact and then you might also point out that if you and I our shared narrative might be
it would be worthwhile to have an interesting conversation because both of us might learn
something and we might have the opportunity to bring a bunch of other people along for the ride
which seems like a good additional bonus and so we both come to this conversation with that
story in mind and then we can play the game as a consequence and even though we don't know each
other because we assume goodwill on each other's part not only are we not anxious in each other's
presence apart from whatever additional relevant features might have to do with being on a podcast
but we can also take some pleasure in joint movement towards the shared goal because
the dopamine system to me seems to indicate progress towards a shared to the instantiation
of a vision it's something like that and then if you're acting in a manner that makes the vision
appear to me making itself manifest then that's rewarding and that reward has a
an existential element a phenomenological element you can feel it feels good but then the dopamine
what it does neurochemically seems to be to track the neural systems that were activated
just prior to the manifestation of the success and make them grow
and so once you establish a shared narrative if you negotiate it successfully you also increase the
probability that the neural architecture manifesting that vision making that
manner vision manifest in skill and apprehension is more likely to dominate in the future more likely
to take priority in the future yeah you you no no go go ahead well no i'm just noting you've
you've now sort of brought in dopamine as an important neurochemical
part of the anatomy of sense making and and exchange so i just wanted to acknowledge that because
in my world the way that one might describe that and interpret all the empirical evidence
is very much along the line of this notion of pursuing a narrative and in this instance
a dyadic narrative or a narrative about how i should behave in a dyadic context and if everything
if i resolve my uncertainty and just to open brackets just to come back to your nice observation
about we might learn something from this exchange i think that speak to that to that novelty bonus
you were talking about a bonus and certainly in machine learning this information gain this
epistemic affordance that is part of the good narratives and the good paths into the future
would be seen exactly as this sort of novelty bonus so that is part of the reward so if in
this exchange we are both realising you use the word instantiating instantiating or realising
committing to the right narratives literally a narrative of verbal exchange or linguistic
exchange here and that secures a resolution of uncertainty about what you think or indeed about
what i think then that will be rewarding in the sense that it's minimising uncertainty minimising
expected surprise minimising if you like entropy in the sense that you originally introduced it
so i think that's an important if you like generic thing concept that you bring to the
table here that all these ways of looking at good narratives and good engagement with the world
i think are all very internally consistent especially when placed in terms of interpersonal
interactions and they also actually have biophysical correlates in our brains and you've
identified a really important one which which is dopamine and we could talk about and i suspect
you would want to talk about what's special about dopamine relative to all the other chemicals
are responsible for message passing and belief propagation and sort of getting the the hierarchical
fantasies aligned in order to explain what i'm sensing what i'm hearing and indeed what i'm saying
so so do you do you want to elaborate on the rule of dopamine i'd be more than happy to hear
what you have to say about that so because we talked about a surprise minimisation but this is
this is reward and reinforcement and so and and the and the propagation of growth and that can
happen artificially i mean if you dose yourself with cocaine you can produce a cocaine seeking
narrative that's instantiated in your brain and that's actually what constitutes the addiction
in some sense it's a cocaine seeking personality that's a unit dimensional monster that now comes
to dominate your neurophysiology in conditions of deprivation that's a very bad idea it's you
you've you've you've generated an internal parasite that's fed on this externally applied
chemical but so if you could elaborate on the role of dopamine i'd be more than happy to hear
what you what you have to say about that yeah absolutely um just picking up on that nice notion
of a cocaine addiction being sort of parasitic i i think that's absolutely right it's sort of
almost as if there's been a short circuit a hijacking of the normal mechanisms that we would
you know our brains would certainly bring bring to the fore to actually choose and register the
choice of the right paths forward so for me reward just is that minimisation or realisation
minimisation of expected surprise or uncertainty so it is intrinsically rewarding to resolve
uncertainty and to secure and seek out those novel things or avoid those unfamiliar and
characteristic obstacle like states that you know states that do not characterise me so i you know
dopamine i think um red light that just is the fact you have resolved uncertainty so if i get a
cue in the world um say a conditioned stimulus that tells me oh i now know exactly what i'm going
to do next i'm going to if i'm a little monkey in an experimental paradigm i'm going to receive a
drop of juice and i'm going to drink that um if i am um um somebody engaging in a social conversation
then i know exactly where this conversation is going that's great i know exactly what i want to say
so i think that's when you get the dopamine blush that resolution of uncertainty suddenly you see
the path forward clearly and it is exactly and i'm using path in your sense of the micro story
that the micro story that's responding to the affordances what's special about dopamine though
well it's a neuromodulator so it plays the role in the brain as not um of sending information from
this neuronal structure to this neuronal structure or this uh set of neurons to this set of neurons
but greasing the pathway by setting the excitability of the game by being the um the chemical mechanism
by which you will switch on this set of messages or that method set of messages another way of
saying that is it sensitises for example let's come back to your sort of hierarchical structure
that the the micro stories are informing or perhaps the mismatch um at the lowest level
the prediction is at the lowest level are inducing belief updates at the higher level
to get to these simpler more abstracted inferences you were talking about before
but how much does the high level listen to the low level and how much does the low level inherit
or um respond to top down constraints afforded by your simple high level abstractions
your which could of course be be the narrative so chemicals like dopamine and i and i wonder
whether you also want to talk about things like serotonin um in relation to things such as depression
and learn helplessness all of these neurochemicals have one thing in common their role in the brain
is just to sensitise one set of neuronal representations to messages from another
set of neural neural representations when placed in your hierarchical context that can have a
profound effect on the balance between how much you're attending to what's going on out there
so you're the micro uh the micro structure the low level sensory uh um um constructions that um um
or categorisations that say you might um think are being played out in the early visual cortex
or the primary auditory cortex relative to your um coherent deeply structured narratives about me
in a particular world so you know i would imagine that you know a lot your where you might want to
go with this is is just thinking well how might that go wrong and um what would that look like
if i had an abnormality of these neuromodulatory transmitter systems in the brain and of course
you've highlighted one of the key uh or a key abnormality that which is induced induced by
drugs of abuse or misuse nowadays um such as cocaine so that's a i think you know drug addiction
is a really good example of what tends to happen if you mess with these really important systems
mm-hmm yeah well cocaine addiction prioritizes the micro behaviors associated with cocaine
self administration prioritizes those over all other potential behavioral microstates
over all other stories and it does that neurologically on the serotonin front so
here's here's a pattern of depressive cognition and we you can think about it as the collapse of
a hierarchy so let's say you have a tiff with your wife and if you're operating let's say normally
in terms of your neurological hierarchy you might say well you know i'm just having an off day or
and having an off hour and it's only one little upset it's only one little anomaly it's only one
little surprise i can safely ignore it but that isn't what a depressive person will think a depressive
person will think oh my god i just had another fight with my wife i'm doing nothing but fighting
with my wife lately my marriage isn't going very well i've always fought with my wife too much in
the past and i'm fighting a lot with my friends i'm not a really good person to get along with
i mess up everything i do i've always messed up everything i do i'm going to keep messing up
everything i do in the present because that's what i'm like and there's no hope at all for
me to change in the future and you can see that an error that could have been bounded at a low
level which is well maybe i didn't have enough to eat in the last two hours and so i'm a little
irritable has cascaded through the entire hierarchy of self conceptualization and so imagine that
each level of the hierarchy has to be protected against the propagation of error messages from
a lower level and then imagine each level of the hierarchy has a resistance level that's set by
something like the tonic level of serotonin so the higher the serotonin level corresponding to
higher social status by the way the more error has to accrue at a given level of analysis before a
message will propagate up the hierarchical system and so one of the things my wife and i have worked
out in terms of modulating our reactivity to each other and to other people is well when should
you respond to a disruption in social communication when should you call someone on it and our answer
has been something like the rule of three that's fairly typical of narrative descriptions of such
things if it happens once you can ignore it it's just random fluctuation if it happens twice you
could mark it but still discount it but if it happens three times it establishes a pattern and
then something has to be called into question so i might say if if i'm interacting with my wife and
it doesn't go well three times in a row i might say to her i tried to be friendly three times in a
row and i've been rebuffed what that indicates to me is something else is going on here that's
like a Freudian slip in some sense it's like i think this is what's happening i want this to
be happening but it's not happening here's the evidence three instances thus we have to
reconfigure the narrative that we're using to structure the space and we have to say well what
actually is happening here what needs to be resolved and so that's a and then maybe and you
don't say well we were rude to each other three times today therefore our marriage is over and
we're both terrible people because that would be leaping too far up in the hierarchy you might say
well is there something else going on in the background that's disturbing you so that you're
more irritable in relationship to me that's part of a different conceptual structure and maybe the
other person will say well you know i i didn't have a very good day at work i was arguing with
my boss he's a bit tyrannical then you can go off on that narrative and try to resolve it but
but you can see depression as the collapse of that resistance of the hierarchy to the propagation
of errors upward and so when you give people serotonergic reuptake inhibitors what they seem
to do arguably is make each level of the hierarchy more resistant to the propagation of upward error
and the reason i tied that into social status is because we know that animals that have higher
social status and therefore occupy a more secure position in the social and environmental hierarchy
are more resistant to anomaly partly because they can rest comfortable in the supposition that their
superordinate status actually means that they're globally safer they have better social relations
they have better access to necessary environmental resources the world isn't as dangerous a place
and so you can imagine that your brain computes how likely an error message is to propagate upward
partly by looking at your social status which would be the value that other people have attributed
to you by their distributed computation and it does that with trait neuroticism which is your own
genetically mediated mostly partially at least genetically mediated initial propensity for those
error messages to propagate up the hierarchy you might say they're more likely to propagate up the
hierarchy the internal representational hierarchy of women and women are more sensitive to negative
emotion than men and i think the reason for that is is because they have to take care of infants
it makes sense for them to be more sensitive to smaller errors of prediction because the
consequences for someone who's truly vulnerable an infant can be cataclysmic and so anyways there's
a lot in that but that's that's a relation a theory of the relationship between hierarchical
processing of entropy and the proclivity for depression yeah there is a lot there
but it all makes perfect sense from the point of view of hierarchical inference in the brain
and particularly hierarchical predictive coding so if you indulge me i'm just going to say exactly
what you said but using slightly different words because i think that that notion that you've just
described and its implications for things like depression has a lot of construct validity in
relation to sort of more machine learning artificial intelligence formulations of this
hierarchical processing so one way of articulating that insight is to think of the the message passing
in a hierarchy that literally is our brain under the rubric or predictive coding so
in this in this sort of framework or scheme the idea is that each level of the hierarchy
it receives information from below and it tries to explain away the information
based upon top-down predictions and that which cannot be explained is in suing prediction
errors so these are the mismatches you were referring to before and then these prediction
errors are used to revise beliefs or representations sub-personal beliefs or
representations at the higher level at the more abstract level until the top-down predictions
are more apt to explain away what's going on below now the key thing about this architecture
well there are a number of key things and we've spoken in depth about about a number of them
but you know framing like this then the game of minimizing surprise the mate the game of
is just the game of minimizing prediction errors but how are you doing that well
you're explaining away what's going on down there based upon higher level hypotheses or
belief structures or expectations or representations in your hierarchy the key aspect of this sort of
message passing schemes predictive coding scheme is that it really matters how much weight you
afford to the prediction errors that are passed and ascend the hierarchy you use the word sort of
cascading up the hierarchy and this is exactly the image that a an engineer would have when building
a predictive coding machine and the degree to which they cascade up is exactly proportional
to the gain or the sensitivity that is set by the neuromodulators in this instance serotonin
so the resistance now is set by having entrenched if you like beliefs about this at this level of
the hierarchy relative to this level the hierarchy that is mediated by decreasing your sensitivity
to the ascending prediction errors so if I if I read your your concept well let's take depression
I also like to talk about psychedelics because they act upon exactly the same neurotransmitter
systems but let's let's just take let's take depression which is a particularly pernicious I
think sort of set of narratives to find yourself in because I'll just cut to the doom onto this
argument there because you know in many senses this this predictive coding formulation when put
in the context of me discovering and learning and optimizing my models of the world is all
about accumulating evidence for my explanations that are updated in a way that minimize the
prediction errors but in accumulating evidence I have to expose myself I have to choose to expose
myself to the world I have to actively sense and go out there depression is pernicious because
of course a lot of the symptoms of depression prevent you going getting evidence that you're
not this kind of person or that you could have coped with this particular scenario so depression
I think a little bit like the cocaine using that it has a slightly self-subverting or self-maintaining
aspect that sort of hijacks the normal ways that we get out of it but just to come back to this sort
of I think quite fundamental notion of sort of inducing either through physiological setting
of that resistance or that what we call precision so we call it the precision it's the inverse
uncertainty it's the the reliability that you can afford these ascending prediction errors that
tell you you've got to change your mind you've got to find a new way of coping either in a marital
relationship or or just in terms of where you're actually looking you know from many many different
levels so this notion of precision translates into exactly what the neuromodulators control which is
the excitability of the neuronal cells that are broadcasting the prediction errors to the next
level and as such that looks very much like attention in in that you know we were talking
before about sort of change blindness and we just don't seem to be able to attend to things that are
irrelevant to the extent we don't even notice changes when they occur if then we don't we don't
assign them the right kind of informativeness or salience or precision that is necessary to
explain the narrative that's unfolding before us so one way of reading this sort of this state
this certain allergic state or continuum where these high level hierarchically high level beliefs
are recalcitrant or insensitive to the lower level information is the remarkable and important
capacity to ignore stuff that is irrelevant and what you're saying is when it happens three times
perhaps I shouldn't be ignoring it anymore and I now have to redeploy the precision the neuromot
refocus my neuromodulatory systems perhaps away from serotonin at the top and perhaps more to say
acetylcholine at the bottom just given the anatomy of these neurotransmitter systems
that would indeed render me in a state where I'm now much more attentive to what's actually going
on out there and what is actually going on out there will have will engender prediction errors
that will change my mind or indeed change my my gerative model that you know that entails this
hierarchical structure so I think everything you've said makes perfect sense from the perspective
of the mechanics of belief updating and structure learning and in the brain seen through the lens
of an engineer who thinks about the brain as a predictive processing or coding machine
so what does acetylcholine do what does acetylcholine do you you contrasted acetylcholine with serotonin
and you you associated acetylcholine with increased precision of attention focused outward
and and and that's at the lower levels of the hierarchy yeah so this is a vast simplification
but it I think it's a sort of a useful mnemonic so if you if you think about the hierarchy that
that you were describing before and you now want to discriminate between a situation where all my
high-level beliefs are insensitive to changes at the lower levels so this would be say the the
dominant alpha male very very self-confident has very precise what we sometimes in a Bayesian reading
of this predictive coding scheme called prior beliefs prior beliefs this is the way I behave
this is the way you behave and I am going to realize instantiate those those fantasies by
behaving in this way and indeed that's what normally happens so I'm very confident and that
translates into a high degree of prior precision which could be mediated by things like serotonin
the equivalent neurotransmitter at the lower level is often just looking at the neuro anatomy
and the neurochemistry and physiological experiments there's a similar role might be
played by acetylcholine so you can think of if you like too much prior precision as being mediated by
serotonergic neurotransmission and of course you know as well as I do that it's you know it's a
very complicated game with different receptor subtypes and sort of inverted u behavior so I'm
not saying it's more or less but certainly rests upon the way that you deploy your serotonergic
firing that will have a profound influence on the higher-level prior beliefs that exactly the same
kind of role may be ascribed for cholinergic neurotransmission from the nucleus basillus
of mineheart which is another neuromodulator so you've got dopamine you've got serotonin
you've got adrenaline or norepinephrine you have oxytocin there are lots of them and they may all
have particular roles in setting the precision or the recalcitrance or the sensitivity at different
hierarchical levels so it's generally in my world if you like if you think of serotonin doing one
thing then the complement of that is that the acetylcholine's doing it in the in the inverse
way so it's sort of like a yin yang so it because when I talk about attention at the periphery
it's likely that that does sorry at the low level of the hierarchy it's likely that that does rely
upon intact cholinergic neurotransmission with possibly a barren serotonergic neurotransmission
that may be due to psychopathology or it could be due to taking drugs that affect say 5H22a
receptors like like all the psychedelics you know psilocybins for example okay so I want to go in
I've got three directions to go in now the first question that's been lurking in the back of my
mind for a while is okay when you make progress towards a valued goal let's say we inhabit a
shared narrative and we're making progress towards our mutual stated goal and when we see ourselves
making progress we get a bit of a dopamine hit could you say that the fundamental reason
for the positively rewarding effect of that movement forward is that as I move forward
towards a goal I decrease the entropy that still remains between me and the goal and so is even
that reward is even that movement forward readable as an entropy reduction yeah absolutely because
I'm closer now so there's okay okay so I mean I didn't know I didn't understand that before okay okay
that I mean it's it's almost written into the the mathematical meaning of the word so if entropy
just is uncertainty and as I get close to resolving that uncertainty getting my fruit juice pleasing my
wife or you know being able to watch the news you know if it's an epistemic reward it is just
expected surprise just is the uncertainty and the closer you get the the more and the less
uncertain you are and all they have to suggest exactly because the well the closer you get
the fewer things you have to compute in order to get there so that's a good working definition
of entropy it's like I have to do less I have to handle less doubt between me and my eventual
destination so that okay so that's cool so that reduces dopaminergic reward to a subset of entropy
reduction right and we should point out you know living creatures are always fighting
entropy they're trying to violate the laws of thermodynamics in some not fundamentally but in
some local sense by insisting upon the maintenance of order in the face of this proclivity for things
to go every which way at once and so all right so movement towards movement forward towards
a shared goal that's also going to reduce the entropy between us say because it means if I can
rely on you to be to accompany me as I move forward that means I can predict you better it also means
that both of us are now in a situation that's less entropic because there's less variability between
you and me and the joint us and that shared goal and so I've fortified my belief in your
reliability and I've reduced my apprehension of your entropy yeah a physicist would love that
because of course the nice thing about entropy and free energy which you know we're here sort of
reading as surprise and prediction errors is an extensive quantity so your free energy and my
free energy or your entropy and my entropy we just have to add them together because they're
extensive and then our free energy is exactly the sum of our free energy so if we can both render our
mutual worlds more predictable and less surprising then our joint free energy will
will fall and this you know this is if you like it could be read as a
statement of imperatives but you could also read another one a much more deflationary way that
stuff societies through to cells that exist are just these free energy minimizing systems so
these conversations are just the kinds of conversations that can only be there simply
because they are free energy minimizing and if you like are what is left when you wanted to say
you know resisting the second law of thermodynamics the very fact that we are here having this low
free energy conversation and this exchange and rendering everything mutually predictable and
resolving uncertainty about ourselves means that this little dyadic exchange is in itself a free
energy minimizing free energy minimizing system you know free energy here again is this being used
as a proxy for uncertainty for unpredictability disorder so by minimizing free energy by we
are implicitly going to be minimizing the disorder and the entropy and the expected surprise so it's
all very consistent with the physics of self-organization what you're doing though I think is thinking
about what would these things look like in a social context in a dyadic context and just to
say also that one way of reading what you were saying about you know well if we can both shorten
the path to a state of orderly predictiveness and uncertainty resolution then if one thinks about
that in the you know in terms of interactions either between people or between between people
and their environment then you've got now a nice model for niche construction and cultural niche
construction that you know everything I do is in the service of making everything more predictable
and if that involves evolving to have a language and to teach my children language then there's
you know even that aspect of very very high level niche construction or in cultural acting upon the
world to make it in an encultured way more learnable and more predictable is all in the
service of minimizing this this entropy anxiety or free energy uncertainty sorry I slipped in
anxiety there I shouldn't do that anxiety I think it would be our remarkable capacity
to recognize that we haven't resolved our uncertainty in the way that we would normally
expect to and that would be the situation where the dopamine just goes away so how do you view the
role of GABA and so that's one question another question is I've I've spent a fair bit of time
thinking about hemispheric specialization and I'm wondering if is it is there any reason to
make the assumption that does the left hemisphere specialize in some sense for precision or does
it specialize for instantiating certainty at the lower levels of the hierarchy whereas the
right hemisphere is involved in play at the higher levels is that is there anything to any of those
concepts that you know of um yeah it's a very interesting question and now I'm sort of speaking
as a sort of an imaging neuroscientist about the functionality I mean first of all if we just go
back to what we're talking about before which is the other cybernetic view and the good regulator
theorem and the notion that we are or we entail good models of our lived world or at least our
sensed world then having two hemispheres tells me immediately that there is some lateral symmetry
in my lived world and of course that tells me because that is true in the sense I have two
arms and two legs you know if my world certainly as a newborn is basically you know 99% my body
I think the sort of having two hemispheres tells you something quite fundamental about
about the universe into which you are as a brain at least introduced just to generalize that what
that means is if you gave me the brain of a Martian I should be able to tell you a lot about
its lived world and its embodiment and its body and the kind of world that it lives in
just by looking at the structure the anatomy of the brain so I think that you know there's an
important aspect to that sort of lateralization issue um and more I think a sort of more um
scholarly and and put some more specific answer to your question is that there is certainly um
in neuropsychology um an asymmetry in the way we deploy attention so if you now read the
deployment of certain your neuromodulators such as say serotonin or acetylcholine or
indeed adrenaline um as um instantiating endogenous attention then its deficits will
correspond to certain kinds of neglect the you know a pathological inability to attend to i.e.
you're always going to ignore or just not be aware of this and of course there's a really
interesting work in terms of hemineglect systems and bilateral asymmetries between the right and
the left parietal cortex in these syndromes so I don't I don't know very much beyond that other
than to be able to say that um for for reasons that uh must have a principal explanation in terms
of the you know the high order causal structure of the world in which we operate there certainly is
some asymmetry in the way that we attend to things or the some benefit in terms of having that
factorization um that allows certain things to attend to that this you know just set the sensitivity
or the um the flexibility or inflexibility of a hierarchal construction um it must be the case
that there are certain domains and certain attributes that do show this um this lateralization
and just to point out also of course that the lateralization issue was quite hot in the days of
of gray at the at the mausoleum as an as a possible corridor of things like schizophrenia
yeah well I mean Goldberg who was a student of Luria's suggested that the right hemisphere was
specialized for processing in the domain of novelty and the left hemisphere was specialized
for processing in the domain of relative certainty and so it might be something like the more novel
it is the more likely the right is to attend to it and that sort of maps on to Gilchrist
McGilchrist conceptualization of hemispheric specialization with regards to both predation
and predator detection so the right hemisphere seems to be specialized for contextual evaluation
and the spotting of predators and the left for focused attention in the service of predation
so a bird for example will attend preferentially with the prey detection system well eating but
the right hemisphere and the other eye are scanning the environment for signs of context
dependent signs of predation on the bird okay I didn't know that I didn't know that that's very
interesting so I was just thinking of course the the obvious example of lateralization is language
and if you look at language as really predation for information so if you think of language as
the way of asking questions that is the tool that we use to predate for information so that makes
entire sense I didn't know that about the comparative ethology anatomy of predators but
yeah well if McGilchrist's new work McGilchrist's new work details that out in some at some length
the the relationship between attentional breadth and focus and hemispheric specialization
it's quite nice and it maps very nicely onto the concepts that we've been discussing today
so shall we take a brief foray into psychedelics and then we'll have to close this part of the
conversation unfortunately although there's about 50 other things I'd like to discuss with you
but well that's I guess we've covered a fair bit of territory for one day but I'd be I'm very
interested in your conception of the relationship between say psychedelic experience and its
antithesis in some sense if I've got this right with the action of antidepressants
yes well yeah I'm not sure it's an antithesis because you know there are in the past few
years and indeed months an increasing number of papers looking at sort of five h2a agonists
and partial agonists and and drugs that act upon the serotonergic system namely psychedelics and
their ability to remediate certain conditions that would have a you know a pronounced usually
pronounced effective state so the game is very complicated but what we certainly know at the
moment is that the actions of psychedelics from the point of view of their definitive
effects on the brain namely you know the you know the abnormal perception
and the characteristic way that you you can't attend from the sort of the microstructure
of your sensations we do now know that that is probably best explained when I say we know
we conjecture that it is nicely explained by exactly the same kind of mechanism that you were
talking about before which is a sort of changing the balance of recalcitrance or precision or
sensitivity away from these high level constructs deep in the hierarchy at the top of the hierarchy
and redo reinvesting that kind of precision or sensitivity under predictive coding models to
prediction errors much lower in the hierarchy so this would look basically like I'm now going to
ignore my prior beliefs about about the narrative that I'm currently committed to in terms of this
interaction and I'm just going to focus in on you know what can I sense so you're talking before
about sort of a mother's predisposition to be very sensitive to cues that could engage or could
represent really important affordances for responding like responding to a baby crying
so this would be you know one way of viewing the effects of psychedelics that you are forced to
by reducing or relaxing the precision of the high level beliefs in relation to the lower level
evidence or belief updating or evidence accumulation you are putting yourself in an
intentional set where everything is interesting you can't attend away from it at a very elemental
level and it distracts me that this is you know very very similar to what you were talking about
before in terms of the you know a neuroticism and I presume this is sort of an inesync like
construct where you know you would have some people who are just truly confident that their
prior beliefs are the most apt explanation and they will ignore lots of evidence to the contrary
simply by suppressing the precision or the importance or turning down the gain on that kind of thing
but you can't do that if you get more than three errors that you can't explain so you know there
is an adaptability built into our brains that will actually say well no actually let's just
attend to these lower level ones and at that point you're going to have to relax the high level
and become more flexible and more adaptive well that okay so that ability to relax at that level
seems to be indexed by the personality trait openness and open people are more creative and so
creative people have more play in the higher order conceptualizations and one of the solid
empirical findings emerging out of the research on psilocybin is that a single mystical experience
induced by psilocybin produces something approximating a one standard deviation increase
in trait openness that's permanent it never goes away yeah yeah and so it doesn't look exactly like
it's a reduction in or say an increase in neuroticism so that error messages can propagate upward
it's it's something akin to that because if you're more open then there's more play in the system but
it doesn't seem to be tied exactly to error per se and negative emotion and I can't puzzle out the
distinction exactly right because if you're high in neuroticism you're going to propagate error
messages but then things are going to collapse if you're high in openness the error messages
propagate but you generate alternative theorems at a very rapid rate in order to re-contextualize the
anomaly I didn't know that that is very interesting so I think then it's the openness that I was
talking to and certainly that's the the aspiration or the motivation behind the use of these chemicals
in say end of life care or indeed in terms of yeah psilocybin assisted psychotherapy it's really to
open you up to new possibilities well maybe with with creative people what you see so imagine
category rigidity and category rigidity might be something like the probability that activation
of one category will activate adjacent categories so imagine that constraint is the constraint of
openness the more open you are the more flexible those boundaries the more when you activate one
category you're going to co-activate a network of associated categories so then imagine you dump
psilocybin into the system and what happens is the barriers between adjacent categories become
more permeable and so then as information propagates up there's more play in the systems
because the category boundaries have become wider and that would increase your probability of a
false certainty right which is on an idea derived from insight that's wrong but it would also increase
the probability that you'd get some true positives out of the deal which is really what creative
people are doing all the time a lot of creative ideas just aren't functional but some are crucial
and so it's a high risk high return cognitive strategy in some sense to generate to have looser
categories or more co-activation of categories at the higher levels and certainly that
is akin to what people report in psychedelic experiences that ideas flood in on them and
they see how things are connected in ways they couldn't perceive before and so that's different
than the flexibility that high neuroticism in some sense produces because that's more like the
probability that a conceptual system will collapse rather than it than it will expand
but your use of the word barriers I think is very nice and I'm just wondering and certainly
I think you'd enjoy speaking to Robin Kaha Harris who has described I think effectively what you've
just described but instead of casting it in terms of jumping through barriers he would describe it
really as a reduction in the height of a barrier so you if you can imagine and it's in my world it
would literally be a free energy landscape and our ideas are our prior beliefs are basically sitting
at the minima at the bottom of a well and sometimes we can get stuck in a rut I see yeah yeah for
example you say I was depressed or I had the hypothesis I am going to die and this is how
things that are going to die behave and this is how I'm going to behave and that may not be the
most functional way of that kind of end of life self-modelling then by making the barriers more
permeable simply by reducing the height you can you now enable a jumping from one minima to another
minima to explore more options exactly in the spirit that you meant in terms of creativity
but it could be creativity about other ways of being me in this situation and that flattening
of the landscape is just you know one way mathematically of writing down the reduction
in the precision or the rigidity of these high-level beliefs prior beliefs relative to the
lower ones so I think there's some beautiful conciliance there okay so so that would imply that
that would imply as those walls come down let's say that it would require less novelty
propagating up the system to produce a phase change exactly yeah yeah okay okay okay well
I'm afraid we have to bring this part of this conversation to a close even though I don't want
to there's there's other topics I would love to discuss with you I would very much appreciate it
if you would consider putting me in touch with is it carhart harris indeed yes I will do that yes
yes because I know some of the papers that you've written jointly and I would like to discuss those
further I would maybe I close with an observation if you don't mind is that one of the most functional
narratives as far as I can tell is predicated on the idea that you should conduct yourself in a manner
that leaves you open to exposing yourself to information that will allow you to update your
narratives right so it's a weird loop it's like well narrative itself is dependent on exploration
and so the best narrative in the most fundamental sense is one that leaves the option of exploration
continually open and that's something like a voluntary confrontation with the anomalies that
characterize existence as the central pattern of adaptive being it's something like that and that's
existence on that border between chaos and order in some fundamental sense so anyways I appreciated
the conversation very much it would be fun to meet in person sometime I think we could probably
talk for about 36 hours and I'll be in London again in January and so maybe maybe we could meet then
if you'd be amenable to that and in the meantime I would like to let everybody watching and listening
know that I'm going to continue my conversation with Dr. Friston for half an hour on the DW plus
site I'd like to go behind the scenes with people and to investigate the process by which
their narrative unfolded the process by which they made their path through life their successful
path through life because I think it's very useful for people to be provided with models of how that
occurs hello everyone I would encourage you to continue listening to my conversation with my guest
on dailywireplus.com
