So, hello everyone, and welcome to the show.
I'm Max, and this is episode 2 of PQ Attic Analysis in the Colatz Conjecture, a video
series I am making to accompany my 2022 PhD dissertation of the same name.
In episode 1, I showed you a seemingly harmless looking formula that nevertheless produced
a totally unprecedented form of convergence, one where the topology of convergence varied
from point to point.
By any standard, this is an incredibly bizarre finding, but these findings of mine did not
come out of nowhere.
Rather, they are the result of a lengthy investigation into the Colatz map and its brethren, and
I'm one that I hope I will be able to share with you in the course of this series.
So in episode 2, what I have been smoking lately, I'm going to give you the rundown
of not just this video series, but what my research is all about.
This is going to be a bit of a broad topic, and I'm going to outline what we're going
to be doing in this series and the various major results that I've achieved.
I won't be stating everything fully, nor will I be providing proofs at all, but rather
this is just to survey the landscape and to illustrate just how much there is waiting
to be done here.
It really is.
There's so much.
So where do we begin?
Well, we begin with a troublemaker that I'm hopefully you're all familiar with.
The Colatz map, c, from z to z, is the function which c of n which sends n to n over 2 if
n is even, and n to 3n plus 1 if n is odd.
As you all know, the infamous Colatz conjecture is the assertion that for every integer n,
there exists an integer k greater than or equal to 0 such that the k-th iterate of n
under c is equal to 1.
That little circle over there means compose and k is the exponent for the number of times.
So rather than working with c directly, we're instead going to consider a well-known acceleration
of the Colatz map, the shortened Colatz map, generally denoted in the literature by t3,
which is the map that sends even n to n over 2 and odd n to 3n plus 1 over 2.
This is shortened in the sense that it takes care of the fact that whenever we feed an
odd number to the Colatz map, we get an even number which we're always going to divide
by 2.
With this, the Colatz conjecture is the assertion that for every integer n greater than or equal
to 1, there is a k greater than or equal to 0, so such that applying t3 to n k times
gives us 1.
Note that when k is 0, this notation would turn this or any map into the identity map.
So a moment's thought shows that this conjecture actually comes in two pieces.
The first of these is the so-called weak Colatz conjecture, which is the assertion that the
only periodic points of t3 in the positive integers are 1 and 2.
A periodic point, recall, is a number which, when you apply your map a sufficiently number
of times to it, you'll get sent back to itself.
So every fixed point is a periodic point, but of period 1.
So the other part is the no-divergence point conjecture.
A divergent point, as the name suggests, is an input which our map will iterate to either
positive or negative infinity, and the no-divergence point conjecture is the assertion that no positive
integer is a divergent point of t3.
So just a little bit of a background here, more about the subject than the problem itself.
From a dry taxonomic perspective, these conjectures belong to the subject of arithmetic dynamics.
This subject was really first established by Joe Silverman's classic text, The Arithmetic
of Dynamical Systems, and in that subject, what you do is you take algebraic geometry
and you apply it, I'll tell you, apply to it the ideas of the study of dynamical systems.
So recall that an algebraic variety is, generally speaking, it's the set of zeros of one or
more polynomials.
Many algebraic varieties also have a group structure, which makes them into an algebraic
group.
One of the most, probably the best example of this is an elliptic curve.
In an algebraic group, there are rational functions, which when you plug in points that
are on your variety, the result will be another point on the variety, and these rational maps
therefore form dynamical systems that we can consider as them acting on the variety.
In this approach, what you do is that there is a wonderful dictionary between the language
of dynamical systems and the language of algebraic number theory and arithmetic geometry.
So for example, there's connections between periodic points and pre-periodic points and
the measurements of numerical complexity called heights, and it's a very fruitful approach
that lets you do a lot of things.
Unfortunately, classical arithmetic dynamics of this sort has very little to say about
the Colatz conjecture.
T3 is simply too far removed from the foundational algebraic structures that one uses in arithmetic
geometry, like algebraic varieties, algebraic groups, and a billion varieties, and as a
result, we can't apply the arithmetic of dynamical systems as Silverman would consider it.
So as a result, the Colatz conjecture is not just a challenge to mathematics, but to
metamathematics, the practice of how we do mathematics.
Mathematics is filled with difficult problems, many if not most of which are also important.
Like in real life, one of the easiest ways for a problem to be important is for it to
have multifarious connections to other subjects.
This is a distinguishing feature of many of the most difficult problems in number theories,
such as Fermat's Last Theorem, the Riemann Hypothesis, and the Birch and Swinninson-Dyer
conjecture.
Each of these problems enjoys context with a wide range of other questions, and their
resolutions would, or in the case of Fermat's Last Theorem, have, had major implications
for other mathematical investigations.
Because of these rich connections, even if we can't solve the main problems themselves,
they're still going to be something useful to be gained by studying something related
to them, or maybe one or two degrees removed from the original thing.
The big trouble with the Colatz conjecture is that unlike Fermat's Last Theorem, the
Riemann Hypothesis, or the Birch and Swinninson-Dyer conjecture, there doesn't seem to be any major
connections between Colatz and other areas of mathematics.
Algebraic geometry is often a site for such useful investigations because it combines
number theory when you're investigating solutions of polynomials and diaphanetic equations,
but it also involves algebra because we're considering the ideals generated by polynomials,
and so the more subjects that can have a say in a problem, the more approachable it is.
Unfortunately, with Colatz, there is really only one subject where the conjecture possesses
a clear, uncontestable connection, and that's transcendental number theory.
Transcendental number theory is the study of transcendental numbers, as the name suggests.
In the simplest case, it's just proving that numbers are transcendental, which itself is
very difficult.
The problem of showing that pi is a transcendental number, as it was first done, I believe in
1883 by Lindemann, resolved the 4,000-year-old problem of squaring a circle, which is given
a circle of a known area.
Can you, using just a straight edge and a compass, construct a square of the same area
as that circle?
And the answer is no.
A transcendental number theory, another thing that's very big in it, is the so-called linear
forms of logarithms.
This is studying the absolute value of an expression like A times ln of 2 plus B times
ln of 3.
We want to try and figure out, as A and B vary, how small can we make the absolute value
of that linear combination?
And a watershed result in this subject is Baker's theorem, due to the late Alan Baker,
which gives explicit lower bounds for the absolute values of such linear forms and logarithms,
and Baker won the Fields Medal for using those to study the solutions of diophantine equations.
Specifically, it is known that if we can resolve the weak collat conjecture, this would yield
a major improvement in lower bounds for the absolute value of 3 to the m minus 2 to the
n, where m and n are positive integers.
These bounds would be a significant improvement over the lower bounds that Baker's method
yields.
Unfortunately though, this connection to transcendental number theory isn't really helpful, because
transcendental number theory is extraordinarily difficult, as a subject in its own right,
because unlike arithmetic geometry and everything that involves polynomials, where we can use
the techniques of algebra, because we are in transcendental number theory, we are studying
transcendental functions, exponentiation, logarithms, we can't use the machinery of
commutative algebra to approach things, and so it often will involve extremely intricate
analytical arguments like the ones that Baker did, which involved constructing an auxiliary
function that had a very specific location and intensity of zeros that you can then examine
and use complex analysis to show that you get a contradiction.
So the result of all of this is that collat stands alone, inscrutable and unapproachable.
It lacks a broader context in which it might be better and more naturally understood.
The fact that collat suffers this problem, really it's absolutely critical if you want
to understand how the problem relates to the mathematical community as a whole.
Collats is absolutely infamously difficult, but what makes it so difficult isn't just
that it seems to be hard to do, but rather there's no meaningful way to approach it.
It seems like if by some for some reason we could get a proof of it, it would be some
extremely arcane technical bit of brinksmanship that involves some crazy properties of the
powers of two and three that don't really shine a light on what's going on in the way
that say Galois theory shines a light on the solvability of polynomials by radicals.
So one of the goals of this series of videos and my research in general is to show that
collats is not quite as unapproachable as we've previously believed.
It's still difficult, still extremely difficult, make no mistake about it.
However, contrary to popular belief, I maintain that it is actually very worthwhile to study
this problem just because there's so much around it waiting to be explored.
As if the methods of this series end up playing a role in solving the collats conjecture, it
will only be because of significant advances which have occurred in the interim.
Well, again, one of the reasons why I'm making this video is because I want to show everyone
there's a lot of stuff to be found here and it would be wonderful to get some help delving
into that.
So as in my dissertation, we're going to be basically doing a tripartite program here.
I have three main innovations to present to you.
The first of these is a novel unifying analytic formalism for studying collats type maps.
This is a function which I call the Newman which we associate to a given collats type map.
The function chi q that we saw in episode one, specifically chi 3 which you get from
a setting of q equals 3, that function is the Newman of the shortened collats map.
So with my formalism, the point, the questions, is x a periodic point of our collats type map
and is x a divergent point of our collats type map can be restated in terms of the value
distribution of this Newman function.
We find that these questions are equivalent to asking is x a value attained by the Newman?
Newman comes from the Latin meaning the spirit or power abiding in a thing or place.
Normally I use the characteristic function, hence my use of the symbol chi, but as we'll
see later, this ends up being a particularly bad choice of terminology because it conflicts
with the notion of a characteristic function from probability theory, which is the Fourier
transform of the probability density function of whatever random variable we're studying.
And it turns out, yes, we can do that here and there's wonderfully rich connections to
probability theory, even though they might not be initially apparent what I'm doing.
So that's the first thing, the Newman.
I should say that the result which makes this reformulation valid is called, I call it the
correspondence principle and it tells us that we can replace the question of studying the
dynamics of our collats type maps by studying the value distribution of our Newman's.
The second innovation of my work is that there is my discovery of an unexpected level
of depth and subtlety in an almost totally neglected area of non-archimedean analysis.
This is PQ and Attic analysis, the study of functions from the PQ Attics to the Q Attics
where P and Q are distinct primes.
As the things we saw in episode one are an example of these of this unexpected level of
depth and subtlety, where we have functions that are not continuous, but nonetheless integrable.
Functions, since they're not continuous, it means in the non-archimedean context that
they should be non-integrable as well, but it turns out, no, there's a way to integrate
them and doing so requires us to work with infinite series that converge, which was point-wise,
but whose topology of convergence varies from point to point.
So all of this analytical stuff waiting to be explored, and it's amazingly, like by magic,
this PQ Attic analysis seems to be almost tailor-made for studying collats type problems.
So there's a synergy here.
The collats type problems give us some really good guiding questions and principles to explore,
and they provide us with an opportunity to test out and develop these new techniques in
this area of analysis.
So you can quite easily make your career out of studying this analytical phenomena independent
of their relationship to the collats conjecture.
There's a lot to be done, and again, I feel very much like some help doing so.
What's really cool is that PQ Attic analysis doesn't just apply to functions from the P Attic
to the Q Attic, it can also apply to functions from the P Attic to some metrically complete
non-Archimedean field, F, whose residue field has characteristic Q not equal to P.
And so, as we saw, by opening ourselves up to frames, we can significantly expand what's
done in this subject.
I can actually probably go further and say that at the end of the road, we probably end
up with a theory of functions from an Adele-valued variable to an Adele-valued variable.
Or by Adeles, I mean the Adele ring of a number field, or it's an analog over a function
field.
And if you read my Frames paper, which I had linked at the bottom of episode one, I talk
about how you can potentially reframe frames in terms of Adele-valued functions, which
may be a potentially fruitful approach.
So one and two are that, but what's three?
So three is the fact that in two, we can do Fourier analysis.
And in particular, this allows us to take one and reformulate collapse type problems in
terms of non-Archimedean spectral theory, which is a very impressive sounding term whose
meaning I'm going to explain at the moment.
So but first, before I continue, there is a caveat that I can ask the risks that I need
to mention.
So when I say that we're going to be reformulating the problem of studying the collapse type
maps dynamics, there's a subtlety here is that, as we saw, this comes in two parts,
the weak collapse conjecture and the no divergent points conjecture.
At the moment, the weak collapse conjecture has been fully reformulated.
More generally, for any type of collapse type map for which my method applies, we can completely
replace the study of its periodic points with the study of values attained by the maps
Newman with divergent points.
However, it's only halfway done.
I've shown that here's an example with chi three, the Newman key three, I've shown that
chi three produces a sufficient condition for an integer to be a divergent point.
However, I have not yet been able to prove the converse that this sufficient condition
is also necessary and that every divergent point is an element of the image of chi three.
The reason for this is quite acute is that the proof of this sufficient vector direction
is completely non-constructive and it relies on an elementary fact of dynamical systems
that if you're dealing with a iteration of a map on a discrete space like the integers,
every point, every integer, every point of your space, it comes in exactly three flavors.
Either it is a periodic point of the map, it is a divergent point of the map, or it
is a strictly pre-periodic point of the map, meaning that it is eventually iterated to
a periodic point, but the point itself is not periodic.
I am convinced that the converse of this result holds.
However, at the moment, I can't find any proof to justify it and it might be that this proof
could be quite difficult.
Perhaps though, a further, a greater development of the rest of my PQ analytic techniques might
help in resolving the rest of this conjecture.
So right now, we're three quarters of the way to completely reformulating co-atts-types
conjectures.
And that itself is a worthy area of interest that has nothing to do with the co-atts problem
itself, but rather with its reformulation.
So that's the first asterisk, the reformulation is incomplete.
The second is that, as I said, this is very impressive sounding, so you probably don't
know what it means, which so I'm going to now explain.
So in the beginning, spectral theory meant the study of eigenvalues of matrices.
In an n-by-n matrix A, we compute the determinant of lambda i n minus A, where i n is an n-by-n
identity matrix, and then we solve for the roots of the resulting polynomial, while also
praying that we're working over an algebraically complete field so that all the roots exist.
The more abstract characterization of this process comes from when we remember from linear
algebra that a matrix is invertible if and only if its determinant is non-zero.
Now n-by-n matrices with entries in a field k form an algebra over k.
We can add them entry-wise, we can multiply them by scalars from k, and we can multiply
matrices by one another.
As quantum mechanics reminds us, this algebra is not commutative, but it is unital, meaning
it has a multiplicative identity element, and that's the n-by-n identity matrix i n.
So if we equip the field k with an absolute value, more on that later, and then stipulate
that the resulting metric space we get on the field is complete, we make k into a Banach
space.
Since as a vector space over k, our matrix algebra, n-by-n matrices over k, is finite
dimensional, we can then use the absolute value on k to give this matrix algebra a norm
as well.
The simplest of these would be to define the norm of a matrix A as the maximum of the absolute
values of its entries.
Equipped with this norm, our matrix algebra becomes not just a Banach space, but a Banach
algebra.
Now, recall here that a unit of an algebra is an element which has a multiplicative inverse.
U times U is a unit, if there's an element U inverse such that U U inverse equals U
inverse U equals the identity element of the algebra, the multiplicative identity element.
So in going back to matrices, the eigenvalues of any matrix A are precisely those scalars
lambda for which lambda i n minus A fails to be a unit of the Banach algebra, of our
matrix algebra.
This then leads to a definition of spectral theory which works in any Banach algebra with
a multiplicative identity.
And specifically, let x be a unital Banach algebra over a field k with 1x as its multiplicative
identity element.
Then by spectral theory, we mean the study of those scalars lambda in k for which lambda
1 minus chi is or is not a unit of x.
If we run our comedian spectral theory, then means doing spectral theory when our field
k is non-archimedean, such as when k is a field of piatic numbers.
So to get to the reformulation described in 3, we need three main ingredients.
The first is, as mentioned, the Neumann.
In this case, it's the Neumann chi 3 for the shortened 3x plus 1 map, t3.
Chi 3 is a 2, 3-addict function from the 2-addict integers to the 3-addict integers,
and as I explained about the character, about the name, so as I mentioned in episode 1, chi
3 can be characterized as, and if so defined, if so desired, defined as the unique 2, 3-addict
function from the 2-addict integers to the 3-addict integers, satisfying the following
equation.
f of 2z equals f of z over 2, and f of 2z plus 1 equals 3f of z plus 1 over 2.
This holds for all 2-addict integers z, but in order to get the characterization property,
you also need to subject f to the following limit condition, which I call rising continuity.
This is the statement that the, this is written wrong, this should be the limit as n approaches
infinity of f of z mod 2 to the n, is converges 3-addictly to f of z.
So in other words, the f of the, f of z mod 2 to the n converges 3-addictly to f of z.
The, this leads to the, oh, I made it, screw it up again.
This leads to the general definition of rising continuity, which is that if we have p as
a prime and let k be a metrically complete value field, which if you don't know what
that is, just don't worry, we'll cover it in a later video, we say that f is rising
continuous if the limit as n approaches infinity of f of z mod p to the n converges in the topology
of k to f of z, whereas indicated this is, it means that the limit occurs in the topology
of k.
Note that we only require the convergence to occur point wise.
So that's, that's in part an ingredient one.
Now as mentioned in episode one, the reason why Shikov and other mathematicians of the
Dutch School of Non-Archimedean Analysis deemed pq-addict functions less interesting
than pp-addict functions was because pq-addict functions were far too rigid.
As we saw in pq-addict analysis, a function is integrable if and only if it is continuous,
which makes a lot of the questions we would ask in classical analysis simply not relevant
here.
Well, we will see later on that chi-3 is rising continuous, which shows that by relaxing continuity
to rising continuity, we can get much more interesting results in pq-addict analysis.
This is, if I had to give a big birds eye view takeaway of my research, it's that rising
continuous functions seem to be the more natural candidates to study in pq-addict analysis
because we can get much more diverse results with them as opposed to continuous pq-addict
functions.
At the moment, this is, there's an asterisk here, while rising continuity seems necessary
for getting interesting behavior, I do not know if it is also sufficient, that is to
say I don't know if an arbitrary rising continuous function will give a nice behavior like what
we saw in episode 1.
Indeed, in my dissertation, I had to impose quite a few conditions on my rising continuous
functions in order to get something nice out of them like we got out of chi-3 in episode
1.
Basically, this boiled down to assuming that our functions satisfied a system of functional
equations like chi-3 does, and then you could get all the nice stuff, and so again, here's
another thing we can figure out, how restrictive do we have to get on our rising continuous
functions?
How many conditions do we have to impose to get something interesting out of them?
And then once we've done so, how do we work with them as spaces, et cetera, et cetera.
So on that note, one reason to care about rising continuous functions is that we can
show that the set of rising continuous functions from Zp to k forms a non-Archimedean binoc
algebra under the usual operations of point-wise addition, point-wise multiplication, and scalar
multiplication.
We denote this algebra by C twiddle of Zpk.
This is the algebra again of rising continuous functions.
C of Zpk, meanwhile, is the binoc algebra of continuous functions, and as I showed in
my dissertation, C twiddle of Zpk contains C of Zpk as a dense subalgebra.
So the closure of C of Zpk in C twiddle is C twiddle.
So aside from classifying rising continuous functions in their own right, it also seems
like investigating subalgebras and ideals of C twiddle is going to help make progress
on collats and related problems.
In particular, not only does our non-Archimedean special theory lead us to studying the ideals
of such subalgebras, but it stands to reason that C twiddle and its subalgebras will be
necessary participants in any attempt to embed my work in the language of algebraic geometry.
In particular, the jury is still out on what the function field of the image of chi-3
over the two attics ought to be.
Again, just to do a parallel here, the continuous p-qatic functions are too rigid to get what
we want, so we're going to have to potentially use some intermediary extension of the continuous
function algebra and the rising continuous function algebra and use that to construct
rings of functions in order to then do shefy, skeiny things.
So now I've been definition six.
I've been saying the Dutch school of non-Archimedean analysis, so I think I might as well clarify
what I mean by that.
I specifically mean the body of work pioneered in the 1960s by W. M. Shikoff, A. C. M. Ruiz,
M. van der Putt, and other mathematicians working at the Catholic University of the Netherlands.
It's since been renamed, but if you Google Catholic University of the Netherlands, you'll
get to the right place.
Also just speaking of which, I cannot, so Shikoff died in 2014 or 2016, which was a tragic,
but I believe that A. C. M. van Ruiz is still alive.
I haven't been able to get confirmation of this.
I sent him an email, no response.
If anyone happens to know if A. C. M. van Ruiz is still alive, please let him know about
my work.
I think he would be interested in it, and I'd just like to know what he'd have to say about
it.
So these mathematicians were doing their work as graduate students at the time, and they
were going about realizing A. F. Mana's hopes, first voice in the 1940s, of understanding
what analysis would be like in the non-Archimedean setting.
Just to take a step back, Hensel introduces the periodic numbers in 1896, and most infamously,
he misuses them, messing up arguments with convergence, and partly as a result of that,
and partly because ideas of metric spaces and topology in the modern sense had yet to
come around.
The mathematical community was a bit wary of Hensel's methods.
So it took, most famously, it took until the 1920s when Hermann Hess was walking around
in Göttingen.
He just found an antique shop and saw Hensel's book on periodic numbers available.
He decided, I need to transfer to Marburg to study with Professor Hensel.
And that then led him to discovering the Minkowski theorem on about quadratic forms over the
And even a decade later, Hess still had to go around defending the use of the periodic
numbers.
But that really, they had, they began to become accepted into mathematics in the 1930s.
And then in the 1940s, what comes along is Mana saying, we need to figure out how to
do non-Archimedean analysis in general.
Now when I say non-Archimedean analysis, you would be forgiven for thinking that this
just means figure out to do how to do a periodic analysis.
Part of the reason why I'm putting so much emphasis in this phrase PQatic Analysis is
because there are really quite a few possibilities that can arise.
And just saying periodic analysis at this point, it's loaded language that isn't clear
enough.
Here are some of the possibilities we can consider.
Here let X and Y be valued fields.
If that means these are fields with an absolute value, equipped to them.
If we want to do analysis of a function F from X to Y, here are the possibilities to
consider.
I have put parentheses next to these, I put the names I've given them so that we can
have everything nicely classified.
So we have the case where X equals Y and both X and Y are Archimedean.
I call this Infinity-Infinity Attic Analysis, Infinity coming from the infinite prime of
number theory, but we'll talk about more about that later.
Infinity-Infinity Attic Analysis is basically class, it's all classical analysis.
It's real analysis and complex analysis.
Then we have the case where X equals Y and both X and Y are non-Archimedean of, in this
case I call it P-P Attic Analysis.
If you go around and Google what textbook in P Attic Analysis, you're going to get
most likely a textbook in this subject here.
I taught myself the material using Anna-Rombert's course in P Attic Analysis.
It's a very nice book, very comprehensive.
This subject is probably the most developed form of non-Archimedean analysis, not only
because it's used in number theory and algebraic geometry, but because we're working in the
same input and output field, we can have analytic function theory.
By which I mean the theory of power series.
In order to have a power series, you need to have the space of the power series coefficients
belong to the same field as the space of the power series input variables, or otherwise
multiplication makes no sense.
From this, we get real analysis has its own analytic functions, complex analysis has its
own analytic functions, and P-P Attic Analysis has its own analytic functions, and despite
certain differences that occur, generally if there is a result in one form of analytic
function theory, it's going to exist in another form, in another version of it.
However, this is only the tip of the iceberg.
Then there's the cases where X and Y are different.
We can have the case where X is non-Archimedean and Y is Archimedean.
This is P-Infinity Attic Analysis.
This one here was first made famous by the late great John Tate in his famous thesis,
a Fourier analysis on number rings, I believe that's the title.
What he does is he shows that the Zeta function's product formula can be realized as a product,
literally, of Zeta functions of P-Infinity Attic type, one for each prime P.
This type of analysis is also done a lot in representation theory.
There's a book by Donfeld and Hundley, Automorphic Representations for the General Linear Group.
The first chapter of that book gives a nice overview of P-Infinity Attic Analysis.
This itself can be considered a more specific case of abstract harmonic analysis, which studies
harmonic analysis on locally compact Abelian groups.
Those are Abelian groups that are topological spaces, meaning that the group operations are
continuous with respect to the topology, and which are locally compact as topological spaces.
You can also further generalize this to non-Abelian groups, but then you get into representation
theory and it gets more complicated.
Now then there's the case where X is Archimedean and Y is non-Archimedean.
This is Infinity P at analysis.
No one does this, and the reason why is because the only continuous function from an Archimedean
field, like the reels of the complexes, to a non-Archimedean field, like the P-Addicts,
the only continuous functions are the constant functions.
As we just saw, though, continuous functions are too rigid, so it may be the case that
we get lots of interesting theory if we allow ourselves to work with a weakening of purely
continuous functions in this case.
I haven't explored it yet, but someone could look at that and see what happens.
It might be interesting.
And then finally we have P-Q Attic Analysis, which is the study of functions from X to
Y, where X and Y are distinct non-Archimedean fields.
Now technically this picture is actually a lie.
You see, I've forgotten to include a very important classification, which is the characteristic
of our field.
Recall that the characteristic of a field is the number of times you need to add one
in the field to get zero, and that a field is said to have characteristic zero if and
only if you can never arrive at zero by adding once.
Wherever you see a non-Archimedean field in this list, you can consider either a non-Archimedean
field of characteristic zero, the P-Anex, or you can consider a non-Archimedean field
of positive characteristic.
These turn out to be fields of formal Laurent series with coefficients in a fixed finite
field.
And for the record, yes, analysis can absolutely be done in fields of positive characteristic.
Cochube has a book on it called Analysis in Positive Characteristic.
So if we had to keep track on tabs on the characteristics of our field, we would get
even more diverse forms, and all of these are distinct, depending on the particular setup
you might get one thing or the other.
And when people talk about non-Archimedean analysis in general, it's very unclear what
do they mean.
Do they mean P-P?
Do they mean P-Q?
Do they mean P-Infinity?
Do they mean P-Q for positive characteristic, etc.
This is why I recommend using this terminology, because it's much clearer.
And just in case you think that the positive characteristic versus the zero characteristic
doesn't matter, no, in my research it absolutely does, because we'll be doing things in positive
characteristic too, eventually.
So that's our first part.
We have our correspondence principle, which as I said, it comes in two flavors.
The one for periodic points and the one for divergent points.
This is the C-P-P-P and the C-P-D-P.
And the C-P-P-P is a complete bi-directional statement, whereas the C-P-D-P currently only
has one direction proven.
So now just before we continue for the next ingredient in my reformulation, I need to
go over a bit of number theory.
So recall that the ring of two adic integers, Z2, is obtained by completing Z with respect
to the two adic absolute value.
In doing so, we end up with a variety of new numbers, some of which will be familiar to
us and others which are not.
In particular, we have the following fact.
Let P be a prime number, then a rational number R is an element of the P adic integers, if
and only if, when written in simplest form, the denominator of R is co-prime to P. So
for example, two thirds would be a two adic integer, but would not be a three adic integer.
As we'll see later on, for every rational number R, there can only be finitely many
primes P for which R is not a P adic integer.
This fact comes up in defining the Adele ring I mentioned earlier.
So because we can speak of those elements in ZP which are rational, we can talk about
irrational elements of ZP as well.
This statement here, note that it's an if and only if.
So just to understand the implication of this, note that we say that a number is R is in
Q, if and only if there are integers A and B with A not equal to zero, such that A times
R plus B is zero.
So we can then say definitively without any worry that a rational number, the P adic integer
is rational if and only if there are integers A and B with A not equal to zero, such that
A Z plus B is equal to zero.
So just like in classical analysis, the irrational P adic integers are those whose minimal polynomials
over Q have degree greater than or equal to two.
From this, it can be shown that just like in real analysis, when we write our integers
in terms of their digits, our P adic integer will be rational if and only if its sequence
of digits is eventually periodic.
So just like how pi is irrational because its digits in base 10 aren't eventually periodic,
any P adic integer whose P adic digits are not eventually periodic will necessarily be
irrational.
With that review out of the way, we can now state the correspondence principle for T3.
The CPPP, for periodic points, a non-zero integer X is a periodic point of T3 if and
only if there exists a Z in Z2 prime intersect Q such that chi3 of Z is equal to X. Technically,
I can actually remove the condition that X be non-zero, but it makes things easier if
I just leave it out.
So here recall that Z2 prime is the set of two adic integers with infinitely many digits.
That's Z2 take away the non-negative integers.
So the periodic points are precisely the rational integer values that chi3 takes over Z2.
By rational integer, that's my fancy number theorist way of saying an integer in this
set Z, the integers of the rational numbers.
As you said, we can distinguish between rational integers and P adic integers, so that's why
the term exists.
Now we have the CPDP.
If there is an irrational two adic integer Z such that chi3 of Z is a rational integer,
then chi3 of Z is a divergent point of T3.
So the converse then is the assertion that every divergent point of T3 is an integer
value attained by chi3 over the irrationals.
This also then leads to probably the prettiest thing I found in my dissertation, which is
that there is a correspondence, which is that the periodic points are precisely the integer
values that chi3 attains for rational two adic inputs, and the divergent points are
the integer values that chi3 attains for irrational inputs, which I think is pretty sweet.
So yeah, I can gesture that the converse is true, but I don't know how to prove it.
So even in this incomplete state, the correspondence principle is still a powerful result.
Rather than study a dynamical system that seems to defy all attempts to understand it,
we can use the CP to pass the matter of solving the colas conjecture to studying the value
distribution of chi3.
This is actually very nice because value distribution theory is technically both a matter of algebra
and a matter of analysis.
Analysis does value distribution theory all the time, probably the best example of this
is Nevanlina theory, there's an extra A here, it studies the value distributions of
analytic functions, specifically meromorphic functions by generalizing the Poisson-Jensen
formula, which allows us to count the number of poles and zeros of our given meromorphic
function.
What's really nice though is as I said, because this is an analytic function theory thing,
it can be done not just in complex analysis, infinity, infinity, but it can also be done
in p-addict analysis, pp.
William Cherry has some notes from one of the meetings of the Arizona winter school
that cover analytic function theory and one of the chapters is about Nevanlina theory,
it's quite nice and it's actually what inspired me to go in this approach partially.
So that's the analytic side of Nevanlina theory, sorry, of value distribution theory, but there's
also an algebraic side, namely what this shows is that we're studying the values, the
vanishing set of a particular family of functions.
So if we rewrite this as chi 3 of z minus x, that's going to be a function, and if x
is an integer, that function will vanish if and only if z is a periodic point or divergent
point.
Also, just when I'm talking, I'm probably, for convenience, I'm going to treat the converse
of the CPDP as true, so whenever I mention divergent points and periodic points, keep
in mind the caveat that the converse has yet to be proven.
So we have the vanishing set problem, and in that respect, this is really cool because
then we can start using the techniques of commutative algebra because we can consider
the ideal of a certain function algebra, possibly the rising continuous functions, we can consider
the ideal generated by this and try and figure out the function field, et cetera, et cetera,
and that would potentially lead us to being able to do et al fundamental groups and other
fancy, fancy stuff there.
So and actually, this is quite nice.
The third ingredient of our reformulation, the non-archimedean spectral theory, the result
that I use to do it actually lies quite beautifully in the middle of algebra and analysis.
In my dissertation, I proved a novel PQ attic generalization of the celebrated Wiener-Tauberian
theorem, first proved by Norbert Wiener in the 1930s, and it's a crowning jewel of 20th
century harmonic analysis.
It generalizes the Hardy-Littlewood-Tauberian theorem.
It's wonderful, and it's one of those things, and we'll talk about this more in the episode
that I have dedicated to it, but it's a perfect example of how, depending on how you state
your theorem, it could seem almost trivial or incredibly dense, and there are really
a chimerical result that has many different formulations.
One of the most classical is that it tells the conditions in which a, one of the most
classical versions is that if you have a Fourier series, which converges absolutely, then the
reciprocal of that Fourier series also has an absolutely convergent Fourier series representation
if and only if the original function has no zeros.
And it's really nice and it connects algebra, specifically the invertibility of elements
of a Banach algebra with analysis, Fourier transform arms, Fourier series, L1 spaces,
L infinity spaces, L2 spaces, et cetera, it's very nice.
So for now though, the main idea is this, this correspondence principle tells us that
in order to understand the dynamics of T3, it's, for example, it suffices to know the
rational integer values that chi3 attains as z varies through z2.
So if we just let x be an arbitrary integer, what we want to, we know that since chi3 is
rising continuous and since all continuous functions are rising continuous and since
the rising continuous functions form an algebra, then this thing is going to be rising continuous
too.
As such, we can consider it reciprocal.
Note that if x lies in the image of chi3, this function is going to blow up when z makes
chi3 equal to x and if x is, chi3 is not, if x is not in the image of chi3, this function
won't blow up.
So the values of x in the image of chi3 are precisely those x's for which this function
is not a unit of our Banach algebra.
This again, this is spectral theory.
This is a Banach algebra.
It has the unit.
It's a, it's a multiplicative identity element is the constant function one.
And so we can study the invertibility of multiplicative invertibility of elements of this form.
So in that sense, the spectrum of chi3 in this, in here, the algebra of rising continuous
functions from the two attic integers to the three attic complex numbers, that's the metric
completion of the algebraic closure of the field of three attic numbers.
So the spectrum of chi3 is precisely the set of scalars for which this thing is not
a unit.
Thus, by characterizing the values, the value distribution, the values attained by our function,
that's the same thing as characterizing its spectrum doing spectral theory.
So since the Fourier transform is a homomorphism of Banach algebras, this is the convolution
theorem which says that it turns that the product of two functions, their Fourier transform
is the convolution of their respective Fourier transforms.
The Fourier transform turns multiplication into convolution and convolution into multiplication.
So with this, the Wiener-Tauberian theorem that I proved boils down to the following
equivalence.
Chi3 of z minus x has a multiplicative inverse in C twiddle.
If chi3 hat of t minus x times the indicator function of zero of t has a convolution inverse,
meaning that we can convolve something with this to get this function here, which is the
indicator function of zero, it is the identity element of the convolution algebra we get
by applying the Fourier transform to this algebra.
In particular, the statement has a convolution inverse will be realized as the span of translates
of chi3 hat of t minus x times one zero of t are dense in C zero of Z two hat C three.
This is the Banach space of functions from Z two hat, that's dyadic rationals in the
unit interval with addition module of one, to the three added complex numbers with the
property that as the absolute, the two-addict absolute value of t goes to infinity, the three-addict
absolute value of f of t converges to zero in the topology of the real numbers.
This much to my disappointment when I was attempting to submit my proof of the Wiener-Tauberian
theorem to a journal of pediatric analysis, they did not understand what this notation
meant.
So for anyone who wants to know, it means for all epsilon greater than zero, there is
an n greater than zero, such that f hat of t will have a three-addict absolute value
less than epsilon for all t and Z two hat, whose two-addict absolute value is greater
than two to the n.
So by studying chi three hat of t, chi three hat of t minus x one zero of t in their translates,
we can then determine whether or not chi three of Z minus x is a unit in the algebra of rising
continuous function, which in then tells us whether or not x is in the image of chi three.
We can actually then take things further because when you unpackage this question, it then
takes you to a study of the, and I'll save it for later, let it be a surprise.
So in summary, what have I done?
The periodic points and divergent points of t three are controlled by the rational integer
values that chi three takes over the two-addict integers.
Chi three is an element of this Banach algebra of rising continuous functions, and so the
spectrum of chi three is then the scalars lambda such that chi three of Z minus lambda
is not a unit of this algebra.
This function right here is not a unit of the algebra if and only if lambda is in the
image of chi three over Z two, and we can determine whether or not chi three of Z minus
lambda is a unit of the algebra by studying the span of the translates of its Fourier
transform.
Now, so that's pretty nice, pretty big, pretty fun.
It along would probably make for a nice full year long course study.
However, we can go much, much further.
So in my dissertation, rather than considering just the coax map, I considered a family of
generalized coax maps I call hydra maps.
The now, so in addition to doing math, I also write fantasy slash science fiction.
So I like naming things coolly like this.
It seems like only other writers who know about mathy stuff seem to appreciate the name,
but trust me, it's a cool name.
So the name is due to the hydra like appearance of the certain visualizations of the orbit
classes of the coax map, as well as the difficulty of defeating the hydra of Greek myth.
The Larnian hydra, remember, Hades, Hercules had to defeat it with help from his charioteer.
He used poison and then he burned calicotterized these decapitated heads than the necks of
the hydra so that the immortal heads could not grow back and then he cut off the immortal
head and buried it under a rock.
So hydras are really hard to conquer and thus the name.
Now this is probably one of my favorite pictures of the coax conjecture.
You guess this is a picture, it's not a seaweed or something.
Here is one and each node, each branch on this diagram represents an individual integer.
We connect two integers m and n if and only if either the coax map sends m to n or n to
m.
The lines between two numbers are then tilted left or right based on whether as we move
to the left, toward 1 at the end, whether we go from an even integer to an odd integer
to an odd or odd integer to an even integer.
Then a nice colored gradient was applied to make it look pretty and we get this.
If the coax conjecture is true, this tree should go on to contain all positive integers.
This shows the trajectories of if I recall correctly the integers from 1 to 50,000.
So here my definition of hydra maps are as follows.
Technically I'm going to be working with p as a prime number.
The theory that I'm going to present can be made to work when p is composite though it
will entail certain technical complications.
So for simplicity's sake let's just focus to prime numbers p.
Also remember that the triple bar with p on top means congruent modulo p.
So let p be a prime number.
Then a one dimensional p hydra map is a map h from z to z of the following form.
Here so we have I call these individual maps the branches of h and here aj, bj and dj are
integer constants with aj and dj greater than or equal to zero so that the following two
properties hold.
The aj's and dj's are co-prime and for each j the output is an integer if and only if
n is congruent to j mod p.
These maps do technically have a pre-existent name but it's horrible.
It's residue class wise affine maps rcwa.
If you type that in rcwa maps you'll get a nice online textbook that has lots of computations
featuring examples of them it's very comprehensive but again rcwa it's just a mouthful hydra
maps is much cooler.
So I define hj as a map on q as hj of x equals ajx plus bj over dj.
I know this is going to make algebras angry but I just write this notation to mean this
set because I'm lazy.
We will occasionally think of this as an actual group with its additive structure but if I
ever write this and you don't know what it means it just means zero to whatever this
number is minus one.
So note here that the branches I define them over q it's going to be important in my work
to consider the action of these branches separately.
So the definition that I'm giving here is slightly less general, slightly more general
than the one that I gave in my dissertation.
In my dissertation two requires not just that this be an integer but that this be a
non-negative integer.
The reason for this is I was basing it off the Colatz map.
The Colatz map fixes zero and sends negative integers to negative integers and positive
integers to positive integers.
So I was going to decide to work with maps of that type.
However for simplicity and comprehensiveness we can drop that condition.
I have then introduced the terminology of rotational.
So h is irrotational if for each j if the branches send positive integers to positive
integers and negative integers to negative integers and I say h is rotational whenever
it is not irrotational.
So if I had to give one word of advice to anyone studying Colatz and other hydromaps
it would be this, Colatz type maps need to be studied in relation to other maps of their
type.
The Colatz map needs to be studied in relation to other maps of its type.
And so is the only way we can figure out whether our observations of the Colatz map and its
dynamics are actually significant and have bearing on the map's conjectured behavior
or if they are just mathematical coincidences.
Beyond this it is also highly desirable to have a unified formalism for working with
maps of this type.
At present Colatz studies are lost in a sea of different notations and formalisms most
of which are not readily compatible with one another and not to mention quite ugly too
with all the indices ad hoc statistics and so on and so forth.
To make matters worse we will have the cranks that will come in claimed they had invented
some completely new theory of math using pictures or beads or tiles or whatever and it is very
difficult to negotiate all this.
And part of the reason why the Colatz studies languishes in the mathematical ghetto is that
there is no unifying formalism and everyone is wasting their time studying just the classical
Colatz map when what we really need to do is build a theory that works for all of them.
So as I showed in my dissertation the correspondence principle as we have seen for CHI3 it works
for basically all of the hydramaps.
These hydra of the type considered above.
These maps have Newman's and their Newman's satisfy correspondence principles.
In fact and this is quite funny the scope of the results I give in my dissertation like
the version you can find on my website it is not as big as it could be.
So it's worth explaining this because as I said it's a bit of a funny story.
So in my dissertation I saw the consider a hydramap like this.
This is a 3 hydra which sends n to n over 3 5n plus 1 over 3 or 7n minus 1 over 3 based
on the value of n mod 3.
So I would call this type of map a polygenic map because of the fact that these coefficients
here I have 1, 5 and 7.
This would be monogenic if the coefficients were either 1 or 5 and 1 or 7.
The fact that we have two different prime numbers occurring here makes things complicated.
It would also work if 7 was replaced say by 25 or 10 or some other number that's a multiple
of 5.
So my construction of CHI3 as we will see in episode 3 came about from considering what
happened when we considered arbitrary sequences of compositions of the even and odd branches
of T3.
So note that the odd branch is actually theoretically contracting if we subtract it it's ellipschitz
continuous with ellipschitz constant of one third.
So really what we have here is two contracting maps except they're not contracting in the
same topology.
This map is contracting in the Archimedean topology the real topology whereas the odd
map is contracting in the Threatic topology.
I'll talk about this again later but studying the images of successive applications of two
contracting maps or two or more contracting maps on a metric space that's a well-established
thing it's called a diram curve after the George diram the diram of diram cohomology
it's a very nice thing and you can basically view my construction of the Neumann as a generalization
of that to the cases where our maps are contracting but not necessarily all in the same topology.
So in this case we have a map which is contracting 5 adequately here this is contracting infinity
adequately meaning with respect to the real topology and a map which is contracting 7
adequately.
I wasn't able to deal with this polygenic case in my dissertation but I was able to
deal with this monogenic case.
So I thought that the polygenic case the reason why I couldn't deal with it because
it would be the contractions wouldn't all occur in a single topology wouldn't converge
in particular I found a way to handle the fact that this converges in the real topology
and this converges in the Threatic that was manageable and it has to do with the fact
that this map fixes zero but in this polygenic case it's no longer tenable it didn't work.
However two weeks before my dissertation was due in March of 2022 I suddenly had a revelation.
Originally I came up with frames as just a shorthand I was doing my computations just
as I did in episode 1 and instead I got sick and tired of having to write at the end of
every proof where the topology is in the real topology if Z is in the non-negative integers
and is the Threat is the Q-addict topology if Z is in the is has infinitely many digits
so I just said fine I'll write F2Q if it means if the convergence is happening in that form
and that was just a convenience.
However to again two weeks before my dissertation was due I was going through rewriting and just
cleaning up my proof of the correspondence theorem and I realized that frames could be
used to handle the polygenic case.
I show an example of this in my frames paper and it gets quite intricate but the point
is once I freed myself from the convention of having to keep my functions domains in
a single topology and instead have a mix and match of them I could make sense of all these
different maps.
I have not written out the details of how the correspondence principle and everything
applies in those case in those case in the polygenic case however it isn't really necessary
the proof as written and in the article that I currently have published one the part one
of my Coloss conjecture and the non-archemedian special theory series which I have linked
at the bottom of the description the proof I have in that paper and which is the proof
that I'm going to be showing you in episode three that proof can be adapted almost verbatim
to the polygenic case just requires being a little bit more careful about what topology
you're using but all that carries over verbate on that is wonderful and it's great but just
the polygenic case alone is by no means the final frontier of my research we can go again
we can go much much deeper so my Newman method admits a straightforward generalization to
Coloss type maps defined on rings of algebraic integers also called number rings such as
Z adjoin root 3 the first example of such a map in fact the map is on Z root 3 is given
by lay in 1983 an account of it and the other maps of that other math maps of that type
can be found in K.R. Matthews excellence PowerPoint slides about Coloss type maps I think I've
included the links in the description my formalism treats a hydra maps of this type as multi
dimensional and you know that for technical purposes I'm giving definition of my multi
dimensional hydra maps in terms of the ideals of a number ring but in practice I'll often
work with affine linear maps on Z to the D particularly when doing Fourier things this
is because recall the ring a ring of algebraic integers like this is isomorphic as a ring
with a basis to the lattice ZD we just pick a Z basis for this ring of integers so here's
the definition of a multi dimensional hydra map again this is defined using number rings
rather than lattices let F be a number field of degree D over Q when D is one we obtained
a hydra map on Z by defining what H does to a given input N based on the N value of
N modulo sum prime P the natural analog for this procedure in multiple dimensions is a
map on O F the ring of integers of the field F whose action on a given F integer Z is determined
by the value of Z modulo I where I is some proper ideal of O F this generalizes the D
equals one case where I is the ideal of Z generated by the prime P so fixing a nonzero
proper ideal I of O F of index Iota index recall is the number of elements in the quotient
ring O F modulo the idea ring modulo ideal so index I the structure theorem for finitely
generated modules over a principal ideal domain tells us that there is an isomorphism of the
add of additive groups of O F mod I is isomorphic to the product of the additive groups Z mod P
N Z where R is between one and the index of our ideal and where the P ends are integers
greater than or equal to two such that P N divides P N plus one for all N from one to R minus one
does not appear to have a standard name in the literature so I call it the depth
and note here that R is always going to be at most D I then write I zero through I Iota to denote
the cosets of I in O F with I zero denoting I itself with all that said an I hydra map on O F
or more succinctly an I hydra map is a subjective map on O F of the following form that it's a
affine linear map that reapplied depending on the value of the input modulo I here the A J's B
J's and D J's are F integers such that here they're nonzero the the GCD is one the ideal the DJs
generate in O F is contained in I and this quantity here we have the integrality condition
these are the direct multi-dimensional at the number ring analogs of the properties for one
dimensional hydra maps I then define the depth of H as the depth of this ideal I by appealing
to the power of linear algebra we can then realize H as a map on the lattice with branches of the form
the D tuple X gets sent to DJ inverse times A J X plus B J for invertible D by D matrices
DJ and AJ and for D by one column vectors B J to denote to do this note that there is a set B in
O F which forms a Z basis of the additive group of F integers so that for any element Z of O F
the image of Z under the projection from O F mod I to Z mod PN Z is the value of X N mod PN in other
words I'm picking a basis such that in order to figure out what H does to X you just look at the
values of each coordinate modulo PN so I choose once and for all such a basis B and then we make
the identification this everything is nice and in this case the elements J are no longer J's are
oh this is a leftover so just ignore the strings that'll make sense later so instead of picking
J's being subscripts like what like we had the zeroth map the one map our J's are going to correspond
each branch is going to be is going to correspond to some J in this set which is my notation for
this product right here so instead of indexing our J's by the values from zero one to P minus one
we're going to be inject and indexing them over a sub quotient of the lattice like this so that
being said a D dimensional P hydro map is then defined as a map of the following form it's H of X
where we sum over all of the equivalent basically it's all J where the P Nth component of J ranges
from zero to PN minus one and then it's this is Iverson brackets and this no station here is my
shorthand for the system of congruences X1 is congruent mod P1 to J1 blah blah blah XR is congruent
to JR mod PR and this is going to be one if these congruences are satisfied and zero otherwise
so again like with the one dimensional case this definition here is slightly more general
than the one I gave in my dissertation in my dissertation I impose some additional requirements
that reflect the two-sidedness of hydromaps on Z like the Colatz map and in this case this leads
to a generalization of the idea of irrotational or a rotational hydromap on the one dimensional
case and my part one paper covers the details of this so as I showed in my dissertations my
methods they don't just work for one dimensional hydromaps they work for multi-dimensional hydromaps
too however like with the one dimensional case I was initially flustered by the polygenic case
so my dissertation only deals with the monogenic multi-dimensional case but like with the one
dimensional case you can use frames to easily make sense of the polygenic case and everything's
nice so I'm going to give an example I found this example on reddit by Aktaionh they made a post on
the math subreddit and I've linked the post in descriptions it contains several examples of multi
dimensional hydromaps along with some lovely images Aktaionh made of their orbit classes so here
let D be the map on the Gaussian integers it's D for dragon defined by the following D of Z is
Z over one plus i if Z is zero modulo the ideal generated by one plus i and we add i otherwise
note that one comma one plus i is a Z basis for Z i and on writing one over one plus i
as negative i over two times one plus i we see that given any a and b and z the action of we're of
an element z written in this perspective this basis by dividing by one plus i is this thing
and so the Gaussian integer a plus b times one plus i will be a multiple of one plus i if and only
if a is congruent to zero mod two so now using coordinates from our basis b given as a Gaussian
integer z I will write it in vector form as x y to mean that z is equal to x plus y times one plus
i we can then define the lattice analog of D on z2 by D sends z's b coordinate vector to D of Z's
b coordinate vector then going through the computations blah blah blah blah
just work everything out write things in basis break it up into coordinates using this formula
we end up with the following that D sends x y to this matrix times x y if x is even and this if
for all for all other possibilities of x and y so note here this map has four branches one
corresponding to the choices of x and y x mod two one corresponding to the choices of y mod two
of these branches three are identical a little rewriting then gives us the dj inverse aj plus
bj four which is this thing and here's the picture provided by acting on h of the orbit classes
of this map this is the two they should say i it should be uh and i know this should be a c and
there should be no sanitation here sorry so this is the orbit classes in the complex plane
here the uh their two fixed points are zero and the cycle one plus i comma one and this is colored
based on whether they go this is proved by establishing the following easy estimate and that
is goodbye reddit so this is the limb soup of the Archimedean absolute value of the nth iterate of
d is less than or equal to this formula which is one over the square root of two mod one and so
because the the d is acting on a discrete space and its iterates are always bounded it can have
only finally many uh uh orbit classes and then it's easy to show that there are just two of them
because these are the only uh fixed points or cycles these are the only periodic points uh with
radius at most this so uh here the elements the picture we see this is zero if it's white if it
goes to zero and blue if they're iterated to the cycle this picture the reason why i call it d is
because we see the famous highway dragon curve present and there is the emergence of this curve
from the map is easily seen if we choose a different set of coordinates namely this set of coordinates
the corresponding realization db ends up being the following and here again we're index this time
we're indexed by the values of x and y and note that this matrix here is one over root two times
a counterclockwise rotation by 45 degrees around the origin the classical highway dragon curve is
the limit set uh that is the deram curve generated by uh arbitrary compositions of the of these
two maps here so we see that f1 is present in d with albeit with a translation
and that's why we get dragon curve very pretty the uh also this map here is somewhat degenerate
in that it is here this part is contracting but this part is not is neither contracting nor expanding
it's a translation map which is why this map's behavior is much easier to study uh the other
maps that actaeon h uh featured they all are are defined on rings of cyclotomic integers he has one
with a primitive third z of primitive third root of unity and they're very nice to study because
they have these easy properties so studying these would make for an excellent uh test case and toy
models to play around with because again the newman formalism it works here too and because of the
the nature of this particular map because it's not expanding it's even nicer than what we get
in the case for colats in in particular um so due to the simplicity of the formula used to define
d on zi it this was one case where working with matrices might complicate things a little bit
more than necessary so the newman of d denoted chi d is ends up being a complex valued function
on z2 and actually ends up being an l one by which i mean it is the space of absolutely
integrable complex valued functions on z2 where the integral is with respect to the real valued
two attic hard probability measure and specifically chi d of z converges in c point wise for z2 take
away s where s is the measure zero set of z's such that the limb soup of the number of ones
in uh z mod 2n divided by n converges to one that is to say these the singularity set is precisely
those z two attic answers z who their ones the ones digits have an upper density of one in the set
of their two attic digits chi d then satisfies these functional equations on the set of point
or set of z which it converges and satisfies the rising continuity condition which here is said
correctly is the limit of as n approaches infinity of chi d of z mod 2n chi d also satisfies the
correspondence principle as we'll see in episode three the proof is very nice and really can be
easily adapted to any topologically complete valued field so the fact that chi d is complex
valued while chi 3 is three attic valued is not at all surprising this is due to the frame
theoretic nature of my approach that is to say we utilize any viable absolute values on the
newman's output in order to make set output meaningfully fully converges so part of what
makes me so excited about my findings is that my worst work extends as I said almost verbatim to
the multidimensional case and the correspondence principle even the even the computations we did
in episode one all of them have direct analogs in the multidimensional case I corresponded with
KR Matthews back in 2017 and he told me that the multidimensional hydromaps are basically
entirely unstudied the only studies of them that have been done are the or lay study and the one
that uh and uh Matthews notes the rest it's completely unknown and my techniques can be used
it and it's again the formalism is the same for the uh one-dimensional and the multidimensional
cases the only way the multidimensional case is different is that you're using matrices and
vectors instead of scalars so you have to be careful about the commute to commute whether
or not the matrices commute but otherwise it's almost exactly the same um so acting on H's maps
and I give the link to his post in descriptions it might be a great time to start developing this
theory we're not done yet though we can still go further everything we've talked about so far
takes place over fields of characteristic zero but why stop there why not consider what happens
in positive positive characteristic and so Matthews slides show that one can get hydromaps
on spaces of positive characteristic here the space we will work over is the ring of polynomials
with coefficients in a finite field um I didn't bother to address these in my dissertation I already
had enough on my plate but as with all the other generalizations I mentioned so far
all everything that I've done can be modified uh easily to show that it's true we get the
correspondence principle we get the Fourier analysis it's everything is wonderful um Matthews
slides present the following example of a positive characteristic a hydromap here f2 of x is the ring
of polynomials in within of the indeterminate x or with coefficients in the finite field of two
elements here it's the t of f is f divided by x if f is congruent to x mod zero uh sorry f is
congruent to zero mod x and x squared plus one times f plus one over x if f is congruent to one mod x
the numin of this map chi t accepts an element of z2 as an input and produces as an output
an element r the ring of the completion of the field of uh rational functions in with coefficients
in f2 in with respect to the absolute value induced by the valuation associated to the prime ideal x
minus one a bit of algebra shows that this ring is isomorphic to f2 of y the integer ring of f2
of y this is the uh here this is the field of formal power of formal Laurent series in y with
coefficients in f2 this is the field of the ring of formal power series in y with coefficients in
f2 and then chi t is the unique function from z2 to uh uh r so this z2 to this satisfying the following
functional equations uh subject to the rising continuity condition there where the convergence
is in the topology of r or if the reader prefers the topology of the field of fractions of r the
isomorphic copy of chi t taking values in f2 of y can then be written as like this and is the unique
function from z2 to f2 of y satisfying these functional equations subject to the rising
continuity condition blah so it's just replacing y x y with x plus one yields the previous version
it would be interesting to see if the number theoretic rule of thumb that function fields
are easier to work with ends up being true in the for the coax type conjectures as well uh
note that this is technically a one-dimensional example of a positive characteristic hydra map
and yes we can do multi-dimensional positive characteristic hydra maps too and everything
works there as well so this is a lot of detail and this is one of the things that makes me kind
of freak out when i heard that my editors of the journal recommend that i should publish my work
as a textbook because i could do a textbook for each of these and because i want because there's
a lot that i'm doing and because i want to be both comprehensive but also clear i am hesitant
to write up a textbook that tries and deal with to deal with all of these cases simultaneously
using a just one go through that would just be too much for me i would need to break it up in
different cases because there's enough subtleties that occur in when you move from the one-dimensional
case to the multi-dimensional case or the positive characteristic to the uh zero characteristic
to positive characteristic that i'd like to treat those separately so i might end up having to write
the same textbook multiple times so rather than just start that i'm gonna say what the hell let
me just make a video and see what happens so as we can see there is a vast amount of generality
to be studied here and again the pq attic phenomena that we saw in episode one for each of these cases
we get an analog of that and we can study that too so as a result for this series of videos
instead of doing all of this very scary very general stuff i'm going to focus on what i basically
have considered the ideal test case which is the shortened qx plus one maps these are what
happens when we take the shortened coax map and replace the three with an arbitrary odd prime q
the tq's are an ideal toy case for the more general theory that i've talked about above
they allow us to get variable behavior by allowing q to vary while also keeping those
same variations under the control of the single parameter q in this regard we actually end up
with a direct parallel with the idea of a bifurcation of a dynamical system where one has a differential
equation that depends on some parameters and as the parameters change the long-term behavior
of the system may change as well it um indeed we see that uh you basically get two cases for the
in this setup one when q is three and another one q is greater than or equal to five you could also
get a case where q equals one in which case you would use real now a real value you would use a
two infinity attic analysis rather than two q attic analysis and it is actually very instructive
and enlightening to treat q as a parameter taking values not just the inner in primes
but integer values or rational values or real values or even complex values and we can it actually
leads to the idea of thinking about this not as one not as a collection of maps but rather a single
map parameterized by over q and that's part of where i'm thinking that might there might be
connections to scheme theory in that language so the shortened qx plus one maps are not entirely
unstudied after t3 t5 is also known as the 5x plus one map is probably the second most well
studied hydra map and it is somewhat infamous for how ridiculously just contrasting its behavior
is compared to t3 so people think that that the colas map is bad they haven't met the 5x plus one
map so in the 1970s rehotaris revolutionized the field of colas studies by introducing the parity
vector uh this is a groundbreaking groundbreaking probabilistic tool which what you do is you
study the value of an individual iterate modulo 2 so you keep track of how it flip-flops from even
to odd and using this he in two papers he proved that the set of all divergent points
of t3 in the non-negative integers has density zero recall this means that the density that the
number of elements so recall that given a set s the density is the limit as n approaches infinity
of the number of elements of s less than or equal to n divided by n it is an unfortunate truth that
not every subset of n zero has a well-defined density so to that end terraces result is groundbreaking
in two reasons not only does he show that uh he shows that the divergent points has a well-defined
density and furthermore that that density of zero is zero those same techniques can be used to show
that the set of all divergent points of t5 in n zero has density one so in t so for the t3 we
expect almost no integer to go to infinity whereas in t5 we expect almost every integer to go to
infinity um however and this is very mortifying we have not proven that even a single number
goes to infinity the smallest us uh no integer suspected to go to infinity is seven uh though
of course no proof of this is actually known uh the same the same uh preponderance of divergent
points also applies to tq when q is greater than or equal to seven just like chi three as those being
associated to t3 as it's newman we can associate the newman chi q to each tq and as what would help
then as i've been saying all along we get all the same things we get our characterization by functional
equations and by the incorrectly written rising continuity condition and then we get our correspondence
principle which for some reason is very big at least spaced out so here again the periodic points
of tq um are in a one or an objective correspondence with the set of of rational two-addict integers
with infinitely many digits that chi q sends to integer values and if there is an irrational
two-add integer at which chi q attains a rational integer value then chi q is a diversion point of
tq so for chi three we should expect that this never happens whereas for chi q we should expect
that most that this almost always happens so that means we would expect that chi q for q
greater than or equal to five would have very many uh integer values attained whereas chi three
would have very few integer values attained also just notice that the uh this method of my result
the correspondence principle it doesn't just apply to the non-negative integers it also applies
to the negative integers so it studies the map that you're working with on the entire space
so as we still see the pq attics of analytic setting utilized in this series is filled with
oodles of interesting tractable secondary and tertiary problems worthy of exploration in their
own right independent of their potential applicability to chi q and colas while the ideal if proving
colas was simply a matter of developing a sufficiently good understanding of pq attic
analysis the only way to truly know what ingredients are needed to resolve colas is to is if we succeed
answering the conjecture once and for all even so this ought to have no bearing on whether or not
pq attic analysis itself is worthy of study it is a new subject with tantalizing mysteries and
unexpected connections all its own and that in and of itself i think makes it deserving of our
attention and i'll hope that you'll join me in episode three to continue the journey that's it
for now and uh have a good night bye
