The lecture is Stephen Restler, Professor of Civil Engineering at the United States Military Academy at West Point.
He earned a Bachelor of Science degree from West Point, Masters and PhD degrees in Civil Engineering from Lehigh University,
and a Master of Strategic Studies degree from the U.S. Army War College.
He is a registered professional engineer in the Commonwealth of Virginia,
commissioned as an officer in the Army Corps of Engineers in 1979.
Professor Restler has served in a variety of engineering assignments in the United States and abroad.
He has been a member of the West Point faculty for 19 years, teaching courses in engineering mechanics, structural analysis and design,
construction management and civil engineering professional practice.
In 2007, he deployed to Afghanistan to develop a civil engineering program for the National Military Academy of Afghanistan in Kabul.
Professor Restler has written more than 80 scholarly papers on teaching techniques, faculty development, curriculum assessment and other topics.
He received seven Best Paper Awards from the American Society for Engineering Education,
and is a developer and principal instructor for the Excellence in Civil Engineering Education Teaching Workshop, a landmark faculty development program.
Professor Restler has won numerous national awards, including the EDUCOM Medal for Use of Information Technology in Education,
the BLISS Medal for Outstanding Contributions to Engineering Education,
and the George K. Wadland Distinguished Service Award from the American Society for Engineering Education in 2000.
Professor Restler was one of Engineering News Records' top 25 newsmakers who served construction.
The American Society of Civil Engineers has awarded him the President's Medal,
the Excellence in Civil Engineering Education Leadership Award,
and the Outstanding Projects and Leaders Award, the Society's highest honor.
The course guidebook that comes with these lectures includes lecture guides, a timeline, a glossary and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to review these materials before or after each lecture.
