Welcome back. In the past few lectures, we've examined two of the six basic types of structural
elements, tension members and compression members. Today, we'll look at an element that
combines both tension and compression within the same structural member, the beam. The two
great aspirations of structural engineering are building upward and building across horizontal
distances. The beam is the simplest element that can span a horizontal distance, and so
it's hardly surprising that we find beams in some of the most ancient structures on
earth. The Lion Gate is one of the best known archaeological remains of Mycenae, a late Bronze Age
civilization that thrived in the Peloponnes region of southern Greece from roughly 1600 to
1100 BC. The massive stone walls at Mycenae are called Cyclopean because later Greeks of the
classical era believed that these immense stones could only possibly have been put in place by
the mythical one-eyed giant, the Cyclopes. As you can see here, at the heart of the Lion Gate is a
stone beam that spans the entire 10-foot opening. This structural element supports its own weight,
plus the weight of that lion sculpture above it, a total of 30 tons. It's no wonder that later
Greeks were awed by this structural achievement. But by the 4th century BC, descendants of those
Greeks who were so awed by Mycenaean construction were building far more impressive structures
themselves. Structures like the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus, one of the seven wonders of the
ancient world. The Temple of Artemis hasn't survived from antiquity, but we know a lot about it from
ancient sources. The Roman naturalist, Pliny the Elder, recorded its dimensions as 425 feet long
by 225 feet wide, with columns 60 feet tall. This immense building enclosed seven times more
interior space than the Parthenon in Athens. A single architrave beam of the Temple of Artemis was
reported to be over 28 feet in length and 26 tons in weight. In Greek architecture, the architrave is
the horizontal element spanning the front of the Temple portico, just above the columns. In this
rendering, the architrave beam might appear to be a single beam at first glance, but it was actually
composed of seven individual spans, each extending only from one column to the next. We can see this
in Greek temples that have survived to the modern era, like the Erechtheon at Athens. Here you can
clearly see that the architrave consists of five distinct beams because the joints between those
beams are clearly visible. The one beam I've highlighted here has a span of about seven feet. Now
imagine the Temple of Artemis with its beams four times longer. Wow! Is it even possible for a
stone beam to span 28 feet and carry its own weight without failing? Or maybe was Pliny's account
just a bit exaggerated in an attempt to impress us with the skills of Greek engineers? Later in this
lecture, we'll answer these questions using modern scientific principles. Now, fast forward to
1998 when the Raft Sundet Bridge in Norway became the world's longest spanning beam bridge. Its
main span measures 978 feet over 30 times longer than that extraordinary architrave beam of the
Temple of Artemis. In many ways, the Raft Sundet Bridge represents the state of the art in modern
beam design, the result of thousands of years of development. So how did we get from Mycenae to
Raft Sundet? During this lecture, we'll examine the beam as a structural element. And in doing so,
we'll examine some key milestones in the historical development of beams from the primitive lintel
over the gate at Line Gate in Mycenae to the sophisticated and highly optimized beam structures
of today. We'll learn about the scientific developments that made this transition possible.
So what is a beam? Well, let's have a look. A beam is a structural element that's subject to
transverse loading, loading that's applied perpendicular to the axis of the member. So the axis of
the member in this case is horizontal. And so a transverse load would be one that's vertically
oriented, like the weight I'm hanging on it now. A beam carries load in response to that
transverse loading by bending. In engineering mechanics, this behavior is called flexure,
and it has two fundamental characteristics. First, when a beam bends, as you can see here,
note that the black lines on the face of the beam get closer together in the top and farther
apart on the bottom. Or to be a bit more precise, they get closer together on the concave side
and farther apart on the convex side. And I make that distinction because it is certainly possible
for a beam to bend this way rather than this way, so it's really better to make the distinction
between concave and convex rather than top and bottom. What that means is that the concave
side of the beam experiences compression and the convex side experiences tension. Second,
this combination of tension and compression causes the beam to deform from a formally straight
configuration to a curved shape like this. Now, when I make reference to this sort of curvature
in the beam, I'll use the terms concave up and concave down. When I say concave up, it means
simply that the concave surface is the one on the top of the beam in this configuration.
When the beam bends the other way, we'll refer to that condition as concave downward,
because now that concave surface is facing down. Now that we know what flexure is all about,
let's see how beams are used in real structures. Like a column, a beam has three main physical
characteristics. It's support configuration, it's cross-section, and it's profile. The most
common support configurations are simple, continuous, and cantilever. Let's look at these. This is
a simply supported beam. Each end of the beam rests on a single support out at the ends,
and under low, this simply supported beam bends into single curvature. That is, we simply see
a concave upward surface from one end of the beam to the other. It is, in a word, simple. Each
segment of a Greek temple architrave is, in fact, simply supported, with each end resting on
one column. Many modern highway overpass bridges, like this one, are also simply supported.
It's a very common configuration in modern bridge structures. The next support configuration
is the cantilever configuration, and we can also represent that here with my model. Take
off the simply supported beam, add the cantilever here. The fundamental essential characteristic
of a cantilever is that one end is fixed and the other end is unsupported. And when we load a
cantilever beam out here at the end, we'll see that it bends into the exact opposite curvature
that we saw with a simply supported beam. Now we see that the general orientation of the
curvature is concave downward. Out in the real world, a flagpole can be thought of as a
cantilever beam turned vertically. And my all-time favorite example of a cantilever is the
skywalk observation platform at the Grand Canyon. Now that's an unsupported end.
Finally, we need to look at continuous supports. And as the name suggests, a continuously
supported beam is one that has supports not only out at its ends, but also intermediate
supports, one or more of them somewhere along the length of the beam. And the beam spans
continuously from one end to the other without a break at that intermediate support. Now
when we load a continuous beam, we get some very interesting behavior. But because this
configuration is so stiff in bending, it's very hard for you to see what those deformations
look like. So rather than use my wooden beam, I'm going to substitute a foam beam which
will give us a much better sense of what those deformations look like. And wow, look at those
deformations. What we see in a continuously supported beam is that both forms of curvature
occur within the same structural element. Out near the ends of the beam, we have curvature
concave upward. But over the support, notice that the curvature goes the opposite direction.
Over the supports, the curvature is concave downward, like this. Because of that change
in the direction of the curvature, what we're going to see is that continuous beams can be
significantly more structurally efficient than simply supported beams. A fine example
of a continuous beam is the Raft-Sundit Bridge, which I introduced earlier. As my 3D model
shows, the completed bridge is one continuous, 2,300-foot structural element that extends
across three intermediate supports. It's a very impressive structure. The second aspect
of a beam's physical configuration that we need to talk about is its cross-section. Temple
architrave beams, like this one, use a simple rectangular cross-section. But lest you think
that the rectangular beam is strictly in ancient form, the wooden beams supporting the ceilings
and floors of many modern homes are rectangular as well. Most modern steel beams use an eye-shaped
cross-section, as this photo of the Empire State Building under construction emphasizes.
Smaller eye-shaped beams are manufactured in a rolling mill, with each beam being formed
from a single piece of steel, heated red-hot, and then pressed into shape with massive rollers.
Larger eye-shapes are generally built up from individual steel plates welded together.
A beam that's built up from an individual place in this way is called a plate girder,
and this photo shows one of those plate girders loaded onto a truck and routed to a construction site.
By the way, on any eye-shaped cross-section, the two horizontal plates, top and bottom,
are called flanges, and the vertical one that connects them together is called the web.
Many reinforced concrete beams use eye-shaped cross-sections as well, but in this case,
note that the top and bottom flanges are very different shapes. If you look closely at the left-hand
end of the beam, you'll see why. These steel reinforcing strands projecting from the concrete
are the reason. Remember that when a beam bends, it experiences tension on the bottom.
The concrete, which is weak in tension, needs to be reinforced more heavily on the bottom,
and so that's why we see this asymmetrical shape, because the cross-section needs to allow more steel
to be placed down on the bottom of the cross-section than in the top.
And finally, that beautiful raft-sundered bridge is also made of reinforced concrete,
but it uses for its cross-section a single hollow box shape, as you can see here.
Clearly, there's an awful lot of variety in beam cross-section configurations.
The third general classification of beams is by their profile.
That's the shape of the beam when viewed from the side.
Most beams from ancient temple architraves to the modern plate girders of many highway bridges
are rectangular in profile, but as we've seen, the raft-sundered bridge uses an elegant curved profile,
with the thickest regions located directly over the supports
and much thinner regions out near the center of the span.
But interestingly enough, this beam has the exact opposite profile.
It's thick in the middle and thinner out at the supports.
This beam is part of the innovative iron structural system of Arles Mill,
a 19th-century British textile factory that we'll be examining in detail in a future lecture.
So why all this incredible variety in beam configurations anyway?
Why are all these different support configurations cross-sections and profiles used
in various applications of the beam in real-world structures?
Well, the answer to this question comes straight from Vitruvius.
Form, function, and structure.
In some cases, a particular beam configuration is used for aesthetic reasons.
Greek temple architraves are rectangular in profile,
primarily because that rectangular shape is integral to the architectural design of the temple portico.
In some cases, function drives the selection.
For example, the decision to use a cantilever configuration for that Grand Canyon Skywalk
was entirely determined by its function of providing an unsupported viewing platform out over the canyon.
But in most cases, the main reason for using a particular beam configuration is structural efficiency.
And to understand why this is true, we need to delve a little bit into some basic scientific principles of flexure.
To guide our way, let's again refer to our structural analysis roadmap.
And to keep it real, let's also use a real beam, the architrave of the Temple of Artemis,
as the basis for our exploration of principles.
We'll begin by considering external forces, loads and reactions.
For this beam, the principal load is the member's own self-weight.
Remember, it's a very heavy stone element.
To accurately represent this self-weight on a free body diagram,
we're going to use something called a distributed load, which is shown here.
As the name suggests, a load of this type is spread uniformly along the entire length of the member.
It's expressed in units of force per length, for example, pounds per foot.
Now, according to Pliny, this particular architrave beam weighed 26 tons, or that's 52,000 pounds.
And it was 28 feet long.
So the magnitude of the distributed load is just 52,000 pounds divided by 28 feet, or 1,860 pounds per foot.
That's pounds per foot of length of the beam.
And the principle of equilibrium tells us that this 52,000 pound downward load causes two 26,000 pound reactions, one at each end.
Those are the external forces, now onto the internal.
As we've seen, when a beam bends, the top half experiences internal compression while the bottom experiences internal tension.
Let's use a free body diagram to get a better understanding of how this works.
And remember that whenever we look at internal forces, just as we did back when we looked at the simple tension test a couple of lectures ago,
we do so by doing this thought experiment.
We make a conceptual cut through the beam in order to expose the internal forces,
and then we draw a free body diagram of the segment in order to apply equilibrium and understand what's going on with those forces.
That's what we'll do here.
We'll cut the beam in the center, draw a free body diagram of half of the member,
and when we do that, here's what we see.
The distributed load, one upward reaction at the end, and on the face of the cut, those two internal forces that we talked about earlier,
a compression force above and a tension force below.
Now the principle of equilibrium tells us that these two forces must be equal in magnitude, even though they go in opposite directions.
The internal tension and compression are the only horizontal forces acting on this body,
so they have to counterbalance each other.
We use this model beam to physically represent the free body diagram that we're currently looking at.
This end of the beam will represent the cut that we just made to expose the internal forces,
and at this end I'm going to represent the 26,000 pound reaction by just pushing upward with my hand like this.
Now out here at the cut, I need to apply that pair of equal and opposite internal forces.
What I'm going to do is pull out on the bottom and push inward at the top,
and I'm going to try to do that by applying equal and opposite forces along that cut face.
When I do that, here's my reaction, here are my two forces.
When I do that, here's what happens.
When I simultaneously apply tension below and compression above, what happens is that I actually rotate the cut end of the beam segment.
Now as you'll recall from lecture two, the tendency of a force to cause rotation is a moment.
And so it turns out that the effect of internal tension and compression is exactly equivalent to the moment of a force.
In this case it's really more accurate to call it the moment of two forces,
the moment associated with the internal tension and compression that occur within the beam as a result of bending.
We call this the internal moment, but I really want to emphasize because that term tends to cause some confusion sometimes.
I want to emphasize that when I use the term internal moment, I'm just talking about that pair of internal forces,
one in tension, one in compression that have a tendency to cause the beam cross section to rotate.
The internal moment is caused by external loads applied to the beam.
In fact, you can think of the internal moment as a measure of the external forces' tendency to cause bending at some particular location in a beam.
And indeed, you can correctly infer from that statement that the internal moment of a beam can vary along the length of the member.
It depends on loading, on span length, and on that specific location along the length of the member.
For any given beam, we can calculate the internal moment anywhere we want by simply making a cut at the point of interest
and then applying that all-important principle of equilibrium to determine both the magnitude and direction of that internal moment.
Once we've determined what the internal moment is at several points along the length of the beam,
we can very easily draw a graph of internal moment versus position.
And for our simply supported architrave beam, here's what that result looks like.
Very interesting. The variation of internal moment for a uniform loading on a simply supported beam turns out to be a perfect mathematical parabola.
This graph of internal moment versus length is called a moment diagram.
It's a vitally important analytical tool not only for engineering analysis and design, but ultimately to help us see and understand structure.
Every loading and support condition has its own characteristic moment diagram, and for this reason it's an extremely valuable tool.
We'll see how it's used both quantitatively and qualitatively in a few minutes.
For now, we've completed the second step of our analysis process, internal forces,
or more precisely, the internal moment that's associated with the internal tension and compression force in a beam.
We're ready to move on to stress.
The first scientific study of stress in beams was performed by the great Galileo and documented in his 1638 treatise Two New Sciences.
Through extensive experimentation, Galileo arrived at some very important theoretical insights about the strength of beams.
Unfortunately, he didn't have a clear understanding of where the internal forces within a beam are applied,
and as a result of that misconception, he ended up compromising the validity of his findings.
And more importantly, because he held such an exalted status as a scientist in his time, his successors still accepted those flawed findings as established fact.
Indeed, it took nearly 200 years before Galileo's misconceptions were finally corrected.
During those two centuries, many of the greatest minds in math and science struggled with the problem of flexural behavior.
They made some incremental gains in one aspect of the problem or another,
but no one was able to put together a comprehensive, scientifically-based model for beam analysis until 1826.
In that year, a brilliant French engineer and physicist named Claude Louis Navier
formulated and published the Scientific Principles of Fletcher that we still use today.
Navier was an 1804 graduate of École Polytechnique, a revolutionary new state-sponsored school in France
that was intended to advance technological development within the country
by integrating scientific theory with engineering practice.
As a result of this unique orientation, this institution was an incubator
for some of the 19th century's greatest and most practical scientific discoveries.
It was also instrumental in advancing the transition from empirical to science-based engineering that began with Galileo
and ultimately came to fruition in the middle of the 19th century.
And no one better exemplified École Polytechnique's philosophy of integrating theory and practice than Navier.
Here's what Navier discovered about beams.
First, he observed that when a beam bends, we get compression on the top and tension on the bottom,
which we've already observed.
But more specifically, the black lines on this beam get closer together at the top,
farther apart at the bottom, and very significantly they remain straight between those two extremes.
What that tells us is that there must be compressive stress at the top of the beam.
And again, in this case, when I say the top, I'm referring to the concave side
because I'm bending the beam in this particular orientation.
And there must be tensile stress at the bottom.
Most importantly, there's a linear variation of stress between those two extremes
with maximum compression occurring on the concave side and maximum tension occurring on the convex side.
Based on these insights, Navier formulated a complete mathematical model manifested in a single equation
for calculating the maximum stress in any beam for any loading condition.
I don't want to delve into the complexities of Navier's equation here,
but for our purposes, it's sufficient to just state the big picture principle reflected in this mathematical model.
Stress in a beam increases with internal moment and decreases with the area moment of inertia.
And we just discussed the internal moment, that measure of the external force's tendency to cause bending
at a particular location in a beam, reflected directly in the internal tension and compression forces
that we see anywhere along the length of the beam.
And last lecture, we learned that the area moment of inertia is a geometric property of the cross-section.
A measure of that cross-section's resistance to bending.
And we saw how it's heavily influenced by the distribution of material around the axis of the member.
There are a couple more wrinkles we won't go into in actually applying Navier's equation.
But to bring closure to that real-world problem that we've been discussing all along,
I decided to use the equation myself to complete that analysis of the temple of Artemis,
Architrave beam that we talked about earlier in this lecture.
And I'd like to quickly summarize what I found.
Based on the weight and span length provided in Pliny the Elder's account,
Navier's equation provides an estimated maximum stress of 200 psi,
with the critical location being the bottom of the beam at mid-span, where the stone would be a tension.
And then to complete the structural analysis, I estimated the tensile strength of marble
using standard material property references.
There's a lot of variability in tensile strength in any stone,
but 1,000 psi is a reasonable estimate for marble.
And so my calculated stress, 200 psi, is considerably less than the strength of the material, 1,000 psi.
Clearly, this beam was able to carry loads safely, with a factor of safety,
and remember that's strength over stress, equal to about 5.
It's a very reasonable number, particularly for a brittle material like marble that's loaded in tension.
So based on this analysis, there is no reason to doubt Pliny's account of that size of the temple of Artemis, Architrave beam.
My calculations indicate that a 28-foot stone Architrave was entirely feasible.
It's also clear, however, that this beam was very close to the upper limit of possibility for stone construction.
And that makes sense too, because no larger temples were ever built.
Remember, this was one of the wonders of the ancient world.
As I've said before, the scientific principles of engineering mechanics can inform our understanding of the built environment
in fascinating and sometimes unexpected ways.
In this particular example, we're even able to draw some historical insight from a quantitative application of Navier's equation.
But we can learn even more about the world's great structures by applying the general principles of Fletcher qualitatively,
to answer some basic questions about the beam configurations that I introduced earlier in this lecture.
First question, why do so many modern beams use eye-shaped and hollow box cross-sections,
rather than the regular rectangular cross-sections that we've seen in so many ancient structures?
Well, it turns out that an eye-shaped beam has significantly greater resistance to bending,
because it has more material located farther away from the member axis.
The flanges represent the majority of the material in the cross-section of a typical eye-shaped beam,
and because those flanges are far away from the central axis,
they contribute to a larger area moment of inertia than we would find in a rectangular section.
And remember from Navier's theory that a larger area moment of inertia produces a lower stress.
So, for example, these two cross-sections use exactly the same amount of material,
so they have exactly the same cross-sectional area.
Yet, because the flanges of the eye-shape are positioned farther away from the neutral axis,
its moment of inertia is 40 times higher than that of the solid square section.
Based on Navier's equation, this beam with higher moment of inertia will experience correspondingly lower stress.
Now, there is a disadvantage of eye-shaped cross-sections.
It turns out that an eye-shaped beam is particularly susceptible to problems with torsion or twisting.
It has very low resistance to torsion or twisting.
On the other hand, a hollow box section is quite strong in torsion because it has a closed shape.
And like an eye-shape, a hollow box also has a large moment of inertia,
at least in comparison with an equivalent solid rectangular section,
because once again it places much of its material in top and bottom flanges
that are relatively far away from the central axis of that member.
And that's why hollow box section was the ideal choice for the long-span structure,
the Raft-Sundet Bridge, that we looked at earlier in this lecture.
So what about the widely varying profiles and support configurations and beams we looked at earlier?
Well, once again the answer is structural efficiency.
Earlier, I showed you a graph called a moment diagram,
which plots the variation of internal moment along the length of a beam.
And here's that parabolic moment diagram associated with a simply supported beam with a uniform loading.
Navier's equation tells us that higher internal moment causes higher stress,
while a larger moment of inertia reduces stress.
We can increase a beam's moment of inertia by making it deeper.
So it's clear that a truly optimal beam design could be achieved
by making the profile of the beam match its moment diagram.
Wherever the internal moment is high, the beam should be deep.
Wherever the internal moment is lower, the beam doesn't need to be as deep.
The result is that the deep portions of the beam provide greater resistance to bending
at precisely the locations where that greater resistance to bending is required.
And that is exactly what the 19th century British engineer Eaton Hodgkinson did
when he designed the iron beams for this innovative structural system in Oral's Mill.
By making the profile of the beam follow the parabolic curve of the moment diagram,
Hodgkinson was able to gain exceptional structural efficiency.
And that's also what the designers of the Raft-Sundit Bridge did
when they developed this very different profile.
For this force-band continuous bridge, the moment diagram is quite different
from the one we saw on our simply supported beam.
The shape is actually still a series of parabolas,
but now we see that the internal moments are distributed in both negative and positive directions.
On my model, the negative moment corresponds to bending concave downward,
as we see directly over these intermediate sports.
And the positive moments correspond to bending concave upward,
as we see in the middle and outer ends of each span.
On the moment diagram, these internal moments with the largest magnitude
occur directly over the intermediate supports.
And sure enough, the graceful parabolic shape of Raft-Sundit's concrete box girder
is significantly deeper over the supports than it is out in the middle of the spans.
So we see that close correspondence between the profile of the bridge
and the moment diagram that is representative of a truly efficient structural design for a beam.
In the Raft-Sundit Bridge, we see the ultimate product of science-based engineering,
a beam with supports and profile that are matched to the moment diagram
and a cross-section that achieves optimal resistance to both bending and torsion.
In short, a structure that's perfectly tuned to its load-carrying purpose.
Beam design has come a long way from the Lion Gate at Mycenae.
Over the past two lectures, we've seen the great human aspiration to build up manifested in the column,
and the aspiration to build a cross manifested in the beam.
Next lecture, we'll look at a structural element that can do both, the truss.
Until then, thank you.
