Welcome back, and now it's time for curves.
In this lecture, we'll be looking at the final two of our six basic types of structural
elements.
Both of which are curved members, the cable and the arch.
When you look at the majestic curve of the St. Louis Gateway Arch and the graceful sweep
of the main cables of the Golden Gate Bridge, has that ever occurred to you that their
principal structural elements, the cable and the arch, have exactly the same shape?
If so, did you ever wonder if there is an underlying scientific reason why the designers
of these structures chose the same shape?
In this lecture, we'll explore the mechanics of the cable and the arch, and we'll determine
the extensive and occasionally surprising parallels between them.
First cables.
There are two basic cable configurations we'll consider in this lecture, and both are illustrated
here.
The first is a cable that supports a uniform load, distributed all along the cable's length.
The second is a cable that supports a horizontally distributed load that's suspended below it.
Now these two configurations might seem like essentially the same thing, but they aren't.
As the diagram shows, there's a subtle difference in the two loading configurations, and this
causes a subtle difference in the mechanics of the two cables.
While we're here, some terminology please.
The horizontal distance from support to support is called the span of a cable.
The vertical distance from the supports down to the lowest point in the cable is called
the sag.
And when I refer to the length of a cable, I'm actually talking about this curved distance.
Think of it as the amount of cable that you need to buy at your local hardware store to
reach from support to support with the appropriate amount of sag.
The cable's length is always somewhat greater than its span.
If we suspend a cable by its ends from two points of equal height, like this, it naturally
falls into this beautiful curved shape.
Note that the only load acting on this cable is its own weight, and the self-weight is
in fact uniformly distributed along the cable's length.
So this is the first of our two categories.
And by the way, for this demonstration, I'm using a chain rather than a cable because
the chain has a lot of mass and because it's very flexible.
So it drapes very nicely, and therefore it illustrates that characteristic shape of a
cable particularly well and in a way that you can see it more clearly.
But from the theoretical perspective of engineering mechanics, there's actually no difference
between a chain and a cable.
Now note that a draped cable carries load entirely in tension.
We can tell because a cable simply won't carry compression.
As I always tell my students when we're working on cable problems, you can't push a rope.
Our first category, a cable supporting a uniform load distributed along its length, is the
oldest form of cable structure.
There's good evidence that simple suspension bridges like this were being built in China
as early as the third century BC.
Initially the cables were made of cane or bamboo, but archaeologists have found a stone
tablet describing an iron chain bridge built in the first year of the Han dynasty, 206 BC.
The structure shown here is a relatively modern bridge in China's Henan province, but it's
still quite representative of the traditional Chinese suspension bridge type.
Note that the bridge deck is attached directly to the cables, which means that the principal
load is in fact uniformly distributed along the length of the cable rather than suspended
below it.
A cable loaded along its own length naturally assumes a curved shape called a catenary.
This can be proved mathematically, and in that mathematical proof what we find is the
shape of the cable is actually a mathematical function called a hyperbolic cosine.
The catenary looks very much like a parabola, however mathematically it is quite different.
We'll talk about that difference shortly.
Anyway, a draped cable naturally assumes this characteristic geometric shape without any
assistance from us.
Now as you can see here, the cables of the Chinese bridge have very little sag.
You think there's a relationship between the amount of sag and the tension in the cable?
Well in a moment we'll look at that question mathematically, but I'll bet if you think
about it you can already guess the answer right now.
Our second category of cable is the type that supports a horizontally distributed load
suspended below the cable.
We can model this configuration, and in fact I've modeled it here with this physical model,
and notice that the load on the cable now is not the cable itself.
In fact for this configuration we're going to assume that the weight of the cable is
very very small in comparison with the loads that are suspended from it.
The load on the cable consists of a series of equal weights which are equally spaced
along a horizontal plane below the cable.
This configuration is more representative of a typical modern suspension bridge, such
as the Bear Mountain Bridge shown here, because the principal loading is not the curved cable
itself but rather the horizontal bridge deck that's suspended below the cable.
The Bear Mountain Bridge crosses the Hudson River just a few miles south of my home at
West Point.
In 1924 when it was completed this was the longest suspension span in the world.
I like to use this bridge to illustrate basic principles of cables because as you can see
in the photo only the center span of the bridge is actually suspended from the main cables.
Those short outer spans aren't connected to the cables at all.
Thus this real world bridge is essentially the same as my physical model and the analytical
model that we're about to develop.
To learn about cables let's again turn to that all important principle of equilibrium.
If a body is at rest then all the forces and moments acting on that body must be in balance.
We can use this principle to determine both the shape of the cable and its internal tension
force.
Let's begin by drawing a free body diagram of the main cable with its external loads
and reactions.
Its geometry is defined by its span and its sag as shown here.
Has a uniformly horizontally distributed load and remember that's the type of load that
we would express in terms of pounds per foot, force per length, distributed along the entire
length of the bridge deck.
The weight of the cable itself is assumed to be very small, negligible in comparison
with the load hanging from it in this analysis.
The cable also needs to have both vertical and horizontal reactions as you can see in
the free body diagram and as you can see in my model the vertical reactions are there
to hold the cable up and the horizontal reactions are there to prevent it from pulling inward
under the action of that load.
Now to investigate the internal force in the cable we need to do what we always do to investigate
internal forces, make a conceptual cut through the cable to expose those internal forces.
The middle of the span is a particularly convenient location for making this cut because the cable
is perfectly horizontal at that point and therefore the internal tension force must
also be perfectly horizontal.
Now we can draw a free body diagram of half the cable showing the internal tension at
the cut and we can also see that we now have three unknown forces, two reactions, the horizontal
and vertical out at the end of the cable and of course that internal unknown cable tension
force.
We also have three equations of equilibrium available to us and so it's a straightforward
process now to write the equations and solve just as we did back in lecture two.
I'll spare you the details and go directly to the solution.
Here it is.
By the way as we look at the solution note that all of the dimensions and loads on our
free body diagram are symbols rather than numbers.
So the solution to the equilibrium problem is also expressed entirely in symbols and
this is really helpful because it allows us to draw generalized conclusions about how
cables work rather than just looking at a numerical solution.
And as you can see the solution itself consists of three equations each one of which results
directly from the solution of a corresponding equilibrium condition.
Each of these equations has something important to tell us.
The horizontal reaction H is equal to the cable tension T so the greater the tension
the greater the outward pull needed to hold the cable in place.
Second, the vertical reaction is equal to half of the total weight of the cable or the
total weight applied to the cable.
In a suspension bridge the cable transmits the same force downward into the towers thus
what we can see from this equation is that the greater the load and the longer the span
the greater the downward force that's applied to the towers.
And third, the cable tension is proportional to the load and inversely proportional to
the sag.
That means that if we hold the sag constant a larger load causes larger cable tension.
If we hold the load constant then a larger tension results in less cable sag.
Now that latter point is particularly important so I'd like to verify it with a simple experiment.
As you can see my cable is firmly fixed up here on this side but on the opposite side
the cable actually runs over a pulley and from that pulley is suspended a set of weights.
So this end of the cable is actually not firmly anchored it's completely free to rotate and
the only thing that's holding in its present shape is that I've carefully selected the
amount of weight hanging from the cable such that the whole system remains in equilibrium.
It's actually free to move.
And of course the amount of weight I've selected is in fact the cable tension because the cable
simply runs over the top of this pulley which is free to rotate.
So what would happen if I increase the amount of cable tension by hanging some additional
weight from this end of the cable?
Well let's give it a try and see.
The mathematical equation tells us that if we increase the tension the sag should change.
I think you know which way it's going to go.
When I apply additional force thereby increasing the cable tension notice that the system seeks
a new equilibrium condition and the new equilibrium condition with the existing loads is one in
which the amount of sag has been substantially reduced.
So there we see very clearly the physical relationship between cable tension and cable
sag.
So what are the implications for this phenomenon for real cable structures?
In general it's advantageous to minimize the cable tension.
A smaller tension force requires a cable of smaller diameter which results in lower cost.
And so increasing the cable sag would generally result in a less expensive cable.
There's a practical limit to this potential cost saving.
On a suspension bridge the height of the towers above the deck must be at least equal to the
cable sag otherwise the bottom of the cable would fall below the bridge deck.
So greater sag also requires taller towers and of course taller towers are more expensive.
So there's a trade off here.
Increasing the sag reduces the cable cost but increases the tower cost.
The engineers challenge as always is finding the right balance between these two competing
alternatives.
We can actually see this trade off playing out in historical development of suspension
bridges with older bridges like this one using relatively short stone towers and low cable
sag.
Whereas newer structures tend to use much taller steel towers and significantly greater
sag.
We'll study these developments further in lecture 15.
Now notice how one simple equilibrium analysis has produced so many rich insights about the
way cables behave and we're not done yet.
If we make our conceptual cut somewhere other than at midspan on the cable and we repeat
that same equilibrium analysis and even more powerful conclusion emerges.
The shape of the cable with that horizontally distributed load suspended beneath it is not
a catenary but rather mathematically speaking a parabola and this brings us to a particularly
unique aspect of cable behavior.
The shape of a cable always depends on its loading.
In other words the cable assumes the shape that's necessary to maintain equilibrium
with its applied loads.
So for example, if on this cable I apply a concentrated load rather than a uniformly
distributed load what we see is that the cable changes shape drastically in order to create
a new equilibrium condition with this new loading condition.
Similarly, if I could somehow instantaneously cut all of these little suspender cables so
that the uniformly distributed load dropped away instantly and all that was left was the
self-weight of the cable what we would see was that the shape of the cable would instantaneously
change from the parabola which is associated with the uniform loading to a catenary which
is associated with a loading that's applied along the length of the cable.
But if I did that you'd still have to take my word for it because the difference between
a parabola and a catenary is extremely small.
This graph shows precise plots of both curves using exactly the same span and sag.
The two lines are so close together we can barely distinguish them.
Furthermore, no suspension bridge cable is really in practice either a perfect parabola
or a perfect catenary because it carries both its own weight which causes it to tend toward
the catenary at the same time as it's carrying the weight of the horizontal deck which tends
toward the shape of a parabola.
So the shape of a suspension bridge cable actually falls somewhere between those two lines the
catenary and the parabola and the fact that they're so close together means that the distinction
between the two is really extremely minor.
For simplicity then I'm simply going to refer to this shape as parabolic.
When I do remember that I'll actually be referring to something ever so slightly different from
a parabola but certainly close enough for our purposes.
Onward to arches.
You know in many ways an arch is the exact opposite of a cable and now that we know something
about cables we should be able to look at arches in a new way.
Let's begin our study by building a semicircular arch of the sort that the Romans would use
in this bridge the Palt St. Martin located in northern Italy.
You might not have guessed it but the 103 foot span of this arch is believed to be the
longest span that has actually survived from antiquity.
Let's go ahead and build a model of the Palt St. Martin.
One of the most fundamental characteristics of an arch is that it isn't self supporting
until it's completely constructed and so when the Romans built an arch like this they
would have started by constructing a temporary support structure called a centering which
is designed to form the shape of the arch.
Once the centering is in place the arch then is constructed of individual wedge shaped
stones called vooswares.
We would install those stones on both sides of the bridge and then add successive vooswares
up the side of the centering in each case bringing the arch a little bit higher until
we finally reach the center and we have one space remaining.
That last vooswares is often called the keystone of the arch and once the keystone is in place
the arch is capable of supporting itself so we can now at this point remove the centering
and the arch now stands on its own and indeed it's not just capable of carrying its own
load it actually is capable of carrying significant compression force as well.
So this arch has two essential structural characteristics.
First it carries load entirely in compression.
We can see that very clearly because as you'll recall the individual pieces of the arch aren't
connected together in any way there was no glue or mortar that held them together the
only thing holding them together is gravity.
So for example if we had an arch and we somehow found a way to apply tension to it well we
would see very easily that it's physically incapable of carrying tension the blocks
would simply fall apart there's nothing holding them together.
So arches hold carry load entirely in compression.
This characteristic accounts for the use of arches in many of the ancient world's greatest
structures, structures like the Ponte Saint Martin.
The principal structural materials available to ancient builders were stone, brick, concrete
and wood.
Wood lacked permanence and was scarce in many regions of the ancient world and those other
materials masonry and concrete are strong in compression but weakened tension.
Thus the arch was particularly well suited to the materials available in antiquity.
In our lecture on beams we saw that the architrave of the Greek temple of Artemis approached
the upper limit of possibility for stone beams and these 28 foot spans would have required
extremely high quality stone because even a small flaw subjected to tension on the bottom
surface of the beam might easily trigger a catastrophic fracture.
But an arch can easily span four times that distance with any number of small stones or
bricks as we see at the Ponte Saint Martin.
The quality of the material is considerably less important in an arch because even relatively
large flaws don't necessarily reduce the stone's ability to carry compression.
For these reasons the arch was made to order for the grand ambitions of the Romans who
exploited this structural form in so many fascinating ways that will require a full
lecture to talk about them.
That first essential characteristic of an arch is that it carries load entirely in compression.
The second is that an arch requires both vertical and horizontal reactions to carry load.
On our model the vertical reactions are provided by the base, the wooden base which supports
the arch from below.
The horizontal reactions are provided by these two wooden blocks on the outsides which support
the arch from the side.
Under load an arch tends to flatten and when it does the ends of the arch out here at the
base tend to move outward.
That outward tendency is called thrust and thrust must be resisted by some sort of physical
support.
So if an arch requires that physical lateral support in order to stand up and carry load
then presumably removing one of these two wooden blocks should cause it to collapse.
Well let's test that theory and see how it works.
If I remove this block out here and then release the arch we see it's still standing
but if I apply just the slightest bit of load we see that it falls over.
So what just happened here?
As always the principle of equilibrium will provide some useful insights for us to enhance
our understanding.
Just draw a free body diagram of the arch and apply the principle exactly as we did
with the cable.
Start with a free body diagram of the entire element and then we make a cut at mid span
and isolate half of the element.
In this case as we draw our free body diagram of half the arch and expose that internal
force we note that the internal force must be compressive rather than tensile.
So the horizontal reaction H now is directed inward to maintain equilibrium rather than
outward as it was with a cable.
This reaction resists the thrust of the arch and it prevents that collapse that you just
saw in my structural model.
Now when we solve the equilibrium equations here's the answer we get.
Exactly the same as the results we got for the cable except now we're calculating compressive
force in the arch rather than tension in the cable.
Now for the purpose of this course the most important conclusion we should take away from
these results is that the horizontal thrust of an arch is inversely proportional to its
height.
You can see that in the third equation.
A taller arch produces less thrust than a flatter arch.
This relationship will be critically important when we compare semicircular Roman arches
with the pointed gothic arches of the medieval era later on in lecture 12.
Wow we're seeing some amazing parallels between arches and cables here.
A cable carries load entirely in tension and arch carries load entirely in compression.
A tension on a cable pulls inward on its supports and thrust from an arch pushes outward.
A cable and an arch both require both vertical and horizontal reactions to carry load.
For the cable the horizontal reactions are oriented outward.
For an arch those horizontal reactions are oriented inward to contain the thrust.
In both cable and arch the horizontal reactions are inversely proportional to the height.
Increasing the sag of the cable decreases tension and horizontal reaction.
Increasing the height of the arch decreases its lateral thrust and its horizontal reaction.
But what about shape?
If the natural shape of a cable is parabolic why are all Roman arches semicircular?
Well it turns out the Romans were tremendously capable as practicing engineers but they didn't
have the analytical methods necessary to discover that a semicircle is really not the optimal
shape for an arch.
It wasn't until the 1600s that our old friend Robert Hooke applied the newly formulated
principle of equilibrium to determine the ideal shape for an arch.
In conclusion, if the arch supports only its own weight its ideal shape is a catenary and
if it supports a horizontally distributed load its ideal shape is, you guessed it, a parabola.
Hooke's theorem, written originally in Latin, is almost poetic, ut pendet continuum flexile
sic stabit contiguum rigidum inversum, as hangs the flexible line so but inverted stands
the rigid arch.
At the time Hooke was working with Christopher Wren on the design of St. Paul's Cathedral
in London and on Hooke's advice Wren actually incorporated this principle into his ingenious
design of the great dome over St. Paul's.
It might not look parabolic in this picture but trust me there is a parabola hiding deep
inside.
We'll examine this structure in lecture 21.
Now at this point it shouldn't surprise you to learn that architect Eros Serenin designed
the St. Louis Gateway Arch as a perfect catenary curve and this made perfect sense because
this arch has to carry only its own self-weight distributed along the length of the arch.
But before we give Hooke or Serenin too much credit we must consider one of the most amazing
structures that has survived from late antiquity, the vaulted throne room of the Persian Imperial
Palace at Ctesiphon located in modern day Iraq.
This magnificent arched vault which spans 82 feet and is over 110 feet tall is a near
perfect parabola.
It was probably built around the year 540 AD over a thousand years before Robert Hooke
made his discovery of the optimal shape of an arch.
The structure is even more astonishing when we realize that it's made of the most fragile
of ancient building materials mud brick and was constructed without the use of any centering.
We can only conclude that this arch is standing today because of its structurally perfect shape.
So if the Roman semi-circular arch wasn't optimal then why have so many of them survived
from antiquity?
This question is best answered through the use of a mechanics concept called the thrust
line.
The thrust line is a graphical representation of the path that internal compression takes
through an arch or any other element that's subjected to compressive loading for that
matter.
To determine where the thrust line falls within an arch we need to make a series of cuts along
the length of the arch and then solve the equations of equilibrium to determine the location
of that internal compressive force.
Then we string them all together and plot them as if it's a graph.
This analysis for an arch shows us that the thrust line for an arch is parabolic as long
as the loading is uniform regardless of the shape of the arch.
And so even for a semi-circular Roman arch the thrust line is a parabola.
But as long as the parabolic thrust line remains entirely within the boundaries of the arch
the arch remains stable.
At any location where the thrust line is off center there's actually a little bit of bending
occurring in addition to the internal compression force.
But as long as the thrust line is physically inside the boundaries of the arch that bending
isn't large enough to cause problems.
And what happens if any portion of that thrust line falls outside the boundaries of the arch
as you see here?
Well, when this happens the bending stress gets so large that it causes the joints between
the voussoirs to open up.
At that point the arch becomes unstable and it collapses.
So returning to our original question, Roman semi-circular arches have survived from antiquity
because they're thick enough to completely contain that parabolic thrust line as you
can see here.
And one reason why pointed gothic arches are often so much thinner than semi-circular Roman
arches is because the parabolic thrust line fits much more comfortably within that pointed
arch shape.
A really fascinating variation on this concept is a particular type of structural element
called a jack arch which is shown here.
This is the lintel over one of the windows of my own house which was built in 1908.
But you can find nearly identical examples in ancient Roman ruins.
It sure doesn't look like an arch, it looks much more like a beam.
But those angled ends and the wedge shaped bricks cause it to function exactly as an
arch.
The key is that the thrust line is contained entirely within the member so it remains stable
under load.
The arch and the cable.
In a sense they're two sides of the same coin as we've seen today.
No one had a better appreciation for this relationship than the Catalan architect Antoni Gaudi.
And nowhere is that understanding more evident than in his master work, Lusagrata Familia
Church in Barcelona.
To design this church Gaudi drew a one-tenth scale floor plan and he attached it to a board
which was then mounted on the ceiling of his workshop.
His setup has been preserved as you can see here and what you're looking at, it's pretty
hard to discern, but what you're looking at is actually a model of Sagrada Familia upside
down.
The way he built it was to attach cords to the plan of the building, again mounted on
this board upside down on the ceiling of his workshop.
And the points of attachment were the places where the columns would be located in the
actual structure.
These cords were then draped from column location to column location to form inverted arches.
And then in some cases Gaudi actually attached small sacks of lead to the cords, you can
see them there in the photo to adjust their shape.
In much the same way that my application of a concentrated load on my cable model distorted
the shape of the cable.
And then finally he took photos of this incredible assemblage, turned them upside down and then
used them as the basis for his design of the building.
Now knowing Gaudi's method, we can't help but look at this incredible structure, Lusagrata
Familia, but in a fresh new way.
We now know that these columns, arches, and spires are actually cables frozen in stone
and turned upside down, giving this extraordinary structure a natural form that's unique in
all the world.
Lusagrata Familia has been under construction since 1882 and it's actually not expected
to be completed until 2026, you can actually see some scaffolding in this video right here.
Before Gaudi died in 1926, he was asked about the slow pace of construction.
A devout Catholic, he responded, my client is not in a hurry.
Gaudi understood the value of patience in the pursuit of a worthwhile goal.
I hope you also recognize the value we've gained from patiently studying the principles
of engineering mechanics over the past eight lectures.
Like Gaudi, we've looked to the fundamentals.
Basic scientific principles apply to basic structural elements, tension members, columns,
beams, trusses, cables, and arches.
Each of these elements contributes uniquely to the splendor and diversity of the world's
great structures.
Next lecture, we'll look at challenges faced by structural systems as a whole and we'll
learn to follow the flow of forces through an entire structure.
Until then, thank you.
