Welcome back.
When you hear the word concrete, what's the first thought that comes to your mind?
If you're thinking of a sidewalk or a parking garage or one of these ugly gray blocks, well,
you're not alone. Concrete is the most commonly used construction material, so many of its uses tend
to be well common, mundane. But in today's lecture, we'll have an opportunity to see the most
underappreciated of all construction materials in new and exciting ways. By the time we're done,
I hope the word concrete will conjure up some very different images. Like these,
Frank Lloyd Wright's Falling Water, named the all-time best work of American architecture
by the American Institute of Architects. This building's characteristic feature,
those cantilevered balconies, are reinforced concrete.
Robert Mayart's stunning Zalgin Etobel Bridge. Contrary to its distinctly modern
appearance, this beautiful concrete structure is over 80 years old. Pierre Nervey's Palazzo
dello Sport in Rome, its most impressive feature, a beautiful ribbed dome made entirely of reinforced
concrete. And Sydney's most famous structure, the Opera House, with its distinctive curved
shell roofs, all reinforced concrete. This even more astonishing roof at the city of arts and
sciences in Valencia, Spain, an impossibly thin concrete shell. And finally, the world's tallest
building, the Burj Khalifa in Dubai, a towering monument to modern reinforced concrete technology.
As you think about this incredible range of structural configurations,
I hope you'll begin to think about this common material in an uncommon way. And then next time
someone uses the word concrete, I hope the first thought that will come to mind is versatility.
We'll be visiting each of these great concrete structures and many more over the next two lectures.
Today we'll look at a wide variety of beautiful concrete buildings and bridges that are
nonetheless conventional because they're composed of the basic structural element types we've
discussed thus far in the course. The versatility of concrete derives from the way it's made.
Remember this? It's the concrete capital that I made back in lecture four. I made it by mixing
Portland cement powder with sand, gravel, and water to create a semi-liquid that could be poured
into temporary forms of virtually any shape to create a rock-like solid of virtually any shape.
The construction of full-scale concrete structures works exactly the same way, except the batches
of concrete are just a bit larger. As we saw in our lecture on engineering materials,
the story of modern concrete technology really begins with the invention of Portland cement by
Joseph Aspden in 1824. As a manufactured product, Portland cement could be produced in much larger
quantities and with much better quality control than that volcanic ash called pazzolana that had been
used by the ancient Romans. So soon after Portland cement became available, concrete became popular
as a replacement for stone in the foundations of buildings and bridges. By the 1850s, engineers
were starting to experiment with concrete arch bridges and aqueducts, a fairly logical structural
application given the materials high strength and compression. But the full potential of
concrete as a structural material wouldn't be realized until its most important limitation,
its inherent weakness and tension was overcome. The decisive technological breakthrough came
from an unlikely source, a French gardener named Joseph Monnier. In 1867, Monnier developed a system
for making large flower pots using concrete reinforced with iron rods. The success of these
products led Monnier to realize that iron reinforced concrete might actually be useful in the construction
industry. And so this gardener turned engineer conducted a series of amazingly well conceived
experiments on concrete structural elements. And based on these experiments, he worked out a system
for placing reinforcement in the regions of a structural member where tension occurs. That is
the most fundamental characteristic of modern reinforced concrete. Now in our lecture on beams,
we learned that a flexural element experiences compression on top and tension on the bottom.
But if we make a beam out of plain unreinforced concrete and we subject it to flexural loading,
it will crack and ultimately collapse. A reinforced concrete beam is designed to rectify that problem.
What we do is to cast metal bars, either iron or steel, into the beam on the lower surface.
That is the portion of the beam that undergoes tension. Now I've created a little bit of a model
here just to serve as a demonstration. And I can't cast bars into this beam. So what I've done is to
simply stretch three steel wires, very slender steel wires across the bottom of the beam.
It's otherwise identical to the one that I just showed you a moment ago. But now because of these
wires, when I subject this beam to flexural loading, you'll notice that it is significantly
stiffer. It carries loads significantly more effectively because those steel wires are now
carrying the tension that occurs at the lower portion of the beam while the concrete continues
to carry the compression in the upper portion. Now you'll notice in my model that when the beam
flexed, the concrete still cracks. And that's not a problem. In fact, the fact that the concrete
cracks is actually absolutely essential to the functioning of reinforced concrete. As you recall,
when any material is subjected to tension, it elongates and steel is certainly no exception.
Remember the stress strain curve of steel? For every amount of additional stress,
there's a corresponding amount of strain. With regard to concrete, there's a characteristic
strain at which the concrete will crack. And that strain is very small. If we tried to design
a reinforced concrete beam so that it wouldn't crack at all, then we would have to use a
tremendous amount of steel. And we'd have to design the beam so that the amount of strain
that occurred in both the steel and the concrete was extremely small. In doing that, we would be
using only a tiny fraction of the steel's capacity. And so in order to use the steel efficiently,
we need to give it an opportunity to elongate under load. And when it does that, the concrete will
crack. In effect, cracking is good simply because it demonstrates that the full capacity the steel
is being used in carrying flexural loads in the beam. And don't worry, this cracking is controlled
because the concrete remains firmly bonded to the steel, and therefore the cracks will only open up
as far as is necessary for the full strength of the steel to be utilized in the reinforced concrete
beam. Steel reinforcement can also be used to strengthen concrete in compression. Typically
though, compression reinforcement is not required to the same extent as tension reinforcement,
so we usually don't have as much of it in the compression region of a beam as we see in the
tension region. Whether in tension or compression, the steel bars can only carry load if they're
firmly bonded to the concrete. Now in the early years of reinforced concrete construction,
the bars were actually square iron rods that prior to the installation in the reinforced
concrete element were twisted into a spiral like this, so that those spiral shaped ridges formed
by the corners of the bar would grip the concrete more effectively. Over time, that technology was
replaced, and now modern structures use circular steel or iron rods that look just like this,
where we now have raised ridges on the bar itself that provide that same mechanical bond between
the steel and the concrete. Reinforcing bars are normally preassembled into a self-contained cage
like this one here, and then that cage is placed inside the forms, and then the concrete is poured
in and vibrated to consolidate it around those reinforcing bars. Once the concrete is cured,
those mechanical ridges on the steel reinforcing bar that I just showed you form that strong
mechanical linkage between the steel bar and the concrete, so that the member as a whole can carry
load as an integrated unit. Now that we've seen how reinforced concrete structural elements work,
let's see how this new technology influenced the design of great structures in the century and
half after Joseph Monnier invented it. In Europe and the United States, several entrepreneurs
capitalized on Monnier's work by developing comprehensive systems for reinforced concrete
buildings. The most successful of these was François Henebique, who patented his system in
France in 1892. The Henebique system was revolutionary in that it provided fully integrated structural
systems, floor slabs, beams, columns, foundations, exterior facades, and roofs all in reinforced
concrete. This 3D model shows a typical example of the interior structural frame of a Henebique
building. Unlike an iron or steel structure, the columns, beams, and floor slabs are not
fabricated as separate structural elements and then assembled. Rather, they're all cast together as a
single monolithic unit. And if we cut away the concrete in this representation here, we'll see
an arrangement of iron reinforcing bars that's essentially indistinguishable from modern reinforced
concrete construction. Henebique built few structures himself. Rather, he licensed this
technology to contractors and then he very closely managed the quality of their materials and
construction methods. His system was enormously successful. By 1899, over 3,000 Henebique
structures had been built worldwide. By 1909, that number had grown to around 20,000.
Here's a typical example. The Royal Liver Building in Liverpool, England.
This grand structure was completed in 1911 and remains one of Liverpool's most famous
structures today. It is entirely reinforced concrete, inside and out, a fine example of the
advanced state of the art just two decades after Henebique developed the system. In the U.S.,
the development of reinforced concrete was pioneered almost exclusively by an English immigrant
named Ernest Ransom, who developed a similar system very similar to Henebique's in the late 1800s.
In 1903, Ransom's system was used in the world's first reinforced concrete skyscraper,
the Ingalls Building in Cincinnati. At 16 stories, it was only about half as tall as the
tallest steel frame building at that time. Nonetheless, it was a groundbreaking structure.
The Ingalls Building used integrated beams, slabs and columns reinforced with twisted iron bars,
just like the simulation I showed you earlier. The exterior walls are all solid concrete,
though they are faced with marble on the first three stories, brick on the next 11,
and then terracotta on the top, following the convention of the first Chicago school,
as we saw last lecture. Given that the tallest concrete building constructed previously was
only six stories high, the Ingalls Building was widely viewed as a very high-risk enterprise.
Because of official skepticism, it took two years to get the building permit approved,
and when construction was finally completed and the form work was removed,
one reporter stayed on site all night so that he'd be an eyewitness to the building's collapse.
Needless to say, the Ingalls Building didn't collapse, and it remains in use today,
and in fact it is a national historic civil engineering landmark.
Although the Ingalls Building was a revolutionary structure from an engineering perspective,
it was architecturally conventional, even in its use of the masonry facade that follows
Louis Sullivan's tripartite organization of the first Chicago school. But during this period,
other architects and engineers were experimenting with new forms that were uniquely tailored to
the versatility of concrete. A wonderful example is the Church of Saint Jean de Montmartre in Paris,
one of the world's first non-commercial reinforced concrete buildings.
This is a uniquely concrete structure. The slender arches and vaults of that art nouveau interior
simply couldn't have been built with traditional masonry. The church was under construction from
1894 to 1904, but it didn't really take 10 years to build. Once again, the problem was skepticism
over the safety of this new building material reinforced concrete, a lawsuit delayed construction
by several years in this case. And again, the critics were wrong as the building continues to
serve quite effectively as a parish church even today. More than any other early 20th century
structure, the Zalgenitobel bridge in the Swiss Alps reflects the unique qualities of reinforced
concrete. It was designed by Robert Maillardt, whose bridges are renowned for their beauty
and economy. The Zalgenitobel bridge was the product of Maillardt's strong technical know-how
combined with three decades of careful experimentation and observation of concrete
structures. Early in his career, Maillardt designed several conventional looking arches made
of reinforced concrete but faced with stone to present a traditional external appearance.
But in 1901, Maillardt broke with tradition in his Zua's bridge where he used a very thin
concrete arch rib, a flat deck, and two spandrel walls to form the world's first hollow
concrete box girder. Recognizing that he had in fact broken with tradition on this bridge,
Maillardt didn't add stone facing to the exterior. This would indeed be a uniquely concrete structure.
Two years later, Maillardt learned that the spandrel walls of his Zua's bridge had experienced
significant longitudinal cracking. What most engineers would have regarded as a failure,
Maillardt saw as an opportunity. After a careful analysis, he recognized that those cracks in the
spandrels didn't affect the structural integrity of the bridge. And indeed, they showed that the
spandrels weren't really part of the main load path. So he reasoned that he could simply remove
most of the material in the spandrels in future designs. That insight led to the extraordinary
form of the Zaganitobl bridge. The structural system of this bridge is a three hinged arch
shown here in schematic form. The three hinges accommodate thermal expansion and contraction
of the arch, as well as the concrete's tendency to shrink as it cures. The unusual shape of the
arch segments is directly related to structural load carrying. Because this arch has a relatively
short span, 292 feet, its live loading is relatively large in comparison with its dead load.
Dead load, of course, is uniformly applied, so it only causes compression in the arch.
But because live load can be applied anywhere along the length of the bridge,
it also causes flexure or bending in the arch. And so in the Zaganitobl bridge,
each arch segment must be able to carry load as both a compression member and a beam.
And so the profile of each segment, thick in the middle and thin out of the hinges,
reflects these two load carrying modes quite well. The concept is actually essentially the same as
Eiffel's brilliant crescent arch on the Garabit Viaduct that we saw some lectures ago. But here,
the concept is implemented in an entirely new way, in an entirely new structural material,
with two crescents now hinged in the center. It's important to note that the contract to design
and build the Zaganitobl bridge was based on a competition in which the sole selection criterion
was low cost. There were 19 entries, and my art won, not because he had designed one of the world's
most beautiful bridges, though he had, but because this bridge was cheaper than the other 18 entries.
Now, this is not to say that my art didn't care about aesthetics. But his writing suggests that
his aesthetic goal wasn't beauty per se, but rather what he called sincerity of form,
a physical configuration that communicates how it carries load. As my art demonstrated,
a sincere form is also often an economical one.
Robert Maillard's structures have been lauded, not only in the world of engineering,
but also in the world of art. In 1947, his entire portfolio of structural designs was featured
in a one man show at New York's Museum of Modern Art. And speaking of artistic achievement,
we now turn to Frank Lloyd Wright's Falling Waterhouse, built from 1934 to 1937, and widely
regarded as one of America's greatest works of architecture. The most prominent features of
Wright's design are the reinforced concrete cantilever balconies that project out from
the building in three directions. Though these cantilevers were intended to evoke nearby rock
formations, Wright didn't try to dress them up with stone facing. Like Robert Maillard,
he achieved sincerity of form by leaving the concrete surfaces exposed.
Unfortunately, Wright was much less competent as an engineer than he was as an architect.
His design for the cantilevers used far too little steel reinforcement. The building contractor
and a consulting engineer had both recommended more steel, but Wright rejected them both.
Ego triumphed over engineering judgment, and the cantilevers began to sag almost immediately
after the formwork was removed in 1937. Over time, the deflections grew to seven inches over a span
of just 15 feet. In 2002, the building's caretakers initiated an emergency structural repair
after an engineering consultant's analysis indicated that the cantilevers were on the verge
of collapse. Here's how that repair was done. This beam represents one of the supporting beams
in Frank Lloyd Wright's structure for the cantilevers at Fallingwater.
The beams themselves were actually located below the floor structure of the cantilever
balconies, so they're not visible when you're actually on the balconies, but obviously they're
the critical structural elements that hold the cantilevers up. In their original configuration,
the cantilever beams were undergoing extremely large deflections and were on the verge of
collapse. What the consulting engineers who did the repair did was to take high-strength steel
cables, lay them along the top surface of the beam as you see here, and then anchor them out at the
tip of the cantilever. Once they were anchored, those cables were then attached to powerful hydraulic
jacks, which were mounted back at the base of the cantilevers. The jacks were then used to pull
those steel cables very tightly in tension in order to raise the cantilevers back up, and then the
cables were anchored at their bases permanently so that the cantilevers would not only have their
excessive deflections removed, the excessive cracking removed, but also be significantly
strengthened so that the threat to the structural integrity of the elements was removed. This process
of adding steel and then pulling it tightly in tension in order to strengthen concrete
is called post-tensioning, and it isn't just a technique for repairing failing cantilevers.
It's now used extensively in all sorts of bridge and building structures. Here's how post-tensioning
works. This model represents a typical modern type of bridge structure called a segmental
post-tensioned concrete bridge. The bridge itself is composed of a series of segments.
Each one of these is precast concrete, which means that it's made in a factory or a manufacturing
facility somewhere off of the project site and then shipped to the site on a truck or on a barge.
This, as you can see, is the segment of a hollow reinforced concrete box girder,
and that extension on the top really just represents the future deck of the bridge,
extending out over either side of the box. The bridge then, in this case, will be made of
five individual segments, but somehow we have to figure out a way to hold the segments together,
and that, of course, is the job of the post-tensioning. For the sake of my model,
we're going to represent that high-strength steel cable, which is called a tendon,
with this piece of rubber tubing. The way the post-tensioning process works is that,
first, we have to thread it through the individual segment of the bridge, anchor it at one end,
so I'm anchoring it out here on the far side. We then pass that steel tendon through the next
segment, and we can now bring those two segments together. We'll pass the segment through the next,
and we'll pass the tendon through the next segment, and, again, bring the additional
segment into contact with our growing bridge. We then pass it through the next segment,
bring it together, and finally, the tendon is now passed entirely through the structure.
At this point, we just have a slack tendon lying inside of a series of concrete segments.
We need to add the force that's going to cause those segments to remain together,
not only to be able to carry the self-weight of the beam, but also to be able to carry all
those externally applied loads once the bridge is in service. To do that, we're going to take that
huge, powerful hydraulic jack. We're going to mount it out here on the far side of our bridge.
We're going to connect it to the steel tendon, and we're going to apply a tremendous
tension force to that tendon, stretching it significantly, and then once the tendon is fully
tensioned, we anchor it out here at the far end, cut off the excess tendon material,
and we now have a bridge that's capable of carrying its own weight. We can now take it to
our bridge site, set it up on top of the abutments, and we have a segmental, post-tensioned,
concrete bridge ready to be put into service. The tendons, which are stretched with enormous
tension to pull the entire bridge together, have the effect of reducing or eliminating
all of the tension in the lower portion of this bridge, and the positive effect of that
post-tensioning process is both to reduce cracking in the concrete and to reduce the
amount of deflection that the bridge undergoes when it's subjected to load.
This is the essence of post-tensioned segmental bridge construction. Of course,
real bridges can't be built on the ground and then lifted onto the supports in one unit,
as I did in my demonstration. Rather, individual segments have to be post-tensioned into place
on the existing structure one at a time. The first bridge in the U.S. to use this technique
was the 1200-foot Linn Cove Viaduct, which carries the Blue Ridge Parkway around grandfather
mountain in North Carolina. This area is extremely environmentally sensitive, and segmental construction
proved to be well suited to the project's principal goal of minimizing environmental impact.
Environmental impact was minimized first by elevating the parkway above grandfather mountain.
Building a highway directly on the mountainside would have required extensive excavation.
By using segmental construction, the bridge could be built almost entirely from above,
so that no access roads at all would need to be cut through the forest.
The only work done at ground level on this bridge was the construction of seven concrete
piers that would ultimately support the various spans of the bridge. The bridge itself is composed
of 153 precast concrete segments, just like the ones I used in my demonstration, except each of
those segments weighs 50 tons. Each segment was then transported to the site on the Blue Ridge
Parkway, and remember that's the road that's ultimately going to cross the bridge. Each segment
was then lifted into position by a special crane that was mounted out on the partially completed
span. The segment was then post-tensioned back onto the existing structure. Those steel tendons
were threaded through the segment, attached to jacks, and then tensioned in order to pull the
segment into place, forming a cantilever. The crane was then displaced forward out onto that
newly installed segment, and then the process was repeated again and again and again until the
bridge was complete. Using this process, the construction crews rarely set foot on the ground
beneath the bridge. The Lynn Cove Bioduct was opened in 1983 and almost immediately garnered
several prestigious awards for both engineering achievement and environmental sensitivity.
Its engineer, Gene Fig, went on to design many of America's most beautiful bridges,
including the cable-stayed Sunshine Skyway Bridge across Tampa Bay and Florida,
a structure we've looked at several times thus far in the course, and the more recent
Natchez Trace Parkway Bridge. Note the incredible sweep of that beautiful parabolic arch,
which is itself a segmental box girder. And that brings us to the most dramatic
demonstration of concrete versatility. Its new role as the material of choice for the world's
tallest buildings. In 1998, the Petronas Towers in Malaysia became the first concrete structure
to claim the title World's Tallest Building. In 2004, Petronas was surpassed by a steel skyscraper,
Taipei 101 in Taiwan. But then again, in 2009, the reinforced concrete Burj Khalifa in Dubai
reclaimed the title. It seems that another great skyscraper race is underway.
The Burj Khalifa represents a revolutionary new generation of skyscraper technology. Constructed
primarily of high-strength reinforced concrete, its structural system is fundamentally different
from that of any previous tall building. As this 3D model shows, the overall form of the building
consists of a hexagonal core with 3 wings radiating out from the core to form a Y shape.
This form is a direct reflection of the structural system, which is called a buttressed core.
That hexagonal core is a concrete tube that encloses all of the building's elevator shafts
and stairwells. In addition to carrying a portion of the tower's tremendous self-weight
and occupancy loads, the core also stiffens the tower against torsion. Indeed, it performs
this function in exactly the same way that that box girder on the Severn Suspension Bridge does.
Now as you probably guessed, those three outer wings are the buttresses of the buttressed core
system. As structural elements, they work just like the buttresses that were used in medieval
cathedrals to prevent the walls from overturning due to lateral loads. In a cathedral, the lateral
load is the thrust of the arches. In a skyscraper, the lateral load is the wind pressure. But those
three wings are also the building's occupied spaces, consisting mostly of hotel rooms and
private residences. How do they hold up the world's tallest building while they're also enclosing
roughly 5 million square feet of usable space? To answer that question, let's look at a lower
story of the Burj Khalifa. Here's that hexagonal core, and the principal structural elements of
each buttress are here. Two reinforced concrete walls that also double as corridors of the occupied
space. And at their outer end, the heavier wall that the building structural engineer calls a
hammerhead wall. This structure is actually designed to work just like an eye-shaped beam,
which happens to be turned vertically. The corridor walls are the web of the beam,
and that hammerhead is a representation of the flange of the beam. The most fundamental level,
the only difference between this system and an eye-shaped beam is that the Burj Khalifa extends
outward in three directions instead of two, to provide appropriate lateral load carrying capacity
all the way around in all directions. This photo of the building under construction clearly shows
that hammerhead wall right here. One other important aspect of this structural system is that the
spire on the very top is actually a steel truss, extending some 600 feet above the highest concrete
elements on the 156th floor. And here you can see that truss, which can't help but remind us of
Gustave Eiffel's Great Tower in Paris. Yes, there is some irony here. The element that allowed a
concrete building to become the world's tallest is, well, steel. So what we've seen is that the
structural system of the Burj Khalifa consists of a series of medieval buttresses made of concrete,
but configured like steel eye beams, surmounted by a modernized version of the Eiffel Tower.
And so we see that sometimes revolutionary engineering innovations are actually just
old technologies applied in new ways using new materials. During this lecture, we've seen the
many faces of reinforced concrete. But concrete's most unique characteristic is its versatility of
form, a sculptural quality that allows engineers and architects to devise forms that are both
beautiful and extraordinarily efficient in load carrying. And if you think structures like the
Zalgan Etobal Bridge demonstrate versatility of form, well, the best is yet to come. Next lecture
will turn to a special category of structures that carry load in a fundamentally different way,
thin shell structures that attain both strength and stiffness from their curved shape,
structures that stretch concrete to its structural and sculptural limits. Until then, thank you.
