Buzzfeed, with over 20 million subscribers and a wheelhouse of the internet's most
talented creators, it is simply astounding that a media company can go from having a
huge presence online to seemingly insignificant overnight.
Whether you hate or love them, there is no denying that Buzzfeed was a media juggernaut
around 2016 producing some of the most viral videos and getting hordes of users to take
their quizzes.
Gaining attention from the 20-something crowd, Buzzfeed was a force to be reckoned with,
but with such a strong cold on the online community and their numbers reinforcing that,
how in the world did this massive enterprise lose their audience?
Competition related.
But, I'm sorry, I just don't buy this.
Yes, it is true that competition and the algorithm can have an effect on viewership, but if individual
creators were to complain about this exact same thing, we'd be told the exact same thing.
You need to change your content.
The audience is just tired of what you're making.
So to understand what actually happened, we need to go back to the beginning.
There was something very alluring about working for Buzzfeed around the mid-2010s, to young
millennials and even older Gen Z.
The company culture depicted in the content embodied everything they valued in a career.
An office job didn't mean you had to be confined to a cubicle working on demoralizing tasks.
Buzzfeed looked like it valued the creativity of young creators who knew the internet, allowing
them to produce unconventional content to comparison to legacy media.
The environment was fun, with some offices featuring a myriad of snacks, beer on tap,
bean bags and those egg chairs.
It was collaborative with open plan layouts and your coworkers around the same age as
you.
At the same time, employees at the company didn't seem like they had to live the life
of a starving artist.
They had things like paid holidays, a 401k plan with company match, dental and medical
benefits.
This was a place where you could be a YouTuber without having to completely sacrifice your
free time.
While the amenities are certainly enticing, I think a lot of what made this type of environment
appealing to young people is how innovative they seemed.
We are filming a Buzzfeed video.
They represented a new generation of creators who didn't have to answer to the gatekeepers
of legacy media.
Buzzfeed knew the internet, and this was very apparent in their origin story.
If you had met Jonah Peretti before the launch of the billion dollar media company, you almost
wouldn't expect him to be its CEO.
In 2001, while working on his master's thesis, Peretti did what any other grad student would
do.
Rastinate.
A friend of Peretti had told him that Nike launched a service where you could customize
your own shoes.
I went and I think first tried a four letter word and it rejected it.
And so I was trying to figure out how the system worked and just to clarify, you could
get any word you wanted printed on the Nike-ish, on the side of a pair of Nike-ish, right?
Yeah, although they had blacklisted a bunch of words, so I was trying to figure out which
words did they blacklist and then I put the word sweatshop in and it went through.
So I was like, oh, I can get a pair of Nike's that say sweatshop under the swoosh.
However, the next day, he received an email from a Nike rep that stated the word sweatshop
was inappropriate slang.
And so I just responded to the email and said, no, it's in the dictionary, it means a shopper
factory where workers toil under unhealthy conditions, now can you send me the shoes?
And then they wrote back another excuse and we were having this back and forth, which
if you're procrastinating writing a paper, this is perfect, right?
You're just like back and forth.
And then eventually they said, we reserve the right to not put that in the shoe.
You have to change the ID and I said, okay, I'll change the ID, but can you at least
send me a picture of the 10 year old Vietnamese girl who stitches the shoes together?
And then they didn't write back after that.
Today, a documented exchange like that posted on Twitter or TikTok would likely go viral
while the internet was a different place back in 2001.
Virality didn't mean followers or views.
YouTube didn't even exist back then.
Instead, Reddy sent the emails between him and Nike to a few of his friends.
And then they forwarded it to a bunch of their friends, so on and so forth.
Soon, he was getting thousands of responses from strangers, from death threats to marriage proposals.
He even landed in the inboxes of the activist community.
Reporters started calling him and somehow Jonah Peretti, a grad student who was just procrastinating,
who only had a surface understanding of sweatshops.
An undercover investigation by Seven News discovered factory workers being paid a pittance
and forced to live in squalor while Nike's stars had a fortune.
Somehow, ended up on the Today show with Katie Couric and Nike's head of global PR.
Peretti was enthralled by the results and wondered if it was replicable,
if so, it would disrupt traditional media entirely.
But the experts he talked to were pessimistic.
They attributed Peretti's short-lived fame to a fluke.
There was no formula to going viral.
Desperate to prove them wrong, he launched other projects in an attempt to replicate his results,
one of which was the rejection hotline,
which was a number you'd give to strangers hating on you that couldn't take no for an answer.
They'd be forwarded to an automated rejection message.
Welcome to the New York City rejection line, brought to you by rejectionline.com.
Unfortunately, the person who gave you this number does not want to talk to you or speak to you again.
We would like to take this opportunity to officially reject you.
Our certified rejection specialists are waiting to serve you in your time of need.
So his other project was a project called blackpeoplelovers.com
and it's a satirical website about those white friends who are kind of too proud
that they have black friends that it becomes racist again.
This one got them on Good Morning America to talk about race relations in America.
These projects kind of seemed like something you'd find during BuzzFeed's peak in 2016.
Despite the naysayers, the formula of going viral was replicated and it was moving fast.
The noise Peretti was making caught the attention of retired executive Ken Lair and Ariana Huffington.
Impressed by his ideas about the internet, Lair and Huffington proposed to start an online news business with Peretti.
They knew news and he knew the internet and in 2005, they launched the Huffington Post.
During his time at Huffington Post, Peretti didn't have the freedom to experiment with this new distribution method
via the internet and viewers as much as he wanted.
So we started a side project called BuzzFeed Labs with John Johnson just one year later in 2006.
The growth was consistent, but it really took off when social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter became viable.
BuzzFeed's formula turned out to be wildly effective on these platforms
because they weren't trying to usurp viewership from legacy media such as TV or newspapers.
Instead, they found a new demographic in need of entertainment.
Peretti coins this demo as the board at work network and the board in line network.
There's literally millions of board office workers
I don't want to work
who spend half of their day working and half of their day on Facebook, on Twitter, sharing media,
I am in each other, emailing each other, collectively that you can reach more people through the board at work network
than the BBC reaches or NBC or CVS or any of the major networks, literally hundreds of millions of people.
Bam.
That initially weren't even aware that they were creating a network, but are now the biggest network in the world.
This network of board people was made possible with the rise of the internet and mobile devices.
These new consumers resulted in BuzzFeed having to take an alternative route in regards to the quality of content produced.
I think the biggest misconception people had was that the way to do it was to focus on quality,
that quality is all that matters.
If you make something that's really high quality, it'll be, it'll go viral.
And the truth is that quality helps you a lot, but there's tons of really high quality things that don't go anywhere and don't really spread much.
So this new media company felt that views were great, but what's even better is shares.
How do we create content that is shareable?
If you think about the board in line and work network, these people aren't looking to consume media that's on par with movies or TV.
This requires way too much focus and time.
How can anyone in the world concentrate on a movie while in line?
Often, these viewers are looking for something that's interesting enough to catch your attention,
yet not too long or intellectually demanding that they risk getting distracted and being caught by their boss.
And so this pretty much explains the reduction in quality you usually associate BuzzFeed with.
The listicles, the cute animals, the quizzes.
Boy, are there quizzes life changing.
I found out tons of stuff I didn't know about myself, like what mood I was in.
Never would have known that, how many kids I'll have, it seems important to know.
My inner LaCroix flavor.
Of course, BuzzFeed did have a journalism portion for more serious stories.
This wasn't what they were popular for.
Lastly, BuzzFeed found that the board network tended to share content that facilitated social connection, a human fundamental need.
You don't tend to connect with someone by sharing the Wikipedia definition of a Basset Hound.
You show them a funny picture of your dog, then they may relate because their dog makes funny faces too.
When you look at these pictures of Basset Hounds running, this isn't what Larry and Sergey had in mind when they created Google.
Nobody types in, I want to see some pictures of Basset Hounds running unless they've already heard about them or discovered them somewhere else.
But Basset Hounds turn out to work very well on the social web because they're both cute and LOL.
And so here's a BuzzFeed post with over a million views.
And the reason people share it is because humor is inherently social.
While modern internet users may scoff at what was going viral in 2006, things that go viral now still follow the underlying formula BuzzFeed has been using.
Content for the board network that is reduced in quality that facilitates social connection.
While all of this was happening, there was something else that was making waves on the internet.
The rise of online video.
And Peretti and his team just couldn't pass up on this opportunity.
This is BuzzFeed motion pictures.
Opening up a studio in Los Angeles called BuzzFeed Motion Pictures and working with internet video legend, Zay Frank.
Words, words, words, words, words, words, words.
They launched their own YouTube channel in 2012.
With implementation of their formula to going viral, their success was wild.
Women became mermaids for a day, 17 million views.
I only said yes to my kids for a week and boyfriends stressed their girlfriends 18 million.
People try fire cupping therapy, 21 mil.
Exes get handcuffed for 24 hours, 24 million.
And like clockwork, these videos dominated YouTube.
Obviously, financial resources are a huge part of why these videos did well.
But it's undeniable that other companies who sure may not have had as much financial backing as BuzzFeed,
but certainly had more than your average creator.
These media companies like Clever or Howcast still didn't have the fan-based BuzzFeed did.
So it isn't just about monetary advantage.
You've made a business out of going viral and what would you say the secret to that is?
I think not a lot of credit is given to these early video producers.
Working on film sets for like the last week and a half means I'm just being fed like a
steady diet of pizza like every day, which is fine.
I have no problem with that.
It also means we're exhausted as f***.
I felt like a lot of these guys made stuff that was authentic to them,
which was what allowed YouTube to emerge in the market in the first place.
Authenticity was a huge reason there was an audience for the kid who wanted to rant to the camera.
BuzzFeed videos were shot in various ways.
Some leaned towards a more vlog-style format.
Others looked like a highly produced reality TV show.
And many a blend of both.
But what tied viewers' favorites together was authenticity.
Even their skits exuded this level of authenticity and genuineness fit for YouTube.
And I know what you're thinking.
Skits, that's the opposite of authenticity, that's acting.
But back when YouTubers did skits more, there was a certain way it was done.
When you would subscribe to sketch YouTubers like Ryan Kiga or Lilly Singh,
you weren't subscribing just to hear their opinion, you were subscribing for them.
You wanted to hear them not just talk about a topic,
but actually creatively convey their ideas through sketches, through skits.
When very small, it's significant formatting choice,
where I could tell BuzzFeed knew what they were doing when it came to their skits.
Was their choice to use their real names in these videos?
Oh my god, please.
I need you to watch my little brother.
They didn't format it like an acting thing like SNL or Mad TV.
This was what YouTubers did.
And BuzzFeed did the same.
Viewers would respond to this content the way they would an early Smosh video.
Viewers can expect more, and find new prices to fall, if we commit.
Investors were impressed by the digital outlet's massive success.
Unlike other internet companies, somehow, BuzzFeed was able to factory assemble authenticity at scale.
The investments started to pour in.
This would drastically affect the dynamics of the company.
We all got pins and buttons when we made good videos,
and that was sort of a weird cult-ish currency.
There's some great fucking company at work!
There was a pin that had some guy's face on it, or a YouTube hit.
There was a different kind of pin.
Based on benchmarks.
Yeah, for a Facebook hit.
One day they go, look at this beautiful hoodie, and everyone goes,
Oh, beautiful hoodie.
And they say, we've gotten one for all of you.
If you'd like to win it, you must get a video that gets to one million in one week.
It was kind of the cult at that level, because we really wanted buttons.
But BuzzFeed, it was like, oh, we're going to give you like,
let-a-me-buddy, or anything for making us millions of dollars.
Um, here's a button, and then everybody clapped.
And then, like, there were, I remember, like, some of the top producers who,
like, had, like, a whole jar full of, full of buttons, and I just go, God, like...
I want, I want that.
When you got your hoodie, though, it was like your SNL jacket.
It was like, welcome to the club, buddy.
And we all drank the fucking Kool-Aid.
Big investments meant BuzzFeed needed to hit Lotus.
And I'm sure, while poorly executed, this was BuzzFeed's attempt at motivating its employees to do so.
The reality of running a media company where revenue is mostly reliant on ads
is you need to do well in viewership.
The end goal of views, however, additionally started to affect authenticity.
I just had a copy of another friend of ours who worked there.
She felt pressured to use her own set as a story for a video.
They were like, you have to make this personal, or it's not going to do well, it's not going to go well.
So she was like, I had processed that trauma.
I was like, I didn't want to talk to people about it.
I always felt this pressure between, it was my duty to make stuff that was really vulnerable
because the comments were all people being like, you know, I'm bisexual and I've never seen myself like this.
And thank you so much.
And so I was like, I have a duty to these young kids, but also I'm not ready to talk about it.
But I have to because I have a duty to these young kids who are now all looking up to me,
which is like hundreds of thousands of people when yesterday nobody was.
Yeah.
And, and also like I have to make sure that the video does well and I have to like be in it.
Also, I haven't spoken to my parents about this aspect of my life.
Here we go.
The pressure to hit quotas created the section of video producers that, yes,
made content that was authentic to them.
But at the same time, these videos were life events.
They hadn't fully processed yet.
It's just that fine line that's so like toxic and hard is like when people feel that pressure.
And like sharing that I'm just like, God, I feel so bad because at the time,
like being a manager and like overseeing like a lot of the videos,
there's sometimes when you really want to be like, wait, like, should we producing this?
Like, let's take a step back.
Although trouble was beginning to brew in the background, the digital outlet didn't address it.
As the adoption of this approach actually resulted in a significant number of cast members achieving widespread success,
paving the way for some of the channel's most popular series.
We saw the rise of shows like the Try Guys.
As their name illustrates, it's simply a series about a group of guys who will pretty much try anything for your entertainment.
Fans raved about Ladylike, which is a series similar to the Try Guys,
but featured a group of women and focus was more on attempting activities perceived as traditionally feminine.
You had worth it where the hosts would try dishes at different price points.
Then you had unsolved in which cast members would discuss unsolved crimes or investigate alleged haunted locations.
A lot of cast members who were successful in their endeavors were awarded opportunities outside of the internet company.
Streaming services bought their shows, they were featured on TV, and some even got the invite to meet up with big-time celebrities.
By 2016, they had become a juggernaut on YouTube, able to produce and outpace your average creator.
This newfound fame garnered by Buzzfeed cast members turned the company into a sought-out job for 20-something aspiring video producers.
Everyone wanted to work here, and competition to get in was high.
I think I applied five different times, and on the fifth try, things worked out.
Buzzfeed was in my head at the time. They were a cool company.
I agree during the mid-2010s, or somewhere in the mid-2010s, was when they were at their peak.
I wanted to work there. I had a few friends who wanted to work there.
It was perceived as a good spot to work in media, especially because I think there was news that they just turned down an acquisition offer from Disney.
So I was like, okay, this place is, like, bumpin'.
When I first got to Buzzfeed, Buzzfeed was really exciting.
Hi! This is exciting. Sort of a big event.
Buzzfeed kind of felt like it was at the center of the universe, because we were doing more video impressions than anyone else.
This introduced yet another dynamic into the business.
Many have been vocal about how the cutthroat nature to land a job at Buzzfeed led to a work environment that they claim is toxic.
The work environment at Buzzfeed was one of the most toxic, sick, and exploitive processes that I have ever been through.
And as a kid, when you're a young person working in entertainment, you don't get it.
They would do these videos, like people try X, right?
Like, so someone came up with the great idea.
Oh, you can drink your own piss. Let's have people drink their own urine for the first time.
The video gets approved by the higher-ups at Buzzfeed.
Sure, it's a great video. Bear Grylls did it, right?
Bear Grylls' drink is pissed. Let's have people drink piss.
So they staff it. They have Buzzfeeders who are willing to do it.
The Buzzfeeders drink their own piss. They film this video, they edit it, and they release it.
I swear to God.
My piss look way more yellow.
Oh my God. That's not unappetizing.
It's here. It's like staring me in the face.
And it's performing well, and then someone has an epiphany.
Wait a minute.
Every single person in this video is an intern.
There's not one full employee in this video.
All of these people in this video that just drank their own piss are in a competitive internship.
So Buzzfeed, just unbeknowingly, forced interns in a competitive internship to drink their own piss for a shot at being hired at the company.
So it didn't sign any NDAs or anything?
No. I'm free to talk however you want.
My name is Aleister Bostwick.
My role at the company was a video producer, video journalist.
I actually worked under Buzzfeed News.
And when did I work?
Like 2015 to 2017-ish?
I want to preference.
I am not hung up on this story. It does not bother me at all.
And I would never bring it up except for you seem to think it's relevant or interesting.
So I'll share it, which is very early into my time at Buzzfeed.
Probably a month into working at Buzzfeed as an intern.
Bear in mind I had just moved from Kansas, rural Kansas, in my car to New York City.
I was 23 at the time. I was an intern being paid $15 an hour, living in East Harlem.
One month into this gig, I wanted to do really well. I was working really hard.
I really wanted to get this job full-time.
And the Try Guys roll up to New York City because they're based out of Los Angeles.
And Keith wants to shoot this video in New York.
So I volunteer to help him on a shoot along with another producer.
And I'm essentially his cameraman for the day. It was a very long shoot.
And we go to the farmer's market in Union Square.
We go to some shops in Flatiron. He tries on some clothes.
We're going all up and downtown.
Eventually we go up to Central Park.
We arrive at a lower boat house, which is you can rent some boats.
And on this boat where I'm filming him talk about something banal or entertaining,
I pop in a dip chewing tobacco because I'm from Kansas.
I'm an unsophisticated hick.
It's a pinch between my cheek and gum gives me real tobacco pleasure.
And continue the film very seratiously.
We wrap the shoot probably around 7 p.m.
Nothing.
Seemed fine.
Next day I come into the office. The Try Guys have left. Keith have left.
And my manager, when I was just an intern at the time, pulled me aside and he said,
hey, Keith complained about you.
He said that dipping was not BuzzFeed culture.
He doesn't think you're a good fit. It really bothered him.
And I was so stunned by that because he had never said anything to my face.
The entire 12 hour shoot.
And from the Midwest when you have a premiere, just confrontational.
And so I learned, oh, Keith is entertaining, but he's somewhat of a corporate weasel.
That he is willing to play pretend and be nice to my face for 12 hours.
So I help him out at $15 an hour.
And then complain behind my back to my manager without saying a word to me.
These cases could certainly be the result of a new company lacking proper structure
rather than being purposefully exploitative.
Whatever the case, one thing is clear.
The results always end up negatively for newcomers.
Former employee Will Neff has been vocal about his time at the company
and makes it very clear how the competitive nature to land a role at BuzzFeed
facilitated a toxic work environment.
There was an intense pressure for interns to perform at the expense of themselves
in order to impress their superiors.
He claims being put through long and extreme work hours.
Recalling a time where he got into a car accident on the way to do his interview
to be promoted to fellow, the next level to intern.
Neff wanted the job so bad he chose to proceed directly to the scheduled interview
instead of going home.
I have this interview still like, oh my God, oh my God.
My heart is just...
I was like so dialed in.
So dialed in and I was like, I have to do this, I have to do this, I have to do this.
And I was like, after the interview immediately I felt very sick.
And I started to ask, I was like, should I go home?
I was just in a car crash.
And they were like, no, no, no, they need you for this vajazzling video, do that.
He showed up to the shoot in the now uploaded video called
People Get Vajazzles for the first time.
And this talent had to get their genitals waxed and cleaned
in order to be prepped for having crystals glued onto them.
Yeah, that's the video.
This was filmed in a small room with a crew of around three, plus the technician,
plus the owner of the salon, watching.
The bottom half of cast members clothing removed.
Nef makes it clear that this is a typical Buzzfeed video
and this was the kind of stuff he signed up for.
Scribing himself as often playing the himbo, he'd be dramatic, chaotic,
and was comfortable wearing provocative or even no clothing on camera.
However, he does hint at the fact that people competing for job security
shouldn't be pressured to participate in this type of content.
And that Buzzfeed should have had some sort of checks and balances for this.
After his promotion to fellow was confirmed,
Nef had to work hard into producing a video that showed his supervisors
he was able to garner massive viewership to hit quotas.
Fortunately, an opportunity presented itself for him
to make a video with the renowned ensemble, The Try Guys.
The series was doing numbers, which meant whatever he made with them
would definitely do well.
And this would certainly impress his supervisors.
His pitch was equally as good.
Try Guys create iconic Playboy centerfold covers.
The pitch was approved and the video was shot.
The guys did their thing posing in different famous Playboy poses.
Typical Try Guys million-viewed idea.
This would be the video that would solidify Nef's chances
of being promoted from fellow and moving on to becoming full-time.
Now at the time, Buzzfeed was in the middle of a move
in which employees were to pack up their belongings into boxes
and label them to be transported into another facility.
Upon arrival at the new building, Nef discovered
that the hard drive from his box that contained the Try Guys footage was missing.
And I searched everywhere for this fucking hard drive.
I searched everywhere.
It had a Try Guys video on it.
This was a video that was going to take me to the next level.
And it was gone.
When I go to my bosses at the time, I tell them,
I'm like, guys, I can't find my hard drive.
And it has three videos in progress on it.
And at that point, we had to turn over 1.5 videos every week.
I was like, I need time to get back to doing what I was doing.
And they're like, no, you need to produce a video this week.
The show must go on!
So they just kept rolling.
And they blamed me for this equipment being lost.
They blamed me for this video going missing.
Even though it was the only piece of equipment in the move that disappeared.
And to this day, I have no idea what happened to this piece of equipment.
This was only one of many things in which Neff claims was done to undermine his prospects for success.
He also, for some reason, was not able to book interns to help him with a lot of other productions,
even though other fellows were able to.
He began scrambling to make videos that showed his bosses that he could produce the metrics they needed.
Upon the conclusion of his time as fellow, Neff did not attain the coveted transition to becoming a full-time employee.
The thing that made me sure that someone had it out for me was on the way out,
I turned my email address over and give all my equipment back.
And I say goodbye to everybody.
And a lot of people are shocked that I'm leaving.
Two days later, I get a call from Cody and he's like, dude, I got to talk to you about something.
I was like, yeah, what is it?
And he was like, I'm going over your final credit card statement.
Now they gave us credit cards to be able to produce content, right?
Going over your final credit card statement.
Did you buy a new iPhone on your credit card the week you were leaving?
And I was like, what? No.
If that had been anybody but Cody, I would have been because someone took my credit card after I turned it in and bought a cell phone on them.
Just to further incriminate and disenfranchise me to the company.
But Cody was an absolute homie and he was my friend and I don't think he believed it for a moment.
And so I left the company.
It was the end of my tenure.
It was the end of my time at BuzzFeed.
The only logical conclusion as to why I think BuzzFeed didn't address this growing problem is I got cocky.
Despite this growing number of people feeling like the work environment was unsustainable or perhaps just a new restructuring needed to happen with leadership,
the company was probably counting on the fact that they could easily replace them with another aspiring young filmmaker looking for exposure.
Even if one of their heavy hitters were to burn out, maybe at that point they felt like it didn't matter that their reach was already so big it'd be impossible to fail.
Another element that made the digital outlets content successful was their ability to use identity to create shareable content.
They found that users were cognizant that the content they shared was a reflection of their identity.
In other words, users were sharing things that they thought made them look good or showcased a part of their personality they wanted to express.
Sometimes people will say, oh, well, if you want to make something really viral, why don't you just post porn or something?
But porn isn't viral because people don't want to share email porn to all their friends.
Maybe people will click on it or search for it.
They certainly do, but it's not usually viral because it doesn't tap into the social side of human nature of wanting to share things and pass things along.
People share stuff because it's about them.
Some primetime show that every 80% of people sort of like doesn't get shared at all on the web,
but something that only 10% of people feel passionate about gets shared a lot.
Given how strongly people identify with political stances and social issues, content in this genre has always been among the most shared.
Now BuzzFeed has released a number of videos that truly highlighted a number of social injustices many were ignorant of.
However, when meeting viewership quota became more and more important, video producers were incentivized to make more content in this area simply because they knew it would get more views.
This is how, in my opinion, you got content like women trying pan spreading for a week.
Man spreading is when a man spreads his physical body to take up as much space as humanly possible.
The people around you are relegated to a very small portion, but the key to man spreading is not noticing.
You have a naturally progressive employees that know their audience is progressive by this point and then can lean hard into that identity to get more views.
So you know, okay, what we want to do is we want to lean into our own audience but also trigger the conservatives.
Just as there's the kind of like trigger the libs meme, the people at BuzzFeed were certainly well aware that they were triggering the conservatives by doing catchy, ridiculous things like women try man-spanning.
Like there is some meta-self-awareness when I was there at BuzzFeed that they knew they were needling, that they would get hate and get reaction, but that's fine because ultimately what you want is views, you just want engagement.
Content like this seemed to function in a way that it received the outrage click of a usually conservative leaning individual while simultaneously capturing the click of a liberal leaning person interested in taking down the patriarchy.
The video did well because of this view-wise.
But it got so much backlash. The comments are turned off.
And I think that's because even for someone who is liberal, this typically isn't the issue to prioritize. No one is out on the streets protesting this.
I think what's annoying about these I tried videos, at least to me, is that it seems like all of them can be boiled down to somebody saying, I'm going to do blank for a week.
And they'll proceed to film themselves before doing said thing and after to tell us how they feel before and after doing it, but rarely ever show us them actually doing what's in the title.
I think they do it on purpose because if they were to actually show the footage of them doing it, it just makes you realize how dumb it is.
Man-spreading for a week is just watching somebody sit obnoxiously on a bus.
And half the time they weren't even really man-spreading.
They were just taking up as many seats as possible, trying to attach some deeper meaning to it.
Like you were just annoying for a week.
But this formula in communicating social issues was the way to meet their quota.
The most interesting one to me was I went down to Mexico to kind of report and cover the way the United States handles deportation on the border.
Like what happens when illegal immigrants or whatever term we want to use cross the border, get caught by ICE, and then are not granted asylum and they're just deported.
Like what does that look like?
Do you remember how well that video did in terms of views?
Yeah, terribly. Nobody cared.
The system in place at BuzzFeed discouraged, certainly taking topical risks outside of tried and true methods.
And so you got the videos like we painted with our period blood that captured individuals all over the political spectrum, for different reasons of course.
We all leaned into the fact that it smelled awful.
Oh, it smells.
Can you smell it?
It hit over here, yeah, it did.
Its intent supposedly was to normalize periods, but I think it's done the opposite.
But I guess a view is a view is a view.
As is the natural progression of anything that is commodified and turned into a business.
BuzzFeed inadvertently helped to create the aesthetic of left leaning progressive values.
They turned it into a brand pushing its core ideological principles into the background.
A fan life on social media was a glorified and romanticized version of camping.
BuzzFeed was this when it came to left leaning political issues.
It was very akin to an influencer lifestyle.
Some have claimed that this service level aesthetic was seeping into company culture.
Timothy Jonay was hired by the digital outlet to grow and manage a number of the company's social media accounts.
I didn't even remember applying and they're like, hey, it's BuzzFeed.
Can you come in tomorrow?
And I was like, I already gave up on my Hollywood dream.
I'm going home.
And they're like, no, we're really serious.
And I'm like, I had been looking for jobs for like six months.
I couldn't find anything out here.
Loved everything I did.
They loved my work on Twitter and YouTube.
And they hired me right away.
It was easy to discount his abilities as he was an unlikely candidate for the job based on his appearance.
What does a trap rapper from Alaska know about growing social media?
But he did well.
In just six months, he helped to grow the outlets Instagram and Twitter for tasty BuzzFeed's food show.
Jonay also appeared as a regular in a number of the outlets videos.
He fit right in.
However, as BuzzFeed shifted its identity from cute pet videos and relatable content to one of left leaning politics,
and remember not actual left leaning, more like the aesthetic of left leaning.
Employees who did not fit this culture are ostracized, he claims.
Including himself.
Jonay recalls a time where he was talking to a colleague about the new Justin Bieber album.
Dude, that new Justin Bieber album is dope.
I have to admit, I love Justin Bieber.
He is totally my spirit animal.
His colleague promptly interjected, scolding him about the phrase spirit animal due to it appropriating Native American culture.
Jonay tells Yahoo News, there were several instances like this that pushed him further and further right,
to the point where he eventually came forward in support of Trump.
In the office, he would wear a MAGA hat and even got Trump tattooed on his body.
Subsequently, he found himself subjected to ridicule.
He became the guy no one wanted to talk to.
Yeah, when I came out that I supported Trump, I was treated like I had leprosy or something.
They stopped inviting me to meetings, and then shortly I quit because it was just so tough for me to even be at that office.
You would probably know Timothy Jonay today as Baked Alaska.
The guy who not only publishes far right controversial content on socials,
but was also sentenced to 60 days in jail, participating in the capital rights.
Colleagues of his, such as Wilnef, believed that the Buzzfeed work environment did indeed have a hand at radicalizing Jonay.
To be clear, this isn't supposed to be a sob story about someone who was ousted for their differing political ideology.
If you're familiar with the Baked Alaska brand, it's possible there may have been some provoking and back and forth we aren't privy to.
Where I believe he was radicalized is how he saw the relationship between politics and viral content.
Jonay learned at Buzzfeed that if you leaned into an identity that not necessarily focused too much on its core values, the internet would reward you.
In a New York Times article by Ben Smith, the editor-in-chief of Buzzfeed News, Smith kind of confirms this point, calling the story of Baked Alaska something different.
The sort of social media power that we help sharpen at Buzzfeed, that can exert an almost irresistible gravitational pull.
If you haven't had the experience of posting something on social media that goes truly viral, you may not understand its profound emotional attraction.
You're suddenly the center of a digital universe, getting more attention from more people than you've ever had.
The rush of affirmation can be giddy and addictive.
And if you have little else to hold on to, you can lose yourself.
Jonay took what he had learned at the digital outlet, and he did the same with right-leaning values.
Smith is sure to separate the company's actions in Jonay, though, stating,
Of course, using the aesthetic of a political ideology is the best way to get an idea to spread via the internet.
But we don't go as far as Jonay, because we're a news organization.
His story leaves me wondering, what's Sheriff Blaine, those of us who pioneered the use of social media to deliver information deserve at this moment?
Did we, along with the creators of those platforms, help open Andorra's box?
Buzzfeed had really benefited tremendously from being early adapters of BLM and a lot of progressive movements, but they were doing it in a totally performative way.
Thank you so much.
And then they make this video, like, I think it's like 20 things all black people do.
And the thing was, our checks and balances for making these videos was like one black person.
And if they were like, yeah, that's cool, the video would get made.
So they got this, like, sign off from one black person.
The video was tremendously offensive.
It basically talked about, like, black people hoarding shoes and stuff like that.
And so black Twitter was like, wait a minute, what the f... this isn't bull...
Why do we call each other the N-word, but get vehemently upset when a white person uses the N-word?
Why can't I love school and also be black?
And then that's like when Buzzfeed and kind of the progressive movement had this splinter where the progressive movement realized like, oh, Buzzfeed is dead, they don't give a f...
They're just making these videos to get views.
And they went to Twitter to apologize for putting that video out saying that, uh, saying something like, uh, we made a mistake and we want to get another chance at earning the black people's trust.
For Buzzfeed, when I first was brought on back, during my first interview, it was strictly for diversity.
Then when I was applying to stay at Buzzfeed, it was for their diversity team.
So I come thinking, I'm ready to do diversity, I've got so many ideas down, and then I am told, surprise, our diversity team is drastically cut and we have a place for you, Steph.
We're gonna punt you on the short, scripted, dark comedy team.
Like, what?
At the end of the day, they didn't want more diversity, they want more viral hits, they want more things that would get views.
When they even said, we don't really know where we would place you, I was like, I don't know where you would place me either.
I don't think they're wrong for wanting what they want, which is quantity and viral hits, and I don't think I'm wrong for wanting what I want, which is quality and representation.
Buzzfeed, at the end of the day, is a company, and just like any other company, they don't always punt moral values first, they put getting money first.
Because you can't make a living on moral values, unfortunately.
When I spoke to former employees for this video, I felt a lot of them had good intentions and truly wanted to produce content that promoted progressive values and not just the surface level image of it for views.
However, I don't know if that matters.
In combination with the algorithm and perhaps a video producer feeling the pressure of having to hit a quota, videos like this would get views, and outshined other videos where those core values were clear.
But eventually, that made Buzzfeed's core fanbase lose trust with them.
And so tweets like this one from the writing department of Buzzfeed Canada would really throw people off of what Buzzfeed's intentions were.
Would you like to write long form for at Buzzfeed Canada? Well, you can.
We want pitches for your Canada-centric essays and reporting. What particularly like to hear from you if you are not white and not male.
The internet erupted with widespread criticism directed at the digital media outlet, with many accusing the company of promoting racist and sexist hiring practices.
The tweets then doubled down. If you're a white man upset that we are looking mostly for non-white men, I don't care about you.
Go write for McLean's. Then the random pinned tweet, yo, these pale demons, nothing.
Almost all responses were in agreement that it is okay to specifically hire a writer based on the type of content you are looking for.
If, for example, you were looking for someone to write a memoir or op-ed about growing up as an Asian American, you are likely going to get few applications from someone who is white.
Whether this be a ploy to solidify that Buzzfeed aesthetic and garner further attention, or if this employee truly meant what they posted, is unclear.
Regardless, the resulting controversy was just one of many incidences that significantly tarnished Buzzfeed's reputation.
Making viewers question whether or not they really believe the progressive ideals their content conveyed.
And to be clear, it's not really about the joke, if you can call it that. If you watch Stand Up or any other comedy podcasts, they still make these types of jokes.
Watch TikTok. They do these and no one really cares. It's just something about those tweets seem to, I don't know, pandering to hostile?
Buzzfeed was crumbling. While they were losing audience trust, the demand for creating a high volume of content began to take a toll on one of the company's main components of their formula. Authenticity.
I did send you a screenshot of a Slack I discovered deep within my computer's hard drive from 2016-2017. Everybody was fudging. The concept's a little bit.
I think in the screenshot it shows that the producer's reaching out because he needs people to appear in a Lunchable video. People try Lunchables for the first time.
Presenting Lunchables Pizza. Three real crusts with all the toppings. Fun to make and eat.
It's like, yo, can you be in my video? Like, have you tried Lunchables? If you haven't. Or if you have, it's all good. Just lie and I'm responding like, it's all good. I've been here a long time. I know how it goes.
So there's a mutual understanding of the facade that we're presenting to the audience.
The understanding was the pressure to get videos out consistently with a format that once discovered works. Like, these people try some new product they haven't tried before.
These people do something they haven't done before to just run that paradigm into the ground at whatever kind of a cost. You know, whether we're embellishing or there's some hyperbole about who or hasn't tried X or Y in the format.
So be it as long as the video is entertaining. But it was never, I don't think explicitly stated to do that, nor was the intent to deliberately mislead any audience.
It was a function of the environment people found themselves in Buzzfeed, which was the pressure to produce content.
And although their intent wasn't to mislead their audience, I think deep down viewers knew some of these reactions were too over the top.
First food ever. Here I go.
That wasn't bad.
Oh my God. Did I just, did I seriously just watch a minute and 25 seconds of this video to hear someone describe a blueberry as not bad?
Just this is content, baby. This is what it's all about.
Which is why viewership for this type of content seem to diminish, yet the format has still been popular on other channels.
Eventually, their high quota would burn out their top talent as well.
Leaving Buzzfeed.
And I'm leaving Buzzfeed for the first time.
I'm going to be talking about why I left Buzzfeed.
Why I left Buzzfeed.
Why I left Buzzfeed.
I left Buzzfeed video.
Anytime a video from like a video producer, a major one would drop like why I left Buzzfeed.
There would always be like rumblings about it on like Slack or maybe even in person.
There was a common theme as to why these creators have decided to leave their job.
To Buzzfeed, in a lot of cases, quantity trumps quality.
They would rather have more videos than fewer good videos.
And the reasoning behind this, I think, is just that the more videos you make, the more money you make generally.
And there was also a focus on virality.
The videos you make are expected to go viral.
Not all of them, but ideally a lot of them.
There were, there was like pretty high quotas.
And so that meant that you had to be filming a lot and you had to be coming up with new ideas and new content had to be put out.
And so those demands kind of were rising as time went on.
But the amount of resources that we were allotted and the amount of faith that it seemed like leaders of the company had in us really seemed to go downhill.
So you're sort of in a situation where a lot is being asked of you.
And it sort of feels like the end goal keeps moving further and further away.
Well, there might be some truth to that.
The themes in the why I left BuzzFeed content still explain exactly why the channel you knew in 2016 was bound to fail.
It wasn't just the demanding workload.
When you work for a company and make videos, everything that you make, that company owns.
So for instance, you might have heard about some people being let go from BuzzFeed.
And those people, the characters and the videos that they, the series that they created while at BuzzFeed, they'll never be able to make that series ever again.
And that's because that is BuzzFeed's intellectual property.
And that began to scare me.
BuzzFeed said, even that stuff, that's ours.
Do I give them my best ideas?
Later in life, I may want to use those ideas for something and I won't be able to.
And that started worrying me more and more.
It is true that this is the standard at most media companies.
Imagine being a writer for a Marvel movie knowing the weaknesses and strengths of the script.
So you write something else based on the same framework and sell it to DC.
It makes sense for them to have it written in their contract to avoid this type of competition.
However, what makes the situation unique from that example is that one of the content these creators produced was based on their real selves.
As we previously mentioned, authenticity is what does numbers on YouTube.
So of course, this was the type of videos they made.
For a company to own the IP of something based on yourself, rendering it illegal for you to produce content surrounding you,
is understandable why there would be apprehension in such a scenario.
Some creators, specifically Gabby and Allison, for example, they were put in a weird position where they were told,
you can't make videos outside of BuzzFeed if you want to work for BuzzFeed or there was some Catch-22 about it,
so they ended up leaving BuzzFeed.
And then for other employees, they were let go for doing outside work.
Why do I think so many people left BuzzFeed around 2017 comes to pretty easy, ultimately, simple answers,
which is that the demands of BuzzFeed were pretty strict.
You had hard quotas, you were not paid very much,
and by 2017, BuzzFeed had a large enough reputation that you could take your marketable skills,
the fact that you had worked at BuzzFeed, and get a higher salary somewhere else.
And I can also then say, why I left BuzzFeed video, and I can generate lots of views,
so it's either the pivoting to another company where they can make more money,
because BuzzFeed didn't pay a lot of money, or they wanted to branch out on their own.
They felt like they had built up a large enough audience by using BuzzFeed as the vehicle
that they were going to leave now, on top, and then create a why I left BuzzFeed video.
By 2020, many of BuzzFeed's most watched talent had left to go in a different direction.
Hosts of Unsolved and one of two of the leads of the show worth that launched the YouTube channel Watcher.
The Try Guys also doing their own thing.
Some shows like Ladylike even disbanded for more mysterious reasons not announced to the public.
Other individuals landed more mainstream jobs.
Devin Little from Ladylike jumped ship for NBC after working at BuzzFeed for five years.
Quinta Brunson went on to create Abbott Elementary, which has been nominated for a number of awards.
These members left the digital media company simply because it was more website to being independent.
I think they weren't built at that point for what we were doing,
and the reason to leave is because I felt like we were in a box and the box was too small for what we were doing.
We had desires to explore this property in a million different directions.
Despite the lack of bad blood, their departure from their on-camera roles also resulted in the departure of their fans.
Viewers came for the authenticity, exuded by a lot of these shows, and once that was gone, they left as well.
In the last couple of minutes, we've learned BuzzFeed has decided to shut down its newsroom.
Yeah, Jose, this is no doubt a rough day for the news business.
So in an email sent to BuzzFeed employees, CEO Jonah Peretti laid out the cuts and the implications there.
BuzzFeed will lay off about 15% of its staff.
I think that it doesn't come as a total surprise because the newsroom has been downsizing for several years now.
I reported last week that investors were pushing BuzzFeed to shut down its newsroom then,
and CEO Jonah Peretti fought to keep it alive in many ways, echoing those sentiments today.
If you're a millennial, an end of the end of an era.
So many things have happened since BuzzFeed's peak in 2016.
They've had several layoffs.
Former employees sued the digital outlet, alleging they were not permitted to sell their shares for a higher price after the IPO.
He had the wife guy cheating on his wife, which I guess technically isn't BuzzFeed, but many people seem to associate to.
Ned Fulmer is no longer working with the Try Guys.
Their news division officially shut down, and despite their millions of subscribers,
a lot of their channels today continue to look like ghost towns, with no recent uploads.
We see, once again, changes. The audience is changing, and their habits are changing.
So the audience is spending more time on social platforms that involve video, like TikTok and Instagram.
And whereas before, they would be on Twitter, they would be on Facebook and link out,
now they are kind of trapped in those platforms, happily trapped in those platforms,
and it's really hard to fight to get content there.
Talent was dropping faster than they could do so.
Whether you think BuzzFeed's work environment was exploitative or not, the bottom line was that their way of doing things,
their system pushed away many of their top performing creators.
Instead of investing in these individuals, paying them more so they stay,
I think they took them for granted and likely felt they were replaceable due to their massive reach.
It's true, the BuzzFeed had the formula for virality, but they hardly knew anything about sustainability.
If you look at the series Unsolved, for instance, which BuzzFeed owns the IP of,
it hardly has any of the attention of when it was hosted by the original duo.
A lot of the comments also express how much they miss the original hosts.
It's not because the new cast is talentless, it's just that what separates YouTube from TV
is the fact that viewers develop the sort of parasocial friendship for creators.
We aren't always watching a video for the idea itself, but for the creator.
Whether it be mundane, like trying different brands of water or grandiose,
like competing in a challenge for thousands of dollars, we want to see how XYZ YouTuber reacts.
To turn creativity into a business is a very delicate thing to do,
and I don't know if, I don't know who has done it right at that scale.
At that scale, it's very complicated to do, and I think even at the scales that we're doing it at,
it's super complicated to turn just like loose fun creativity into a P&L that works.
I can't imagine what it's like to run a company that's entire business model
is based off of the economics of the internet.
You look at the YouTube channels of many former BuzzFeed employees, for instance,
and their fanbase, unlike the company, is still strong.
How BuzzFeed lost their audience was failing to meet the needs of the people that helped build them.
Of course, if you have the means to do so, as you know, as I posted before,
sponsorships are rare on this channel because sometimes they just don't like the topics that I post.
Either way, thank you for watching. That's the end of the video.
I will see you guys next time. Stay safe.
