Welcome back. In today's lecture we're going to be looking at electronic circuits, that
is entire interconnections of electronic components. You may recall in the preceding lecture we
actually looked at a particular electronic component, the resistor in some detail. We'll
look at it in a little more detail here, but we'll also learn how to represent many other
kinds of electronic devices in circuits, and we'll learn how to read diagrams for circuits,
and we'll learn a little bit about how to interconnect electrical systems. Let me give
you an example of a complete circuit. Over here I have a board from a computer, probably
decade old by now, but it still illustrates the main idea here that we're talking about
devices that are interconnected in modern circuits. They're almost always interconnected
by putting them on a board made of insulating material, and wires are etched out of copper
that was originally applied to the board in a solid piece, and that's how the interconnections
are made, but in the old days they were interconnected by running wires from one component to another
and soldering them together. But the point is, an electronic circuit is simply an assemblage
of interconnected electronic components, a big interconnection or a very small interconnection.
I have another circuit here or part of a circuit consisting of a couple of light bulbs, and
they're simply connected together by this one wire, and later we'll connect those up
into another complete circuit. So we'd like to represent circuits in a kind
of symbolic way. So let me give you an example of how we're going to do that. So here's a
complicated looking circuit. It happens to be the circuit diagram for an audio amplifier.
If it looks daunting to you right now, come back after a few lectures, and you'll actually
be able not only to identify the individual electronic components in this circuit diagram,
but you'll also be able to kind of follow through what the circuit diagram does and
what each component does. Just to give you a few examples, on the left you see an input.
You see a number of zigzag structures. Those are resistors that we talked about in the
preceding lecture. You see some devices with three wires coming out of them or three connections
coming out of them, and one of them has a little arrow on it. Those are transistors.
You see some capacitors, and you see on the right-hand side a loudspeaker because this
is an audio amplifier. So what we have here is a language to learn. The language of electronic
circuit diagrams, schematic diagrams. We could draw pictorial diagrams. I could draw a picture
of a transistor and a picture of a battery and a picture of a resistor, but different
resistors look different, and different transistors look different, but their circuit symbols look
the same. And that gives us a common language for representing electric circuits. Let me
give you some other examples. Here's a much simpler example of perhaps the simplest electronic
circuit or electrical circuit in this case that you might be able to build. This one
consists of a battery, typically a C or D flashlight battery, connected in series with
a resistor, and it's a 1000 ohm resistor. I can tell that by reading off its color code.
It's a 1.5 volt battery. On the left is a picture of what that circuit would actually
look like if you put it together. The white lines represent wires, which we consider to
be perfect conductors, so I'll say a little bit more about that later. We ignore any resistance
they might have, but there's plenty of resistance in that resistor, 1000 ohms. So on the right,
I've shown the circuit diagram, and in that diagram are two electronic circuit symbols.
The symbol for a battery, which consists of this series of alternating long and short
lines. Technically, a battery consists of several cells. This is actually just one cell,
but we're going to use this symbol for batteries in general, and I'll talk a little bit more
shortly about what a battery does, and that battery in this circuit is marked with its
voltage. It's a 1.5 volt battery. Remember, a volt is a measure of the push that that
source can supply in terms of pushing current through the circuit. And on the right hand
side, you can see connected directly across the battery is the 1000 ohm resistor as represented
by that zigzag kind of symbol. So there is about the simplest circuit you could imagine
making. A simple circuit consisting of a source of electrical energy, a battery, and
a load, something to which that energy is going to be supplied. It's sometimes called
a load. Maybe it's a loudspeaker. Maybe it's a motor in this case. It's simply a resistor
which is going to heat up with the power that is dissipated in the resistor. So what we'd
like to do is look at briefly at some symbols for other circuit elements. I won't introduce
them all now, but I'll simply show you them, and then throughout the course of the lecture
series, you'll see each of these devices introduced. So here are some common electronic symbols.
We will use every one of these in this course. Some of them coming much later. Some of them
coming much sooner. On the left at the top, you see the wiggly symbol that's the resistor
that I just introduced. We see the battery. We see a capacitor which is not the same as
a battery. It consists of two equal length lines with a gap between them. That reflects
the electrical nature of the capacitor. Sometimes you'll see one of those two horizontal lines
drawn as a curve, but that's still a capacitor. Next element is a diode, a kind of one-way
valve for electric current. We'll be using those shortly. And on the top right is a transistor,
a particular kind of transistor called a bipolar junction transistor, which is commonly used
in, for example, audio amplifiers. On the bottom left is another kind of transistor
that we'll have more to say about when we get to logic circuits, digital circuits in
particular. Next is a transformer, a device for changing voltage levels in electric circuits.
We'll be using that when we build a power supply in lecture four. And right after that come
a pair of switches. Switches are simply devices for opening or closing an electric circuit.
In the simplest case of the single pole, single throw switch at the top. In the case of the
switch at the bottom, a single pole double throw switch. It's a switch that can be moved
to one of two different possible positions. We'll have occasional uses for these switches.
At the bottom right is a really important symbol. It's a ground symbol. And ground is
a slightly ambiguous meaning in electronic circuits, but in most electronic circuits
there is a common point to which many things are connected. It's often in a battery powered
circuit the negative terminal of the battery. In a car, for example, the metal body of the
car is called ground and it's usually, not always, but usually connected to the negative
terminal of the battery. In electric power wiring, the electric power system is actually
for reasons of safety connected directly to the physical earth ground. And outside your
house there's a copper stake, typically copper stake driven many feet into the ground and
your electric power system is tied to ground there. I mentioned ground because we'll often
use ground as a shortcut instead of drawing all the wires that come back to the negative
terminal of the battery or the negative terminal of the power supply will show a ground symbol.
And many circuits we'll talk about and particularly some of the simulations we'll do of circuits
in the projects will require us to have a ground symbol in there to have the circuit be grounded.
So that ground symbol is going to be a common and important one. And sometimes you'll see
it not drawn as this series of decreasing length horizontal lines, but instead as simply
a little open triangle pointing down at the bottom. So we're going to deal with ground
symbols. So those are some electronic symbols. Now what we'd really like to do is to be able
to characterize the electrical characteristics of all these different kinds of devices. Well,
we can't do all of them in exactly the same way, but a remarkable number of them we can
characterize in a similar way. And the way we're going to characterize them is by drawing
graphs which show their characteristics. And I'm going to start with the battery. So I
have that battery symbol again. I'm marking the plus and minus terminals of the battery.
The longer bar on the outside edge is the plus terminal of the battery and the shorter
one is the minus terminal of the battery and we'll mark what the battery's voltage is.
And so that's a six-volt battery, for example. And over here I have a six-volt battery, a
common battery. It's called a lantern battery. It actually consists of four one-and-a-half
volt cells inside it. And these two spirally wire things at the top are the two terminals.
And if I look at it, the middle one, it says minus. So that's the minus terminal and that's
the plus terminal. And every battery has two terminals and a rated voltage. So the battery
is one example of what's called a voltage source. There are plenty of other examples. An electric
generator could be a voltage source. A so-called power supply is a voltage source. The wall
outlet is a voltage source, which is a varying voltage source, as we'll see in another lecture.
But a battery is a very simple example. It converts chemical energy into electrical energy
and it produces, in principle, if it's ideal, exactly the same voltage across its terminals.
In the case of this one I'm showing, that would be six volts, regardless of how much
current it's supplying. Now that turns out to be an impossibility if we could have an
ideal battery. We would have solved all the world's energy problems. I'll talk a little
bit more about that later. But that would be an ideal battery. And so now I'd like to
try to characterize an ideal battery by drawing a graph that shows how the voltage and current
are related in an ideal battery. And as I do that, remember, an ideal battery maintains
the same voltage across its terminals, regardless of how much current you or the external circuit
it might be connected to is asking it to supply. For example, that six-volt battery I just
showed you is sitting on the table with nothing connected to it. It's not being asked to supply
any current right now. It's supplying zero current. But even if it were supplying a hundred
amperes of current, if it were ideal, it would still have six volts across those two terminals.
So the key idea here is going to be what we call VI characteristics, voltage current characteristics.
And I want to show you how we describe VI characteristics. First for a battery, then
for a resistor, and then as I introduce new components, we'll introduce their VI characteristics,
which will be more interestingly complicated. So here's our battery again. It's an ideal
battery, the same voltage across its terminals, regardless of how much current it's flowing.
And I happen to have chosen it to be a six-volt battery. So to describe the VI characteristics,
I want to draw a graph in which voltage is on the horizontal axis, in volts in this case,
and current is on the vertical axis in amperes in this case. And voltage can be positive
or negative, depending on which sign is in which place, and current can be positive or
negative depending on which way the current is flowing. And that distinction isn't terribly
important for a simple circuit like a battery or a resistor, but it becomes very important
when we talk about some unusual semiconductor devices whose VI characteristics look very
different depending on which way the current is flowing. So remember, our ideal battery,
has the same voltage across the terminals regardless of the current, and in this case,
it's a six-volt battery, so it has six volts regardless of the current. So the VI characteristic
curve, if you will, it's not a curve, it's a straight line of that battery, it's simply
a straight vertical line. Go up or down that line, and you're changing the value of the
current. In fact, you're even changing the direction as you go through zero. But if
the battery's ideal, maintain six volts regardless. What about a resistor? Well, we're going to
use the same graph. We're going to put up in the upper left corner a one-ohm resistor.
And remember Ohm's law, the current is the voltage divided by the resistance. That's
a one-ohm resistor. So that says if I put, for example, six volts across that resistor,
six amps will flow. V is six volts, R is one ohm, I is V over R, six amps. So there's
one point on the VI characteristic of that resistor. Here's another point. If I put ten
volts across the resistor, ten amps will flow because I is V over R. If I put zero amps,
by the way, zero volts across it, no current will flow. That'd be another point. If I put
minus four volts across it, in this case, put a four-volt battery across it the other
way, I'd get minus four amps of current flowing. And if I put minus ten volts across it, I'll
get minus ten amps flowing. And you can connect the dots and you can see that the VI characteristic
for a resistor is simply a straight diagonal line. And in this case, that diagonal line
has a slope of one amp for every volt because this is a one-ohm resistor. What would happen
if I made it into a two-ohm resistor? Well, two ohms has twice the resistance, so for
a given voltage, only half as much current would flow and a two-ohm resistor would have
the same kind of characteristic curve that is a diagonal line. But the slope of that
line is less, reflecting the fact that we get less current for a given voltage through
the two-ohm resistor. Think a minute about what a half-ohm resistor would look like.
Well, a half-ohm resistor has less resistance than the one-ohm or the two-ohm. What would
happen in that case? Well, in that case, I'd get more current flowing and the VI characteristic
for the half-ohm resistor, 0.5 ohms, is another diagonal line, which is, in this case, steeper
because more current flows for a given voltage. So that is the VI curves, the VI characteristics
for two devices we've looked at now, namely, a battery and a resistor. So now I want to
move on not to characterize individual devices, which is interesting in itself, but to asking
how do we connect devices together? So in fact, there are two important ways of connecting
electronic devices, and let me define those and talk about them a little bit. So two components,
any components, any kind of electronic components, are in series. If the current flowing through
one of them has nowhere to go but into the next one. So here's component one, here's
component two. If electric current flows through component one, the charge that's flowing has
no place to go but into component two, and that defines series resistors. And it has
to be that way. There can be no other place for the current coming out of one component
to go but into the second component. If it has a choice, if there's more than one possibility,
they are not in series. And consequently, because the current that's flowing through
one device goes on to the other, the same current flows through both components. Now
I have to qualify that a little bit. I'm talking about circuits where things are happening
in kind of a steady state. If electric charge were somehow building up on that wire between
the two components, this would no longer be true, but that would be a very impossible
situation physically because soon a big voltage would build up and it would drive a current
through the second component, and it would be the same. So when you see components in
series, they have the same current through both of them.
Here's a little question. Are components one and two in series? How about one and three?
One and three. Well, look at what happens to the current through one. It has the possibility
of splitting some of it through two, some of it through three. So none of those resistors
are in series. There are no series combinations in that particular situation. So that's general
what series means. Let's talk now about connecting resistors in series. So here are two resistors
in series. I'm labeling them R1 and R2. Current through R1 can only flow through R2, so they're
in series. And without going through the physics of deriving this, and it's not terribly difficult,
you can convince yourself that the series resistance is the sum of the two resistances.
Resistors in series simply add. Think about a garden hose. The pressure is like the electrical
voltage, the push, the flow is like the current. If you attach an extra hundred feet of hose,
it's going to be harder to get water through that hose. The resistance goes up in the same
thing happens when you put resistors in series. So those are series resistors. They simply
add and here's some examples. If R1 and R2 are the same, and just call it R, then R series
is simply twice R. So that is series resistors. And let me do a little bit of mathematics with
series resistors over here on the big screen, because I want to describe a particular circuit
configuration that's going to be really important in this course. It's called a voltage divider,
and it is basically two series resistors across some source of voltage. So the battery voltage
is V. We have resistor R1 and R2. We want to know what's the voltage across resistor R2.
So those resistors are in series, and the equivalent resistance we've just seen is the sum R1
plus R2. We know Ohm's law. Current is voltage over resistance. So the current that flows
in that circuit, and here it is going around the whole circuit. Everything's in series,
same current through everything, is I equals V over R1 plus R2. Now supply Ohm's law to
R2, because we're asked about the voltage across R2. V is current times resistance. That's
this current that we've just derived, multiplied by R2. If I do a little tiny bit of algebra
on that, I see that what happens is the voltage across the lower resistor, R2, is simply this
fraction, R2 over the total resistance times the battery voltage. That's why it's a voltage
divider. It divides the voltage in proportion to the resistances. And let's just take a
look at some special cases of the voltage divider. One special case is when R1 and R2
are equal. In that case, got 2R down there and 1R up there, and the output voltage or
the voltage across R2 is half. The voltage divider divides the battery voltage in half.
If R2 is zero, on the other hand, we get no voltage across it. It's a perfect wire. Wires
don't have voltage across them. No voltage across zero resistance. And finally, if R2
is really big compared to R1, then V2 is almost equal to the battery voltage. And I'll have
a lot more to say about that in a minute when I talk about ideal batteries. R1 becomes almost
a perfect wire if R2 is much bigger than R1. So that's the voltage divider, a really important
configuration that we'll see again and again and again throughout this course. Okay, I
have an example of a voltage divider over here. Here is a circuit consisting of a couple
of resistors. Well, are they resistors? Yes, they're light bulbs, and incandescent light
bulbs are just resistors. And I'm going to connect it across the 6-volt battery. And
I'm going to come around and get my voltmeter fired up. And my voltmeter is set to read
DC voltage. And so I'm going to read the voltage across this second light bulb. And
you can see it's just about 3 volts. And we're across a 6-volt battery, and we have
two identical resistors. They happen to be light bulbs. And consequently, we are good
with 3 volts. We've seen that that voltage divider is working. So there's an example
of a voltage divider. Now, I want to take this voltage divider idea and talk a little
bit about real batteries, because real batteries are important to understand. Here's how we
think about a real battery. This is not really what's inside a battery, but a way to model
a real battery is to think it's got an ideal battery, that impossible thing. In series with
a resistor, which we call the internal resistance, you can't get inside the real battery. All
you have access to are those two terminals on the end of it. And what you typically do
is connect something, a light bulb, a whole complicated circuit, a resistor, whatever,
across the battery, across its two terminals. The battery has some intrinsic voltage V sub
zero. It has an internal resistance R sub internal. And the batteries, V sub zero is
the battery's rated voltage, 1.5 volts, 6 volts, whatever it is. R-int is the so-called
internal resistance. It's not really a resistor. The battery companies don't take ideal batteries.
If they did, they saw all the world's energy problems and slap a resistor in series with
them. The resistor represents, rather, some physical resistances of the materials the
battery's made of. But more importantly, it represents the speed with which the chemical
reactions in the battery can replenish charge and move positive charge to the positive terminal
and negative to negative. So this is sort of a model for a battery. And now we put a load
resistance across it. Again, the word load meaning what we want to supply power to. And
if you look at this circuit, you'll see it's exactly like the voltage divider circuit we
just had. So RL is the load resistance. And we want to know what the voltage is across
the load. I connect a 6-volt battery and I connect a resistor or a light bulb across
it. And I may not get 6 volts across it. It depends on that voltage divider. It depends
on R internal and R load. And there's that voltage divider fraction that we saw before.
V load is that fraction R load, that second resistor I called it R2 before, over the sum
of the resistances times V0. And if you want V load to be equal to or approximately equal
to the internal rated voltage of the battery, then as we saw when we derived that voltage
divider equation, that second resistor R2 or R load in this case has got to be much
bigger than the internal resistance. And let me give you a quick demonstration of that.
Okay, so here I have a simpler circuit, just one light bulb, one resistance connected across
a 6-volt battery. It's a beefier light bulb, which means it takes more current and draws
more power from the battery. And there we go. The light bulb is lit. The battery seems
to be doing its job well. Now I'm going to disconnect the light bulb and I'm going to
connect the voltmeter so I can read the battery voltage. And there it is, 6.1 volts. That's
a reasonably healthy 6-volt battery. It might actually ought to be about 6.3 volts, but
that's okay. And now I'm going to connect the light bulb across it at the same time.
And you'll notice the battery voltage has dropped to 5.1 volts. It's dropped by a whole
volt. That's an indication that this battery isn't doing too well or, put it put it a different
way, the internal resistance of this battery is high enough that we can't supply current
to this particular light bulb without the battery voltage dropping because we're losing
energy in that internal resistance. Current is flowing through the internal resistance.
Ohm's Law says there's therefore a voltage across it. And so that battery is not working
as well. It has too low and too high an internal resistance for that particular application.
Now this is an old battery. If I had a brand new fresh battery, it'd probably be okay.
You may have noticed a similar phenomenon when the furnace comes on in your house or
you, the oven cycles on or something and the light's dim. And what you're seeing there
is the same effect but caused by extra current flowing through the internal resistance of
the household wiring. And you might ask, what's different about different batteries?
Here I've got a bunch of 1.5 volt batteries, a little tiny button battery, a double A battery,
a C battery, flashlight battery, and a D cell flashlight battery. They're all 1.5 volt batteries.
They all give charge the same amount of energy per unit of charge. What's different is the
bigger battery has lower internal resistance and therefore can supply more current. Here
I've got a little tiny 9 volt battery. It has a rather high internal resistance. And
here's a car battery, 12 volts, not much different from 9. What's different is it has a vastly
lower internal resistance. So real batteries or any real sources of voltage have internal
resistance and you have to take that into account if you're going to use them correctly.
You have to put loads across them that aren't too low so you don't drop a voltage across
that internal resistance. Here our device is connected in parallel. Two components are
in parallel if the two ends of each component are connected together. So their component
one and component two are in parallel and because they're in parallel they have exactly
the same voltage across either of them. You connected a battery across there of 6 volts,
you would get 6 volts across both components. Same voltage V across both components. So
that's parallel components. Are 1 and 2 in parallel? They look like they're in parallel
right beside each other, but they aren't because their bottom ends aren't connected together.
Component three comes in the way so those are not parallel components. Parallel resistors?
Well, it's sort of like adding an extra lane to a highway. If you add an extra lane to
a highway it's easier for cars to flow down the highway. It's easier for traffic to flow
and you have less, the highway offers less resistance to the flow of traffic. It's the
same thing when you put resistors in parallel, the combined resistance goes down and it goes
down in a rather funny way, which again we could derive but we're not going to bother
to in this course. And it turns out that what adds is the reciprocal of the resistance one
over it. So one over R parallel is one over R1 plus one over R2. And here's an example.
If the two resistors are equal and they're equal to R, then one over R parallel is one
over R plus one over R, that's two over R, and if you invert that, that says R parallel
is R over two. So if you put two equal resistors in parallel, you get half the resistance of
either one. Remember if you put them in series, you got a resistance that was twice that of
either one. So two ways of connecting components, series and parallel. Not all circuits exhibit
series and parallel connections, but these are easy connections to understand and series
connections in particular give us voltage dividers with that fraction we talked about.
So the R parallel combination, by the way, is sometimes called a current divider because
current coming into that combination of the left-hand picture of the diagram is coming
in at the top. It can split and go between R1 and R2 and more current will go into the
lower resistance. The electricity takes the path of least resistance, quote, well it doesn't
take the path of least resistance. It divides in proportion to the resistance and more current
would flow through the lower resistance. Well let me give you a quick quiz here. So I'd
take a look at this circuit. Now it's a fairly complicated circuit. It's got one, two, three,
four, five, six, seven, eight resistors and a battery. And I would like you to think about
which pairs of resistors are in series and which pairs are in parallel. So press your
pause button and think about this for a minute. Okay, come back out of pause and let's see
what we see here. You might think, well, it looks like R2 and R4 there are in series
or something or maybe I don't know what's in series, but let's look around. I see actually
only two resistors that are in series. There is only one series combination. And by the
way, when you're looking at circuits, it doesn't matter how they're drawn. Series resistors
don't have to be in a straight vertical line. They don't have to be in a straight horizontal
line. In this particular circuit, the actual series combination is going around a corner.
The resistors that are in series are R6 and R7 because if you come out of R6, the only
possible place you can go if your electric current flowing is through R7. So those are
in series. R7 and R8 below it are not in series because there's that path, that horizontal
path at the bottom of R7 and that path could take current that way to the left as well
as down through R8. So those are not in series. The only series combination in that circuit
is R6 and R7. So which pair or pairs are in parallel? Well, again, there's only one
parallel combination. It's the combination of the lower right of R5 and R8. You can
see they're connected together at the top by that single wire, and they're connected
together at the bottom by a single wire, and that's all I need to know to know that those
two resistors are in parallel. I don't care what else is connected to that parallel combination.
Those two are in parallel, and I would calculate the equivalent resistance of that parallel
combination by using that formula I just described. So there's a quick quiz. It's easy
to get this wrong. It's easy to look in a circuit and say, oh, these two are in series,
but they aren't in series unless there's no place current going through the first component
can go except into the second component. And it's easy to think things are in parallel
when they're not. They are only in parallel if their tops are absolutely connected together
and their bottoms are absolutely connected together. And in the case of parallel resistors,
that means they have the same voltage across both of them. In the case of series resistors,
that means they have the same current through both of them.
OK, let's wrap up what we've seen in this lecture. So we looked at electronic circuits
as complicated interconnections of components or simple interconnections as interconnections
of electronic components. We can describe these components by graphs like we show here
with the VI characteristics. We schematize the components with their circuit symbols.
Next we found can be connected in either series or parallel, two possible common ways of connecting
them. Series resistors simply add. Series resistors form a voltage divider with that combination
of voltages, the voltage across the lower resistor being that fraction, its resistance
over the total resistance times the source voltage, in this case, a battery. And parallel
resistors we found add reciprocally. So that's a quick summary of what we've done in this
lecture and we are now set to go begin building some simple circuits. Before we go on to another
lecture though, if you're interested, there's a project associated with this one that you
can do separately. I'm going to ask you to use only 1000 ohm resistors, but you have
as many as you want, design a voltage divider that produces 4 volts when connected across
a 6 volt battery. And we'll actually use this particular project circuit even if you don't
do it, I'll describe it in the next lecture. And here's a question now. Suppose you connect
a 10,000 ohm resistor, 10 kilo ohms, across your divider between the points where you're
supposed to have 4 volts. Will the voltage still be exactly 4 volts? Or if it won't,
explain why it won't be and determine exactly what that voltage would be.
So lecture 2's project is a combination of design and calculate. I'm going to ask you
to use only 1000 ohm resistors, 1 kilo ohm resistors, as many as you want, design a voltage
divider that produces 4 volts when you connect it across a 6 volt battery. And once you've
done that, suppose you connect a further resistor, a 10,000 ohm resistor, 10 kilo ohms, across
your voltage divider between the points where you're supposed to have 4 volts. Will the
voltage still be 4 volts? And if it won't, explain why and determine what the actual
voltage will be. So take your time, work that project, and I'll be back with the solutions.
Well, what we need is a 2 to 1 ratio of resistances because we want to have 2 thirds of the voltage
dropped across our bottom resistor, R2, in my description in the lecture of the voltage
divider. So we really want 2,000 ohms there and 1,000 ohms for R1. Well, we can make 2,000
ohms by putting 2 1,000 ohm resistors in series. So that works fine. And if we do that, there
will be 4 volts across that series combination of 2 1,000 ohm resistors, which functions as
a 2,000 ohm resistor. So our circuit could be reduced simply to 6 volts, 1,000 ohms,
and 2,000 ohms where you made the 2,000 from 2 1,000s. Let's check this out with our voltage
divider equation. V2 we found is the second resistor, the lower resistor, over the sum
of the two resistors times the battery voltage. That's 2,000 ohms over the total, which is
now 3,000 ohms, times 6 volts. That's 2 thirds of 6 volts or 4 volts. So we have exactly
what we want. Now the second part gets a little harder. Suppose we connect an additional resistor
of 10 kilo ohms in parallel across the two points where it's supposed to be 4 volts.
Will it still be 4 volts? So let's give a qualitative explanation of that and then let's
determine what the actual voltage will be. Well, I now have two resistors in parallel,
the 2 kilo ohm and the 10 kilo ohm. And I use the parallel resistor formula. One over
the parallel resistance is 1 over 2 kilo ohms plus 1 over 10 kilo ohms. That's 10 sixths
kilo ohms for our parallel or 1.67 kilo ohms. Now let's think about what that means. We
want to know what that unknown voltage is. We could apply the voltage divider equation,
but before we do, let's just note that we now have a lower resistance for our R2 and
our voltage divider equation. That means we're going to pull more current from the battery.
More voltage is going to drop across the 1 kilo ohm resistor. And the voltage I've marked
there with a question mark is going to be lower than the 4 volts. What exactly is it
going to be? Well, again, apply the voltage divider equation now with R2 being 1.67 kilo
ohms and the total being 2.67 and we get back 3.75 volts for what the actual voltage will
be in that case.
