Welcome back. In this lecture we'll be considering AC and DC. Now what's that all about? Well,
so far we've dealt with power sources that were largely batteries and batteries have
chemical reactions that maintain basically a fixed steady voltage across the batteries'
levels. You plug something into the wall and that's not what you get. What you get out
of the wall is a varying, a time-varying voltage and it will drive a time-varying current through
whatever you put there. There's a good reason why we use such alternating current in power
systems. One is that rotating generators naturally make AC power. The other reason is it turns
out to be easy to transform or change voltage levels in AC systems. So we can step the voltage
up to hundreds of thousands of volts for a long distance transmission line and then back
down to relatively safe levels for use in the home or in industries. We're also going to be looking
at AC when we think about audio signals and a lot of other signals that vary with time, but any
electrical signal that represents sound, for example, varies with time. So we want to begin by
looking at the waveform of basic alternating current and that's called a sine wave. And one
reason the sine wave is useful is because it's simple to deal with mathematically and also it
turns out that you can make any complex waveform out of a sum of sine waves. And so let's begin by
taking a visual look at AC voltage. So here's an AC voltage plotted as a function of time. Time is on
the horizontal axis. The voltage V is on the vertical axis. Zero volts is the horizontal line
through the middle. There's an arbitrary start to time. I'll call time zero and that happens to be
when this voltage is passing through zero on its way up. And the AC voltage rises to a peak, comes
back down again through zero, goes negative. In other words, it reverses direction. That's why it's
alternating, goes to a negative peak, rises back up and completes a full cycle. So we want to learn
how to characterize this AC voltage. So first we're going to talk about the peak amplitude. That's
the peak value of the voltage. That's the voltage at the very maximum. It's also the opposite of the
voltage at the very minimum. Sometimes, by the way, you'll see people talk about the peak to peak
voltage, which is twice the peak because it's from the bottom to the top, at least for a voltage
that swings symmetrically about zero as this one does. So there's the peak voltage. There's also
something called the RMS voltage, the root mean square voltage, that complicated language has
to do with squaring this waveform, taking the average of it and taking the square root. You do
that because if you took just the average, you'd get zero because it's up as much as it is down.
And it turns out that for a sine wave, the RMS voltage, the root mean square voltage, is 0.71
times the peak voltage. That's actually the peak voltage divided by the square root of two, but
we won't worry about that. So there's the RMS. It's about not quite two and not quite three quarters
of the way up from zero. So two different ways of characterizing AC voltages in terms of how much
voltage there is. Now we also are interested in the period. What's the time for one full cycle?
Well, there's a full cycle from where the wave starts out at zero rising, goes up, goes through
zero, comes down, and goes back up through zero rising. That's a full cycle. It's not a full
cycle when it reaches zero again because at that point it's falling, and it has to wait till it
comes back, and that's a full cycle. You could measure a full cycle also from the bottom most
trough to the next bottom most trough or from the top peak to the next top peak. All of those
are the period T, the time for one cycle of this sine wave. And we also talk about the frequency,
the number of cycles per second that the sine wave undertakes, and the frequency is simply one over
the period, the inverse of the period. So those tell you the same thing. Frequency is measured
in cycles per second, which is given a special name, the Hertz, after Heinrich Hertz. So we'll
talk about either frequency or period when we're talking about AC sine waves. And let me give you
a demonstration of an example of what some AC sine waves look like on the oscilloscope,
and also what they sound like. So we'll switch over to the oscilloscope. Here I have the oscilloscope,
it's displaying on the big screen, it's also displaying on itself, and I'm feeding the oscilloscope's
red channel, that's channel four, with the output of this function generator that we used in the
previous lecture to generate those pulses for the speed of sound. But now I have it set basically
to generate a simple signal at a frequency that is audible.
So there you see the waveform, it's running at a fairly low frequency of a few hundred,
it's running at 200 Hertz in fact, and you can hear a low tone coming out of a loud speaker.
You can see the oscilloscope is having a little trouble dealing with this one,
with its triggering, but that's okay, there's that waveform, there's one cycle of it displaying
on the oscilloscope screen. Okay, so now let's switch up to a higher frequency. Two things will
happen, you'll see more of the cycles fill the screen, we're going up to 300 Hertz, and now we see
about one and a half cycles on the screen, and you hear the higher pitch coming out of the loud
speaker. 400 cycles, more, 400 cycles per second, five, six, seven, eight. So there I'm adjusting
the frequency or period of the waveform, I could also choose to adjust the amplitude,
the vertical height, the number of volts being output, and let me do that.
There it is coming down, keeping the frequency now constant, but bringing the amplitude down
to lower and lower levels. So amplitude and frequency or amplitude and period are the two
things that characterize an AC signal. So before we leave the subject of AC sine waves altogether,
let me turn off this function generator and talk about a very familiar AC voltage, at least
familiar to people in North America, and that's the 120 volt 60 Hertz AC power line. Frequency
60 Hertz, 60 cycles per second, 160th of a second is the period, that 120 volts is the RMS voltage,
the actual peak voltage is about 170 volts, so 120 volts RMS, about 170 volts peak. I say that's
familiar to North Americans because if you're in Europe, you typically use about 230 volts and your
frequency is 50 Hertz, which is one of the reasons you need power converters when you go traveling
abroad. So there's a familiar example of an AC voltage, and this is the one that is supplied
to us by the power companies at all our electrical outlets here in North America.
Now there's a problem with this AC voltage because electronic circuits, like we're studying in this
course, like usually to work on DC. Batteries are great for them, but we don't want to be
lugging batteries around all the time, although these days with smartphones and things that have
rechargeable batteries, that's how we power them. Nevertheless, we need to get DC to charge those
batteries, so somehow we need to convert this AC into DC, and that's going to be the subject of
the rest of this lecture. Getting practical, making DC from AC, and there's another reason
we need to do that also, and that is that circuits involving solid state components, transistors,
typically run on voltage levels of a few to a few tens of volts. 170 volts, that peak of the
AC power line is far too much, although I will say tube circuits, many of them would have been very
happy with that voltage, but transistor circuits, solid state circuits, no. So we've got to do two
things. We've got to reduce the voltage, and we've got to convert it to DC, to steady DC that
doesn't change with time. And so we're going to meet three new components that are going to help
us to do that. Three new electronic components, all of which I showed you circuit symbols for
back in the lecture on circuits and diagrams and so on, but now we're going to look at them in a
little more detail. The first of them is the transformer. Now the transformer is an interesting
device. It consists of two coils of wire in close proximity. For the kind of transformers we're
talking about that transform power, those coils are typically wound on an iron core. And if you've
taken any other physics course, either from the great courses or in college or high school,
you probably learned about the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction, whereby a changing
current in one circuit will induce, cause a changing current in another circuit,
even though the two circuits aren't connected, and the intermediary is the magnetic field that's
created by those currents. I'm not going to go into those details here. Again, in keeping with
this being a practical course, I'm simply going to introduce you to the transformer. And here we
see its circuit symbol that you can see. Obviously what it is, it's the two coils of wire and those
vertical bars in between are representing the iron that those coils are typically wound on to
concentrate the magnetic field between those coils. So there's what the circuit symbol looks like.
We have a V1 and a V2. The left hand side is called the primary. The right hand side is called the
secondary, although those names could be reversed. It doesn't really matter. So we have N1 turns on
the primary and N2 turns on the secondary. And what happens is V2, the voltage that appears
across the secondary is the ratio of the turns, N2 over N1 times V1. So if I had a transformer
with the same number of turns on both secondary and primary, I would get the same voltage out.
You might say, well, that's not useful for anything. Well, it's very useful. It isolates
the secondary from the primary. A lot of medical applications, for example, use so-called isolation
transformers that don't step the voltage up or down, but they keep it roughly constant,
but they isolate the circuit that might be connected to the patient, for example.
Here's some examples of transformers. They're ubiquitous. There are huge transformers at power
stations which step the voltage up for long-distance transmission and step it back down for safe use
for end users in cities and towns. By the way, we don't get something for nothing
when we step up voltage. We get stepped up voltage, true, but we get stepped down current and power
is voltage times current. And in principle, the power is the same either way. There's a smaller
transformer of the type I'll show you in just a moment. There's a transformer, a typical transformer
that you'll see sitting on power poles around your neighborhood. And they supply one or more houses
with stepped-down voltages coming from maybe 7,000 or 8,000 volts on the power line down to
240 volts for your home, and that's split into 220-volt circuits. And finally, there's a power block
similar to this power adapter that you see in common electronic equipment. There's a little
transformer in there. Sometimes in very small ones, there's some other circuitry, but usually
there's a small transformer, especially if it's a fairly hefty power block, and then that transforms
the AC into a lower voltage, and often it also turns it into DC using devices that we'll see
shortly. The transformer I'm going to use today is this one. It's a small transformer. I've just
got it mounted on a plastic block and a couple of binding posts so I can connect to it easily,
but the transformer is the thing I'm holding in my hands. It's got this iron core, and then
underneath those paper layers are the windings, the two coils. And this particular transformer
is supposed to take in standard 120-volt power line. There's the power line I'm going to connect it to.
By the way, don't go connecting things to power lines. It's dangerous. I know what I'm doing here,
and normally people working with electronics as hobbyists never have to touch
the power line or go near it. Their circuitry already takes care of what I'm about to do here.
So here's the power line coming in, and here is supposed to be 6.3 volts RMS coming out.
That's a common transformer used in the old days to power the filaments in vacuum tubes,
but it's also useful for a lot of other purposes, and I'm going to use it for some of these purposes.
And so I'm going to begin by doing some changes to the oscilloscope that will allow me to look
at the voltage that is being produced by that transformer. So now I have the oscilloscope set
up to measure the output of the transformer through this wire, which connects to channel 1,
the channel that displays in yellow. I'm going to connect the two wires to the two outputs of
the transformer, and I'm going to plug in the transformer. And let's take a look at what we
have. So here we have a clear pattern that looks pretty much sinusoidal. It's not perfect. There's
a bunch of electrical noise in this studio, and there's some other issues going on here,
but basically it's a nice sinusoidal waveform approximately. It's running up and down about,
here's the zero, it's running up about 10 volts. That's about two divisions. You can see at the
upper left it says 5 volts per, that means each of these squares is 5 volts, so we're coming up
about 10 volts. I thought I said that transformer was 6.3 volts. It is, but that's 6.3 volts RMS,
that's that average, and so the peak is closer to 10, and so it's coming up to not quite 10 volts,
and take 0.7 and 10, and you get about 7, and that's a little more than 6.3, and so it's working.
And if you measure the time between these peaks, you would find on the oscilloscope at
5 milliseconds per division, it would come out a 60th of a second. So there is the output of
the transformer now swinging about plus and minus 10 volts. It's still AC, but it's now a lower level
more appropriate to the kind of electronic circuits we're going to be building. So we've taken the
first step in building a power supply to take what comes out of the wall and turn it into a suitable
voltage to use to power electronic circuits, but we've got two more steps to go through before
we can do that, and I need to introduce two new components in order to make those steps.
So let's take a look at first the diode. I showed you a diode when I gave you a bunch of circuit
symbols a while back in the second lecture. Now I'm going to say a little bit more about diodes,
but we'll really get into them and how they work a few lectures hence. But what a diode is,
practically speaking, is basically a one-way valve for electric current. It likes current flow in
one direction. In other words, it has a very low resistance in this so-called forward direction,
and it has a very high resistance in the reverse direction. There's the circuit symbol for a diode.
It's this solid triangle. Sometimes it's drawn hollow with a bar. Current flows through that
diode from left to right. That's the direction of the current flow. If you put a positive voltage
on the left, you'll get current flowing through it, and it will act like a very low resistance,
almost like a wire. If you put voltage the other way, it won't work. And we're going to
characterize the diode like we did other circuit components with a VI characteristic curve,
and here is the VI characteristic for an ideal diode. An ideal diode, if you put positive
voltage across it or try to, huge amounts of current will flow because it is, after all,
just like a short circuit, like a piece of wire. It takes almost no voltage to drive current through
it. It's like a switch that's on. But if you put the voltage the other way, you can build up large
voltages in the reverse direction, and no current will flow because it's like an open switch,
and it switches abruptly when the voltage across it changes. Now, nothing is perfect. Nothing is
ideal. A real diode has a curve that lets a tiny, tiny bit of current, typically microamperes,
nanoamperes, or less flow in the back direction. So it's very small, and it allows a small voltage
to build up across it. And that voltage for a silicon diode, which is what most diodes are
made of, is on the order of 6 to 7 tenths of a volt. And that's going to come back to haunt us
many times in this course. So there's the diode. It's like a one-way valve, if you will, for electric
current. So there's the 0.7 voltage that the diode maintains across itself when it's passing current.
And again, if you're dealing with a circuit where voltages are big, that's irrelevant.
But if you're dealing with a few volts, you've got to take that into account. So that's the diode.
So what I'm going to do next is take my power supply now. It's the step-down transformer that I
already showed you that I have connected. And I've got out of it 6.3 volts RMS, about 9 to 10 volts
peak. And I'm going to attach a diode. And I'm going to look again on the other side of the diode
at the output and see what that looks like. Okay, before I actually demonstrate what the diode does
in the circuit, let me say a little bit about the circuit I have here. Here I have a small white board
with a lot of little holes in it. And those holes make electrical contacts. And I've taken one of
those boards and taken the back off it. So you can see kind of how the contacts go. There are rows
of holes that are all connected together by these bars of conducting material. There are rows along
the edges that are all connected together. And we're going to wire almost all our circuits from now
on, on these boards. And this is the first example of that. We'll get more sophisticated examples
as we move on. And I'll be plugging components into these boards. And I'll be doing it in such a way
that I connect the parts I want connected and don't connect the parts I don't want connected
by plugging them into the appropriate holes. So I have one of these boards mounted here.
And it's got connections to these binding posts so I can bring in signals from outside. Now,
there's some more stuff on this board. There are actually three things on this board. There's the
power supply I'm now describing. There's a regulator circuit that makes it better. And I'll talk about
that in a minute. And there's actually an audio amplifier and a loud speaker. And we'll get to
that by the end of the lecture. So let me begin by connecting the power supply, the input of the
power supply to the transformer. So the voltage from the transformer is now coming into there.
And now let me take the oscilloscope, which has this probe, which makes it easy to connect
to little points on these circuits. And I'm going to first connect, I'm going to connect it right
here to the output of the diode. The diode is a tiny black thing that you can barely see.
And I'm not even going to bother to hold one up. It looks like a little resistor, but without any
stripes on it. And it's got a little bar at one end. And that indicates the end toward which
current flows. Okay, so let's see what we've got. Well, you can see the yellow curve, which is the
output of the transformer going up and down and alternating current. And you can see the output
of the diode, which is almost the same. That little difference is partly due to that 0.6 or 0.7
volt drop across the diode. But it's following the AC coming out of the transformer while it's
positive. But as soon as the transformer output goes negative, the diode shuts off, it becomes an
open circuit, and it's no longer passing current. And so we get zero volts at the output. And then
the next cycle comes along and we get a voltage that follows it and across we go. Now you might say,
well, we've made DC. Well, we have in the sense that we've made a voltage that only goes in one
direction. But it's far from steady. And it would sound awful. And I'll show you that at the end of
the lecture if we tried to power, say, a piece of audio equipment with that signal. So we need to
move on and we need to look at still another component that we have to add to our power supply.
So meet the capacitor. Capacitor is a pair of conductors separated by an insulator. We'll be
using capacitors a lot throughout the course. And I'll be introducing more and more about them. But
for now, it stores charge and energy. The charge and voltage are proportional. So if you put a
certain voltage across the capacitor, you get a certain amount of charge on the plate. And the
capacitance, C, is the ratio of how much charge you get for a given voltage. One coulomb per volt is
called one farad, which by the way is an enormous capacitance. And what capacitors do is it takes
time to flow charge onto their plates. And so they slow things down. They introduce a time
dependence in electric circuits. And the voltage across a capacitor can't change instantaneously.
So we have plus Q on one plate, minus Q on the other plate, and some corresponding voltage
between the two plates. That's what a capacitor does. So we're going to use the capacitor as a
so-called filter in this power supply. We're going to use it to smooth out these variations that
we're seeing after the diode. So let me add a capacitor to this circuit. And I will take a
fairly big capacitor. This is a 2200 microfarad capacitor. And I'm going to put it right into
the circuit. Okay, so the capacitor, this big cylinder, has been inserted into the circuit.
And let's take a look at what's happened. And what's happened is we have an almost perfectly
steady DC voltage. There's a little tiny bit of a blip where the voltage, where the peak of the AC
comes in, but it's pretty good steady DC. By the way, that little blip is called ripple. And you
have to decide if you're an electronic circuit designer how much ripple you can tolerate. If you
buy a power supply, it will be rated for what the ripple voltage will be, what this variation in
voltage would be. And typically, it should be a very tiny fraction of the actual output voltage.
And you'll notice we're producing a little bit less than 10 volts as our peak voltage coming
out of this power supply. Now, we need to do something else to our power supply. And I've
actually already got it in there. And that is, so we've connected the filter capacitor, again,
from the diode back to ground, back to the return of the power supply. And we've got about
8.0 volts DC. And then we connect a load resistance. And I've actually already got a load resistance
connected in that circuit. That's the thing to which we're wanting to deliver power.
And we need to size that capacitor. We need to make it big enough so that during the time the
AC has gone negative and the diode isn't conducting and there's no more charge or energy coming into
the circuit, the capacitor can hold that charge and energy for a long enough time that it's
voltage doesn't decrease appreciably. And this capacitor is doing quite a good job.
If I had a smaller capacitor from here, that voltage might have decreased quite a bit
and then come back up again and so on. So there is the power supply with the filter
capacitor in place. And I'll show you or I'll let you hear soon just why you really want to have
that filter capacitor. So now we've introduced three new components, the transformer, the diode,
and the filter capacitor, the capacitor in general and filter capacitor in this case.
Let's improve on this power supply one more time. And here I've got to introduce something
who's working as you won't understand for a few more lectures. When we get into the lectures on
operational amplifiers, you'll understand how we'll be able to build a device like I'm showing you.
Down here at the end, I have a little tiny thing. It looks just like a transistor,
but it isn't. It's a little black piece of plastic with three wires coming out.
What it is is a voltage regulator, an integrated circuit voltage regulator. It probably has
something on the order of a dozen transistors in it. And its job is to take an input voltage that
may be varying, may not be the voltage you want, and produce an output voltage that is fixed by
the specifications of that voltage regulator. And this particular regulator I've chosen
is designed to produce an output voltage of 5.0 volts. So let's see how well it does. So I have
actually the output of my power supply also going into the input of that voltage regulator.
And then I have the output of the voltage regulator. And now I'm going to connect my oscilloscope
across the output of that voltage regulator. So that output is right here. And there are a few
extra components connected to that output. Let's see if we've got the right place.
And we want to connect to there. And now we see a very steady, smooth DC voltage.
Exactly the kind of thing we would like. Just a very slight little wiggle as we go
under the peaks here, but hardly noticeable. That's a good power supply. We probably, in fact,
with that electronic regulator attached, could have gotten away with a smaller filter capacitor.
And since capacitors are expensive, that would have been a good thing. So our circuit now looks
like something with this electronic voltage regulator attached. And then we've got our load
resistance following that. And it's beautiful. It's smooth. It's DC. And furthermore, if you
notice we're at 5 volts per division on the oscilloscope, that's one division. We're up at
exactly 5 volts. If I threw it into my voltmeter, I would see it read 5.01 or 5.02 or something
volts or 4.98, pretty close to 5 volts. So we've built a nice DC power supply. Now let's do something
useful with this power supply instead of just looking at it on the oscilloscope. What you might
want to do with a power supply like this is to power some kind of electronic circuit. And the
circuit I've chosen to power is a little audio amplifier. And so the last thing I have on this
board, and again, this is something we'll learn about and we'll actually build from individual
transistors, a few lectures hence. But for now I'm going to simply point it out. I have on that
board a small little rectangular chip. It's an integrated circuit, audio amplifier. It's not
a great big power amplifier, but it can put out enough power to drive a loudspeaker. That amplifier
is set in that circuit. It's driving this loudspeaker that you see here. And it is not yet
connected to a power source. This yellow wire brings in its power, but I'm going to connect
that yellow wire to the output of my voltage regulator. And then this amplifier needs an input.
So I've taken as my input my iPod. And I've just connected my iPod to some wires that I can plug
right into this board. And they're plugged into the input. One of them is grounded and one's plugged
into the input terminal of that amplifier. The iPod is now playing, but we don't hear anything.
That's because we haven't connected the power for the amplifier. So we'll plug that right into the
output. And there's our music. So we've got a complete audio system built with this integrated
circuit audio amplifier. And we've also built the power supply that's giving it the smooth,
steady DC that it wants to have. You'll notice that occasionally there are loud pieces in the music
and they're probably drawing so much current out of the regulator that it can't quite
keep up the regulation if I turn down the volume a little bit. Sounds a little better and it's
running a little bit smoother, although you see a few glitches. By the way, that lovely music
is called Starlight. It's written and played by my sister Helen Wolfson, who's a hammer
dulcimer player. And so that's the music. And now I raise the question, what good is this
filter capacitor in the power supply? What's it good for? What's it all about?
Do we really need this big hunking thing there? Well, let me show you what happens. I'm going to
do grievous damage to my sister's music by simply removing the power supply, the filter
capacitor from the power supply. So here's the nice music playing.
And that's what we hear. What we're hearing are the 60 cycle, the 60 hertz oscillations,
almost the same as the oscillations we heard when I did the speed of sound thing. But this is
coming from the fact that the system is unable to regulate. The filter capacitor can't hold
enough charge to take care of maintaining the voltage to the regulator during the time that
the AC goes negative. The regulator is doing its best to regulate, but it can't regulate if it's
not getting enough voltage at its input. And what we hear instead of the beautiful music is this
of this every cycle, the voltage coming up and we get a little bit, you can kind of hear the
music playing underneath it, but not very much. So we really do need filter capacitors in power
supplies. If we don't have them, we got a big problem. And I'll just stick the filter capacitor back
and back it goes and we get the beautiful music again.
Okay, so let's wrap up. What we've done here is learned how to convert alternating current to
lower voltage for solid state circuits and convert it to nice DC. We needed three more
components to do that, the transformer, the diode, and the filter capacitor. We're going to see a
lot more of diodes and capacitors. We won't use transformers much more because they're built in
to the kinds of things we'll be working with. Now, if you did the project in the previous lecture,
you learned about how to simulate circuits with some of these web-based simulators. And if you'd
like to extend your prowess to that, I'm asking you in the project for this lecture to design
a simple 5 volt power supply. It needs 100 ohm load resistance. You're going to use a source.
You're going to have to pick your transformer. You're going to have to try different capacitors
and see what happens. And you're going to have to tweak your transformer to achieve about 5 volts.
I'm not letting you use one of these electronic regulators. And if you want to, as a sort of
extra credit or an extra learning, you could add one of the integrated circuit voltage regulators
similar to the one I did here that's available in these circuit patterns. So I recommend the project
for this lecture.
So your lecture four project is to simulate the 5 volt DC power supply or a 5 volt DC power supply
similar to the one I talked about in the lecture, except it's a 5 volt supply.
I want it to have 100 ohm load resistance, which is lower than I used. You're going to use a standard
North American AC power line of 120 volts. You've got to choose the turns ratio for your transformer.
Don't worry about any other specs on the transformer. Don't forget that there's a 0.7 volt
drop across the diode. And I'd like you to try three different values of filter capacitors,
1 millifarad, 10 millifarads, 50 millifarads. And you're going to need to run a time domain
simulation. So I'll spend a little more time showing you how to use the circuit simulators
for that. Then you need to tweak your transformer to get exactly 5 volts or pretty close. And if
you want to do some extra learning, you can add an integrated circuit voltage regulator as I did.
So here I've come up in Circuit Lab with my prebuilt power supply. And before I talk about it
in detail, let me just point out some other things you can do in these simulators. For example,
I can draw a box around that or go select all. And once I've done that, I could move the circuit
around or I could go down here to the zoom buttons and I could make it smaller or I could make it
larger. So sometimes I'll zoom them around. Sometimes I won't. And you can do that as you
need to to make things more legible. Let's just see what I've picked here. So I'll take a look at my
supply voltage. It's V line. It's 170 volts. Remember that 120 volts is the RMS. The peak is
that times the square root of 2 or about 170 volts. So I've set it to 170 volts. And I've
set it to 60 hertz, the AC power line frequency in North America. I calculated that I needed a
transformer turns ratio of about 28 to 1. So 28 in one side and 1 turn, 1 to 28 on the other side
would give me the 5 volts. And that's about right because 28 times 5 is going to be somewhere
up above 150. So that makes sense. The diode was just the default diode that Circuit Lab came up
with. I didn't bother to change that. I chose the 1 millifarad capacitor to start with and I got the
100 ohm load resistor. And so let's now simulate this thing. Now we are wanting to do what's called
a time dependent simulation because things depend on time here. And we want to see
how these circuit quantities behave with time. We'd like to have an oscilloscope actually,
but Circuit Lab doesn't have an oscilloscope, but it does do a time domain simulation. It makes
graphs like an oscilloscope would show. And so I'm going to, for reasons I'll explain, I'm going to
start my time domain simulation at two seconds in. That's because it takes a while for the capacitor
to really begin to charge up fully. And I want to see what's going to happen after the circuit's
been running a while. So I'm going to start it too. I'm going to go out a tenth of a second,
which is many cycles, about six cycles, of the power line. And I'm going to go a time step of
a millisecond, which is much less than the period of the AC power line. So that gives me good
resolution. If I go too small with my time step, it will take forever for it to do the calculation.
And so I'm set up. I've got two labeled points. VT is the transformer output,
and V out is the output point, the actual load resistance voltage. So I'm going to run the
time domain simulation. And it takes a little longer because it keeps having to solve the
circuit over and over again. And there is the result for the output voltage. I'm not showing
the transformer voltage here, just the output voltage. And by the way, there are a number of
options with these graphs in CircuitLab. And I've chosen the option to show zero.
So zero is way down here. That's zero. And up here, we're at about five volts. You can see four
volts here, six volts here. So we're swinging between about four and six volts. If I hadn't
chosen include zero, I just would have seen this kind of sawtooth pattern blown up a whole lot.
And it wouldn't show the point I want to make. The point I want to make is we've achieved a power
supply whose output voltage is approximately the five volts we want. But there's certainly plenty
of ripple on there. And as you saw in the demonstration in the lecture, if I plug this
into a tried to supply an audio amplifier with this thing, it would go because of this 60 cycle
variation. So that's not good enough. So let's go to a bigger power filter capacitor. And I'm
going to go right up to the 50 millifarads. So we don't have to try the intermediate one,
but you should try the intermediate one. So I'm going to double click on that and change its
capacitance to 50 millifarads, which means it's going to take a lot longer for that capacitor
to discharge. It will hold the voltage much better between the peaks coming along of the AC power.
So there I've done that. I'm clicking back. It's the same circuit otherwise. I'm just going to go
simulate and got the same time domain simulation. I run the time domain simulation, takes a little
while and look at that almost perfectly smooth voltage at just a little bit over the five
volts that I want. So there is the power supply using my filter capacitor at 50 millifarads
and getting it almost perfectly smooth DC. And if I tweak the transformer ratio a little bit
more, I might be able to get that down to about five volts. But instead of doing that, let me
just do the extra learning while I have circuit lab open. And instead, I'll hide this. Instead,
let me bring up my prebuilt circuit with the voltage regulator because both these
circuit simulators have that voltage regulator in them. So I'm going to not bother to save this.
I'm going to open something new. And I see all my circuits that I've already built for some other
lectures. And let's see where we have it. You can sort these by various. Now, a power supply
regulated. So I'll open that up and open it in editor. And it's the same circuit,
except now I've got this 7805 regulator, which is in fact exactly the same regulator I used
in the lecture. I'm going to simulate the circuit. Well, I think I better move it over a little bit,
get it out of the way of the simulation box. So I'll take the whole thing, I'll get a
grab on it, move it all over here. Maybe I'll make it a little bigger while I'm at it.
And I will go back and simulate it. I'm going to use the same steps I had before. Now, there's
one other thing I've done here, which I should mention. The transformer ratio is now 15 instead
of 28. That means I've got a much higher output voltage from the transformer, almost twice the
five volts I had before. I got about nine volts. The reason for that is these voltage regulators
need a substantially greater voltage than they're going to put out to regulate. You can't give the
five volt regulator five volts and expect it to regulate. You can't even give it six volts.
I think 7.5 or something is what it needs. I've given it about nine volts here. So my transformer
has changed its turns ratio. And now I'll simulate this thing. Run the time domain simulation.
Go, getting complete, 73, 80%. And there we are. And we have an output voltage of 10 volts
from before the regulator. And you can see there's a good bit of ripple on it because I've got a
smaller filter capacitor there. And you can see the AC power line voltage coming in. And you can
also see the voltage at the output of that regulator right here is at just about five volts exactly.
Right there, that's the regulator voltage, the blue curve. And that's the output of the,
basically, the first stage of the power supply before it goes into the regulator.
That's a good bit of ripple. You wouldn't want that ripple, but the regulator's able to take care
of that. And so you can get away with a smaller filter capacitor. In fact, I'm using just a
one millifarad capacitor instead of the 50. And given that capacitors are expensive,
this is a good way to go. Okay, let's go into due circuits and see what we can do there. I've
already brought up the power supply in due circuits. I won't bother to do both the regulated and
unregulated. But here in due circuits, I have something neat. Due circuits has an oscilloscope.
And if you want to play with oscilloscopes and learn how they work, you can actually
use due circuits oscilloscope. So let me do a simulation. I'm already set up for the time
domain analysis. In due circuits, the time domain analysis, by the way, comes up with
some more defaults that are usually pretty good. Not always. So we'll simulate.
And there's due circuits graph and took a while for that capacitor to build up. But then it's
got a nice, fairly steady output. I'm going to close this graph and look instead at what
the oscilloscope shows. I think I have to close the oscilloscope, bring it up again after that
simulation. And here we are with the 50 millifarad capacitor. And you can see the capacitor charges,
and then it's nice and smooth and steady right across there. So there's the due circuits oscilloscope.
And you can actually move the knobs on the oscilloscope. This is now set for five volts
per division. I can change it to two volts per division, one volt per division. I'm off the screen.
I can vary the vertical position of that trace, just like I did on the oscilloscope,
or we'll be doing on the oscilloscope in lectures. So there are circuit lab and
due circuits solutions to the project for lecture four.
