Welcome back. In the previous lecture, we looked at AC signals, voltages and currents that
vary sinusoidally with time, and the emphasis was largely on a single frequency. In fact,
in the end, we built a power supply that worked on the 60 hertz AC power line frequency.
Life would be pretty dull if we only had one frequency in the world. In fact, we're
usually confronted with a mixture of frequencies. Think of the audible spectrum, the sounds
we hear. If we could only have one frequency, all you would hear me do was go, and you
might reply, because we don't have one frequency. But we have mixes of frequencies. And frequently,
we want to do things to those mixes. We want to alter the mix of frequencies. We want to
emphasize, say, the treble, if you're getting hard of hearing and you need to hear your
TV a little better, you might want to boost the treble, the high frequencies. You might
have electronic noise, you might want to eliminate it, and so on. So we need circuits that can
process signals consisting of multiple frequencies. And that's what this lecture is about. It's
about filter circuits. You've heard that word before because I talked about the filter capacitor
in our power supply, and we're going to enlarge on that concept in today's lecture. We're going
to learn how filters can process the different frequencies that appear in electronic signals
and consequently in other signals like sound that we might then convert to electronic signals.
So let me give you some examples. In the audio world, there's a clear example of the tone
controls on perhaps old-fashioned radios and stereos. Nowadays, they have more complicated
systems called equalizers that can vary the frequencies in different frequency bands.
My TV has a menu that shows me able to adjust the treble and the bass up and down various
amounts. If you play the electric guitar, you've got frequency controllers, you've got
some kind of filters in there that you can use to boost or diminish different frequencies.
So in the audio world, treble and bass controls, as they were called in the old days, equalizers
and more complicated frequency controls, as they're called today. And those are sort of
obvious. You're probably familiar with those. But there are many other examples where we
have frequency issues. For example, at the top left in this diagram, we see a sort of
clean electronic signal. It happens to be a single sine wave. In the lower right, it
looks the same sort of, but it's got all this noise superimposed on it. And the fact about
the real world is there are sources of electromagnetic noise which get into our electrical signals
and make them noisy. And we'd like to avoid that. We have techniques for avoiding it,
but when the noise gets in there, we need to remove it, and we can do that with an
electronic filter.
You use your cell phone. A hundred or a thousand other people are using cell phones and communicating
through the same nearby cell phone tower. How on earth does the cell phone system manage
to sort all those individual calls out? Well, one way is with very, very fine filters that
respond only to a very narrow band of frequencies and are able, therefore, to sort out many,
many, many phone calls that are very closely spaced in frequencies, but nevertheless, the
filters can handle that. So I want to talk a little bit conceptually about filters and
then about the main component that we're going to use to make a filter work. So here is a
conceptual picture of a filter. We have an input. The input consists of a mix of frequencies.
We have an output, and the output consists of an altered mix of frequencies. Maybe it's
a stereo system, and we've boosted the base, and so the output consists of a greater amount
of power at the low frequencies, or maybe we boosted the treble, and it's a greater
amount at the high frequencies. Or maybe there was some noise at a particular frequency,
and we've applied a filter that removed that frequency alone and left the other frequencies
unimpeded. We can design filters to do all kinds of things, and we'll be talking about
those different kinds of filters throughout this lecture. But before we do, we need to
look at the one component that's going to let us do this filtering, and it's the same
component we used when we filtered out the ripple in the power supply that we built in
the preceding lecture, and that's the capacitor. So I want to get a little bit up close with
capacitors and spend a little more time explaining how capacitors work and what they do. So let's
go to our big monitor and take a look in more detail at capacitors. So let's look at capacitors
up close. What's a capacitor? I introduced capacitors briefly before. Capacitor is a
pair of conductors separated by an insulator, and because of that charge goes on the plates
of these capacitors when you put a voltage across them, and it turns out that the voltage
and the charge are proportional, and that proportionality defines the capacitance of the capacitor.
Now there's something funny about a capacitor. It is an open circuit. It's a block. It's an
insulating gap. No current can flow through the capacitor, but it can flow in the wires
leading to the capacitor, and we want to explore what happens under different conditions to
that current as a function of what's going on with the voltage you put across the capacitor.
If there's a constant voltage, then the capacitor has got some charge on it. Maybe it's zero.
Maybe it's some charge. We've got positive charge on one plate, negative charge on the
other, as we show here, with the plus signs and the minus signs, and there's some voltage,
v sub c, across the capacitor. But under these conditions, there's no current flowing because
there's no charge moving on or off those plates. So with a constant voltage, there's no current
through the wires leading to the capacitor. I, the current, is zero in that case. That's
not very interesting, although it's modestly interesting because under those conditions,
the capacitor is storing charge and also storing electrical energy, which it could release at
a later time through a flow of current out of the capacitor. But what happens if the
capacitor voltage is changing? If the voltage is increasing, then because the charge and
the voltage are proportional, that means the amount of charge has to be increasing. And
where does that charge come from? It flows in through the wires that are leading to the
capacitor plates. So here's a little animation of how that happens. Now, in a real circuit,
it would be only electrons moving onto the negative and electrons moving off the positive,
but I'm showing it more symmetrically. So there was some charge flowing through the
wires leading to the capacitor, and that brought the capacitor now up to some charge level.
So current must flow through the wires leading to the capacitor while the voltage is changing.
Current is the rate of charge flow. It's the amount of charge, which I'm going to call
delta Q, a little chunk of charge that flows in a little chunk of time, delta T. So I is
delta Q over delta T, the rate of flow of charge through those wires. The charge, though,
is proportional to the voltage. And what that means is that the current depends on the rate
of change of voltage. So a capacitor has a different kind of relationship between voltage
and current than, say, does a resistor. In a resistor, the current is directly proportional
to the voltage. In a capacitor, the current, and again, when I say in a capacitor, it's
not through that gap, but in the wires leading to the capacitor, the current doesn't depend
on the voltage, but on how rapidly the voltage is changing. So let's take a little more
look at this relationship between capacitors, voltage, and current. And in particular, look
at what happens when we have a sinusoidally varying voltage. There's our current that
is going to flow when the voltage is changing. So here's a little simulation of an AC voltage
source that is a voltage that is changing in direction in a sinusoidal way. Charge is
piling up on the plates. Then as the voltage swings negative, charge goes off the plates
or swings down again, and then the voltage goes negative, and we end up putting negative
charge on the upper plate and positive charge on the lower. And as that goes on, what I've
done on the right here is to plot the voltage in yellow, which was supplied by that voltage
source. So we turned a dial in a voltage source and said, give us this much volts. We also
said, give us this frequency. And here's the current in green. And the current depends
on the rate of change of voltage. So you'll notice where the voltage was rising steeply
at the beginning, the current was high, where the voltage was not changing at all, which
was happening briefly down here at the bottom, and up here at the top, the current is going
through zero. The current depends on the rate of change of voltage. You'll notice something
else that that leads to. The current and the voltage are what we call out of phase. In
this case, the current reaches its peak before the voltage. The current peaks before the
voltage peaks and so on. And so in a capacitor, the current leads the voltage, and it leads
it by, in fact, 90 degrees or a quarter of a cycle of this sinusoidal oscillation. Well,
that was a relatively low frequency. Let's move to a high frequency. Things are happening
much faster now because we've got a higher frequency, same voltage, and let's plot it.
Two things you'll notice are different. First of all, the voltage, although it's the same
in amplitude, now there are more cycles fit in here because we've got a higher frequency.
And the current is bigger because the rate of change of voltage is bigger because the
voltage has to change more rapidly to change at this higher frequency. So that's what
capacitors look like up close. And the key to take away from this is that a capacitor
is a device in which the current responds not to voltage, but to rate of change of voltage,
and we need to think about also this phase difference between the voltage and the current
in a capacitor. Okay, so that was a conceptual look at how
capacitors behave. Now we want to talk about filter circuits in particular and how we would
use a capacitor to make a filter. And to do that, I have to introduce a little bit more
about the voltage and current in a capacitor. So I'm going to put in quotes here, Ohm's
law for capacitors. Now, any electrical engineers watching this course, we know Ohm's law does
not apply to capacitors. In fact, I just told you that. I told you that the voltage and the
current are not proportional. But when you have an AC signal coming to a capacitor, there
is a sense in which you can talk about the proportionality between voltage and current,
between the maximum value of the voltage in particular and the maximum value of the current.
And I want to introduce that. So I'm going to say that a capacitor acts sort of like
a frequency dependent resistor. Sort of. And I want to keep emphasizing that sort of because
I'm on thin ice here, this is not quite correct, but it gives us a feel for what happens. And
this resistance that the capacitor has, quote, resistance is proportional to one over the
frequency. Remember when I showed you the animations at the low frequency, we got a
lower current at the high frequency, we got a higher current. It was as if it was easier
for current to flow at the higher frequency. So the capacitor has a quote resistance proportional
to the inverse of the frequency. There's a high frequency, there's a low resistance
and vice versa. If the frequency gets very high toward infinity, the capacitor basically
acts like a wire, like a short circuit. So a capacitor at high frequency acts like a
short circuit. You can already begin to see why our filter capacitor worked in our power
supply because it acted like a short circuit to ground for the high frequencies of the
ripple, but let the steady direct current go through without being shunted to ground.
At very low frequencies, on the other hand, the capacitor acts like what it is actually,
a gap between two conductors. It acts like an open circuit or an open switch. No current
can flow. And in between, there is some kind of variation. And why do I say sort of? Because
this is not really Ohm's law because a capacitor doesn't just change the amplitude of the current
relative to the voltage according to this quote resistance, but it also changes the
phase. As you saw, the current leads the voltage in a capacitor. And that's really important.
It makes the mathematics different, and it makes the whole electronics, and it makes
the energy considerations all different. I'm not going to go into that, but remember,
a capacitor is not a resistor. And when I say it behaves sort of like one, we've really
got to take that with a grain of salt. It does behave sort of like a resistor, but only
sort of. A better name for that quote resistance is what's called capacitive reactants. It's
given the symbol x, and I put a sub c on it because it's here about a capacitor. And that
capacitive reactants is proportional to 1 over the frequency times the capacitance.
Okay. Well, now let's start trying to do some things with capacitors. You can see the phase
lag there. We're going to try to build filters out of capacitors. So remember in lecture
2, I introduced the voltage divider. It consisted of two resistors in series, and we asked about
the voltage across the lower resistor R2, and it divided the battery voltage in proportion
to that resistor's resistance in relation to the total.
Well, we're going to do the same thing with this circuit, which consists of a resistor
in series with a capacitor instead of a battery. We've got an AC voltage source, a generator,
a function generator like I've been using, or whatever. And the question is, does this
also act like a voltage divider? And the answer is sort of, again. And the mathematics is more
complicated. I'm not going to into it. I'm not going to derive it. If you don't like
seeing square roots, you can phase yourself out a little bit. But the point is, there
is in the bottom the sum of the resistance and the reactants, but they come in kind of
with a Pythagorean theorem, and that's because of that 90-degree phase difference. So the
answer is it sort of is like a voltage divider, but the relationship is a little more complicated.
And that's really all you need to know. So I'm going to stop here, and I'm going to
give you a quick quiz and ask you to think about this circuit and tell me whether it's
a high-pass filter or a low-pass filter. So remember our conceptual picture of a filter.
We had an input, the filter did something to the signals coming in, and the output was
different, an altered mix of frequencies. So if I put a mix of frequencies into this
circuit, will the output consist more of the lower frequencies or more of the higher frequencies?
So take a minute, pause, and think about that. Okay, let's come back and take a look at it.
Well, if you want to do the formula, you can, but you don't have to. But the fact is that
the capacitive reactants, this quote, like resistance, goes up as the frequency goes
down, as the frequency goes up, because it goes like one over the frequency, and therefore
at high frequencies, that capacitor acts more like a short circuit, more like a wire, more
like a low resistance. And so at high frequencies, it's a voltage divider, if you will, with
less voltage across the capacitor than would be the case with low frequencies. And therefore,
this is a low-pass filter. Low frequencies get right through to the output, high frequencies
are passed through the capacitor and go to ground and return back through the ground,
and they're not visible at the output. So this is a low-pass filter. And before we do
any more with the low-pass filter, let's pause and simplify this circuit a little bit, because
we're frequently going to draw circuits that look simply like that, with the capacitor going to
ground, and it's understood that the input voltage is applied relative to ground, and the output
voltage is measured relative to ground. It's just like the circuit I had before, where there was
a wire going across, connecting the bottom of the capacitor to the bottom of V in and V out.
It's just a shorthand way of writing it, but we're going to do that. So let's stop looking
at conceptual diagrams now and turn to the real world, and let's build a low-pass filter and
see how it works. So what I have here is a very simple circuit already wired. It consists of a
capacitor. It's a one microfarad capacitor, a millionth of a farad. That means a millionth of
a coulomb for every volt on that capacitor. And I got a 1000 ohm resistor, and that's all I've got,
because that circuit, that filter, is that simple. It consists of a resistor in series with a
capacitor. The input is this red wire coming into this binding post here. That's connected to the
resistor. The output is coming from the junction of the resistor and the capacitor, and that is
coming out on this yellow wire and going into this cable. And I've got the ground wires connected
to the black, and that's connected to this whole strip down here, which is then grounded, and the
bottom of the capacitor you can see is connected to ground. I'm going to feed this now with a signal
from my function generator, and I'm going to look at both the input coming in here from the
function generator and the output on the two channels of the oscilloscope. So let me get the
oscilloscope set up to handle this. Okay, I've turned on both channels of the oscilloscope. You
can see on the screen here the traces, and let's turn them on over here so we can see them a little
better on our big screen. And what you see are two sine waves. They both have 500 millivolts,
half a volt per division. They are approximately the same size. They're certainly the same frequency.
They're also in phase. So there are our input and output, and we're running right now at a fairly
low frequency. We're running right now at a frequency of, let me take a look and make sure,
frequency is 100 hertz. And now I'm going to begin to turn up the frequency of the function
generator. So up it goes a little higher. It's a little higher. You can see two things happening.
You can see, first of all, the bottom trace, which is the output, getting smaller. You can see both
traces getting more compressed because we're going to a higher frequency, and so we're seeing more
cycles. Go up again, and you can see the frequency drops lower. Sorry, the frequency goes higher,
but the amplitude of the output drops lower because this is a low pass filter. It's letting
the low frequencies through easily. When we started out at 100 hertz, the two were almost
exactly the same amplitude, just a little bit of attenuation in the output relative to the input.
But as we go to higher frequencies, the output amplitude drops, and drops, and drops, and drops,
and drops, and gets lower, and lower, and lower, and there it is. The oscilloscope is having trouble
triggering now because I asked it to trigger off channel two, which is getting a little bit low
amplitude. But you can see the idea. We have a filter which is reducing the high frequencies. So
there I've gone to a very high frequency, and the output is very, very small. So this is a low pass
filter. Now, what good is a filter like that? Well, I want to give you one example of an application
of that filter other than the one you used yesterday, on the previous lecture. In the previous lecture,
we built a power supply, and we basically put a low pass filter in it. That's what the capacitor did,
and we filtered out that 60 cycle variation. Remember when I pulled the capacitor out of
the circuit, I was playing beautiful music, and all you heard was ahhh, because of that variation.
Now I want to consider another situation. I want to consider a situation in which
I have a noisy signal, like I showed you at the beginning of this lecture,
and we're going to see how well our filter does at removing the noise from that signal. So I'm going
to change the setups on the function generator, not the oscilloscope so much, but the function
generator by adding some noise to the signal, and we'll see what the filter does to that noise.
Okay, so here we are with a slightly different setup. What I've done is function generator,
and by the way, if you're wondering how this works, we'll get to that around lecture 15.
You'll actually build one, so you'll understand how it works. This is a two-channel function
generator, which is very convenient, and I've set the second channel to generate random noise,
and I've set the machine up so that the output combines the random noise with that nice, smooth,
100 hertz sine wave that we started with, and you see on the big screen the sine wave we had
before, same amplitude, same frequency. It's just got all this messy noise piled on top of it.
If that were an audio signal that we were trying to play, it would sound bad. If that were a signal
representing some electrical quantity that was represented, some physical quantity we were trying
to measure in a scientific lab, that noise would bother us and result in less accurate
measurements, for example. We'd like to get rid of that noise. Well, the reason we can get rid
of that noise is because that noise is at a much higher frequency than the signal.
It's running a bandwidth up to 100 kilohertz, 100,000 cycles per second, although it does include
components that are much slower than that, but clearly, as you can see, the variations associated
with that noise are much faster than the variations associated with our basic sine wave.
This is still connected to the filter just as it was before, so it's going through our low-pass
filter. Remember how our low-pass filter attenuated high frequency noise, or high frequency signals
of any kind. In this case, it's the high frequency noise. All I have to do is step over there and
turn on the channel 2 display of the oscilloscope, and you'll see what wonders our filter is able to
work for us. This is the same signal that came in, except it's been put through our very simple
filter consisting of a 1 kiloohm resistor and a 1 microfarad capacitor. Nothing else is going on
there. It's that simple, and we've cleaned the signal back up beautifully. We've removed all that
noise. So one very important use of filters is to remove noise in circuits, and we've done a really
nice job of it there. Just to remind you, I'm going to let that go a minute or two to show you
that that is really doing a great job of removing noise. You can even see the randomness in the
noise as the channel 1 signal jumps around. Okay, so there is a beautiful real-world demonstration
of an electronic circuit doing just what we wanted to do, in this case, an RC resistor
capacitor filter, removing the noise from a signal and making it beautiful and clean.
Okay, let's think a little bit more about filters. Let me start with a little bit of
a quiz for you. What's this circuit? Take a look at this circuit, think about it, pause your pause
button, and figure it out. What does this circuit do? It's different from the circuit I showed you
before. Okay, what does this circuit do? This circuit, if you want to go through the math,
you can, but you don't really need to, because you know the capacitor acts like a big resistance at
low frequencies and a little resistance at high frequencies, and so if you think of this thing
as sort of a voltage divider, the resistor 1, the upper resistor, is small for high frequencies.
They go through it easily, but it's big for low frequencies. They don't go through it easily,
and consequently, what is this? It's a high-pass filter. It's the opposite of a low-pass filter.
And we can analyze these high and low-pass filters a little more carefully and sort of
display what they do by showing curves that describe their frequency response, how much
of a signal they let through as a function of frequency. And it turns out to be best to do this,
and I'm going to do this for the filter I actually have with a 1 kilo ohm resistor
and a 1 microfarad capacitor. I have the low-pass filter I actually built and the high-pass filter
I just quiz you on, and it turns out to be good to plot these on logarithmic scales.
So here's the frequency plotted in kilohertz, 0.01 kilohertz, 0.1 kilohertz is our 100 hertz
that we started at, 1 kilohertz up to 10 kilohertz, and I'm plotting the logarithm on the vertical
axis of the output voltage over the input voltage. Actually, I'm plotting the actual output voltage
over the input voltage, but I'm doing it on a logarithmic scale also. So these individual
divisions are a factor of 10 rather than a fixed amount. And you see what happens at low frequencies
for the low-pass filter. For a long time, there's very little variation, and then on this logarithmic
graph, there is a rather sharp, it's called a knee, where the thing bends, and then it tapers off
at a constant rate, and by the time we get down, get up to 10 kilohertz in frequency,
we've got almost no voltage at the output. That's a filter characteristic curve.
We can draw a very similar curve for the high-pass filter, which used the same components of the
same values in this case, and there we have something opposite happening. We have no voltage
out at DC at zero frequency or very low frequencies, and then it gradually rises and at that same
breakpoint, which happens to be 159 hertz for this particular combination of resistor and capacitor,
it begins to level off, and at frequencies above, much above that 159 hertz, up to about
thousands and thousands of hertz, it passes all the input into the output, basically unattenuated.
So those are characteristic curves for filters. So now I'd like to take a few more minutes and
look at more sophisticated filters we could build. So we could clearly put a low-pass filter and a
high-pass filter together, and what that's going to do is if we put a high-pass filter first,
then we're going to let only high frequencies through, and we're going to cut off the low
frequencies, but then we come to a low-pass filter, and we're going to cut off the high
frequencies, and you might say, what good is that? It lets nothing through. Well, if you pick those
knee frequencies, those breakpoints differently, you can build a band-pass filter that passes
a particular band of frequencies. So I want to have a communication system which has limited
bandwidth, and bandwidth, that's a term you've heard, it has to do with how much information
you can carry on a single path, like a fiber optic or the internet or a cable. Maybe you want to
limit that bandwidth so you can carry more information, but with a limited range of frequencies,
and so you might do that with a band-pass filter, letting a particular band of frequencies through.
Here's an application for a band-pass filter. If you have any kind of loud speaker system,
and I have an example of one here, which does this very nicely, any good loud speaker system
consists of at least two different units in it, two different speakers, two different devices
that convert AC electrical signals into sound. They do it by running current through a coil
of wire. The coil of wire is in a magnetic field, and it moves back and forth and moves this
cardboard cone, which makes the sound waves in the air. And notice there's a fairly big one in
this speaker at the bottom, that's the woofer, that produces bass frequencies easily, but it's not
very good at producing high frequencies because it can't move fast enough, and inside here is a tiny
little tweeter, which is good for high frequencies. Well, it would be really stupid to have an
expensive high-power audio amplifier dumping all its power equally to those two speakers.
So what do we do? We use filters, a high-pass filter, to pass only the high frequencies
to the tweeter, and a low-pass filter to pass only the low frequencies to the woofer,
and that's how we sort them out. And many speaker systems would have several other drivers,
typically a mid-range, and there'd be another, there'd be a band-pass filter that would pass
to the mid-range. So that's another example of a filter application here used in this loud
speaker system. So let me summarize and then tell you a little bit about the project for this lecture.
We've learned a lot about capacitors, devices that act, quote, sort of like frequency-dependent
resistors. We learned how to put them in very simple voltage divider-like circuits and build
filters that did wonderful things for us, like extracting a nice clean signal from a very messy
amount of noise. Now, if you'd like to go on to the project for this lecture, I have a project
called a twin-T filter, and a twin-T filter is a very sophisticated filter that has a very
narrow frequency response, and I'm not going to give away the punchline anymore. If you would like
to do this project, I'm going to have you simulate this twin-T filter with your circuit simulation
software. However, I want to tell you how excited the people were here at the great courses when
I mentioned I was going to do the twin-T filter, because they said, oh, we use, it's called a
notch filter. I'll give away a little bit about it. It takes out a very narrow notch of frequencies,
and we use notch filters all the time. And I said, well, what do you use them for? And they
said, well, for example, suppose a cell phone goes off in the middle of a recording session or
something. We don't want to re-record the whole thing. What do we do? We apply a notch filter at
just the frequency of the tone made by the phone ringing, and it takes out those frequencies,
and it doesn't take out anything else, and it leaves the recording nice and clean. Now,
they don't use this particular circuit for their notch filter. They probably simulate it digitally,
but it's the same idea. Filters do wonders for us, because they take a wide range of frequencies,
and they alter it in a way that we've engineered to do exactly what we want with them.
So, for lecture five, I'd like you to build a more sophisticated filter than the ones I
talked about in the lecture. This is called a twin-T filter. So, I'd like you to simulate
this circuit and explore its characteristics. And exploring a filter's characteristics means
making a plot of the logarithm of the voltage ratio, V out over V in, versus the logarithm
of the frequency. Let's do that from 10 hertz up to 100 kilohertz. That's a wide range. And a
straightforward way to do that is to use a voltage function generator from the signal sources
as the input, and then use a fixed voltage at the input, and find the output voltage,
and then make a plot by hand. But if you want to do some extra learning, you could explore
circuit labs or do circuits, frequency domain simulations, where they sweep a whole range
of frequencies and find out, produce directly a graph. Now, notice that this filter has capacitors
of value C and 2C and resistors of value R and R over 2, and you're to take 0.01 microfarads
for C and 10 kilo ohms for R. So, let's take a look at what these circuits look like. So, here I
have the circuit in circuit lab, exactly the same circuit wired up in circuit lab, and I have it set
to simulate in what's called a time domain simulation. I'll show you the results of the
more straightforward approach in just a minute. But when I run the, sorry, frequency domain
simulation, when I run the frequency domain simulation, I'm asked about the input, I'm asked
about the start frequency, 10 hertz, I'm asked about the ending frequency, 1E5 means 1 times 10
to the fifth, which means 100,000, 100 kilohertz, and the number of points I'm going to put for every
factor of 10 in frequency. And so, let me just run this. There goes the frequency domain simulation,
and there's the plot. Along the horizontal axis, we have frequency. There's a little above 1 kilo
hertz. We're going all the way up to 100 kilohertz. We're going all the way down to 10 hertz. And
look what happens. Here's a logarithm of basically 0. That means the factor is 1. The output is 1
times the input. And so, for low frequencies, the output is the same as the input. And for very
high frequencies, the output is the same as the input. But there is this notch in the middle. Very,
very steep notch. So, a very narrow range of frequencies gets dramatically rejected. They're
down by a large factor on this axis. So, that is the frequency domain simulation run in Circuit
Lab. If you want to see what this looks like when I did it the more tedious way, I took and plotted
what I knew with the theoretical results for this particular curve. And then, I took some actual
data and added some data points to it. And those points show you the actual data I took at different
points, different frequencies. And I plotted them and they fit very nicely along that curve.
Let's take a quick look at the same thing in do circuits. Before I get there, I wanted to show
you how to get to your, quote, workbench or it's called your dashboard in do circuits. You have
a little icon here which you could add your face or something else to, should you want to. And if
you click on that, you see various things and the dashboard is your set of circuits. And you have,
you only see four of them, three of them in a possibility of a new circuit. But if you click
on my circuits, up they come. And you have all these circuits you can deal with. And let's see if
we can find the twin T on here. Lecture 5's twin T filter. There it is. Connecting to do circuit
server. Loading up. Edit the circuit, which I need to do to be able to run it. Loads the application.
Loads the components. And there we have it. So that's do circuits simulation. And it also can
run a frequency domain analysis. And I'll just do that. And there it goes. And this frequency domain
analysis also shows the notch just before. The scales are a little different, so it doesn't
look as dramatically deep. It shows something else that's really interesting. It shows the phase of
the input and output voltages. And they're in phase at low frequencies. That's what zero phase
difference means. They're in phase at high frequencies, but they're out of phase by 90 degrees
right around that notch frequency. And there's a dramatic jump across the notch in whether V in
and V out or whether V in is leading V out or whether V in is lagging behind V out. Quite a
dramatic result for this filter. Remember that effect of capacitors is also to change phase,
not just to change amplitudes. So there we have the analysis of a rather sophisticated
filter called the Twin T filter. It's a type of notch filter because it takes out a deep notch
in frequencies.
