Welcome back. Last time you learned about transistors, all kinds of transistors, you
learned about MOSFETs and JFETs and BJTs or Bipolar Junction Transistors. Now one of
the earliest applications for transistors and indeed of the vacuum tubes that preceded
them was to be amplifiers, devices that took weak signals and made them stronger. And you're
particularly familiar with amplifiers in the audio realm. So I'm going to emphasize audio
amplifiers in the next couple of lectures, but then we'll generalize the amplifier concept
considerably beyond that. So we want to think about applications for audio amplifiers briefly.
Your radio has an audio amplifier, your stereo system has an audio amplifier, your cell phone
has an audio amplifier, anything that produces sound that you can hear coming out of an electronic
circuit, I guarantee you has an audio amplifier on it. So we'd like to develop a simple circuit
for an audio amplifier in this lecture and then in the next lecture we're going to combine that
with some other circuits and make a complete audio amplifier system. So let's switch to our big
screen and take a stab at designing a simple audio amplifier. The amplifier we're going to start with
is called a common emitter amplifier. And before I go into the amplifier itself, let me explain the
meaning of that term common emitter. You'll recall that a transistor is a three-terminal device,
and yet it's a device that allows one circuit to control another. But because it has only three
terminals, one of those terminals has to be shared by both circuits. And you can build a transistor
amplifier in which the collector is common, the base is common, or the emitter is common. And
perhaps the common emitter is the most common configuration, but the others are used as well,
and we'll see some of them in the next lecture. So we have a common emitter amplifier in this
circuit. The emitter is grounded. Ground is a common point. It's the negative terminal of the power
supply. I should also add that I'm adopting here another shorthand notation. I mark plus 10 volts
at the top of that resistor. That means that point is connected to a 10-volt power supply. I'm no
longer going to show separately a battery or a power source or something else. It's assumed. And
that 10 volts is understood to be taken with respect to ground. So there's 10 volts between
here and here. By the way, if you're doing the projects and the simulations, you can explicitly
put a battery or a DC power source into your circuits. You can also, at least in circuit lab,
simply put a node name here and label it plus 10V or minus 10V, and it will assume that there's a
10V or whatever voltage you want power supply there. So that's one of many common sort of shortcuts
we're going to be using. We no longer show all the wires. We no longer show the voltage sources
and so on. So what I have so far is the collector and emitter of the transistor. I have my resistor
here. It happens to be one kilo ohm. I call that the load resistor because that's the resistor in
which the power produced by this amplifier is being dissipated. In this case, just turned into heat.
On the other hand, if I wanted an output from the amplifier, an output voltage, I'd take it right
there at the collector or the junction between the collector of the transistor and that load
resistor. So this is our first try. So there's the output circuitry, if you will. And now let's
add an input. So I put a half volt AC power source. That's actually pretty big input to an amplifier.
Amplifiers usually start with voltages in the millivolts or 10s or hundreds of millivolts,
but that's 500 millivolts. That's a half a volt. That's pretty big input voltage.
And I have an input resistor of 10 kilo ohms. Remember, we can't put a voltage source
right across the base emitter junction or we'd burn it out because it's basically a
short circuit when it's forward biased. Well, this is our first try. Will it work?
No. It won't work. And here's why. Remember that that base emitter junction is a diode.
A diode doesn't really start conducting in the forward direction until there's about
six or seven tenths of a volt or more across it. So as that AC swings up to half a volt,
five tenths of a volt, it's not enough to turn that diode on. And even if that diode
were perfect and didn't have that extra six or seven tenths of a volt drop across it,
this still wouldn't work. Worked a little better, but it still wouldn't work because it would only
allow current to flow when the input went positive. When the input went negative, that's
still a diode and it would be shut off. So this circuit doesn't work. So we have to get a little
bit more sophisticated about our common emitter amplifier. So here's the idea of the amplification.
When current does come in here, if we could make that happen by putting a begin of voltage in,
the idea is base current would flow and larger collector current flows because we know that
the transistor is basically a current amplifier. So here's how it goes. If the input voltage
increases, and I have an AC voltage there, so it's going to go up and down, the base current
increases. Now the base current remains small. We've got a big resistor there and small voltage,
not much current, but the base current will increase as the voltage goes up. What that
means is because the transistor has this big current gain, beta, the collector current will
increase and the collector current is large. Now there's a larger current flowing through
that load resistor. The voltage across that load resistor by Ohm's law is the current
times the resistance. If the current goes up, the voltage across that resistor increases,
and that means the output voltage right here goes down. There's a bigger voltage drop across
that resistor, so that decreases the collector voltage, which is the same as the output voltage.
And as a result, as the input voltage swings up and down, the output voltage will also swing
down and up rather than up and down, and that's going to be important in a minute.
The bigger the current flowing in, the bigger the collector current, and the lower the output
voltage goes, so you increase the input and the output goes down. You get larger voltage swings
at the output, and that's what we mean by amplification. So in principle, if it weren't
for this problem with the base emitter diode either not being able to turn on or not being able
to turn on at least when the input goes negative, we would have an amplifier. But as I say, because
of that issue with the diode, this amplifier isn't going to work, so we've got to get a little bit
more sophisticated. So here is the more sophisticated way to build this amplifier. It's with circuitry
called biasing. Now if this were an electrical engineering course, we'd probably have several
lectures on how to bias a transistor. I remember in my own electrical engineering course in college,
we actually had to spend a lot of time biasing a transistor, and it was one of the harder things
we figured out how to do, and it involved thinking a little more sophisticatedly about the transistor
and its own internal resistances and capacitance, all kinds of stuff. We're going to skip all that.
We're going to use trial and error to bias our transistors when we need to do that.
So I haven't shown any input yet, but what I have shown is an extra connection through a rather
large resistor, 82 kilo ohms to the base, and then there's this extra resistor from the base to ground,
and that doesn't make a lot of sense unless you recognize that there is also
some resistance in the base emitter junction. I'm assuming the transistor has a beta of 100.
I've still got that one kilo ohm load resistance. And here's the idea. There is a current,
I'm going to label it IB because it's the base current, and it's going to flow down through
this resistor and through the base emitter junction, and it's going to provide a level
of base current even when there's no input. So if there's base current, there is also
collector current, and therefore this voltage at the output or at the top of the collector
is smaller than the 10 volts, but it's not as low as the zero volts. And if I pick these
resistors carefully, and that's the tricky part of biasing a transistor, so I'm not going to go
into the details, and you can do this in your project by trial and error, if I pick those
carefully, I will get this output voltage when there's no input to be roughly half the power
supply voltage. So it's sitting halfway between the 10 volts at the top and the zero volts of
the ground. That's a biased transistor, and it's interesting because now we have base current
already, whether or not there's an input. We also have a slight disadvantage of that. The
transistor and these resistors are all dissipating power, so the circuit does use up power even
when nothing's happening. Now let's add an input. So in comes the input. Now I've reduced the input
voltage to a more typical input. That's 0.01 volts AC. That's 10 millivolts. That's typical of what
you might get. I'm going to couple it in through a capacitor because if I didn't do that, the
direct current flows associated with these resistors would get messed up by whatever else
was connected out there, but because I've got a capacitor and the capacitor blocks direct current,
DC cannot get through a capacitor. It's like an infinite resistance to direct current to zero
frequency. Then all we're going to see at the capacitor is going to let through the changes
associated with the AC, but it won't let through any DC voltage that's associated with this source.
So now I have a situation in which if I put a small sinusoidally varying waveform in at the
beginning, the current through the base emitter junction will also vary slightly in response to
that, and that will cause a much bigger variation in the collector current, and that will cause,
as we saw before in our basic idea, that will cause this output voltage at the collector
also to vary, and it will vary much more. And there we have amplification and also notice,
as I said before, when the input voltage goes up, the base current goes up, the collector current
goes up, and the collector voltage, which is the output voltage, goes down. So when that one goes
up, this one goes down. So that's a common emitter amplifier with biasing, and that's a decent start
at an amplifier. So here is a sinusoidal output. This is a probe in circuit lab looking at the
collector of that transistor, the voltage I've labeled V out, and it's a sine wave, and if we
look at it in a little bit more detail, you'll notice it's swinging about just about five volts.
That means I've biased the transistor successfully. It sits normally between zero and 10 volts,
its power supply voltage, and it sits roughly halfway in between, and that's going to be
important for reasons you'll see shortly. So there is the output from circuit lab,
and not only do we have, it's sitting at about five volts, we also have a variation of about
1.5 volts. So it's going from five up to about 6.5, and down to about five, less 1.5 is about
3.5, and so it's swinging 1.5 volts either side of where it would sit if there weren't any input at
that roughly five volts. Now remember that I had a 0.01 volt AC input signal. It was going up
0.01 volts and down 0.01 volts below zero, and so on. So we can use that to calculate the gain
of this amplifier. How much does it amplify? How big is this output voltage compared to the input
voltage that we started with? Well, the output amplitude is 1.5 volts. That's the peak of the
output. The input amplitude was 0.01 volts, and what that means is the gain of this amplifier
is 150. 1.5 divided by 1.100 gives us 150. So this amplifier takes its small input voltage,
which is varying some small amount, and it amplifies that variation by a factor of 150.
That's a good, very, a good amplification factor. Impressive. Now you'll notice that I have put
absolute value signs, the vertical lines around the word gain, because this picture, this number,
this 150 doesn't really quite describe the entire gain, and we can see what the gain really is.
That is what its sign is also. If we look at the input and the output waveforms, again,
I've asked Circuit Lab now to look at both the input and the output, and they aren't on the same
scales. The input variation is much, much smaller, but I've blown it up so they look about the same,
but they are different in amplitude by a factor of 150. But because they're out of phase, that is,
when the input goes high, the output goes low, and when the input goes low, the output goes high,
it's an inverting amplifier. It's turned the signal upside down, and so the gain we're going to call
minus 150. So that's a common emitter amplifier with gain, and as stimulated in Circuit Lab,
and we'll do a real amplifier shortly. So we have an inverting amplifier with a gain of minus
150 there. Okay, I'm going to pause now and do what's one of the more sophisticated things I'm
going to do in the whole course, probably, and particularly in this part of the course, and
that is look at an idea that electrical engineers talk about called load line analysis, because
we're going to have to get a little more sophisticated about this amplifier if we're to
understand how it really works and what its limitations are. So I'd like you to imagine a
very abstract situation in which I take a power source, in this case it's our same 10 volt power
supply, our load resistor of 1000 ohms, and then I'm going to put between the bottom of that load
resistor and ground any device. It could be another resistor, it could be an inductor, it could be a
diode, it could be a capacitor, it could be anything. Later it will become the transistor,
and I'm going to ask the following question. What is the current if the output voltage happened to
be 10 volts? If V out there on the right at the junction between the resistor and the arbitrary
device, if that were 10 volts, what would be the current through that resistor and therefore
through the device? And the answer is it would be zero. Why is that? Because both sides of the
resistor would be at the same voltage, there would be no voltage across the resistor, Ohm's law
tells us there would therefore be no current through the resistor, and so I would be zero if
V out were 10 volts. I'm not saying V out is 10 volts, I'm saying if that were the case,
maybe the device allows that, maybe it doesn't. We'll get to that. So I would be zero in that case.
What's I if V out happened to be zero? That would certainly be the case if the device were just a
piece of wire, for example. Well, in that case, the entire 10 volts would appear across that load
resistor. It's a 1000 Ohm load resistor. So with one volt across one kilo Ohm, we would get a current
of one milliamp. I'm sorry, we would get a current of 10 milliamps, 10 volts across 1000 Ohms,
across one kilo Ohm gives us 10 milliamps. So that is the possibility that the two extreme
possibilities in this case, we could have an output of 10 volts, in which case the current
would be zero. We could have an output of zero, in which case the current would be 10 milliamps,
and we could have anything in between. You could easily convince yourself, for example,
if V out were 5 volts, then we'd have 5 milliamps flowing through the load resistor,
and also on through whatever that device was. And in fact, we can describe all this graphically
by drawing a plot of V, the output voltage there, the voltage across that unknown device,
or that arbitrary device, versus the current through it. And one of our points was 10 volts
and no current. And another point was no volts and 10 milliamps. Another we just thought about
without calculating out was 5 volts and 5 milliamps. And you can quickly convince yourself
that all the possible cases lie on that line. So when I have the circuit set up like this,
the output voltage and the current through the whole string there of the load resistor and the
arbitrary device must be on that line somewhere. Now, the other thing we need to think about is
we have some arbitrary device down there. That device also constrains the voltage and current,
and the constraint is given by the VI curves we've been plotting before. If it was a resistor,
it'd be a diagonal line up from the origin there at the corner. But it's a transistor in this case.
So I'm now going to replace that arbitrary device by the collector to emitter
part of the transistor. We'll worry about the base later. And here are the characteristic curves
that we developed before for a bipolar junction transistor for different values of the base current.
And so what this is telling us is the output of this amplifier, the current through the load
resistance and the output voltage, must lie on that line. And as we vary the base current,
these points slide, the actual value of V out and the corresponding current slide up and down
that line. And there are two special points we need to identify. We need to identify, for example,
a point roughly in the middle. Actually, three special points I want to talk about. That's the
point I biased my amplifier to be at. It's at that middle point. That's, by the way, called the
operating point or also the quiescent point. And if I've biased my transistor carefully,
that point lies roughly in the middle of that load line, that diagonal line called the load line.
Now, as I vary the base current, where we are on that load line is going to swing back and forth.
And the two extremes we can swing to are the point called cutoff, where there's no current
flowing through the device, in this case the transistor. And there's the maximum possible
voltage at the output. And the other extreme is called saturation, where there is the most
possible current flowing in that circuit. And that's set by the value of the power supply
and basically the load resistor with a little bit of fudginess for that steep curve at the start
of the transistor curves. So we have to live somewhere on that load line. And our amplifier
output has to lie on that load line. And if we try to push the amplifier further than that,
things are not going to work out very well. And what's going to happen in particular is
we're going to get what's called distortion. We're going to get sound, if it's an audio amplifier,
that just doesn't sound very good. And so let's take a look at how that would work. In fact,
let's not only take a look, let's take a listen. So what I have over here now is, in fact,
an amplifier very similar to the one I just described, and very similar to the one I had
built in circuit lab, which I just talked about. It's built down here in this corner,
and you can basically see most of it. Let me describe what I have here. There's the input
coupling capacitor. There's the transistor. There are the two little resistors that form
the biasing network in the base circuit. And there's the load resistor. That's all. That's
my audio amplifier. I've got a lot of other wires going on here. And let me explain them to you,
but they're not all that significant. Here is my function generator. It's set up to produce a 440
hertz tone or sine wave. That's A above middle C for you musicians, and it will sound like that.
And that is set to be a peak to peak voltage of 100 millivolts. So it's going to swing up 50
millivolts and down 50 millivolts. In fact, you can already see that on the big screen.
That is what we are seeing. There's that variation. The yellow is the input. So here comes the wire
out of the function generator. It's going into a connector here down into the circuit through
this yellow wire and into the input of my amplifier going in through that capacitor,
that purplish brownish thing. There's a T connector here, and another cable is going out
the yellow cable and into channel one of the oscilloscope, channel one being the one that
displays in yellow. Now, what's at the other end of this? Well, at the other end of this,
there is a red wire coming out of that output point. That is, it's connected directly to the
collector of the transistor and also to the bottom of the load resistor. The top of the load
resistor is connected to my 10 volt power supply, which is connected to this yellow thing. And I
have adjusted the voltage. So it's 10 volts. That red wire goes out and it goes into this connector
whose green cable takes it into channel two of the oscilloscope, the green channel. And in
addition, this connector takes it into the voltmeter, which is now reading almost zero. It's
reading a few millivolts perhaps. Now I'm going to turn this circuit on.
And what do we see? Well, take a look on the voltmeter. First of all,
the voltmeter is a DC voltmeter. It's reading about 5.9 volts, 6 volts, something like that.
I didn't quite hit the biasing right. I would rather it be at 5 volts. So the right in the middle
of that load line, but we're a little closer to 6 volts. That's okay. Doesn't matter. Not crucial.
Although it does mean we will have a little bit less dynamic range in our amplifier,
a little less range of input. So it's running at about, about 6 volts almost,
at that dense called the quiescent point or the operating point. That's where the amplifier
that's where the amplifier sits when there's no input. Now there is input right now, but this is a
DC voltmeter. So it's not noticing that fluctuation associated with that input. So there's our
operating point. And then we look on the oscilloscope and you can see that best on the big screen.
And you can see that there is an output voltage. And let's just take a little look at that output
voltage. You say, might say, well, the output voltage isn't nearly as big as the input voltage,
but that's not the case. Take a look. The output voltage is at 5 volts per division. That means
one of these divisions is about 5 volts. So the output voltage is swinging up about 2.5 volts.
And then down about, well, maybe a little less than that is the zero point of it is maybe somewhere
along here. So maybe it's swinging up about 2 volts and down about 2 volts. Now you'll notice
something else interesting. These little marks here show where the zero level is a voltage,
and I can adjust those with a knob where they appear on the oscilloscope. And you'll notice for
the input voltage, which is a sine wave swinging up and down above and below zero, that is right
in the middle of the sine wave. But you'll notice for the output, it's not. It's the output's way
above that by about 5 volts. Lo and behold, 5 volts. There's our 5 to 6 volt operating point
voltage at the output of the amplifier. So we have, we see the operating point on here too. We
see this fluctuation by roughly 2 volts. So we got an output amplitude of roughly 2 volts. We've
got an input scale at 200 millivolts per division. So what are we doing? We're going from here up
maybe, I don't know, half a division maybe. So that's about 100 millivolts. So we've got 100
millivolts and 2 volts. Now what do you have to multiply 100 millivolts? That's a tenth of a
volt by, to get 2 volts. Well, you've got to multiply it by, let's see, if you multiply it 100
millivolts or a tenth of a volt by 10, I'd get 1 volt. So I've got to multiply it by 20 to get 2
volts. So this amplifier has a gain of about 20. This waveform is actually 20 times bigger than
this one. And if I put them on the same scale on the oscilloscope, the green one would be way off
scale. So we have an amplifier. It is amplifying and it's producing a gain of about 20. And further
more, if you look carefully, you can see that where the input is up, the output is down. So
they're out of phase. So that's actually a gain of minus 20. Now let's see what happens if we turn
up the input voltage. So I'm going to adjust the level of the input voltage by 10 millivolts on a
step. I'm going to raise it up, raise it up, and you can see as I do that that the output voltage
goes up and up and up and up and up and up and up and the input keeps going up and oh,
look what's happening. The output voltage is beginning to be no longer a sine wave. It's
beginning to flatten out at the top. Now that's the highest voltage we can have. That corresponds
to the point called cutoff on that load line analysis. What's happening here is we've reached
the maximum possible voltage that can be produced in that circuit. The transistor doesn't really make
the voltage or the power. It just controls the power coming from the battery and it's a 10 volt
battery or 10 volt power supply and so we can't go anymore. And so that waveform is distorted.
This is no longer a high fidelity amplifier. And if we go up higher, you can see that distortion
worse and worse and it's beginning to distort at the bottom now too because we're running into
saturation as well. Because my operating point was 6 volts, it didn't happen quite symmetrically.
If it had been 5 volts, we would have hit saturation and cutoff at almost the same point.
So there is a bad situation. Now why is it bad? Let me have you hear why it's bad. So let's bring
it back down to about 100 millivolts where we started. And let me just do one other thing.
This little amplifier I built is not a power amplifier. It's not good enough to drive a loud
speaker itself. So I have connected here a loud speaker and I'm coupling into it through a capacitor.
It's coming out this red table to an amplified loud speaker. It's got its own amplifier. But we
want to hear what this little amplifier is doing and that's what we'll hear. So I think I probably
want to go over here so you can hear the sound coming from that loud speaker and it sounds pretty
good. Nice steady tone. Now I'm going to turn up the gain on that input. Now I think I'll just
hold this right near my microphone so you can hear it. And up we go. Bigger and bigger. It just
gets louder and louder but still sounds pretty good. But just about the point.
Just about the point where you could see visibly the distortion on the trace from the oscilloscope,
you also heard that raucous sound. That's because we no longer had a pure sine wave. In fact,
if you mathematically analyzed that, we would see that that had to be a mix of frequencies and
there's kind of a dissonance there that makes it sound really lousy. So that is the limitations of
an amplifier as imposed by that load line. We can't push the input too far or the output will go so
far that we swing between saturation and cutoff and then the output distorts. And so we're going to
look at a better biased amplifier. And so here's a picture of a slightly better biasing scheme and
what you'll notice about this scheme is there's one more resistor and it's in the emitter lead
and it's a rather small resistor. It's only 50 ohms. What's that one for? Well that resistor does a
number of things. First of all, it protects the transistor against what's called thermal runaway,
the transistor getting hot, more electrons are liberated and holes, more power is dissipated,
it gets hotter and thermal runaway can occur and destroy the transistor. If that starts to happen,
the voltage drop builds up across that 50 ohm resistor and helps prevent that. That's one
possible purpose for that. There is a little bit less distortion because of this. There's a little
bit of feedback involved. We'll talk about that later. But probably the most important reason for
putting this extra resistor is when you buy a bunch of transistors, their beta is not, their
current gain is not really very well fixed. It might be 50 for one of them and 150 for another
one from the same bin, the same type. What putting this load resistor, this emitter resistor here
does is to give you a fixed gain that is independent approximately of the transistor's own characteristics
and in fact that gain becomes the resistance of the load, in this case a thousand ohms,
over the resistance of that emitter resistor 50 ohms and if you take a thousand over 50 you get
20. And in fact, this is the circuit I built here. It has that extra resistor and that extra
resistor is giving us a gain of only 20 instead of 150 that we calculated before. By the way,
if we put a, if we wanted a little more gain we could put a capacitor across that 50 ohm resistor.
The 50 ohm resistor would still do its job as far as direct current is concerned,
but the capacitor would act as a lower quote resistance to AC and we could increase the gain
that way and that's a common way to increase the gain, but I didn't bother to do that on this
particular circuit. So there's our amplifier with better biasing and I'm going to simply add an
input and couple it in through a capacitor and then I have a complete common emitter amplifier
and we'll end by looking at what the output of circuit lab looks like for this common emitter
amplifier and there are the input and output voltages and if you look at the input and output
voltage swings and do the calculation, you will find that this amplifier has a gain of just about
20 actually minus 20 again because when the amplifier is up, the input is up, the output is down.
Okay, well that is a real audio amplifier. One stage will take that and combine it with other
circuits to make a complete audio amplifier system. In the meantime, if you'd like to design and build
your own audio amplifier with your simulation package, you can do that and that's what the
project is for this lecture.
So now we've had our first look at transistor amplifiers and it's your job in this project
to build one. So I'd like you to simulate a common emitter amplifier like the ones I covered in the
lecture but with a few twists. I'd like you to use a 2N2222 transistor although that's not really
critical and you can use the generic transistors available in the simulators if you'd like.
I'd like you to take the power supply voltage up to 15 volts from the 10 volts we were using.
I'd like you to develop an amplifier whose gain is minus 10 and you're going to need trial and error
to come up with the bias resistors so that the operating point will be within about half a volt
of half of the power supply voltage that is within half a volt of 7.5 volts. Verify the gain that
has the gain of 10, verify the operating point and then determine the input voltage range for which
you can't see distortion in the output. Okay, so let's take a look. We'll start this time with
due circuits. So here I have my due circuits version of this amplifier, the 15 volt supply up here,
the load resistance of a kilo ohm, the RE of 100 ohms because the gain is supposed to be our load
over RE so that's the gain of 10. I'm going to pick voltage, pick levels for the resistances that
look sort of like what you saw in the lecture. I'm coupling in with a coupling capacitor. I'm going to
come in with a 1 kilohertz AC sine wave at 50 millivolts, 0.05 volts. Due circuits has an oscilloscope
so I've got the oscilloscope connected. I have chosen these resistors so that I indeed get the
right biasing and let's take a look now. So we're going to run the simulation. We're running as a
time-dependent simulation, time-domain analysis. And there it is. The input voltage is tiny,
almost hardly any variation on this scale. The output voltage is varying at around seven volts
or a little bit above somewhere around seven and a half volts which is exactly what we want. That's
half the power supply voltage so we got this output swinging. Remember that the common emitter
amplifier boosts the output swing up by the operating point so it swings about the operating
point not zero. If we'd like to look at this more professionally we can go to the oscilloscope. So
let's go to the oscilloscope because that's kind of a neat way to look at things in due circuits.
So here's the oscilloscope. Now once I've run the simulation if the oscilloscope's in there it's got
the result but I can double click the oscilloscope to open it up and here it is. And what I'm seeing
is in the red channel that is my actual signal. So I'm going to take that red channel and put it
up at the top. That's my input signal. And the input, let's take a look to make sure. I'm going
to close that. The channel one is the output and channel two is the input. I had it backwards.
I can't tell by looking at the size of them. So what did I say? Channel one is the output,
the red and channel two is the input and they look totally reversed. But that's because I'm
looking on different scales. Remember the oscilloscope, you've often seen me adjusting knobs on the
oscilloscope to adjust how big the display appears. How many volts per division. So I'm going to bring
this down to one volt per division. That puts the channel one output off the screen a bit so let
me bring it down. So there it is. So that's the output now on channel one, the red curve. And here's
the input on channel two and I'm just going to take that down to one volt per division. It probably
would have made more sense to put the input on one and the output on two. There's what it looked
like in our graph. Almost no variation at the input. But the nice thing about the oscilloscope
is I can compare the two by bringing them up. That's one volt per division. I'm going to bring the
channel two to point one volts per division, a tenth of a volt per division. And now if I bring
these two close together, you can see that they are almost exactly the same amplitude on the screen.
But the input setting is for a tenth of a volt per division. It takes only a tenth of a volt
to displace things this much, whereas it takes a full volt to do it here. The fact that these
two curves are the same height then tells us we've got a gain of 10. Whoops, we've got a gain of minus
10, as you can see they're out of phase, where the input is up, the output is down, and vice versa.
So there's a quick analysis that verifies the gain. We verify the operating point with the graph
that showed us that the output was swinging about 7.5 volts. And now finally, let's go over to
Circuit Lab and see what we can do about the distortion. So here's lecture eight,
common emitter amplifier now in Circuit Lab. Looks pretty similar. We've got a 15 volt source. I
use the just generic DC power source instead of the battery. I could even just use a label that said
plus 15 volts and we would have it. Sine wave, same input amplitude of about 0.05 volts, 50
millivolts. We're good to go. We will simulate. Run the time domain simulation. And we got the
same thing. And I've used the fact that Circuit Lab lets you put two different graphs if you would
like. It lets you put two different voltages on two different graphs. It's default is to plot them
on the same graph. And that's when we would have seen a very small input and a very big output.
But here I've plotted them and you can see that the variation up here in the output is between
about 8.2 volts and 7.2 volts. That's a variation of a full volt. Whereas down here at the input,
I'm going up to about 50 millivolts and down to about minus 50 millivolts. That's 100 millivolts
variation or a tenth of a volt. So again, I have a gain of 10. Again, they're out of phase. And again,
we see the gain is minus 10. And just to wrap up, let's take this input voltage and change it to
something bigger. So instead of 0.05 volts, I'm going to change it all the way up to say 0.5 volts
and see what happens. So at 0.5 volts, I'll run the simulation. That's 10 times as much input.
And they still look pretty good. So let's go one step higher.
Hide that and bring this voltage up even a little more. It's not 0.5 volts. Let's bring it up to one
volt and run the simulation. And now you can see we've clearly reached saturation and cut off. At
both ends, we're flattened out. So somewhere between half a volt and a volt at the input is going to
cause distortion. I think I saw visible distortion for the first time in this circuit when I reached
about 0.8 volts. And here we've gone a couple tenths of a volt beyond that. Clearly the output
is distorted. And this would sound awful if you were using this as an audio amplifier.
