Welcome back. In the previous two lectures you got an earful of audio amplifiers, transistor
amplifiers that are designed specifically to amplify in the range of audio frequencies.
Today I want to go a little bit more general and I want to look more theoretically at what
we would really like to have in an amplifier and we're going to open up to a world of wonderful
little amplifiers that can do almost anything for us in the world of analog electronics.
Before I get there, let me point out that audio is not the only thing we want to amplify.
For example, you go into your doctor and you're given an EKG, the doctor or the nurse puts
electrodes all over your body. Those electrodes are measuring tiny voltages, very small millivolt
voltages produced by your heart muscle and available at your skin. Those voltages have
to be amplified so they can be recorded, displayed, whatever. Maybe you have an electronic weather
station at home, it's got a temperature sensor in it, it's got a barometric pressure sensor,
it's got various sensors. They produce typically very low level voltages in order to display
them to memorize the maximum and minimum temperature, whatever else your instrument does, you need
to amplify those voltages. At Middlebury College, we've got a new 143 kilowatt array
of solar trackers. My students and I are studying them to see how efficient they are and we
have a special instrument that measures the intensity of sunlight, it's called a pyronometer,
it has in it a little sensor that produces just a few millivolts. In fact, in bright,
direct sunlight, it produces only 10 millivolts, one one-hundredth of a volt and that needs
to be amplified. And so we need amplifiers that aren't just audio amplifiers. And so
in this lecture, we're going to look more at what we would really like to have in an
amplifier and then we're going to see how remarkably close for how remarkably little
money we can come to that ideal amplifier. So let me begin by suggesting what we would
like to have in an amplifier. Well, what an amplifier does is to amplify. So we'd like
it to have gain. And we'd probably like it to have pretty high gain. Remember we built
an audio amplifier with a gain of only 20, but we put some capacitors, got the gain up
to 170, so we want kind of high gain. Either that or we want a gain that we can control.
I want an amplifier with a gain of 30, I want to be able to control it and make sure the
gain is 30. So I'm going to tell you something remarkable that you won't really believe fully
until we've gone through the next couple of lectures. The ideal gain we would like to
have is infinite. What? Yup, infinite. And we're going to temper that gain and make it
whatever we want with a magic called negative feedback. But that comes in a few lectures.
So take my word for it, we would like the ideal amplifier to have infinite gain. We're
not going to achieve that, but maybe we can get a gain of a million or 10 million or 100,000
or maybe a thousand anyway. We want a big gain because we can get the amplifier to give
us any gain we want smaller than that. So maybe that's a little bit surprising to hear,
but that's what we want infinite gain or a very high gain. We would also like the amplifier
to have low output resistance. Now what do I mean by that? An amplifier is basically like
a battery in the sense that it's a source of voltage. And remember, a battery has an
internal resistance, and if you put too low a load resistance across the battery, you
draw so much current that the battery terminal voltage drops below what it's supposed to
be. We had a 6 volt battery, we put a light bulb across it, we only got 5 volts at the
terminals. We don't want that to happen with an amplifier. An amplifier, like a battery,
like any other source of voltage, has an internal resistance. In the case of an amplifier, it's
called the output resistance because it's the resistance that you would see looking into
the amplifier from its output. And if the output resistance is low, then the amplifier can deliver
a lot of current. It means it can deliver a lot of power. Or, and I say this carefully,
it can not only source current, deliver current coming out, it can sink current coming in
because typically our amplifier's output voltages swing positive and negative, and so we think
of them as sourcing current, pushing current out, or sinking current, pulling current in.
And if it's got a low output resistance, it can sink or source lots of current. Ideally,
that output resistance should be of all things zero. It isn't, but the lower it is, the better
the amplifier, meaning the more current and therefore the more power the amplifier can
deliver. And we would like something else. We would like high input resistance because
an amplifier is a little bit like a voltmeter. It senses an input voltage and then does something
to it. In the case of an amplifier, amplifies it. And we would like to make sure that the
voltage at the input of the amplifier, when the amplifier is connected, is in fact the
voltage you want to do something to. And if the amplifier has too low an input resistance,
too low a resistance between its input and ground, it will draw lots of current from
the source whose voltage you're trying to measure, and that may alter the voltage you
get from that source. So we want high gain, ideally infinite, low output resistance, ideally
zero, and high input resistance to draw minimum current from the external source that we're
connecting to the input. And ideally that should be infinite. So if I tried to conceptualize
an amplifier, here's kind of a conceptual view of an amplifier, that big triangle represents
not a transistor or other single component, it represents a whole circuit that has been
designed to be an amplifier. So this is a conceptual view. This isn't really what's inside an amplifier.
On the left we see the input to the amplifier. And the input, there's not really a resistor
connected from the input to ground, there's all kinds of circuitry, but it presents an
effective resistance at the input, and that's the input resistance. Then we have a controlled
voltage source. I'm going to use the letter A to stand for the gain. So whatever the input
voltage is, this controlled voltage source makes a voltage equal to A times V in. That's
the gain, the amplification. Now I show these completely disconnected. That can't be, what
I'm showing here conceptually stands for a whole bunch of circuitry that involves a
lot of transistors mostly and other components, like the amplifiers we designed in the last
lecture, that took an input voltage and produced a bigger output voltage and had some gain
factor. But conceptually we look at it this way, and then between the controlled voltage
source and the output itself is that output resistance. So there is a conceptual view
of the insides of an amplifier. Again, not what's really inside, but conceptually what's
inside. In comes the input, the input controls the output, the output produces a voltage which
is A times the input voltage, where A is that gain and sends out current if you ask for
current, but it has to go through that output resistance. Now what would the ideal amplifier
look like? Well, I suggest it already. What the ideal amplifier looks like, the resistance
at the input is infinite. It's as if the input were not connected to anything. Now that
can't be, but we can get pretty close. And then we have this controlled voltage source
with a gain of A and A ought to be infinite, and then we ought to have zero output resistance.
So that is conceptually what a real amplifier or an ideal amplifier ought to look like, and
a real amplifier approximates that goal of an ideal one to the extent that the input
resistance is very high, the output resistance is very low, and the gain is very large, much,
much, much larger than one. Now there's something else we want in an amplifier. We would like
an amplifier to have a high gain, low output resistance, high input resistance, and typically
we would want it to have a wide frequency response and a flat frequency response. What
I mean by that is for the range of frequencies we're interested in amplifying, we would
like it not to amplify one frequency more than another. If it did, suppose it amplified
the range of 400 to 500 hertz more than other ranges, then every time we played A above
middle C at 440 hertz, that note would sound louder in the output of the amplifier than
it was supposed to, than it did in the music that we were inputting. That's why we want
a flat frequency response. And so I've shown a curve here that might be the typical frequency
response for an audio amplifier. Our ears can hear from about 20 hertz, 20 cycles per
second, up to, if you're not too elderly, about 20,000 cycles per second, you lose
high frequencies as you age. But 20 hertz to 20 kilohertz is about the audible frequency
range. If you're a bat, you got to hear higher. You need a different audio amplifier. But
an audio amplifier ought to be flat over that frequency range. And so the amplifiers we've
been talking about with those capacitors in them and stuff are designed to cover that
range fairly well. The amplifiers we're going to be dealing with in the rest of the analog
part of this course are amplifiers we might use in instruments, like measuring the output
of my sunlight measuring instrument or the, and the amplifiers in an EKG machine or something
like that. And they typically need to go from DC. They need to be able to take a millivolt
input at DC. And if the amplifier has a gain of a thousand, they need to be able to produce
from that millivolt, that thousands of a volt, an output of one volt. So we'd like the ideal
amplifier to go from DC to frequencies that are very high. How high? It depends on the
instrument. That oscilloscope I've been using in this course, it can go from DC. It has
lots of amplifiers in it. And those amplifiers can take frequencies from DC. They can amplify
a steady level. You saw that when I connected a six volt battery to it. And they can actually
go up to the gigahertz range, billions of cycles per second in that oscilloscope. That's
one of the things that makes it a very high end oscilloscope. So we'd like a wide frequency
response. And let's look at the issues that come up if we want a wide frequency response.
Well here is our two stage, common emitter, preamplifier, coupled with the input coming
in through a capacitor, and the stage one output going to the stage two input through
a capacitor. This one won't cut it. It's no good for DC. Capacitors are open circuits
to DC. They only respond to variations in voltage. So if we want an amplifier that goes
all the way down to direct current, this one isn't going to do it. And we've got to do
something better to make a DC amplifier. So when you hear someone say DC amplifier, it
doesn't just amplify DC, but it will amplify DC as well as signals that are varying at
a range of other frequencies. You plug a battery, a 1.5 volt battery or something into your
audio amplifier. Well don't do it because you might damage it. But plug a small millivolt
level signal into your audio amplifier and it's not going to come out the other end because
there's capacitors in there and the capacitors block the DC. So the amplifiers we've seen
so far are just not going to cut it as DC amplifiers. So here's what we're going to
do instead. We're going to build a circuit called a different amplifier. And this different
amplifier is going to have two inputs. And I've drawn one side of the different amplifier
here. It's got an NPN transistor. It's got a resistor from a power supply voltage to
the collector. It's got another resistor in the emitter lead. And then I'm going to add
to this an identical piece, symmetrically exactly the same transistor, same resistor,
and a common resistor in the two emitters. Now I'm not going to go through the complicated
mathematics of this but I'm going to try to motivate you to understand what this circuit
does. And by the way, you might have to have a little variable resistance in there to compensate
for the slight differences in the transistors. But I'm going to assume those two resistors
are exactly identical and the transistors are exactly identical. And let's ask what happens.
We have several inputs here. We have an input one on the left and an input two on the right.
And we're going to take the output as the voltage between the two collectors. Between
the two collectors. And let's figure out what happens. So suppose V1 and V2 are equal.
I don't care what they are. Within limits they better not exceed the power supply voltage
or the negative supply voltage. But suppose they're equal. Well, if they're equal, then
equal currents flow through those two collector resistors. The voltage drops across those
two collector resistors are the same. And so no matter what those two input voltages
are, as long as they're equal, the collector voltages of the two transistors are the same.
And therefore V out on the left, V out minus I'll call it, and V out on the right, V out
plus I'll call it, are in fact the same. And therefore the output voltage, which I'm
going to define as the voltage between those two collectors, taking it to be positive if
it's more positive on the right and negative if it's more negative on the right, more positive
on the left, that will be zero. So this is in some sense finding the fact that the two
input voltages are the same and it's giving us zero output if they are the same. It's
a different amplifier. Now what if V1 is greater than V2 and therefore V2 is less than V1?
Well if V1 is greater than V2, we're going to get a bigger base current coming in on
the left. And that means we're going to get a bigger collector current on the left than
we have on the right. And since V, the drop across the resistor, is I times the resistance,
we're going to have a bigger drop across the left hand resistor. And therefore the voltage
at the minus out, the voltage at the collector of the left hand transistor is going to be
lower because there's a bigger current flowing. And therefore there's more of a voltage drop
across that left hand resistor and the voltage at the bottom end of it at the collector of
the transistor is lower than on the right hand transistor. And therefore V out minus
is less than V out plus. And V out is not equal to zero. In fact it's bigger than zero because
the voltage on the right is bigger than the voltage on the left. And you can easily convince
yourself that the output voltage is in fact proportional to V1 minus V2. So that's the
output voltage, V1 minus V2. In this case we have V2 less than V1 and we get an output
voltage which by our definition is positive. So this is a different amplifier. The output
taken across those two terminals is in principle proportional to, and the resistors determine
the proportionality, the difference of those two voltages. It doesn't care what their actual
values are. I can have two volts at one and one volt at two and I'll get the same output
as if I have three volts at one and two volts at two because all it depends on is the difference.
Now that's ideal. Ideally that's what happens. It's more complicated than that but in principle
a difference amplifier just gives you an output proportional to the difference between its
two inputs. If you wanted to make a DC amplifier you could do it like this. You could ground
one of the inputs. That's silly. Why are we wasting that whole transistor? And they just
go in through the other one and the other input will then tell us the out being proportional
to the difference between V in and zero, between V in and ground and we'll get an output proportional
to the input and that will be true even if there's DC because there's no capacitors involved
in coupling this. You might say that's sort of a waste of that right hand transistor but
it isn't. What happens is, several things can happen. If the circuit heats up, the transistor
characteristics change a little bit but if we have a different amplifier both transistors
change the same way and to a first approximation the output is not affected. So this is actually
a nice circuit for precision amplifiers that measure DC voltages carefully.
Okay. Well, that's great. We know how to make this difference amplifier. Now we're going
to take this different amplifier and use it as the input stage of what's called an operational
amplifier or op amp and the next few lectures are going to be out op amps and they're wonderful
devices. I have to tell you I'm very enthusiastic about op amps so you hope you'll share some
of my enthusiasm. The concept of an op amp is a little compact amplifier, differential
amplifier or a difference amplifier. It's got two inputs. It's got an output. It's got
a high gain. It's got a low output resistance. It's got a high input resistance and it's
got a broad frequency response and it can do DC. All those things in a little tiny package
cheap and that's we're going to see how we build that. That's the op amp concept. It's
called operational amplifier because they were originally designed to do mathematical
operations and we'll see how some of that works. That function is fairly much obsolete.
We used to actually build analog computers out of them but they are still useful for
a great many applications in analog electronics. So let me begin by talking about some operational
amplifiers. Here's a very common operational amplifier. It's actually one that dates back
to the 1970s. It's a single integrated circuit. I'll show you one in a minute built on a
single chip and it's got a dozen or so transistors and a few resistors and some other things
in it and we're not going to go through the details of its circuit. But I want to point
out roughly what it has. At the left you see circled a part of the circuit containing a
number of transistors. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven. The upper two transistors
are the important ones. You can recognize that those are essentially in this difference
amplifier configuration so we have an inverting input and a non-inverting input, a plus input
and a minus input as they're called. You'll see often in integrated circuits that there
are transistors used in place of resistors. It's cheap and easy to make transistors on
integrated circuits. It's easy to get more sophisticated control than with a resistor
and so that's why you see a lot more transistors and I'm not going to go through what all of
them do. But that left hand block is basically the input stage. Then down at the lower right
there is a stage that provides the voltage gain, voltage amplification and then on the
right you should recognize a complementary symmetry output stage with a PNP transistor
and an NPN transistor. So the 741 operational amplifier, again one that's been around since
the 1970s or so, does it all for us and we'll be using, I'll actually be using 741s because
they're very easy to work with. If you work in circuit lab, for example, you'll find that
their default operational amplifier is something called the TL081 and its circuit looks a little
different but quite similar. It actually has junction field effect transistors at the input
to make its input resistance even higher. So we work with that one also. Whichever circuit
we have, we're going to ignore individual transistors from now on. You'll be glad to
know we're not going to deal with all the details. We're going to shrink that whole
thing down into a triangular structure and the triangle represents all that circuitry
that's inside. So there is what an operational amplifier looks like sort of symbolically.
Let me just tell you a little bit more about the op amp before I show you a few of them.
So meet the op amp. The op amp has two power supply connections, one to a positive power
supply typically plus 15 volts, one to a negative power supply typically minus 15 volts but
it could be something different. It has a non-inverting input called the plus input.
It has an inverting input called the minus input and it has an output and here's what
it does. Its output is its gain times V plus minus V minus. It's a difference amplifier.
It takes the difference between V plus and V minus and it amplifies it by some factor
A which better be big. That's what an operational amplifier does. The ideal op amp has a very
big A and V out is A V plus minus V minus. So here's sort of an anatomy of that equation
because we're going to use it not a ton of times actually, a few times so that we get
the hang of op amps and then we won't need it anymore. V out, the voltage at the output
is the difference between the voltage at the non-inverting input, the voltage at the inverting
input multiplied by the amplifier gain. So that's our picture of the ideal op amp. It's
just this triangular symbol. I should warn you that I will often draw that symbol and
other people who do circuits will often draw that symbol without the power supply connections
shown. They're implied and in your circuit simulators you can get op amps that either
have explicit power supplies that you have to connect a voltage source or they're assumed.
In the real world they can't be assumed you really have to connect power to an op amp.
One of the first problems my students have when they work with op amps sometimes they
forget to connect the power because the circuit doesn't show it but it's got to be there.
So often we won't show those two power connections coming off the top and the bottom. We'll just
show the plus and minus input and the output and watch out. Sometimes we'll put the minus
input on the top. I will usually but not always do that and sometimes the minus input will
be on the bottom and some of your circuit simulators will come up with the minus input
on the bottom and some on the top and you just have to watch out for it. So there's
the ideal op amp. And I have to say something more about this. This output will be equal
to A times the difference of the inputs only if that value is less than about the supply
voltage. You can't possibly get more than 15 volts positive out of an amplifier with
a positive 15 volt supply and you can't get more than 15 volts negative out of an amplifier
with a negative 15 volt supply. And for some amplifiers you can actually swing all the
way up to those limits. For others like the 741 you can probably get up to a maximum of
about 12 volts out and minus 12 volts. So somewhere in between there and beyond that
the amplifier is said to be saturated and it's sitting at its maximum possible voltage
which is either at or close to the power supply voltage.
Okay well let's look at some op amps that are out there in the real world. First I'll
give you a little sense of the specifications available and then we're going to actually
look at some real op amps. So I've got a list here of five op amps, some of which you'll
be using if you're doing the projects, some of which you may not use. The TL081 which
I mentioned is circuit labs default, that's in the comments column there, has a typical
gain of around 200,000. Remember I said we wanted a big gain, a lot bigger than one.
Well 200,000 is a lot bigger than one. We'd like a big input resistance and the input
resistance for this amplifier because it's got field effect transistors at the input
is about 10 to the 12 ohms, a terra ohm, that is huge. It can supply a maximum of about
40 milliamps at the output. That's another way of telling you that it has a modest output
resistance and it's got a bandwidth of about 3 megahertz which means it can amplify from
DC to up to about 3 million cycles per second and it costs about 22 cents if you buy them
in quantity. Due circuits if you're using due circuits for your simulations has a sort
of generic op amp although you can specify a particular op amp and it will give the real
specs for that but if you just bring up their generic op amp it's got a gain of a million
and that's all we're told about it. A very common op amp and the default in the book
The Art of Electronics by Horowitz and Hill which is on the reading list for this course
That is a 411 op amp. It has a gain of typically 200,000. They just specify the minimum. They
can go up higher than that because an infinite gain would be fine so 200,000 might be 2 million.
Turns out not to matter a bit. Again an input of about a terra ohm, 10 to the 12 ohms it
can think about a source or think about 20 milliamps and goes up to 4 megahertz and costs
about 70 cents. These costs are pretty variable. This old workhorse getting obsolete but still
great. The 741 again of 200,000 or more. Typically the input resistance is 2 mega ohms. It's
a lot lower because it has bipolar junction transistors. It can source or think 25 milliamps
and goes up to about a megahertz and they cost a few tens of cents also. Finally, one
other one I want to show you because I'll be using it in some circuits is a 165. It has
a gain of only about 10,000 and an input resistance pretty low of only about half a mega ohm, 500,000
ohms but it can source or think 2 amps. It's a power op amp. Costs about a dollar and we'll
be using those in some neat circuits. I'll be showing you in a couple of lectures. So
those are some op amp specifications. Let's look at a couple of op amps or actually a
few more. So I have some op amps over here. There's a 741 down there. It just looks like
a little square thing with eight pins. They all look pretty much the same. There's not
much to see here, but that happens to be a 741 op amp and it's actually connected in
a circuit that I'm going to demonstrate in a minute. Up here is a 747. It's really just
two 741 op amps on the same package, on the same integrated circuit. So that's a 747.
Up here is the 411 that I just mentioned which is almost identical to the 741. It's
got a little broader frequency range but it has a much higher input resistance and there
are cases where we want to use that. And finally here's the 759 power op amp. It's even got
a heat sink and we've attached a wire to that heat sink. It's one of the contacts for the
op amp because it has that heat sink because it can get pretty hot because it can dissipate
several watts of power. So those are some what op amps look like. They're not very exciting.
It's much more exciting to see that triangle with the plus input and the minus input and
the output if you're into electronics. That really excites your imagination.
Well I've mentioned that these op amps ought to have infinite gain and I want to say a
little bit more about that. What possible good could that be? Well in the next few lectures
we'll see as I said how to use the magic of negative feedback to tame that gain to make
the op amp have any gain you want or indeed to do various other things. But you can even
do something with the infinite gain and here's why. Because any of these op amps, even the
ones with the smallest gains, even the smallest input voltage and the smallest voltages we
can get down to very realistically without them being swamped by noise or in the millivolt
range. So if you have a gain of 200,000 and you put in a millivolt, a millivolt, a thousandths
of a volt times 200,000 is going to try to give you 200 volts out and you just can't
do that because you've got plus minus 15 volt power supplies. So what happens in practice
for real op amps, if you take a real op amp, connect the power to it and either and don't
connect anything to the inputs or connect something to the inputs but don't do this
negative feedback magic. I guarantee you the output will either be at plus limit typically
around plus 15 volts maybe plus 12 or something like that or minus limit. It will be saturated
either way. And that in itself can actually be useful. There is no way you can get the
input voltage between those two so small unless you use the magic of negative feedback
to get down within the range between the maximum and minimum voltages. So an op amp left to
its own devices goes to one of those two limits. By the way, I have to caution you, the op
amps in your circuit simulators are a little more perfect than real op amps and sometimes
they will converge on zero, which is something that a real op amp won't do. So I have one
example of this to show you. And this is the op amp as what's called a comparator. It simply
compares the two voltages and asks which one is bigger and it only gives you information
about that. So here, imagine I have an op amp with a gain of a million. And so the output
is always going to be near plus the supply voltage or minus the supply voltage. If the
plus is bigger, it's going to try to go, let's see, we got a gain of a million. Let's say
there's a whatever's at the input, we're going to get try to get plus a lot of voltage, if
the plus is bigger, and we're going to try to get minus a lot of voltage, if the minus
is bigger. So we're going to either be at plus 15, if the plus is bigger, or plus or
minus 15, if the minus is bigger. That's why it's called a comparator. The only thing the
output knows about is which of the inputs is bigger. It doesn't tell you any more information
than that. Why would you want that? Well, here's an example. Maybe you want to test batteries
quickly. So here I have a circuit for an op amp, could be a 741, could be another one.
I've got it wired up. This time I'm showing the power supply connections, which I won't
always show. I'm going to connect a voltage, and I'm making this to test 1.5 volt batteries,
which is a common battery voltage. So I'm going to connect 1.4 volts to the minus input,
and I'm going to connect the battery I'm trying to test to the plus input. And at the output,
I've got a resistor and a couple LEDs, and they're back to back. So if the output is
positive, the green LED will be forward biased. Current will flow through it to ground. If
the output is negative, the red LED will be lit, and current will flow from ground up
through it and into the amplifier. So if V plus is greater than V minus, V out is positive,
limit around 15 volts. If V plus is less than V minus, V out is negative, and will light
the red LED if V minus is greater than V plus, and will light the other LED under the other
condition. And so in this case, with 1.4 volts at V minus, if V plus the battery voltage
is greater than 1.4 volts, we'll get plus 15 and we'll light the green LED, and if it's
the opposite, we'll get minus 15 and we'll light the red LED. Let's see how the thing
works. Okay, so here I have the circuit. I've got my function generator, which also can
produce DC voltages. It's set to produce 1.4 volts, and you can see the 1.4 volts on that
meter. Here's the circuit. There's the 741 op amp. There are the two LEDs. If I were more
sophisticated, I'd have it be off until I connected something, but as I said, these op
amps go to one limit or the other, and right now it just happens to be going to the negative
situation. Here I've got a little piece of wire, which is connected to ground. That's
the ground for my battery under test. And here's a battery I'm going to test. I'm going
to put the ground in contact with the ground. Here's the plus input of the op amp, and I'm
going to connect that to the battery. And it's green. That battery is good. That's all
I know about it. It's got a voltage of more than 1.4 volts. Here's another battery. Connect
it and the red stays lit. That one's got a voltage of less than 1.4 volts. That's all
I know. And finally, here's a third battery. Looks like that one is also good. So three
batteries tested with an op amp in so-called open loop configuration, no feedback. All it
can do is go to one output or the other, but that's useful in giving us a quick check on
the battery. And let's just see if it did its job correctly.
Okay, so here we have the battery that tested bad. And lo and behold, it measures in at
1.34 volts. That's below the 1.4 volts that we set kind of arbitrarily as our standard
for dividing between a good and a bad battery. So there we've seen an application of an op
amp with its almost infinite gain producing either plus about 15 volts at the output or
minus and only able to distinguish whether the inputs and outputs are which one is bigger
than the other. It's a comparator. It's actually a useful circuit. And now we want to move
on and see how we contain that infinite gain by making circuits that do whatever we want
them to do. But let me just wrap up by saying we've developed this concept of the operational
amplifier, a nearly ideal amplifier with huge gain, low output resistance, high input resistance,
cheap, available in a small, easy to use, complete package with all its transistors
in it, a wonderful device that we're going to have a lot more to do with. So that's all
for this lecture. But if you want to move on to the project, you can build yourself
a different samplifier. That's the last circuit you'll be building with individual discrete
transistors. And then you can move on to work with an op amp as a comparator. And from now
on, our analog circuits will all use op amps rather than individual transistors.
Okay, so we've seen some more sophisticated transistor amplifiers in this lecture. And
your job here is to simulate the two transistor difference amplifier that I showed in the lecture.
Use plus and minus 15 volt supplies and use 56 kilo ohms for all the resistors. And put
a voltmeter between those two output terminals and check to have it display its voltage.
And then I'd like you to find what's called the differential voltage gain, the output
versus the difference of the two inputs. You can attach voltage sources to both inputs,
the transistor bases, you can set them both initially to zero, and then run DC simulations
and record the output voltage shown on the meter, raise one input by 5 millivolts, drop
the other by 5, record it again, and continue until you've got a bunch of measurements and
do a graph. Okay, well on the big screen, I have the actual circuit as I did it in Circuit
Lab. I've got the two sources. Here it's 5 millivolts. Here it's minus 5 millivolts.
This particular simulation gave me about 2.5 volts for a difference of 10 millivolts. 5
millivolts minus a minus 5 millivolts is 10 millivolts. You can see that in the reading
on the meter. Rather than to go tediously through applying all those voltages, I'm simply
going to show you what happened after I did those results. So here are some results for
the difference voltage plotted down on the horizontal axis and the output voltage plotted
on the vertical axis, and they fall almost on a straight line. The greatest input voltage
difference is beginning to go off a little bit because, again, these transistors are
not perfectly ideal, and I may be approaching saturation or cutoff. But before that, we've
got a nice straight line, and the slope of that straight line is a measure of the gain.
I've got 50 millivolts, 11.5 volts there, and so the gain is about 230. That's a pretty
big gain, and that makes sense because I had 10 millivolts difference at the input and
about 2.5 volts at the output, so my 230 is about right for the gain of this circuit.
So there is the solution to the first part of this project. Here it is in due circuits
where I'm looking with their nice simulated digital multimeter, and you see the same results
there for the DC output voltage with the same input conditions. So project one solution
in due circuits, and the gain here is coming out 254. Again, none of these measurements
are perfectly accurate. Project two, we've got this plug-in smoke detector. It's got
a 4.5 volt backup battery. You get that with three 1.5 volt AA batteries in series. It's
got a built-in 15 volt power supply plus minus 15 that operate normally unless there's a
power failure and the battery has to take over, and you've got no other power sources
available. So I'd like you to design a low battery warning circuit that will light a
light emitting diode if the battery voltage drops below 4 volts, and the LED should draw
about 15 milliamps of current when it's lit. You don't need to actually build this one.
I just have you sketch the circuit, and you could use either an off-amp or a voltage
divider or a Zener diode, because you've just learned about off-amps, and you've learned
how to use them as comparators. So again, we're not going to wire this one, but let's take
a look at how you would design such a circuit. So think about that. I'll come back and give
you my solution anyway. So here's my solution. I've got an off-amp. It's connected as a comparator.
The battery is going into the non-inverting input, the plus input. The battery voltage
is not supposed to drop below 4 volts, or if it does, I'm supposed to get a warning.
So let's see how to make that happen. So I'm going to compare the battery voltage with
4 volts, but I don't have 4 volts. I've only got plus 15 or minus 15. So I've made a voltage
divider. I've used 11 kilo ohms in series with 4 kilo ohms for my voltage divider. That's
a total of 15 kilo ohms. Across the 4 kilo ohm resistor, I'm going to get 4 kilo ohms
divided by 15 kilo ohms times the 15 volts, and that's going to give me 4 volts. So I've
got 4 volts at the minus input, and if the battery voltage drops below that 4 volts,
then the minus input has a bigger voltage, and consequently the off-amp goes swinging
to its negative limit. And if you look at how the red LED is connected, the LED is connected
so that it will conduct when its bottom end, which is at 0 volts, is at a higher voltage
than its other end, and its other end is connected through the resistor to the off-amp output.
I've chosen a 1 kilo ohm resistor to give us that 15 milliamps we wanted through the
LED, and so when the off-amp output goes to minus 15, the diode conducts and it lights
up. When the off-amp output is at plus 15, which it is when the battery is in good shape,
then the LED is reverse biased and it's off. So there's a nice quick design for project
2, and you could have come up with different designs, you could have switched the way the
inputs worked and the way the LED went, and so on, several solutions to this particular
problem.
