Welcome to the first of two lectures on what I like to call the magic of feedback.
Now, you're familiar with the term feedback.
Give me some feedback.
How am I doing?
What's feedback?
Well, feedback in electronics and in lots of other areas is a change in a system that
follows as a result of some earlier change.
So something happens and as a result of that thing that happens, something else happens.
And there are two kinds of feedback.
There's negative feedback in which the additional change has the effect of diminishing the original
change.
Negative feedback is stabilizing.
If something goes one way, the feedback brings it back the other way.
And then there's positive feedback.
In positive feedback, the additional change that happened as a result of the first change
enhances the original change.
Positive feedback is destabilizing.
It can lead to runaway effects.
And I want to give you some examples of feedback from realms other than electronics before
we get into talking about electronic feedback and then we'll look at some really intriguing
demonstrations involving negative feedback in electronic circuits.
So let's look at, for example, grade feedback.
This is one you're familiar with if you've had kids in school or been through school yourself
or like me or our teacher.
So what happens?
Somebody gets a low grade and that affects their grade in the course they're taking.
And so what does that do?
Well, as we go around this loop here, sort of counterclockwise, that affects their motivation.
And so what do they do?
They study harder.
And so the next test gets a better grade and their class grade goes up.
So here's a feedback effect in which the low grade caused a secondary effect, motivation
studying more and getting a better test and then the class grade goes back up.
Negative feedback, the negative feedback, the secondary change that followed the first
change mitigates to some extent the first change.
It can't reverse it, it turns out, but it mitigates it.
So that's a common example of feedback, feedback associated with grades.
Let me give you another feedback that we worry about a lot in this age of climate change.
This is called ice albedo feedback.
You hear a lot about this in connection with the melting of ice in the Arctic.
So here I have in the top box Earth's temperature.
And suppose for some reason we're not going to specify what Earth's temperature goes up
a little bit.
Well if Earth's temperature goes up a little bit, then going around this loop counterclockwise,
the ice cover decreases because some ice melts.
Well when ice melts, especially ice that's floating on the oceans, the ice itself is
quite reflective of sunlight, but the ocean surface is quite dark and absorbs sunlight.
So what happens when ice melts is the reflectivity, it's also called the albedo, decreases.
And as a result there's a greater increase in the amount of solar energy absorbed and
that of course raises Earth's temperature.
So this is a destabilizing positive feedback and it's this destabilizing runaway nature
of this kind of feedback that gets us particularly worried about them.
So there's a feedback in sort of the psychology of students, a feedback in the climate system.
Let's look at a few more feedbacks.
Here's a feedback in your house.
You have a thermostat in your house.
I like to think of a thermostat as one of the simplest feedback devices.
And also one of the simplest devices that if I can use this word exhibits a little tiny
modicum of intelligence.
So what happens with a home thermostat?
Well suppose for some reason the temperature in your house decreases.
Somebody opens a window or it simply gets colder outside.
What happens?
The thermostat, which has a temperature sensor in it, and I'll show you one in just a moment,
the thermostat switches on, that turns on the furnace and the furnace produces heat and
the house temperature increases.
That's a negative feedback.
If the house temperature starts to go down, the thermostat kicks in, produces this negative
feedback loop that warms things up again.
Let me show you an example of a household thermostat.
I have one here.
This is an old fashioned household thermostat.
You may still have this kind in your house, but if you do, at least if it operates the
way this one does, you're not supposed to anymore.
Because what this thermostat has inside it is a small metal coil.
And that metal coil is made of two different metals that expand differently with temperature.
So the coil tightens or untightens, depending on whether the temperature is going up or
down.
And resting on that coil is a small glass tube containing two metal pieces, which are not
connected to each other, and a drop of liquid mercury, which is why these thermostats are
now no longer supposed to be used.
In fact, I know my recycling center will give me $5 if I turn in one of these.
So we're trying to get the mercury out of circulation.
Nevertheless, as the spring winds or unwinds, or I set the temperature to different values,
that drop of mercury can go the other way as the tube tilts, and it closes the switch,
and that's what turns on the furnace and causes the system to heat up.
And so the thermostat is wired in such a way that if the house temperature drops, the coil
turns in such a way that that switch, switched by that little drop of mercury, turns on and
turns on the furnace.
And then of course, as it gets too hot, the furnace turns off again.
The thermostat senses now it's too hot, and the thermostat turns the furnace off.
So there's another example.
Let me give you just a couple of other amusing examples.
Here at the upper left is a picture from my garden in Vermont.
In Vermont, we don't have a very long growing season, although it's gotten a lot longer
in the last few decades because of global warming.
But still, I want to grow lettuce in March.
So I have this cold frame I built.
And inside this cold frame, well, you can see some lettuce growing, but you can also
see that arrow.
And the arrow is pointing to a cylinder that's connected to the lid of the cold frame, and
the cylinder has a fluid in it that expands when it warms up.
So if it gets too hot inside that cold frame, which you don't want to have happen, lettuce
doesn't like it too hot, that cylinder expands, and it opens the lid of the cold frame, and
the cold frame cools down.
And if it gets too cold in the cold frame, that fluid contracts, and the cylinder pulls
the lid back down again.
So there's another example of a negative feedback system increasing the growing season.
And another negative feedback system that you use when you're driving is the cruise
control in your car.
The cruise control senses how fast the car is going.
You've set it to go 60 miles an hour.
If it senses it's going 61, it backs off on the throttle, drops down to 59, turns the
throttle back on, and so forth and so on.
So negative feedback is with us, it's common throughout much of the technological world,
and it's also common in the natural world.
So you get the idea of how feedback works.
Let's back off now and look a little more philosophically or a little more abstractly at feedback.
What do you need for a feedback system?
First you need a sensor that senses the quantity that we're dealing with.
In the grade feedback, that sensor is the brain.
In the ice albedo feedback, that sensor is the ice undergoing melting.
In the thermostat, that sensor is the temperature dependent switch.
And then you need a mechanism for acting back on the system to either mitigate or enhance
the change depending on whether it's negative or positive feedback.
In the grade feedback, that mechanism is motivation.
In the ice albedo feedback, that mechanism is the absorption of solar energy.
And in the thermostat, that mechanism is the production of heat by the furnace.
And I would argue that operational amplifiers, in fact, make wonderful facilitators for feedback
systems.
So in the rest of this lecture, I'm going to show you three examples where we use operational
amplifiers as to facilitate a feedback system.
They are not entirely electronic feedback.
They use the feedback loops in these things.
It's called a feedback loop, that thing that takes you from the effect back to the cause
and mitigates or enhances it.
The feedback loops in these are definitely not electronic.
And in the next lecture, we'll get to purely electronic feedback systems.
So I'm going to begin with some demonstrations of some of these, and they're rather crazy
funky demonstrations.
Let's move over to our demo table and take a look at the first one.
So here I have a crazy looking thing.
It's a voltmeter.
It says volts, less volts, more volts, less volts to the left, more volts to the right.
What does this thing consist of?
It consists of a single operational amplifier, a power op amp.
This one's a 759 that I showed you last time that can handle a lot of power.
It can put out a lot of current.
The op amp is connected, and I'm going to show you the connections in a little bit,
to this potentiometer.
I introduced the potentiometer in connection with the volume control in an audio amplifier,
but it's the same thing.
It's that variable voltage divider.
At the back, maybe if I turn it, you can see it a little better.
At the back, there's an electric motor, and it's a simple DC electric motor.
It runs on 12 volts plus or minus 12 volts, and if you put plus 12 volts, it turns one
way, and if you put minus 12 volts, it turns the other way, so it can go in either direction.
And the feedback loop consists of a connection between the shaft of the potentiometer that
sets how much voltage you're dividing and the output shaft of the motor.
So those two are connected, and that's the feedback.
And now I'm going to demonstrate the operation of this thing, and then we'll talk about
how it works.
So I'm going to turn it on, and you can see the needle starts to jiggle a little bit.
Now I have an input voltage to this system.
The system is a voltmeter, and I'm getting the input voltage by using another potentiometer,
the one that's built into my board here, and I've got plus 15 volts at one end of it and
minus 15 volts at the other.
So if I turn the knob, I can dial any voltage between minus 15 volts and plus 15 volts,
and that's what's going into the input of my voltmeter over there.
So let's turn the voltage down a little bit, and the needle follows.
It goes down.
Down it goes.
Down it goes.
You'll notice the needle's wiggling a lot.
We'll talk about that.
It's wiggling back and forth, not a lot, but a little bit.
Turn the voltage up.
Up goes the needle.
Turn it up a lot.
The needle goes up until it finds the right position to correspond to that input voltage.
And if I wanted to, I could have calibrated this thing, and I could have made a nice voltmeter
that was accurately calibrated.
Now you might think about this and say, well, you know, I could do more with this than just
make it be a voltmeter.
I could, for example, make that motor a really hefty one, and this could be not just turning
an indicator needle, but it could turn some heavy piece of machinery and follow exactly
what I do over here with this little knob.
So my puny hands turning this knob are making that big needle go back and forth, and that
needle could be, instead of a needle, it could be the bucket of a huge power shovel, or as
you'll see in a minute, it could be an artificial limb moving, it could be all kinds of things.
This is called a servo mechanism, servo meaning slave.
This system is a slave to this simple little knob here, and the way the slaving works is
by the magic of negative feedback, and the feedback is the connection between that potentiometer
and that motor.
Okay, so let's look at the circuit behind that servo voltmeter I just demonstrated.
So we start with a power op amp that 759 op amp can deliver currents up to hundreds
of milliamps at its output.
It delivers plus or minus 0, 15 volts, roughly maybe more like 12, but it delivers the kind
of voltage that motor wants, and remember the output of the op amp when there's no feedback
and there isn't any feedback yet, is always at one limit or the other.
So if it's at one limit, the motor goes clockwise, if it's at the other limit, the motor is going
to go counterclockwise, the motor, depending on the polarity of the voltage it gets.
The bottom end of the motor is at 0 volts, the top is at either plus or minus 15 volts,
and depending on which it is, it goes one way or the other.
So that's sort of the business end of the amplifier.
Now we have this potentiometer, and one end of it's connected to 15 volts, the other end
is connected to minus 15 volts, and that potentiometer is acting like a variable voltage divider.
So the voltage here swings anywhere between plus 15 or minus 15, depending on where that
sliding contact that is adjusted by turning the potentiometer shaft is, and that potentiometer
is connected back to the inverting input of the op amp, the negative input.
And the input voltage that I'm trying to measure with my voltmeter, the voltage I was getting
at by turning that little knob on my so-called breadboard, that's connected to the plus input.
So how does it work?
So suppose the voltage here, tapped off by the potentiometer, happens to be greater than
that input voltage.
Suppose that just happens to be the case.
So voltage at V in, voltage here, which is the same as the voltage at the minus input,
is bigger than the voltage at the plus input.
Well remember how an op amp works, V minus is greater than V in, an op amp produces an
output voltage, which is that huge amplification factor times V plus minus V minus, but V
plus is my input voltage, so I'm calling it V in.
And that in this case will be minus 15 volts, because remember, an op amp just goes to one
limit or the other unless it has really good negative feedback.
So that's going to go to minus 15 volts.
What's going to do?
That's going to turn the motor, in this case, counterclockwise, and there is the mechanical
link.
That's the feedback, the mechanical link between the motor and the potentiometer, and I've
got it set up so counterclockwise lowers the sliding contact and clockwise raises it.
So in this case, the motor turns counterclockwise and the sliding contact goes down.
That moves this voltage lower.
It moves it more toward minus 15 volts.
So even though that voltage was greater than the input voltage, now it's less.
And so we have a bigger voltage on the positive input and consequently we get an output voltage
which is positive and the motor turns the other way.
And what's going to keep happening in this relatively primitive circuit is the motor
is going to be either one side, the output voltage here of the potentiometer is going
to be on one side or the other of the input voltage that we've selected.
And if it's on one side, it will go to the other side.
And as soon as it gets to the other side, it will go back.
And that's why the needle is sitting there jiggling just a little bit.
But it does a pretty good job of following that input voltage.
If I track the input voltage up, it goes up.
If I track the input voltage too fast, it takes a while to get to the right place, but
eventually it gets there and then it starts that bobbling back and forth just as this
circuit describes.
So there is an example of a very simple servo neckism, just an amplifier, a DC motor and
a potentiometer and that all important feedback link.
Here's a picture of a practical application of this feedback system.
It's a robot whose arms are controlled by the arms of the man standing behind him.
Just as my servo voltmeter had the position of its needle controlled by the position I
turned my hand to in dialing the input voltage, as this man moves his arms around, motors
control the positions of the hand and arm in the robot.
You can see that the robots left and right arms are in positions mimicking those of the
man behind them.
So that's another example of a feedback circuit.
Now let's look at one other feedback circuit.
Before we do, I'm going to take this servo voltmeter and I'm going to morph it into another
circuit.
And I'm going to do that because I'd like you to see that all these feedback circuits
I'm demonstrating are very similar.
So it's now morphed into something that looks a little bit different.
It's the same power op amp.
It's got almost the potentiometer, but instead it's got a resistor and a photo resistor,
something I introduced in the very first lecture that measures, that has a resistance that
varies with the amount of light on it.
And I've got a light bulb and I've got a diode and we'll talk about all those things.
But before we do, I would like to demonstrate what that circuit looks like.
So I'm going to go over here.
I'm going to disconnect the servo voltmeter so we won't have it going and I have to move
the light bulb.
Okay, so here we are now set up to show you a circuit that I call the intelligent light
bulb.
Why is it intelligent?
Well, here is my photo resistor.
This is the resistor whose resistance depends on the amount of light falling on it.
And you'll recall that the resistance decreases with the amount of light.
Now if you look at the circuit on the big monitor with the photo resistor down there at the
bottom, if the resistance decreases, that's going to pull that middle point between the
photo resistor and the other resistor toward plus 15 volts.
That's going to put a big voltage into the negative terminal, the inverting terminal
of the op amp.
The positive is grounded.
It's at zero volts.
And so if there's a big voltage at the negative input, the output of the op amp is going to
go negative and that's going to turn that light bulb off.
Now right now the photo resistor is seeing the lights in the studio and what it's done
is swung toward the plus 15 volts at that junction point which is connected back to
the minus input of the op amp.
And there's a big voltage going in there and consequently the op amp voltage output is
negative and that diode is blocking any current flowing through the light bulb.
We're going to not worry about the studio lights, instead we're going to worry about
that light.
And now I'm going to point the photo resistor at that light.
And right now the situation is that we are getting some light on the photo resistor and
as I move the photo resistor toward the light bulb you'll see that the light goes dimmer
and dimmer and dimmer.
And then I pull it back and it goes brighter and brighter and brighter.
Why is this an intelligent light bulb?
It's intelligent because if I put my eye right next to that photo sensor and I move my eye
in right next to it, the light looks the same intensity to me the whole time.
What is this circuit doing?
It's a very simple negative feedback circuit and what it's actually doing is trying to
keep the level of the light falling on that photo resistor the same regardless of what
else is happening.
How is it doing that?
If the level of the light gets too big, the photo resistance goes down, we go toward plus
15 volts at the minus input of the op amp and we turn the light bulb off.
If it gets too dim, we go toward the minus 15 volts.
That means we have a lower voltage on the negative input than the zero, the ground at
the positive.
That turns the power op amps output to plus 15 because of the way the diode is that turns
the light bulb on.
It's just like the voltmeter wobbling back and forth and so what the intelligent light
bulb does is produce a level of light that depends on how much light the photo detector
sees.
So there is a circuit that I call again the intelligent light bulb.
Okay, so I've argued that this is a circuit that tries to maintain a constant level of
light on this photo resistor.
Another way of putting that is this circuit tries to maintain the voltage at this point
at a fixed value.
What fixed value?
It tries to maintain it at zero because the positive input is at zero because as soon
as this level gets below zero, the light bulb turns on and that brings the photo resistor
back toward plus 15 volts and brings this point above zero and that turns the light
bulb off because there's now a bigger voltage at the minus input.
We get minus 15 out, nothing can go through the diode in that condition and so we're
going to switch back and forth, bobbling back and forth just the way the servo voltmeter
did between plus and minus 15 volts at the output and the light bulb being alternately
on and off and we're going to do that in just such a way that keeps the photo resistance
constant because that's what keeps this voltage at zero volts and that's going to mean that
the intensity of light falling on the photo resistor stays the same and if I pull the
light bulb away, the intensity of light falls off with the distance from its source, the
light bulb is going to have to get brighter to maintain those conditions and that's exactly
what we saw happening.
Now let's take a more sophisticated look at that by connecting an oscilloscope to this
point, the output of the amplifier and to this point, the junction of the two resistors
or equivalently the minus input, the inverting input of the amplifier.
So let's look at the oscilloscope.
So what we have on the oscilloscope screen now are yellow trace that represents the output
of the amplifier and that is at a 5 volt per division scale and both the red, yellow
trace and the green trace have their zeros right across the middle of the screen.
So if you count, we're up about two and a half divisions, that's about 12 and a half
volts, that's about the maximum that comes out of this particular op amp and the light
bulb is fully on as it better be when we have 15 volts coming out of there, 12 and a half
volts coming out of that op amp.
Notice that the green, which is that junction between the two resistors or equivalently
the inverting input of the op amp is at minus 15 volts.
This is a situation when the op amp is said to be out of control, the negative feedback
isn't working yet.
But now watch what happens as I bring the photo resistor near the light bulb.
Now we see the output of the op amp swinging back and forth between plus and minus roughly
12 and a half volts and look what happened, as soon as it came in control, look what happened
to that junction point, the minus input, the inverting input of the op amp.
It went smack dab to zero and just stays there and as I move the op amp, as I move the light
bulb in and the op amp gets dimmer, the light bulb turns on less and less of the time.
We see only one of those pulses as I go further out, we see more and more of them and they
get wider and wider.
That's the op amp doing this on, off, on, off, on, off of the light bulb and it's doing
it in such a way to keep the average output of the light bulb at just the right level
to keep the resistance of that photo resistor the same.
Now I do want to show you one other thing before we move on and that is what happens
if I turn up the gain on the green channel of the oscilloscope.
So I'm going to turn that up and the first thing that happens is the trace disappears
all together, gone, we don't even see it because it's gone way off the bottom of the
screen because it's at minus 15 volts and now I'm at 100 millivolts per division.
But watch what happens as I bring the op amp back into control.
So here we go, take the photo sensor, bring it near the light bulb and now we see a very
slight variation in the voltage at the minus input.
Normally it would be exactly zero but in fact it is varying very slightly and it's those
slight variations above and below zero.
You can see it swinging above and below the middle of the screen that are driving the
op amp with its enormous gain to swing equivalently between plus and minus 15 volts and this is
all happening in such a way that we maintain the voltage at the minus input at almost zero
and we maintain the light intensity at whatever value it is and it stays the same as far as
the photo resistor here is concerned.
Now you can imagine some practical uses for this kind of circuit.
One practical use might be some kind of sensor in an energy efficient building that senses
what the level of ambient lighting is and turns the lights up or down accordingly to
keep the amount of light falling on your desk the same mixing sunlight with artificial light
and automatically doing that, turning down the artificial lights to keep the total light
the same.
That would be a practical application.
Here's another practical application of this circuit.
We can take the same circuit and morph it very simply into a similar thing in which
instead of having a light bulb we've got a heater and we've got instead of a photo resistor
we've got a thermistor which is a thermal resistor whose resistance drops with increasing
temperature and we have thermal feedback and that device could be a temperature controller.
So we have many many applications for these simple negative feedback circuits and I want
to end with a kind of fun one which is the last one which also has some practical applications
but it's going to be really silly as I demonstrate it to you so I'm going to set up the equipment
a little bit differently and I'll show you my last feedback demonstration.
Okay so here we are with a really silly looking demonstration which I call Funny Face.
Many of my students are amused by Funny Face and a few of them are freaked out by Funny
Face.
I'm not going to tell you much about how Funny Face works except to say that he works very
much like the other feedback demonstrations we've seen and if you want to do the project
for this lecture the project consists of reverse engineering Funny Face and figuring out how
he works.
But here's Funny Face and he's got a couple of eyes and he's mounted on a motor and this
fancy arrangement here is nothing but some electrical contacts that feed electricity
into this region without preventing it from rotating so we used to have wires but they
would get all wrapped up on themselves.
Funny Face has a friend, here's his friend and he really likes her, she's his friend
and he likes his friend so much that he will follow the friend wherever she is.
Now we're in a studio with lots of bright lights so the friend doesn't work too well
so instead of the friend I'm going to use this bright LED flashlight, LED's remember
a kind of diode.
So I'm going to turn on the power to Funny Face, I have Funny Face plugged into our breadboard
we're only using it for the power supply in there so I'm not showing you the rest of it.
It has the same 759 op amp you've seen before the power op amp that can drive these motors
and we're going to turn Funny Face on and there goes Funny Face bye bye and let's see
what Funny Face does when I bring a friend nearby.
Funny Face really likes that friend.
So that's Funny Face.
You may have noticed Funny Face bobbling about kind of indecisively.
Funny Face is not very well designed for doing what it's supposed to do.
We can do better.
Funny Face is silly, it's a fun little demonstration.
We often set it up in the hall at Middlebury College and people can come by and wave the
friend around and watch it go but Funny Face is sort of a metaphor for some much more serious
circuits that do similar things and I just want to end by showing you one of those circuits.
So here is my student Misha Gershel who did a senior thesis with me recently and behind
him is an apparatus he built that is designed to track the sun and it's designed to improve
the efficiency of sun tracking solar collectors and Misha's tracker has somewhat more sophisticated
electronics but the idea is still the same.
It has two motors so it can turn in two mutually perpendicular directions so instead of just
rotating in one direction like Funny Face it can point anywhere in the sky and the thing
on the right that black thing sticking up is comparable to Funny Face's two eyes except
it's got four eyes which is what allows it to move in two mutually perpendicular directions.
I'm not going to say any more about Misha's project right now except to say that it is
a more sophisticated version of the same feedback system here we have in Funny Face.
We'll get back to Misha's project in lecture, the final lecture of this course in which
we'll see a whole day's time lapse movie of this thing tracking the sun across the sky.
Well that's a quick introduction to the magic of feedback in particular negative feedback
that tries to mitigate a change and keeps the system in a stable location.
The servo voltmeter at a location appropriate to the input voltage.
The intelligent light bulb with an intensity of light that's appropriate to the settings
of the two resistors that make it up and Funny Face with a position that is appropriate
to maximizing the amount of light that falls on Funny Face.
So if you would like to do the project for this one and I recommend it, this is not one
you're going to be building with a simulator, your job is to reverse engineer Funny Face.
That is to design a plausible circuit for Funny Face.
What do I mean by reverse engineer?
I mean take something that you don't have the diagram of how it works and figure it out.
You'll actually find if you buy certain pieces of software or hardware there are sometimes
rules that say if you use this you are not allowed to reverse engineer it.
But I'm going to ask you to reverse engineer Funny Face and I'm going to tell you you really
only need the following components.
One of these power op-amps that we've talked about, two photo resistors rather than one
and a DC motor which is reversible depending on which polarity it gets and of course put
it in parentheses because you always need a power supply for your op-amp.
So you can reverse engineer Funny Face and see if you can figure out how to make that
simple but quite impressive circuit that maximizes the amount of light falling on it.
Okay, in this lecture you've seen some funky negative feedback circuits that I used to
show my students the concept of negative feedback and one of them was Funny Face.
The other two I explained but Funny Face I didn't.
So your job is to reverse engineer Funny Face that means look at this thing and figure
out how it works.
So design a plausible circuit for Funny Face there's no one answer to this problem but
there's probably a simplest answer and for the simplest answer you need only the following
components a power op-amp that can drive a motor, a couple of photo resistors, a DC motor
which goes either way depending on the polarity and of course you always need a power supply
for your op-amp.
So it's a little hard for me to work through this as a reverse engineering problem because
I engineered Funny Face in the first place so I'll show you what my solution looks like.
So here we go, I came up with a very, very simple solution.
I have the motor at the output of the power amplifier, the motor can turn one way or another.
I have a string of two photo resistors connected between the plus and minus 15 volt power supplies.
I have the plus input of the op-amp grounded and there is a connection, a mechanical connection,
a mechanical link between the DC motor that can go in either direction and the Funny Face
itself with its face and the two photo resistors were its eyes.
So what happens?
So the motor turns in the direction that takes the photo cell with the least light and turns
it in such a way that it will get more light and vice versa.
If one photo cell is showing too much light, that one or showing more light, that one moves
away from the thing rotates so that that one will move away from the light.
How does that all work?
Well, what's trying to happen is the circuit like all these other feedback circuits is
trying to hold that point between the two photo cells at zero volts.
If it's not at zero volts, the motor is going in one direction or the other and since this
is an open loop circuit in the sense that there's no electronic feedback, it's a closed
loop with the mechanical feedback, it is going to overshoot and go wiggling back and forth
which you saw Funny Face doing.
But there's the quick solution to Funny Face, it's that simple.
Well, not quite.
What those two photo cells are trying to do is maintain the voltage between them at zero
volts and what that would do is maintain exactly the same amount of light on both photo cells.
So if there's not the same amount of light, the motor will turn in the right direction
to make there be the same amount of light.
But the photo cells aren't perfect, they aren't exactly identical in their characteristics,
so I actually have an extra little variable resistor in there in the circuit and I can
get in with a little screwdriver and adjust it.
So the two photo cells will be pointing right toward the source of light when the light is
falling equally on both of them.
By the way, this is a pretty lousy solution.
What I really ought to do is give Funny Face a great big long nose so that we get a sharp
shadow cast when one of the photo cells isn't in the direct light and that would make it
work a lot better, but it's more fun the way it is now.
So there's my solution to Funny Face and that's how it is, in fact, engineered.
