Welcome to yet another lecture on the wonders of operational amplifiers. So far what we've
been doing with op amps is to build inverting amplifiers, configurations where we brought
the input of our circuit in ultimately to the inverting input of the amplifier. And
although these amplifiers are wonderful, versatile and easy to build, there were a
few disadvantages. One is because they have an input resistor, which tends to be typically
fairly low, tens of kilo ohms perhaps, they don't present a very, very high input resistance
to the input source that we're connecting. And sometimes that's important. The other
problem with them is we need another inversion if we don't want an inverting amplifier. So
today we're going to go through a whole zoo of circuits using operational amplifiers.
The first ones we're going to start with are non-inverting configurations of the operational
amplifier. So let's go over to our big screen and look at a very simple configuration. So
here we are, and here is what's called a unity gain voltage follower. So the voltage follower
consists of just an operational amplifier. We're going to take our input right into the
plus input of the amplifier. Now remember an operational amplifier has very, very high
input resistance, 10 to the 6 ohms for bipolar junction transistor op amps, 10 to the 12,
maybe a tera ohm for FET input op amps. This is a simple, simple circuit. The output is
simply connected back to the minus input, and that's the feedback, and that's all there
is to this circuit. Let's analyze it, which is going to be very quick by using our op
amp rules. So rule number two tells us that V plus and V minus are the same. The negative
feedback works to keep zero volts essentially between these two. Now we don't have a virtual
ground in this case. The reason we don't is because neither the plus input is not connected
to ground, neither is the minus input. What happens is the two inputs become equal to
each other. So rule two tells us that V minus is V plus. The input connection tells us that
V plus is the input signal we want to amplify. And finally we have the feedback connection,
tells us that V minus is the same as V out, because they're just connected by a piece
of wire. And so the end result is V out equals V in. Huh? What good is this? Well this is
a unity gain voltage follower. It's a voltage follower because the output follows the input.
It's exactly equal to the input, in fact. Why on earth would you want that? Well there
are many situations, and we'll see one in the next lecture, where you have a very weak
signal source that you would like to do something significant with, and the weak signal source
can't, for example, power a loudspeaker, or even drive a very big meter or something.
And so you put a unity gain voltage follower that does not change the voltage at all, doesn't
change anything, but it allows you to deliver more current at the output. You can think
of this thing as a bit of a power amplifier, or a current amplifier, but it doesn't amplify
voltage. It gives you exactly the same output as you had at the input. That's a unity gain
voltage follower. Before I praise it up too much, I should point out that it has an issue
with it that you should be aware of in the real world, an issue I've been ignoring. Remember
that any difference amplifier is supposed to look at only the difference between the
two input voltages. But difference amplifiers actually respond a little bit to the actual
value of the voltage as well. So if you put zero volts and zero volts in, you should get
zero volts out. If you put two volts and two volts in, you should get zero volts out,
but you get something slightly different because of what's called the common mode response.
It's not a big deal, especially if you're dealing with reasonable voltage levels here,
but it is something to be aware of. And in this circuit, you are subject to common mode
issues because neither input is at ground. In the inverting configuration, both inputs
are at zero volts effectively, and so that's not an issue. So it's a slight issue for these
followers, but not a big issue, and the follower is a quick and simple way to make an amplifier
that doesn't invert. Okay, so let's move on and look at some other circuits in this
zoo of circuits we're going to deal with. Let's begin with this one, and let me ask
you to pause a moment and see if you can figure out what this circuit does. Okay, let's come
back and take a look at this circuit. So let's look at what rule number two says. Rule number
two says, again, that the two inputs to the op amp have to be at the same voltage as long
as we have negative feedback, and we do indeed have negative feedback coming from the output
through that 10 kilo ohm resistor to the minus input. And so what that means is V plus equals
V minus in this case, and V plus is V in, so V minus is equal to V in. Now rule number
one says that no current flows into the inputs of an op amp. So even though it looks like
there's a third path for current to go after it goes through the upper one of those 10
kilo ohm resistors, there really isn't, because current can't flow into the op amp. So the
10 kilo ohm resistors constitute a nice true voltage divider, and since they have the same
resistance, they divide the voltage in half. So the voltage at the minus input is half
of V out. So the voltage, the resistors constitute a voltage divider, V minus is therefore half
of V out. But V minus is equal to V in, as we saw by rule number two, and that means
V in is equal to V out over two, or turn that around, and V out is to V in. So this circuit
is called a follower with gain. It's like our unity gain follower, except it multiplies
the voltage in this case by two. So we have now a follower with gain. Notice that it took
two equal resistors to make the follower with gain. In the inverting configuration, two equal
resistors would give you unity gain. Here the two equal resistors give us a gain of two.
And we can analyze this circuit with arbitrary resistances R1 and R2. We still have a voltage
divider. The analysis still works just the same way. The inputs are still equal, and
consequently the minus input is equal to the plus input, which is equal to V in. And if
we work out the voltage divider equation from very early in the course, we find that the
output voltage and the input voltage are related by this fraction, this ratio of the sum of
the resistors divided by the second resistor, and that gives us a gain. And we can set that
gain to anything we want simply by choosing those resistors. Okay, don't take my word
for it. Let's go and build these circuits. We'll turn on our oscilloscope so we can see
what's going on. And what I have here is a one kilohertz signal coming out of my function
generator going into this connector and onto my board, and it's going into the plus input
of this op amp. And you'll notice there's just nothing else there except this all-important
red wire, which is the feedback connection. Right now I've got this thing set as a unity
gain non-inverting amplifier, a unity gain follower. I turn it on, and you can see that
the output looks exactly like the input. The output is green. It is following the input
perfectly. If I change the input waveform or change the input frequency, the output will
do exactly the same thing as the input. And now let me just take a few minutes and reconfigure
the circuit, and it isn't going to take much work to do this to make it into a follower
with gain. So I've got a couple of 10 kiloohm resistors, and I'll just bring them in here
and make a voltage divider. Okay, so I haven't had to do much to alter this circuit. What
I've done is to make a voltage divider of two 10 kiloohm resistors going from the output
of the op amp to the beginning of another 10 kiloohm resistor which goes to ground,
and the only other change I've made is to take the feedback loop and run it not from
the output right back to the input, but from the junction of those two resistors back to
the input, and let's look at what we see on the screen, and lo and behold, we have a gain
of two amplifier. The output is exactly twice the input, otherwise it's following the input
perfectly. So there is a voltage follower with gain, a gain of two voltage follower with
gain. One of many, many circuits we can make with op amps, and let's move on and look at
some other circuits now. Here's a circuit. Again, if you'd like to pause and think about
this one, you can. It's a little bit more complicated to analyze this one, but not too much. But
notice, this circuit has two inputs, and I want to know what V out is in terms of those
two inputs labeled one and two. Now, in this case, you'll notice there are four resistors,
and they're all exactly the same. Okay, pause, look at it, and let's do an analysis again
using our op amp rules. Okay, so let's take a look at how this circuit works and what
it does. So rule one tells us no current flows into the op amps, and that implies, as it
did before in the follower with gain, that both those strings of connected resistors
are basically voltage dividers. So if we look at the lower string, that tells us that V
plus is simply V one divided by two, because we've got a string of two equal resistors
going from V one to ground. So the midpoint, which is V plus, is V one over two. V minus
is a little bit more complicated, but you can see that it's the average of the V two
input voltage and the output voltage, because the feedback resistor there is connected from
the minus input to the output. And rule two tells us that V plus is equal to V minus.
So those two voltages have to be equal. So I'll set them equal, and I'll do a little
bit of algebra, and I'll work on that algebra a little bit more, and I find that V out is
simply the difference between V one and V two. So what have I got here? I've got a difference
amplifier. Its output voltage is the difference between the two input voltages. I'm now exploiting
the fact that the basic op amp is itself a difference amplifier to produce this amplifier.
Now if you want to build a difference amplifier, you've got to be a little bit careful. You've
got to use resistors that are really carefully matched, otherwise you won't get that nice
V one minus V two situation. We can take this basic circuit for a simple difference amplifier,
and we can expand on it by making the two input resistors the same, but making the feedback
resistor and that resistor to ground different, and then we'd get some gains. So V out would
be this factor of the ratio of those resistors to multiply by the difference between the
two voltages. And if you wanted to weight the two voltages in the difference separately,
you would change the input resistors as well. So that's a difference amplifier with gain
or without gain. And before we go on and talk about what you might use these things for,
let's take a look at what one of these things does. So I have a difference amplifier already
wired on my circuit, and I just have to make a few changes in order to get it to work.
Okay, so I've made a few changes here. I've disconnected the input that I had connected
to my simple non-inverting follower amplifier, and I've taken it down here into my difference
amplifier, which is this op amp right here. And you can see these Brown resistors, those
are 1% precision resistors. They're more expensive than the usual kind, but I've used those so
they're pretty well matched so I get a true difference amplifier. One of the inputs is
through that resistor. The other input is through this resistor. The first input is coming in
through the same red wire that I used to bring in the input to my voltage follower. The second
input is coming in on this yellow wire from this blue cable coming out of my function
generator. And on the big screen, you see the outputs of the function generator. It has
two channels. The yellow is that same sine wave we were just looking at, but the function
generator can produce different waveforms, and now it's producing a square wave. Down,
up, constant voltage, down, constant voltage, up, constant voltage, and so on. And I'm going
to ask you to think a minute about what the difference between those two should look like.
That's what the difference amplifier should be producing. Think about that a minute if
you want to pause and scratch your head a little bit. Go ahead. Otherwise, I'm going
to go now and connect the probe from the oscilloscope to the output of this difference amplifier.
Is that crazy? Well, not so crazy actually. If you think about it, and you can convince
yourself that what we're seeing is, in fact, one of these waveforms subtracted from the
other. So there is the difference waveform. You can see the jumps associated with the
square wave. You can see the down going part of the sine wave, superposing on the constant
part of the square wave, and so on. So this is a difference amplifier. It amplifies the
difference between two signals. Maybe it just gives it unity gain. Maybe it gives it some
additional gain. In this particular case, it's a unity gain difference amplifier. It's
just taking the difference between those two voltages, and they came in with equal magnitudes.
And there it is. So that's a difference amplifier. What might you use a difference amplifier for?
Well, let me give you one example. One thing you can do is reduce noise. If you have an
ordinary so-called single-ended amplifier, one input, one output, both of them understood
to be relative to ground, you send in an input signal, you have some quantity that you're
trying to measure, and you get an output. But often along the way, electrical noise comes
in. We've seen that in this studio where we had noise problems in a previous lecture
on the big screen due to lights flashing on and off in here, or some other kind of circuit
switching. If that electrical noise gets into the very small input signal to your amplifier,
it can either overwhelm it or at least dramatically alter it, so you get a noisy signal, and the
noisy signal gets amplified, and you get a noisy signal at the output. Well, that's no
good. We saw one solution to this earlier, which was to use a filter. Filter won't work
if the noise is at almost the same frequency as the signal you're looking at, though. But
here's how a different amplifier can help. Here's a different amplifier whose output
is proportional to the difference between the two inputs. And so what you do is connect
your source so that it's connected to the two inputs of the different amplifier. Now,
this is not just an op amp. It's that whole circuit that I just showed you. And now what
happens? Suppose electrical noise gets on both those wires. Well, the electrical noise
is the same on both wires. The difference amplifier takes the difference between those
two inputs. They're at different voltages, according to that source that's connected
between them. But the noise is the same on both, so in the subtraction, the noise gets
subtracted out. Both input waveforms have noise, but the noise is subtracted out, and
we get a clean output signal. So one common application of different amplifiers is in
very sensitive circuitry where you need to make sure you eliminate any noise that might
creep in to your input signals. So noise reduction is one example of what we can do with a different
amplifier. Okay. Well, I've argued that this is going to be a bit of a circus looking at
other applications of op amps. Let's move on to yet another one. Here's something called
a peak detector. There are times when I have a signal that's varying, and I don't really
care about what it's doing as a function of time. I'd like to know what the maximum
value it contains is. And I'm going to show you a simple circuit that will, quote, remember
the maximum value of something. Now, I should caution you ahead of time, don't go and make
a maximum minimum thermometer, for example, with his circuit, and expect it to hold the
temperature for a week. You'd use digital circuitry and digital memory that we'll cover
in later lectures. But as I'm going to show you in an application of this in just a moment,
maybe we have a situation where something, over a few seconds, some quantity is changing
and we want to find out what the peak was. So what I have here is an op amp connected
in basically the unity gain follower configuration that I introduced at the beginning of this
lecture, except there's that diode. And that means the amplifier feedback only works if
the input voltage goes positive relative to the voltage at the minus input. Otherwise
the diode is reverse biased and we don't have feedback and the output of the op amp
will go to one of its limits. And I'm going to now add a capacitor. That's going to be
my sort of memory device that's going to hold this information. And since I don't want the
capacitor to discharge easily, I'm going to throw a unity gain inverter on the other end
of it using the virtuous fact that the unity gain inverter has this very, very high input
resistance. So that's going to be a peak detector. And what I would like to do now is imagine
putting in an input signal that varies with time, what I get at the output of the diode
and into the capacitor is when the input is going up, the output of the diode goes up.
But when the input goes down, it can't go down because of the diode, so it stays there.
And then another higher peak comes along and it locks in at that high peak and that's how
it works as a peak detector. And let's actually build a peak detector now. And the peak detector
we're going to build is, in fact, a second use of the phototransistor that I showed you
with the current to voltage converter in a previous lecture. And it's only the second
of three examples we're going to use with that same light meter. We're now going to
use build a peak detecting light meter.
Okay, so here I have a different circuit on the board. And in fact, this part of the circuit
is exactly what we worked with before. There's the little phototransistor, there's the op
amp, there's the resistor in series with the phototransistor, there's the feedback resistor.
That's the same circuit we had in the previous lecture. I talked about it as a current to
voltage converter. It became a light meter when the current source was a phototransistor.
So we have the phototransistor. The only difference now is I've built exactly the peak detecting
circuit that I just showed you. And the peak detecting circuit, remember, had two op amps.
The first one in a basically voltage follower configuration except with a diode in the diodes
right there. It had a capacitor also that was going to store the charge we put on it,
and that was going to hold the peak level for us. And then it had a second unity gain
inverter so we'd have a very high input resistance and the capacitor wouldn't discharge very
quickly. The size of the capacitor and the input resistance of that second op amp determine
how quickly the capacitor discharges or equivalently how long it can store the information.
You might say you don't see two op amps there, but you do. You see a dual 741 op amp here,
which is two op amps on one package. So now I'm going to demonstrate this circuit and
I've got to be a little bit careful because the studio lights are quite bright. And remember,
what this circuit is supposed to do is record the peak of the brightness. So what I'm going
to do is take a flashlight and I'm going to start with the flashlight shielding the
phototransistor from the studio lights. And I'm going to turn on the circuit and watch
the old analog voltmeter here. The old analog voltmeter jumps up a little bit. I now remove
the shielding and it jumps up a little bit more as it sees the studio lights and I turn
on my flashlight and it jumps up still more. And now when I take the flashlight away or
even completely shield the phototransistor, nothing happens. The voltage there is an indication
of what the peak voltage was or equivalently what the peak light level that that detector
saw. So we have a peak detector. A varying voltage was coming out of the first op amp.
And that varying voltage was representing the varying amount of light falling on the phototransistor.
That varying voltage went into the peak detector, which used the diode, the first op amp in
the capacitor to store the maximum voltage as the charge on the capacitor. And then that
was read out by our voltmeter, which has a rather low resistance. So that's one case
where we would use a unity gain inverter to avoid the low resistance of the voltmeter
from draining the capacitor. So there's a peak detector and it's still reading that peak
level. So that's another addition to our zoo of possible op amp applications. Well let's
move on to one more before we wrap up this lecture. And it's a little bit more complicated.
Take a little bit more time to explain it. And I've got to go over and use the big screen
briefly to talk about what we're doing here. Okay, so we're going to actually go back to
an earlier application of op amps before we talked about negative feedback. And that is
the op amp as a comparator where it simply looked at its two inputs and it went to one
limiter or the other depending on which input was bigger. And here I've got an op amp hooked
up as a comparator and I've got plus one volt at the plus input. So what I'm doing is
comparing the minus input with one volt. If the minus input is less than one volt, I'm
going to get one value for the output. If it's plus, if it's greater than one volt, I'm
going to get the other value. That's all it's going to be able to tell me is, is the input
there greater or less than one volt? Is the battery good or bad? Did I turn on the green
LED or the red LED? Is the output plus 15 volts or minus 15 volts? So let's take a little
look at how this comparator works. So V out for any op amp is A V plus minus V minus and
A is a great big number. V out in this case is A times one volt minus V in and A is a
big number. So V out goes to plus the supply voltage, 15 volts typically. If V in is less
than one volt because then V plus is bigger than V minus and it goes to minus the supply
voltage, typically minus 15 volts, if V in is greater than one volt. So now let's imagine
we have a voltage which is slowly rising with time and we'd like to know when that voltage
reaches one volt and we're going to use this circuit, this comparator, to catch that point
when the voltage reaches one volt. So here's a graph of our voltage versus time at the input
and also the voltage that the comparator produces. So remember if the input voltage is less than
one volt, we're going to see an output of plus V s. If the input voltage is more than
one volt, we're going to see an output of minus V s. So here's what happens. As soon
as V in reaches one volt, the output switches abruptly down and then becomes at the minus
limit. So that's how this circuit should work. Now that's ideal. There's always noise. We
just discussed the use, for example, of a difference amplifier to help eliminate noise.
What if that V in has a little noise on it? Well then things are going to look a little
bit different. So let's look at the same situation now, but V in is going to have some noise
and I'm going to actually exaggerate the noise to show you what happens. So here's V in but
there's got some noise on it. So the first time V in crosses one volt, the output of
the comparator, the op amp without any feedback, falls to its negative limit. But then the
op amp goes, the input with its noise wiggles back down. It crosses below one volt again
and so it shoots back up. And if the noise wiggles another time, we shoot down again
and then we cross again and up we go. And finally V in has risen to such a level that
it's not going to go below the one volt and then we're good. But what's happened is instead
of getting a nice clean break from one level to another, from green LED to red LED or whatever,
we get this back and forth, back and forth business. And you can imagine if the noise
has higher frequency, that's going to be more significant. So that's a problem for us. And
we need to deal with that problem. How do we deal with it? Well, we deal with it with
a circuit called the Schmidt trigger. The Schmidt trigger looks a little bit complicated
but let's bear with me. The Schmidt trigger actually has positive feedback. It has a feedback
from the output back to the plus input. And what's going on here? Well, I've taken a string
of resistors from plus 15 volts to minus 15 volts, a 14 kilo ohm and a 16 kilo ohm. And
if you work out that voltage divider, you can convince yourself that the voltage at
the plus input would be one volt. That's the one volt I want to compare with. It would
be one volt but for the presence of this extra resistor. And that resistor is sensing what
the output voltage is. And let's see what the effect of that positive feedback is. So
I have all these resistors. And remember, if it's 14k and 16k, that comes out right
on the one volt that I want to compare with. But I don't just have 16k because what I now
have is a combination of resistors that looks like 15 volts, 470 kilo ohms, and it's connected
to minus 15 volts because I'm assuming at this point the output is at minus 15 volts.
The input voltage here is less than one volt. Okay, so the effect of this extra resistor
here is actually to lower that comparison voltage a little bit below one volt. In fact,
I'm going to let you work this out if you want to do the project, it's down to about
0.75 volts. And what that means is as the voltage falls, it now needs to fall below
0.75 volts before we get that transition. On the other hand, once it does fall below
0.75 volts, the output swings to plus 15 volts and now that 470 kilo ohm resistor is connected
up to the plus 15 volts. And now I have this configuration and that pulls this point up
above the one volt. In fact, as you can work out, it happens in this case to pull it up
to 1.22 volts. So what we've done effectively is to change the levels at which we're switching
to two slightly different levels. And that phenomenon is called hysteresis. It's a phenomenon
that says if we have a circuit, something that's supposed to switch back and forth between
two levels, don't switch always right at the same level. Wait till you get a little
too high and then wait till you get a little too low. Something much simpler that has the
same effect is the thermostat that I showed you when I first talked about feedback. You
don't want the, if you set the thermostat to 68 degrees, you don't want the furnace
to turn on as soon as it drops to 67.99 degrees because immediately it'll get above 68 degrees
and it'll be 68.01. It'll turn off and the furnace will be cycling on and off very bad
for the furnace motor or racket in your house. Instead, the thermostat has a built-in hysteresis.
It maybe switches the furnace on when it gets to 67 degrees and then it lets it heat up
to 69 degrees before it shuts off. And that's called hysteresis. And we represent hysteresis
with a graph that kind of shows what happens. In this case of the circuit I just described,
switching on the way up at 0.75 volts but then coming back down, switching at 1.22 volts.
And that avoids that switching. And if we make the hysteresis big enough, bigger than
that noise we were worried about, then we will avoid that problem of multiple switching.
So that's the rather sophisticated phenomenon of hysteresis. And I want to end with one
practical example of hysteresis. Here's an example. Here's a freezer alarm. You might
build, suppose you have a freezer in your house and you want to, you go away for a while and
you're worried your food might spoil if the temperature goes above 32 degrees. So here
I have the output of that thermometer that was part of the project in a previous lecture.
Remember it put out a voltage that was one-tenth of the Fahrenheit temperature. It's connected
to the minus input. I have a rather simpler hysteresis setup, a simpler situation involving
positive feedback. And here's what happens in this circuit. 32 degrees is 3.2 volts in
this case. And so if we got below 32 degrees, we are at plus 15 volts on the output. And
we've got 3.2 volts. I've divided that voltage divider to make that be true at the plus input.
But the problem is this. What if the temperature goes high, above 32 degrees? Well, then the
thing switches. We turn on that LED, that red morning light, which you'll notice is connected
with its upward bias direction upward. So when the op-amp output goes to minus 15 volts,
we get the light on. But at that point, the feedback, the positive feedback swings the
comparison to minus 3.2 volts. And that corresponds to minus 32 degrees. And that light will not
turn off again until your freezer gets back down to below minus 32 degrees and no freezer
gets down that low. Freezers get down to about zero degrees Fahrenheit. So once your freezer
goes above 32, that red light turns on and the positive feedback locks it on. And it
tells you that even if the freezer goes back to normal, the food may have spoiled because
it was above freezing. It doesn't tell you how long that could be another thing you could
add to this. Okay, let me wrap up now with what we've got here. We have done many, many,
many circuits here. We started with a voltage follower. We added a follower with gain. We
did a difference amplifier. We did a peak detector and connected it to our light meter.
We looked at the Schmidt trigger and this whole phenomenon of hysteresis and we developed
out of that this freeze alarm. Here's a project if you want to do it, if you don't want to
do it, fine. But first part of the project is sort of mathematical and circuit analysis.
Verify those 0.75 and 1.22 volt thresholds in the Schmidt trigger that I showed you in
this lecture. And the second part of the project is to design a different amplifier that has
a gain of 10 and very high input resistances like the tera ohm, 10 to the 12 ohms, typical
of an op amp. And a hint about that one is you'll need to combine several circuits from
this lecture. And I'd like you to simulate this circuit and verify that it works.
Okay, so here's another two-part project. The first part will appeal to the math aficionados
and the second part to the engineers. But I hope you'll try both parts. So the first
part is to verify those 0.75 and 1.22 volt thresholds in the Schmidt trigger circuit
that I showed you in this lecture. And the second is to design a different amplifier
that's got a gain of 10, that is, it multiplies the difference between the input voltages
by 10. And it also has very high input resistances like the tera ohm, typical of a good op amp.
And you'll need to combine several of the circuits from this lecture and then simulate
it and verify that it works. Okay, let's begin with part one, the mathematical part. Here
is what the string of resistors in that circuit looked like in the one case where the one
end of the 470 ohm resistor, which went to the output of the op amp, was effectively
at minus 15 volts and therefore in parallel with the 16k resistor. So let's first work
out the parallel resistance of those two, work it out. You can take that parallel resistance
formula 1 over r parallel is 1 over r1 plus 1 over r2. If you combine those things algebraically
you'll find you can get this by multiplying the two resistances in the numerator and adding
them in the denominator and we get, not surprisingly, a resistance that's a little bit less than
the 16k ohms because the 470 is pretty big compared to it, 15.47k ohms. We put that
in our voltage divider equation. We try to figure out where we're going to be between
the plus 15 and the minus 15. The whole total string is 30 volts. And the answer we get
is 0.75 volts. Notice how I did that. I did it as minus 15 volts and then I added the
part of the drop across the total 30 volts that's due to this parallel resistance. And
so this voltage divider. And so there's the 0.75 volts. In the other situation the 470
kilo ohms was in parallel with the 14 kilo ohms. That gives us a combined parallel resistance,
a little bit less than the 14, 13.6 kilo ohms. Do the voltage divider thing again and we
get our 1.22 volts. So if it looked like a mystery when I was giving the lecture you
could have worked this out yourself and there it is worked out. So that's the solution to
the first part of the project. What about the second part of the project? Well I'm going
to show it to you first on the big screen as I implemented it in due circuits. So here
is my due circuits, circuit implemented. And I'm not going to work out all the details
and graph everything but I'm going to point out here I have 750 millivolts at V2, 250
millivolts at V1. That's a difference of 500 millivolts or half a volt. We're supposed to
have a gain on that half volt difference of 10. So we should get 5 volts at the output.
So let's run it. And we're going to run a DC simulation without any sweep. Just on this
pair of inputs. We'd have to do it many times. And there we get 4.99999 volts. That's the
5 volts which is 10 times the difference of the two inputs. Well I'm not going to take
you through the tedium of plotting a lot of numbers but let's look at what happens when
we do the same circuit in circuit lab. You could have done it in either one. Here it
is shown in circuit lab and I made a table here and in all cases you can see that the
output voltage is 10 times the difference of the two input voltages. Now there will
notice one other thing about both the due circuits rendition and the circuit lab rendition.
I asked you to make a difference amplifier that had a gain of 10. Fine. But I also asked
you to give it a very high input resistance. High like the 10 to the 12 ohms of a good
field effect transistor input op amp. Well the difference amplifiers with those relatively
low resistances at the beginning. I used 4.7k. That's pretty low as the input resistances
and the 47k as the other resistances to get the gain of 10. That's too low. I wanted a
big input resistance. So how do I handle that? I put a unity gain voltage follower in front
of each input resistor and now those two sources see this very high input resistance of the
plus input of the op amp. And it's the outputs of those unity gain followers that are following
those input voltages precisely that then go into the difference amplifier. So this again
is a sophisticated circuit that took several of the circuits we had learned in this lecture
and put them together into one.
