Welcome to the final lecture in this great courses series on electronics.
This lecture is going to be a little different than the others.
I'm not going to spend as much time developing new circuit concepts, although I will introduce
one important new device.
I'm going to instead look toward the future.
In particular, I want to look toward your future in electronics, your electronic future.
And there are really two aspects of that electronics future.
Even if you're not interested in electronics, you as a consumer are going to be buying more
electronics than you have in the past because more and more electronic devices will be developed,
they will be faster electronics, and they will by and large be cheaper electronics.
Electronics will be incorporated into nearly everything.
Already your car has numerous electronic devices and sensors and computers that help
the car operate at top efficiency.
It probably has a navigation system.
It has many other electronics.
They will be incorporated into nearly everything.
Even your toaster probably has some electronics in it now.
And more significantly perhaps is that entirely new technologies are going to be enabled by
the complexity that the miniaturization, the continuing miniaturization of electronics,
permits.
Now that's just you as a consumer, but you may also choose, especially after taking this
course to be your own creator, builder, maker of electronic devices.
So you're ready after this course to make your own electronic circuits, and you've probably
had some practice in that if you've done some of the projects, building simulated circuits
with web-based circuit simulators.
I've given you a number of basic building blocks, amplifiers, flip flops, counters,
operational amplifiers, all kinds of other things.
And we've seen how you could build these up from even simpler circuits ultimately based
in transistors and other components.
But now I'm going to start with a mantra that you'll hear again and again in the course
of this lecture.
And that is buy.
Don't build these basic circuits.
Don't go out and build a flip flop out of NAND gates, for example.
Buy an integrated circuit that does flip flops.
Or if you need lots of flip flops to make a counter, buy the counter circuit.
And I'll explore that buy, don't build a little bit later.
And you can combine these basic circuits to make very complex and practical circuits.
So two aspects of your electronics future as a consumer and as a creator-builder of electronics.
Let's look briefly at the future of electronics and in the context of the past before we move
on.
So here's a graph I actually showed you very early on in the course.
This is Moore's Law.
Gordon Moore was an engineer at Intel in the 1960s, Intel the maker of electronic chips.
And he made a proposition.
He said, I think the number of transistors, again, that basic on-off switching device
that's the heart of all modern electronics, the number of transistors on a given integrated
circuit, one of these silicon integrated circuits that has many, many, many transistors and
other components on it, will double every 18 months.
Now Moore was not quite right, but he was close.
Since 1965, it's been approximately true that the number of transistors on an integrated
circuit chip has doubled about every two years.
Where are we headed?
We may be headed to some sort of limit around the year 2020 when we get transistors down
to about a nanometer, a billionth of a meter, about 10 times the size of an atom in size.
But we don't know that for sure.
We've got a ways to go to get to that.
This graph shows you the year on the horizontal axis and I've projected up to about the year
2020.
And on the vertical axis is the number of transistors, again, on a given single integrated
circuit chip, and that is a logarithmic scale.
What that means is we start with 1,000, the next division up is 10,000, the next division
up is 100,000, a million, 10 million, 100 million, a billion, and 10 billion.
So that's a logarithmic scale.
Each division is a factor of 10 increase.
And if exponential growth is occurring and to double every two years is exponential growth,
exponential is not just a word that means big, it has a particular mathematical meaning.
It means you go up by a certain percentage in a certain time and this says we increase
by 100%, we double every two years.
And getting a straight line graph on a logarithmic scale plot tells you that you've got exponential
growth.
So the straight line you see here, and on that line I've labeled some individual chips,
particularly some microprocessor chips that were used in personal computers, and you may
recognize some of those names, and those are where those particular processor chips lie
in the plot of the year they were developed versus the number of transistors on the chip.
And you can see that we are up in the mid-second decade of the 21st century.
We're up at about somewhere between 1 and 10 billion transistors on a chip, about as
many transistors on the microprocessor chip at the heart of your computer as there are
people on this planet.
That's quite remarkable.
Okay, so let's look at Moore's Law in one other way of thinking about it.
We can also think about it as the size of the transistor.
And if you go to semiconductor manufacturers, they'll tell you what size they're using for
their basic feature, 32 nanometers, 14 nanometers, 64 nanometers.
What is it?
What size has been shrinking over the years?
It's heading down toward the 10 to 1 nanometer range.
And again, we are on a logarithmic scale.
The size of the transistor is on the vertical axis in nanometers.
And again, in the current era, we're down somewhere between 110 and heading toward somewhere
between 10 and 1 nanometers as these transistors shrink.
And again, somewhere around 2020, we may run into troubles as we approach the 1 nanometer
range.
But that isn't clear yet.
So the transistors have been shrinking and shrinking and shrinking and will continue
to shrink.
And what that means, of course, is that we cram more transistors on a chip.
We can store more information if it's a memory chip.
We can process more information.
We might yet again increase our word lengths.
We can do more complex operations faster.
That's what's happening because of the shrinking transistor.
Nothing's new about the transistor.
Well, I shouldn't quite say that.
There are innovations even in the transistors.
But they're basically transistors that work like we've seen throughout this course.
They just get smaller and smaller and more of them get crammed into more complicated
circuits.
Ultimately, we're looking at transistors that are nanoscale-sized systems.
And here's a couple of images of some nanoscale-sized transistors.
On the left, we have a carbon nanotube transistor.
It's made with a carbon nanotube, a very hot thing in today's world of nanoscale electronics.
I have two colleagues at Middlebury College who are condensed matter physicists who actually
work on devices like this.
The left one is the scale size of the carbon nanotube, which is in the middle at the intersection
of those four things coming in, which are actually electrodes which connect to the carbon
nanotube.
That's on the scale of a large molecule.
The transistor at the right is a single electron transistor.
At the bottom, that rectangular structure pointing upward is the gate.
You put charge on that gate or not.
That determines whether a single electron is trapped in that channel up above the gate.
This is a single electron transistor.
It works by a single electron.
What is the ultimate limit to the scale size of these things?
Well, Gordon Moore has a quote about this.
Gordon Moore says, when during a 2005 visit to Intel, that's when this happened, Stephen
Hawking, the famous physicist, was asked, what are the fundamental limits to microelectronics?
He said, the speed of light and the atomic nature of matter.
Now, the speed of light is a limit because the speed of light, although very fast, 186,000
miles per second.
Wow.
The speed of light is nevertheless finite, and it's about, if you work it out in feet,
it's about one foot per nanosecond.
That means in a billionths of a second, light goes this far.
Well, the speed of light is the ultimate speed limit in the universe.
The speeds of electrical signals in wires turn out to be, on the order of the speed
of light, typically two-thirds of it, half of it, something like that, depending on the
wires and their configuration, so they're close to but not quite the speed of light.
What that means is, if you want to build a fast computer, and modern computers operate
with clock speeds of several gigahertz, several billion cycles per second, you can't have
a computer that's this big because the time for an electrical signal to get from this
part of the computer to that part of the computer is much longer than the cycle time
of the clock.
And so the speed of light is a real limit, and that's forced us to make computers smaller
and smaller and smaller.
And one of the problems with that, as computers get more and more powerful and more complex
and have more transistors on them, you're cramming more and more power dissipation and
you're generating a lot of heat.
And one of the limitations, and one of the really clever things about today's modern
laptop computers particularly is, they've managed to make very fast computers that nevertheless
dissipate so much heat that they burn themselves up, although sometimes we get pretty close
to that limit.
So the speed of light is one of the limitations, the other is the atomic nature of matter.
And ultimately, the limiting transistor size, although I've suggested we may get into troubles
when we get down to about a nanometer in scale, the ultimate size is certainly governed by
what's called the Compton wavelength of the electron.
And this is a measure, I don't want to say the electron size, because an electron is
probably a true point particle, but in some instances it manifests itself with a size.
And the Compton wavelength is the sort of size of the electron as it appears to electromagnetic
radiation coming in that scatters off the electron.
And that size is a small fraction of a nanometer, it's down in the X-ray wavelength range, but
we certainly will not be able to make transistors that have scale sizes smaller than that.
And we will probably run into trouble well before that.
So if you extrapolate the exponential Moore's Law graphs I showed you, the one of transistor
size, we will probably reach this ultimate limit in the 2030s sometime.
As I suggested, we'll probably reach more practical, but still quantum related limits, probably
around the year 2020 or maybe a little beyond it, who knows.
So we're talking about futures.
What are some examples of futures?
Well at some point, again I want to emphasize the basic circuits that I've taught you in
this course, and that I've been teaching to students at Middlebury College for several
decades are basically unchanged.
It's remarkable to me that I've taught electronics through this huge revolution in electronics,
but the basics have stayed the same.
But what's happened is we have more transistors, they are faster, we cram billions of them
on a single chip, where when I started teaching about electronics we maybe had dozens or hundreds
on a single chip.
What a change.
At some point, that amount of complexity and miniaturization enable entirely new technologies.
And here's just a couple of examples.
Google has been experimenting with a self-driving car, and self-driving cars have driven hundreds
of thousands of miles on the public highways of California.
At some point, year 2020 maybe, these things will be available for sale.
They drive themselves, they're smarter than regular drivers, human drivers, they don't
fall asleep, they don't drive under the influence, they keep, they stay attentive, they don't
text while they're driving, and they will make driving safer, and in some sense easier
because we won't have to do the driving.
That's an example of the kind of complexity enabled not only by the miniaturization of
electronic circuits and computing power particularly, but also by the miniaturization and increasingly
less expensive sensors of all types, ultrasonic sensors that bounce a beam off the car ahead
to measure the distance, sensors that tell how fast you're going, and so on and so forth.
So there's Google's self-driving car as an example of an electronic future, and we also
have here a smart pal domestic robot which increasingly will do domestic chores, not
just running around like a big Frisbee vacuuming your floor, but doing all kinds of domestic
chores.
Already these things are in use in places like nursing homes and other areas where we
need, we have, that are labor intensive and robots can play a role.
So your electronic future is going to see more and more smart systems of all sorts.
Sometimes you won't even know that the systems are smart, but they got more and more smarts
built into them.
So that's your electronic future.
Now I have declared my mantra which is don't build by or by, don't build, and I'd like
to talk about that mantra before I move on to the final part of this lecture.
So your electronic future remember here in the second part of your future is as a designer,
a builder, a doer of electronics, and there's where my mantra applies, don't build by.
So I spent a lecture talking about flip flops, and I showed you how to build up from the
simple by stable circuit to an RS master slave flip flop which is shown here in circuit diagram.
You can go build one if you want.
My students do that as part of their electronics course, and you may have done it as part of
a project, but I don't recommend doing that if you're actually going out and building
your own electronics.
Rather, go buy an integrated circuit that already has flip flops on it.
One example, and I used it in several of the demonstrations I showed you, is a 74, 76 dual
JK flip flop.
You'll remember the JK as the most versatile of all the flip flop types.
It can do anything any flip flop can do for 40 cents or so.
You can buy a 74, 76 dual JK flip flop.
You've got two of them to work with in a single little integrated circuit package.
So buy.
Don't build.
Don't build.
Buy.
Down below I've got a counter circuit.
We talked about counters.
This happens to be a 3-bit counter, and what do we do with this counter?
It's a 3-bit synchronous counter in this case, and I wouldn't build one.
I'd buy a counter circuit which already has flip flops built into it.
I wouldn't take JK flip flops and make them into a counter.
I'd just go buy a counter chip and explore what kind of counter you want.
Here's an example of the pinout connections for a 74, 160 series counter.
So in your electronics future, don't build.
Buy.
Some other examples.
Way back early in the course, we talked about amplifiers, and we built, and maybe you constructed
it if you did the project, a complete audio amplifier with two stages of common emitter
pre-amplification followed by a complementary symmetry output stage, and I actually demonstrated
a tiny little integrated circuit audio amplifier chip.
I did it very early on when I was talking about power supplies and why the filter capacitor
was important.
I did it again when I talked about amplifiers, but if you don't like a puny fraction of a
watt amplifier, you can go out and buy this circuit here, which is a 68-watt audio amplifier
on a single chip, by the way.
It's got that big metal tab at the top, so you connect something to that to dissipate
the heat that that thing generates.
So don't design amplifiers and try to build them.
Go out and buy them as chips.
In the last lecture on analog electronics, we developed a function generator.
It produced square waves and triangle waves, and we could adjust its frequency and so on,
and that was sort of like the function generators, the fairly expensive instruments that I had
been using to make signals for my experiments.
Well, you can go out and buy a single chip function generator, and here's a picture of
a little board with that single chip function generator on it, and you can buy these boards
as kits for a few tens of dollars.
You attach a few knobs and potentiometers, and you've got yourself a complete function
generator, not quite as good and stable and accurate and so on as the ones I've been using
from the scientific instrument companies, but perfectly good for a hobbyist experimenting
with electronics and wanting to have a function generator that makes different waveforms at
different frequencies and different amplitudes.
So don't build by.
Having said that, the 23 lectures you went through this before are not wasted because
to use these devices intelligently, it really helps to know what's going on inside them.
I really don't like to think of them as black boxes, but sometimes it's good to do that,
and now I want to move on to the final part of the lecture and introduce an entirely new
idea, and that's the idea of the, not a new idea, but an idea that's a more complex circuit
than anything we've seen, and that's the microcontroller, and a microcontroller is
just a very tiny computer on a chip, and many electronics courses that you could take
in colleges and elsewhere, in fact, start with microcontrollers, and they show you how
to build things with them, and it's great because if you have microcontrollers, you
can do all kinds of stuff right away.
I wanted to show you how things work inside microcontrollers and every other electronic
circuit, and that's why we spent 23 lectures going through the individual pieces that work
inside computers and other devices.
Here's an example of a microcontroller.
It's got a central processing unit, which is just a lot of logic gates set up to compare
binary numbers to add them to do various other things.
It's got flash memory.
That is like it's hard drive.
That's where it stores stuff for the long time, including data and programs.
It's got some random access memory.
It's got a serial parallel converter and a serial port that can bring data in or out,
and typically it has digital inputs that can look at voltages and say, is this a one or
is this a zero, and it's got analog inputs going through analog to digital converters,
and it's got digital to analog converters giving you analog outputs.
It's a complete computer on a chip.
Here's my laptop.
It's actually a two-year-old unit, so it isn't the absolutely most modern, and here
is a microcontroller, that long black chip, and I'm going to just do a quick comparison
of them.
My laptop uses 64-bit words.
The microcontroller, it's an Amtel AT Mega328 microcontroller, has only eight-bit words.
My computer has 768 gigabytes of flash memory instead of a mechanical hard drive.
The microcontroller has 32 kilobytes, 32,000 bytes.
Mine has 768 billion.
Mine has 16 gigabytes, 16 billion bytes of RAM.
The microcontroller has only two kilobytes of RAM.
The clock speed in my computer is 2.7 gigahertz, pretty fast, but not the fastest these days,
and the clock speed in the microcontroller is 20 megahertz.
They both have serial ports that are the same.
They're USB ports.
The processor costs for my, the processor alone, the micro processor at the heart of
my laptop is $300.
The processor here costs about $3 in bulk.
So these are comparisons between two full computers.
One just has less capability than the other.
Either of them, by the way, in that $300 includes things like the display or the keyboard or
other peripherals you might need to connect.
Now I have said I wanted you to understand the interior of controlling of computers,
of all kinds of electronic circuits.
That's why I've taught you this course.
On the other hand, if I were starting over today as an electronics hobbyist, I would
want to learn everything that I learned from this course or that you learned from this
course, but I would probably start in right away playing with microcontrollers because
they're easy, they're basic, and they can do everything.
And I want to spend the rest of this lecture giving you some examples of that.
You can actually go out and buy little boards that have a microcontroller and several other
components on them.
This particular board is called an Arduino.
There are actually several models of Arduino.
Arduino is an open source product that was developed first in Italy.
It's widely available.
Electronics hobbyists all over the world play with these things and use them to do all kinds
of work, all kinds of devices.
This particular one is an Arduino Uno board and the long chip at the bottom, the long
black thing, is the microcontroller and that is in fact an Arduino board over here.
So there's the microcontroller and right now you see a couple of one LED blinking.
By the way, you may have observed this thing moving around in the course of this lecture
and you may have heard a clunking noise as it moved.
That's because when I stood in front of it, it's a light seeking device and I'll get
to it soon and it moved to a different source looking for the brightest light it could find
in the sky.
That's what that's doing.
We'll get to that shortly.
So here is an Arduino microcontroller.
You can buy this thing for about $30 and you can pay a little bit more for some peripherals.
You can power it off a little power adapter or you can plug it into your computer's USB
port and power it off that or you can plug it into the little adapter you have with your
phone charger that plugs into the wall and has a USB port because USB, remember, supplies
power as well as moving signals around.
So let me talk a little bit about this Arduino microcontroller development board and I would
tell you if I were starting out again as an electronics hobbyist, I would start right
here.
But I would want to know about all the things I've showed you in this course and the thing
that will make you a more powerful user of microcontrollers is knowing how to wire other
small circuits that might be controlled by or do controlling of the microcontroller.
This microcontroller, by the way, this whole board has, in addition to a couple of power
receptacles, a USB input and a power input, it's got five or six 10-bit A to D converters.
Remember the A to D converter in the previous lecture was the most sophisticated circuit
we built.
Well, this has five or six of them on here.
It also has digital inputs.
It has digital outputs.
It has analog inputs.
They're all in these little connectors at the sides of the board.
It also, in addition to getting power from a USB, the beautiful thing about this is it's
a computer and it's programmable with a rather simple coding language that you can learn
very quickly.
And if you buy one of these, you can get free software and you can have examples of simple
circuits that you can build and then modify the code and see how it works.
So these are computers and no longer are you just connecting wires to do electronics.
You're also programming and you can program on your laptop.
You can connect the USB cable to your laptop.
You can upload the program to the microcontroller and then it resides in the microcontroller's
flash memory and the microcontroller will execute that program.
That is, it will do what you're asking it to and it will continue to do that without
needing to be connected to your computer.
It just needs power.
So let me give you an example that here is the Arduino microcontroller and I have connected
it up.
So two digital outputs, which produce 5 volts or 0 volts, depending on whether they're 1s
or 0s, are going to two LEDs, a red one and a green one.
And I have connected one of the analog inputs to a potentiometer, a variable resistor again
that I can tap off the middle of, and that's put across the 5 volts supply, so 5 volts
at one end, 0 at the other, and I can dial any voltage between 0 and 5.
And what I did was go to the, download the Arduino software, go to the software and look
at a simple example that made an LED blink with an interval between blinks that depended
on the voltage, the bigger the voltage, the longer the interval between blinks.
So I'm going to turn the dial on this potentiometer up and you can see that the LED, the red LED
is blinking more and more slowly.
So that was one of the simple examples of a code you could write in an utterly simple
circuit you could build with this thing.
And so I did that and I said, well, I want to do a little bit more, I want to learn a
little bit about this.
And so I said, well, let me modify this, let me say, suppose the input voltage is less
than half a volt, let me not try to blink that LED, it's going to blink so fast you
won't be able to see it.
So I'm going to turn the voltage down and the LED blinks faster and faster, but then
I said, if I get below half a volt, let me turn on a green LED instead.
And that's what it does.
The green LED is on as long as the input voltage is less than half a volt.
And if I go up over about half a volt, the red LED starts blinking and the rate at which
it blinks gets slower as the voltage gets greater.
A little more coding, you could have made it blink faster as the voltage went greater.
You can do all that.
And here is an example of what a piece of Arduino code looks like.
Now if you've never seen computer code, you might be overwhelmed by this, but don't be.
Many of the lines are simply things that initialize the Arduino microcontroller and get it ready
to work.
Many of the lines are simply comments about what the program is doing.
They don't actually do anything themselves.
But I've highlighted some lines here that have to do with things like comparing the input
number that's coming in from the A to D converter and doing one thing, namely lighting the green
LED if it's too low and just keeping it lit, or if it's higher, blinking the red LED and
some of these commands and you can just read them out in English and you can almost see
what they're saying.
You can see what they're saying.
They turn on this LED and then it says pause for a while and that tells me how long the
pause interval is going to be before I turn it off again and so on.
So the highlighted lines are really doing the meat of this program and they're not at all
hard to understand.
So you too could get an Arduino and work with it and connect it to many of the other circuits
we've developed in the course of understanding modern electronics here.
Okay, well let me end with something I'm really proud of, an example of something my student
has done with microcontrollers which I think is really a beautiful example of electronics
of everything we've learned in this course.
So to begin with Middlebury College where I teach recently installed a field of 34 solar
tracking units that produce a total of 143 kilowatts in bright sunlight.
Now these trackers do not actually follow the sun.
What they do instead is they have GPS units on them and they do a calculation, this calculation
is perfectly accurate because we know exactly where the earth is in relation to the sun
and so on.
Based on the time of day and the season and so on, they calculate where the sun is in
the sky and they run motors that tilt these panels so they're pointing directly at the
sun.
Even if it's a cloudy day, the snow sun visible, they're still pointing at where the sun would
be if the clouds weren't there.
And my student reasoned this way, he said, well maybe that isn't the best thing to do.
On a bright day with no clouds, it is the best thing to do, point right at the sun.
But what if it's a cloudy day, what if there are clouds covering the sun and some clouds
are reflecting light and there's actually more energy coming from a different part of
the sky?
What if it's completely overcast, maybe you're better off putting these things flat.
And so he set out to build a device that would literally track the sun by looking for the
brightest point in the sky, the point where the most energy was coming from.
So here's my student, Misha Garshall, I'm very proud of him, a Middlebury physics major
who went on in a joint program with Dartmouth and studied engineering at Dartmouth.
And here he is on the roof of our science center with his device, which you can see
in some of the close-up pictures.
But I'd like to show you the device because it's sitting right here.
And what we have here is a, on the device is a thing called a pyronometer.
This has nothing to do with the circuitry.
This is a device that actually measures the intensity of sunlight.
This is a $5,000 instrument by the way, which is very precise and gives us a very precise
measure of solar energy.
And it's just going along for the ride.
Now remember back in the first lecture where I introduced feedback, I had that crazy demonstration
I called Funny Face.
And Funny Face, I shined a flashlight, and Funny Face had two little eyes that were photo
conductive cells, photo resistors, and it followed the flashlight.
And it had a motor, and it turned in one dimension to follow the flashlight.
Misha's apparatus is a much more sophisticated version of Funny Face.
It has four eyes, and they are down here at the bottoms of these channels created by this
big cross-shaped thing, and that's designed to cast very sharp shadows.
And so what this does is the device looks at the voltage levels coming in from a voltage
divider consisting of these photo conductive cells, these photo resistors, and another resistor.
And it compares them, and it has two motors, one that moves the apparatus in this direction,
and one that moves it in this direction, and it tells those motors to move in a way that
optimizes the amount of light coming into here, and so it points at the brightest source
of light around, and let me demonstrate it now.
So I have a bright light, go behind here, and right now it's found the brightest lights
in the studio, and the reason it was the other way at first is because when I was talking
about my laptop and standing in front of it, I was blocking those lights, and it went and
found a brighter light that's behind me.
But now I have a very bright light, which I'm going to turn on, and this will be an artificial
sun, and I'm going to hold this light up, and you immediately see the device starting
to move.
There it is, the total light on it is now a maximum.
It's measuring not just the light from this, but all the studio lights and everything else,
and it's optimizing that light.
Notice it moved mostly around its vertical axis, but it knows about the other axis also,
and if I raise this light up higher, it's going to move both axes in such a way that
it will optimize, maximize the amount of light coming in.
So that's a very clever device, and Misha wrote a code for the Arduino.
The Arduino is right inside there, you can see the blue Arduino board if you look closely.
The other board, the white board is containing several controllers for the motors, the motors
take more power than the Arduino can supply, and so it sends signals to the motor controllers
and the motor controllers, which are powered by this heftier power supply, then tell the
motors how to move.
So there's Misha's tracker, and let me end this demonstration and the entire course as
well with a movie that shows you time-lapse photography of this thing over the course
of an entire day.
Misha took this movie, he set up a camera that took a picture every 10 seconds through
the entire course of the daylight hours of the day, and it is a beautiful movie that
shows what's going on with this tracker on the top of the Middlebury College Science Center
throughout the course of an entire day.
So let's take a look at that movie.
So here we are on the roof of Middlebury College Science Center by Centennial Hall.
We're looking east at sunrise.
You can see the tracker that I just demonstrated.
It's on the cart at the left center of the frame, and we're going to show you now a movie
that is taken at one frame every 10 seconds throughout the entire course of the day.
So let's roll the movie.
People coming and going, sun beginning to rise, up it comes, watch the tracker, you'll
see it beginning to move.
Get a close-up soon, there it is pointing toward the sun, some clouds coming by, it's
looking for the brightest spot in the sky, even if the clouds are still there.
It may not be right where the sun is.
Up it goes as the day advances into the morning, here we are midday, you can see the tracker
pivoting around as the sun goes through the sky, we sped it up a little bit there.
The device to the right, by the way, is a radio telescope built by another Middlebury student
for his project, it can image the sun in radio waves.
Now you can see the sun in the sky and the tracker following it beautifully as the sun
begins to drop down in the afternoon, a few clouds come by, and down it goes, lower and
lower, the tracker following it beautifully on a crisp clear day where it really is seeing
the brightest sky from the sun, here we are finally late afternoon toward sunset, looking
toward the Adirondack Mountains in the west as the sun is setting lower and lower, and
we actually see the tracker move up a little bit as the glow of the sunset rises up into
the sky, and finally evening comes, it darkens, and eventually the tracker goes to a rest
position pointing straight down.
Well that was quite an impressive movie and quite an impressive project, all the more
so I like to think because it's an example of electronics in the service of our planet.
What could be a better thing to do than to figure out how to maximize our ability to
extract clean, free, non-polluting energy from the sun, which is supplying us energy
at the rate of a thousand watts, a kilowatt, on every square meter of Earth's surface in
bright direct sunlight, electronics in the service of the planet.
Well I want to end this lecture and this course as I have every other one with a project,
but the project for this lecture is much more open-ended.
I want you to do two things, or at least one of these two things, the first one is to go
out and enjoy your evolving electronic devices, and I hope you will enjoy them all the more
because you have some appreciation and knowledge of what's going on inside those devices.
And if you're more adventurous, build your own electronics.
You're coming out of this course with the knowledge and understanding to put together
the basic building blocks to make electronic devices of your own design to do what you
want them to do.
Well I very much enjoyed teaching this course because I so much enjoy working with electronics
and I hope you have too.
Get out there and enjoy your electronics.
This series of lectures is intended to increase your understanding of the principles of modern
electronics.
These lectures include experiments in the field of modern electronics performed by an
experienced professional.
These experiments may include dangerous materials and are conducted for informational purposes
only to enhance understanding of the material.
Warning
The experiments performed in these lectures can be dangerous.
Any attempt to perform these experiments on your own is undertaken at your own risk.
The teaching company expressly disclaims liability for any direct, indirect, incidental, special
or consequential damages or lost profits that result directly or indirectly from the use
of these lectures.
In states that do not allow some or all of the above limitations of liability, liability
shall be limited to the greatest extent allowed by law.
