All right, come on Blender. Let's see what you got. Yes, it finished! One frame, only
16 hours. Okay, so let's see. Per frame, 16 hours for a 1000 frame animation should get
done in about six months, which is before Christmas. Yeah, that's all right. Let's do it.
Hello? Hello? Can you hear me? It worked! It worked! Hello! It's me! It's you in the future!
I'm calling you from 2030. Hi! Really? Because it looks like you haven't aged a day. Well, yeah,
I mean, I wear a lot of sunscreen. What can I say? But listen, you need to know, render times are
important. Okay? Because if you spend too long rendering, then you'll end up like me, living in
a box on the side of the highway, poor, desolate, a piece of chewing gum on the soul of society,
I'm homeless. Right. So because I rendered for too long, I ended up homeless?
Basically, I spent so long rendering that, well, I was never able to develop my skills as an artist
because I was rendering so much and then so I was never able to get a job. Also meth. Ah, right.
Copious amounts of meth. I'm sure, yeah. Listen, the sky's going black again, so I haven't got much
time, but I need to give you the advice that might just save your life. It's the 18 ways to speed up
cycles. Okay, well, just email it to me or something. Can you do that? No, no, in the future,
we don't have email. It's all like cerebral uplinks. It funny story, actually, it was the downfall of
society, like the nanoparticle base of the pain and what collapsed. Okay, it's breaking up. Okay,
okay. All right, listen, I'll fax it to you. Fax it? Who's got a fax machine? Yeah, I know the hipsters,
they brought it back, it's done. Well, fine, but I don't have one, don't... All right, listen, I've
just sent it. Andrew, with great power comes great responsibility. Rest easy on the wicked,
for they have not seen the truth. Also, don't touch meth.
It's weird, but helpful, you know, the best kind of weird. So that's what we'll do in this video,
we'll go over the 18 ways to speed up cycles rendering. These aren't, well, these aren't like
a checklist that you must follow, but they're sort of helpful tips, you know, if you want to shave
off seconds, or maybe you're rendering a big feature length animation, you know, one of the
first for Blender, and you want to see how to improve it, this is going to go over all of the
ways that I know of how to do it. So let's get to it. Number one, reduce your light bounces.
Light bounces. What are light bounces, Andrew? Well, light bounces are something that happens
in the real world and in 3D software. So when light hits another surface, it bounces off that
surface, and it'll hit another surface, it'll bounce off that surface, et cetera, et cetera,
to infinity in the real world. But in 3D software, that bouncing process is a very
processor expensive task. So you pay for that in your render times. So there's a value in Blender,
which will allow you to set the maximum, the minimum and the maximum amount of light bounces
that happen in the scene. And by default, it's set to 12, which I think personally is a little bit
too high. So for example, this is a classroom scene, which has eight light bounces set at maximum,
right? Okay, this is how it looks at eight, right? Now, what I'm going to do, I'm overlaying a grid
over here, and we've got along the x-axis, the number of bounces. And what I'm going to do is
I'm going to cycle through these bounces here. And in the background, the render is changing
with this graph, okay? It's an interactive demo, right? So you can see that up until about
four light bounces, there's no difference, no difference at all. And that's basically,
my guess is, there wasn't actually any extra light to bounce around. So four was the maximum.
And then after about four, you can see three to one, you can see that the glass becomes opaque,
but don't worry about that. I'll show you a fix for that in a second. And then finally,
zero down at the bottom there. So zero, there's a big change. You'll notice the biggest difference
between no bounces and one bounce, okay? So in my opinion, other than the glass, you don't need
anything beyond one light bounce for this scene, which means you can save a considerable
amount of time. So instead of going from eight light bounces, if you went to one,
you'll be rendering at 48 seconds instead of 95, which is a huge savings. Now, I know you're
probably thinking, hey, yeah, but that glass looked really horrible there. So we still want the
glass to look nice. Well, actually, the settings over here, these are the bounce sets. This is
where you would change it. So these are the broad values here, the maximum, minimum for the whole
scene. But you can also set it individually for your transparency and your transmission,
and all the different ones there. So all you would have to do is just set these diffusing
glossies down to one, and then just make sure that the transparency is set to at least three
or four or something like that. And that would be it. And you would be able to save a huge amount
of render time. A lot of people don't know that, but it's a really easy way you can do it. Okay,
number two, use portals. Portals. Does he mean these portals? No, not those portals. I'm talking
about Blender's portals. So when you are making an interior scene in Blender, which is like, you
know, a room, and you have a window in which there is light coming in through the window
from particularly an HDR, but any environment light, basically, you've got a lot of light
calculation because it's actually lighting the outside of your room. And then some of that
light is going in through the window. Well, that's wasted information, right? That there's too much,
you know, that that's being wasted there. So what you can do is over the window, if you place one
area lamp, and then in the lamp settings, if you check a box that says portal, what that will do
is it will tell Blender essentially where the window is. So make sure that you get the light
in through here. And don't worry so much about the rest of it. It's huge. Once you see it,
have a look at this. So this is with no portals. All right, you can see very grainy. I'm hoping
you can see that in the YouTube compression, but it's a very, very grainy image. Now, when we add
one portal, sorry, two portals, because there's two windows, look at the difference from super grainy
to almost completely clear, okay, which is crazy. Now you can see the render time does actually go
up by 30 seconds, which is not much. So that's not really a fair comparison, because really,
you know, the whole point of a render is to get rid of the noise. So if we were to, without portals
at all, try and get it to the, to that level, I would have to double or probably even triple the
amount of samples. So just for this comparison to make it fair, you can see that you would have to
really go double or triple your render times to try and get it without portals. So it's a huge
saving. So make sure that if you're making an interior scene, all the architects out there
watching this, if you hadn't learned about portals before, and hopefully this will save you a lot
of time in the future, use them and yeah, it's really, really handy. So again, that's where to
find it. And I've got a tutorial in the description if you want to watch it, but it's super easy to
use. All right, number three, use your GPU. Now some of you older blender users perhaps would say,
yeah, come on, everyone knows that. Well, not necessarily. Especially a lot of beginners,
they will not know that you can actually, with Blender, you can render with either your CPU
or your GPU. So there's most computers have to and generally speaking, and this is,
excuse me, let me get a drink. That's where you change it. You change it in the device setting
right there. You can set it to GPU. And if you don't see that, by the way, if you only see CPU
there, if you go to file user preferences, system in the bottom left hand corner, you should see
underneath compute device, something that says CUDA. If you don't see something that says CUDA
and your graphics cards underneath it, then you don't have a card that is supported in Blender.
Right now AMD is not supported in Blender. So I mean that they're working on it. I just don't
know when it's going to happen. So Nvidia, yeah, you would see it there. And generally speaking,
Nvidia, you know, GPUs, whatever, they render a lot faster than a CPU. So this is just one example
here, but you can see that it's saved a render time of 33%. And that's, you know, that's probably
with a really good CPU as well. So that's a considerable savings. But the really, really
cool thing about GPUs, and the reason that there was such a game changer for the industry like
five years ago, is that you can add more graphics cards to your computer, but you can't add more
CPUs. Like if you wanted to upgrade your CPU, you first of all won't get that much of a bigger
difference over your last CPU. But not only that, like you can't put two CPUs in your computer,
at least not usually, right? So if you wanted to upgrade your CPU, you would have to upgrade your
motherboard, which means you have to upgrade your RAM, which means forget it, I might as well just
get a whole new computer. Whereas a GPU can be taken out and put into another computer,
no problems. So it's a very easy investment. If you want to halve your render times, you can
purchase two graphics cards, and it will render it in half the time, because it's a linear sort of
growth. So three graphics cards, four graphics cards, it's going to render four times faster
than one graphics card. So yeah, it's a huge, huge thing. So make sure that if you've got
a GPU and you can use it, use it whenever possible. Number four, change your tile size. So this is
another really important one that a lot of people don't realize is so important. Tiles. What are
tiles? Well, tiles are when you hit the render key, those little blocks that appear on the screen
that slowly reveal your render. Those are tiles. And the size of your tile is defined in the
render settings underneath tiles X and Y. By default, it's set to 64, which is not really ideal
for most people's whatever they're they're rendering on. Okay, the size of your tile depends on whether
what whether you're working on a CPU or GPU, the tile sizes should be different. In fact,
the exact opposite. So if you're working and you're rendering on a CPU, the smaller your tile size,
the best coming in at about 16 by 16 pixels, the better it will be. If you if you go larger for
CPU, the worse it will be. And on GPUs, the opposite, the larger your tile size, the better the
renderings will be. So you could see that you could considerably like if you accidentally were
rendering at a really small size on the GPU, you could take forever to render the scene because
it's you've got the wrong tile size, right? So you can have huge memory, sorry, render time
improvements just by changing the tile size. As a general rule of thumb, smaller tile sizes work
better for CPUs. I just use 16 by 16 every single time works for me. And the bigger tile sizes for
GPUs maxing out at about 512 by 512, generally speaking, is better. Now different GPUs, different
tile sizes will work better. I've heard that like different architectures for Nvidia,
like a Kepler card or a Tesla card, some of those use better with like rectangle shapes. I don't
know why. But just when you get a new card, just do some tests and figure out what your optimal
size is for your card, because that'll save you a lot of time in the future. All right,
got to get another drink here. I think his office is really dry. My throat is getting raspy. All
right, number five, reduce your samples. Yeah, you might say, duh, you got to reduce your samples.
But okay, first of all, what are samples? I know a lot of you do, but let's talk about samples.
Samples, most of you know as that grain that appears over your image, okay? So the whole
point of rendering is to try to reduce that grain and you do that by increasing your samples,
which you can define in your render settings right there. So obviously the higher the render
sample amount you set it to, the longer your render times are going to be. But the clearer
your final image will look. So basically you want to try and set it to a higher value for your final
render. And yeah, but the problem is, is that I see a lot of people using incredibly high sample
amounts to the point that there's no point in doing it that high. So for example, here is a scene
set at 10,000 samples. And here's the same scene again set at 2,500 samples, one quarter of the
number of samples as before. Now as I flick back between them, can you see a difference? No, you
can't because it's indistinguishable to your eye. You can't see any difference between them. And yet,
the 10,000 samples one took most of the day to render and the 2,500 rendered in less than an
hour and a half. So huge time differences there, but very, very little difference between the actual
images. So there's a point where the samples that the point of going any high is pointless. So you
want to try and find out what are the optimal amount. Because while this might sound like an
exaggeration, like yeah, who would go to 10,000? Have a look on Blender Artists. You'll see some
people that are rendering their scenes. Like I've seen some with like 50,000 samples and they said
they let it render for 48 hours thinking, what are you doing? There's no reason to go that high.
That's just insane. It's just a waste of power, a waste of your time more importantly. And it's
just don't go that high. Okay, keep it keep it as low as it needs to be. Speaking of noise and
samples, there is a new feature in Blender 2.79 called denoising. And it is going to be a game
changer. Now I've only just played around with it for a little bit, but I'm going to show you
here what it does. Denoising does this. It takes that grainy image and then it applies
like a post processing step, I believe, on top of it, which will make it appear clear and smoothed
out. So it's a big deal and it's going to be a huge deal for the Blender community once everyone
sees it. It's like, whoa, this is going to make a lot of difference. You're going to see it from
now on, like in the future, most renders are going to be using a denoiser. Because for example,
here is my bathroom scene and I'm hoping you can see it in the YouTube thing, but this is a very,
very noisy image. Very noisy. I would never use this as a final image. However, when I applied the
denoise filter on top of it, it looks like a final render. It's amazing. I don't properly
understand how it works because I haven't really researched it that much, but it looks like black
magic. It's like sorcery. So yeah, okay, now the difference between these two here, you can see
that the denoising step applies a small, like it does actually add something to the render,
but again, it's not a fair comparison to say that the denoise one took longer,
because the whole point is to make a clearer render. So it's saving you, let's say if you had to double
or sorry, quadruple the rendered time, it's saving you considerable amounts of time,
especially for animations. Like I can now, looking at this, I can say like, wow, I can finally do an
architectural animation now. Because before like interiors are just horrible, just noise absolutely
everywhere, but with this, it's going to make it possible. So I'm really, really excited about this
feature. And I think once the community sees it, they're going to go ballistic. But yeah, try it out.
It's really fun. In 2.79, it'll be in there for everyone. I'll probably do a tutorial on it if
people want it. But there you go. All right. Number seven, this is one a lot of people don't
realise, but you should be using the latest Blender version, because there are big differences
between all the versions of Blender and newer versions. Pretty much every new version of Blender,
they try to improve on the render times of the one before it. And they're always doing improvements.
So this is, I did this one a couple of years ago, but comparing 2.64 to 2.71,
basically like a year of releases there, you can see considerable time savings. And this is for
both CPU and GPU. CPU, especially they've been able to really crush the render times in each
consecutive later release. So it's just going, it's going crazy. So make sure that you are using
the latest version. Sounds like a no brainer, but you know, I still see emails from people
where they're like, Hey, I'm, you know, I'm using 2.66. So I don't have that feature. And I think,
why, why? And they're like, Oh, well, you know, I just, that's the one I've got. So I don't,
I like how it works. So I don't want to install the latest one. It's like, you can do that. And,
you know, I'm all for making life simple, but you're going to be paying for it in your render
time. So make sure you're using the latest version, please. Again, I haven't done it for 2.78,
whatever we're on now. But yeah, it just, it's going down. Okay. All right. Number eight,
this is an interesting one. A lot of people don't realize, but actually different operating systems.
And by that, I mean, you know, Windows, Mac, Linux, they have different rendering times,
because it is supported on every platform, which is fantastic. And most software, you can't do that.
But there are different times between them. So here I've got two tests, just testing between
Windows and Mint, which is Linux, a Linux distribution. And you can see that for GPU,
there's almost no difference. In fact, in most examples, I found Windows performs better on
Windows, sorry, GPUs perform better on Windows than they do on Linux. However, for CPU, Linux
kills it. So CP, so Linux is really good at CPUs, not as great with GPUs, because I think they put
a lot more effort into the drivers for Windows, because there's gamers on it, obviously. But yeah,
it's really good with CPUs. So that's just something to keep in mind. I wouldn't just
immediately rush out and go and get Linux. Don't feel you have to do that, or that you're missing
out because you're using Windows. I've known about this for years, and I use Windows. And that's
just because it makes my life easier, because that's where all the software is. I can play games on it
as well. And it's just, I don't see, I'm happy to eat the render time. But you know, hard core
people out there, if you really want to cut down on the render times, this is why a lot of render
servers, by the way, if they use Linux, because it's just optimized and just performed so much
better. So yeah, you might be wondering, hey, Andrew, what about Mac? Where does Mac fit into
that? I have no idea. I'm going to throw it to you guys. Do you guys have a Mac that also has
Windows and Linux? Because I searched for it online, and I didn't see anybody that had one,
like a triple boot system. So if you do, it'll be great to test out the render times between
them. I'd like to see it. Yeah, post it in the comments if you do. All right, number nine,
clamp it. What do I mean by clamp it? Wouldn't you like to know? Clamp it? What's clamping?
Other than that meaning? Clamping is, okay, so you know, sometimes when you render a scene,
you see in the background, you sometimes see these tiny little little tiny grains of light.
Okay, those are called fireflies. And oftentimes, no amount of extra rendering like increasing your
samples will get rid of those. So you can't get rid of those fireflies. Sometimes they're just there.
They're usually caused by small light sources or core sticks or a bunch of different things.
But you can get rid of them by changing your clamp settings in the render settings there.
I will say this should be used as a last resort, and I'll explain at the end why,
but it can be done. So say, for example, you have this teapot scene here, and you can see that in
the background there, you've got a lot of grainy noise. Okay. Well, if you were to clamp it, you
can see that it goes away immediately. So this is without clamping, and then this is with. Okay,
big change. So that's, that's going to save you a lot of time because you don't have to use as higher
a sample amount. So that's a huge improvement there. Now, again, that is where you can find it,
the clamp direct and indirect. However, I use it as a last resort. So to me, I use it like a get
out of jail free card. If nothing else works, that's when I do the clamping. And the reason I
don't use it all the time is that by clamping, it's going to bring down the values of, yes,
the fireflies in the background, it'll clamp those values down, but it will also clamp down every
other value in your scene. So you can see with this teapot here, difference between them, I'm
losing some brightness in the rim there, because when I clamped it, I had to, I had to get rid of
some of that brightness in the teapot, which I didn't want to do, but I had no choice. So that is
something to keep in mind. Just keep it in mind. Generally, also zero is turned off. And then the
higher the value, the better, because the higher the value, it's going to allow more light values
to get through. And then you just turn it down gradually and see when the fireflies disappear.
And generally speaking, you only want to use indirect, not direct, but yeah, it's up to you. So
like if you have like light shining in on the floor, that's a big part of your scene. If you
just clamped it, you're going to lose all that brightness in the, in the floor. So that's why
use it sparingly. Number 10, speaking of fireflies, caustics, the largest cause of them. So caustics,
for those who don't know, are like if you've got a glass of water on a table, the light shines
through it, you see that weird little like light pattern that appears on the table. That's refractive
caustics. You can also have reflective caustics, which is when light bounces off a surface onto
another surface. And it creates like an interesting light pattern. So those are two different types
of caustics. And they are very processor intensive for, for a renderer, right? And they often cause
more problems than they're worth. So there is two little checkboxes in your render settings,
enabling you to turn them off. And sometimes turning them off can save you a lot of time.
So for example, this is an image of a glass of water on a table or floor, I guess,
that's a big glass of water, let's be honest. But you can see there, you've got that nice
light shadow on the ground there. But if I was to turn it off, you can see that there's no light
shadow. However, the render times were a lot faster. So this is the difference between the two
there, 31% faster without the caustics. However, you could argue that the whole point of this scene
is to see the light shining through the glass. So you would obviously want to leave it on.
But honestly, for a lot of scenes, it's just, it's more trouble than it's worth. And for probably
95% of all my renders I've ever done, I just leave it turned off because it's just so commonly the
cause for those fireflies to appear in your scene. I just don't like it. And I just, I don't see the
point in most of the time. So I usually leave it turned off. But there you go. Okay. So number
11, let's talk about object instancing. What is object instancing? So say you have one tree
like this, right? And you want to make two trees. So you take that tree, you hit shift D,
and you duplicate it. Now you have two trees. However, as well as two trees, you've also doubled
up on the amount of memory you've used, and your render times as well, because it has to
now cache that mesh, essentially. So by duplicating it, I have doubled the amount of information in
the scene. Not so great, especially when they are an identical tree. So what you can do is you can
use object instancing so that they share the same object data. So for example, with this, with this
leaves here selected, if I select these other leaves, shift select, then hit Ctrl L here underneath
make links, if I select object data. Now up here in the object data panel, you can see that next to
the object, there is now a two number next to it. Because there are now two objects using that same
object data. And you'll know that they're connected because if you were to edit one of the meshes,
like say make that all the way out there, then you can see that they both have that change. Okay.
But you say okay. But I've got a number of different objects here. Okay, I've got I've got tree branches,
I've got a bunch of different stuff going on. I don't want to have to do that every time I duplicate
something. Well, if you want to duplicate something, but you want to keep that object information,
if you use alt D, alt D instead of shift D, the same thing happens, you've duplicated the tree.
However, it's automatically made them share the same object data. So this means a lot for
your final render. So this is very simple scene with a bunch of trees on it. And this is with
them set to single users, meaning I duplicated them the wrong way, I did shift D instead of alt D.
Okay, they're all spread out there. Okay, you can see that the render times two minutes 42 seconds
and six gigabytes of RAM, which is incredible amount. However, if it's instanced, I have the render
time. And I'm more than I decrease the memory used by 100 times almost, just by using instances
instead of actual like, single objects for each one. So huge savings there. And I'm ashamed to
say it took me like six years of using blender before I even realized that object instances were
a thing. So don't feel bad if this is the first time you're finding out about it. I'm hoping it's
news to a few of you out there. So use that and you'll save a lot of render time and memory,
which means that you more likely you can render it on your graphics card. So anyway, there you go.
Cool. Now let's talk about adaptive subdivision. Sounds technical. Well, this was something that
again is a very new feature. It only came out, I think in the last release or two. But what it
allows you to do is say you have an object, a scene like this where there's a lot of depth
in your scene. So you've got stuff that's in the foreground, you've got stuff that's in the
background. So a lot of nature scenes, interiors, all that kind of stuff, they have this going on.
Well, the detail that you need to see in the foreground is different to the amount of detail
you need to see in the background. The background, you can get away with very low poly objects,
but in the foreground, you want to have higher poly objects. So adaptive subdivision allows
you to do that. You just check one box in your modifier settings there to use the adaptive
subdivision. And now it will subdivide it depending on how close it is or how far it is
from the camera. And that has big savings for your render times. So check this out.
This is where it turned off. Render is in 21 minutes, uses 12 gigabytes of memory. Now,
with it enabled, it's 14 minutes and it's used a fraction of the amount of memory.
Huge amounts of saving there. So this is why I was so excited when it came out.
I made a whole tutorial on it, by the way, if you want to see it, it's in the description.
You can check it out. But it's such a huge feature. So yeah, it's really important. So
especially for nature scenes, do make sure that you make use of this new cool feature.
Number 13, remove alpha transparency. So this is fairly scene specific now we're getting into.
But this is a big one. So what is alpha transparency? So this is when, particularly when
you're making trees or plants or anything like that, sometimes you want to have a leaf and
the leaf maybe has like interesting little bits on the like frilly bits on the outside there.
And you want to make sure that it has that frilly bit in the render. So you can actually use
the alpha channel of the leaf so that it has that nice frilly pattern there.
As opposed to if you were to just model around it, you know, in a blocky shape,
you wouldn't get that pattern there. So it looks nicer with alpha transparency.
However, you pay for it in render times significantly. So here is a tree with alpha
transparency, it took 29 minutes to render. Without alpha transparency, the blocky method,
it's 16 minutes to render almost half the render time. And honestly, there is very,
very little difference between them in the in the final render. You can actually see like a
bright green outline there. But that's only because I think it was just as an example on
this render to show you where it is. But you shouldn't see that if you've modeled this correctly.
If you're if you're making a tree, I I'm ashamed to say I didn't even realize this and I was making
trees for ages. I thought that using alpha transparency was the way to go because it makes
a better looking leaf. And I didn't realize it was adding anything to the render times,
but significant amounts. So just crazy. So make sure that if you're making a tree or a plant,
that you are using the blocky leaf shape. And don't worry about the alpha transparency because
you'll pay for it. It's just too expensive. So forget it. Alright, number 14, reduce the strand
count. So again, very niche depends on your scene. But strands, basically, it's the particles. So it
could be grass, it could be, what could it be, could be hair on a character's head, or it could be
rug on a lounge room floor. It's a very expensive thing to render all that every single one of
those particles. So you pay for it. So this is with 145,000 particles with five children's
strands for each 36 minutes. 65,000, however, is 26 minutes. So there's a big difference between
that. And you know, you might think, you know, maybe it's not that bad, I might go with the extra,
you know, 145. And that's fine. You can do that. But just know that the more strands you add into it,
the longer you're going to be paying for it. A lot of people don't realize that they try and use like
a full on million particle ground or something like that. And then wonder why they can't render.
So just know it's a very intensive task. I'm gonna get another drink here. Gosh.
Number 15, coming to the end. Remove volumetrics. Volumetrics. What are volumetrics? Well,
you might already know. But it's like fog. It's when the light shines through something,
or it's just fog in a scene, right? So this was a new feature, well, new ish two or three years ago,
they added it, but you can now render volumetrics, which is very, very cool. It's also very, very
expensive in terms of rendering. So here's a scene with volumetrics, very cool scene. And here's it
without volumetrics. Obviously with looks a lot nicer. And that was actually the whole point of
this scene was to show off the volumetrics. But you can see that it does add significant amounts to
the render time, about 40% almost extra. And it looks a lot looks a lot grainier as well. Maybe
my throat is as well. So you have to you have to be aware, like when you're building a scene,
know that when you if you're just going to add some fog or whatever, if it's a tiny little bit
of fog, like do you really need it? Because you're going to be paying for it with your render time.
So use it when necessary. Sometimes for this scene, it makes a lot of sense. But if you're
seeing just consider it. Okay. So number 16, speaking of things to cut, you can also cut
the SSS, which is subsurface scattering. So subsurface scattering is something that you might
have seen. If you hold your hand up to the light, or if you're talking to somebody in the sunlights
behind them, you see it through their ears. But it's light as it's traversing through an object,
it will shine through on the opposite side. That's called a subsurface scattering.
And there is a special shader for that in your node settings. So yeah, basically, if you're
making a character, that's really the really the only time you use it. Another example might be
food, like a glass of milk or something, you can sometimes get it there, but mostly just characters.
Yikes. Sintel the sequel. Sintel, my precious. You forget how good hair looks until you don't
have it anymore, right? I'm sure a lot of men have realized that. With SSS, you can see it
renders in four and a half minutes. But if you use no SSS at all, it's a fraction of the time. So
it's a very expensive shader to use. So I would agree that it does actually look better with
subsurface scattering. If you don't use it for a character, the skin sort of looks waxy. No,
not waxy. It looks like like hard concrete or something like you really need some light to
be passing through it. So yeah, I would say you do need to use it in this case. It is a lot to
pay for those. So you know, you know, when when useful, you can use it. Otherwise, I just don't,
right? Number 17. Enable MIS. What is MIS? You might ask. It looks like MI5, but it is
not the same. Multiple important sampling is what it stands for. It's in the world panel,
right down there, little checkbox sort of hidden there. And there it is. What does it do? Well,
if it's turned off, it might, your scene might look like this. If it's turned on,
your scene might look like this. Now this is really only applicable if you have
lit your scene using an HDR environment light. Because I believe what it's doing is it's taking
it from, you know, an HDR with all its thousands of pixels and trying to find the light values of
each one. And I think when you enable it, it tries to average it. So you don't get that noisy
some parts dark, some parts bright sort of mess going on. It tries to average it, I believe.
Don't quote me on that. But it has a huge, huge impact. And yeah, I believe it's now turned on
by default, but it used to be like this hidden secret that some artists knew about. And when
they turned it on, they were like, Whoa, my scene looks so much better. But now I think it's turned
on by default. So it's not as cool anymore. You can't impress too many people with it.
But for a while you could. So if you if you are rendering with an HDR,
got to make sure that that one is checked. Otherwise, it's going to look awful.
I mean, basically, it looks broken if it's if it's not enabled. So that's I mean,
it really shouldn't be called a performance improvement. It should be called like,
is it right? Yes or no. With it checked, it is correct. So anyway,
finally, the last one to leave on because there was 18 cycles improvements, we're going to talk
about these are the small performance improvements which you can find in your render panel underneath
performance. So these are the use spatial splits, the use air BBH use, sorry, save buffers and the
persistent images. Now, here's the thing, maybe you might have noticed this as I was cycling
through it. But in these examples, I didn't actually find these checkboxes to actually
make an impact. The first time we ran these tests, we were able to see an improvement.
We did it for a different scene and we rendered like one frame and then we stopped in another frame.
And we were able to see an improvement. However, I and then I recorded the start of this video
and I call it the 18, you know, ways to improve cycles or whatever. And now I then I did some
retests halfway through, you know, doing this tutorial, and then I wasn't able to reproduce it.
My point being is that these small performance improvements supposedly are supposed to improve
the performance of cycles, but I haven't actually found that to be the case. I found it to pretty
well stay the same whether their boxes are checked or whether they're not checked spatial splits,
I've been told as opposed to increase your memory slightly with a decrease in render speed,
I didn't find that I found that render speed was about the same. By the way, if you see like two
seconds plus one or two, whatever, factor that as zero improvement or change because the system,
if you re-render, I think twice without changing anything, it can usually come within a hair of
that anyway. So it's basically the same, no difference. Use hair BVH. Maybe five seconds
faster with more memory. It was actually supposed to be when you check it, use hair BVH, it's supposed
to use less memory. So I found it to be the opposite way with that one. Not great. But I did, I spoke
with Andy Karalsik on Twitter and he said from he heard from Shurgay that this is really only
impact, it really only impacts it if you've got motion blur. So say you had grass blowing in the
wind like that, and there was motion blur. Oh, for Agent 327, his hair was moving or whatever.
And apparently that really, really taxed the render times. So this was supposed to solve that.
Or it should solve that, right? But I wasn't able to replicate it. Sorry to say I really,
yeah, I wasn't able to do it. Save buffers. I've since learned Andy told me that this is actually
was really only applicable to the render, the Blender internal rendering engine, and that cycles
it won't make much of a difference, which explains why I wasn't able to get much of a difference from
it. It was supposed to case your image textures somewhere so that it's then able to reference
them faster for your extra frames then on, I didn't find any improvement. And then we've got
persistent images, which I think also might be the same, like it doesn't apply to cycles,
I could be wrong on that. But I wasn't able to find any improvements. So yeah, so these,
I mean, I feel bad ending on such a low note, like I wasn't able to replicate this stuff. But I do
include it because it looks so important. And you see this stuff in the performance settings.
And you've probably wondered, like I've wondered, what do these buttons do? Should I leave them
checked checked on checked off? Does it am I paying for render times because it's turned on or because
it's turned off? Honestly, in my opinion, it doesn't make any difference. Probably nine times
out of 10 the scene that you're rendering is not going to make any difference. When you're doing
a production, like they were doing for Agent 327, you probably come across like one or two
frames where it just crashes, or you get horrendously long render times for this specific object. And
that's where having a guy like sure gay, the developer on your team to go, Oh, you've got to
check the head be the age box, right? That's when it's applicable. But I think for the everyday
artist, I mean, this should really be hidden almost in like the user preferences. Because it's
that I feel like it doesn't make that big of a difference to anyone. In my opinion, that's just
my opinion. But yeah. Alright, we discussed a lot. Let's round it off. We discussed a lot in
this, this little video. The summary is on blender guru.com. You can click the link below.
That's what it says behind my shirt and microphone. Link is below. So I'm going to put the whole
summary up there with images and everything. So you can just reference it in the future. You
don't have to listen to my voice all over again. You can just reference it on there. Now, if you
look at this and you think, boy, Andrew, that sure is a lot for the user to take in like why don't
those stupid blender developers pull their head out and turn this stuff on by default or make it
automatic or something like that. Here's why you a lot of these things you might seem like a no
brainer like, Hey, the everybody should be using GPU. Well, not everybody has a computer that supports
GPU. A lot of features don't work with GPU. So having it on by default isn't a good idea. Other
things like portals, how would blender know whether you've got an interior scene or an exterior scene
where the lights coming from, etc. Some of these things you just have to it's when you're building
the scene. It's only the artist that's building it that can know that this particular thing is
useful. Yes, it's true. Some of this stuff you would never know unless somebody told you. But I
think that's part that comes with the territory. Some of it is becoming automatic. Like for example,
use optimal tile size. Tom told me that that's going to be in 2.8 or 2.79. But yeah, that's going
to be automatic. So hopefully you shouldn't have to touch that in the future. And there's other
stuff like use denoising. You could argue that should be an automatic feature, but you could also
argue the other way that it blows things in, you know, so you might not not every artist needs it
on by default. So the whole like default argument isn't as clear cut as it sounds. So some of this
stuff you do just have to know. So that's why I'm making this video because it's a common question
a lot of people have. How do you improve render times and some of the stuff you just don't know
until you find it. So and the other thing is, is that a lot of these things here you don't have
to do every time you make something. It's just like some of this stuff like volumetrics, sss,
object interesting, all that stuff, that stuff that you once you know it now, when you make a
scene in the future, you'll know like, oh, if I add fog to this, I'm going to pay for that
dealing. So I might not do that or something like that. Like you don't have to go through a checklist
every time you render a scene, or maybe you'd want to do that anyway. But yeah, you can just
yeah, know about it. So as an example, this is the scene that I started with on the on the first
slide. Let's talk about let's say I finished this scene. And now I want to do an animation,
I want to make the camera fly through the scene. Now, if I was just doing a still
I probably wouldn't worry about doing all 18 of these. I would say, you know, if I can render it,
who cares? I'm just going to render it overnight. I'm going to come back. It's going to be fine.
If I'm doing an animation, it could mean the difference between a two month long render
and a five day render or a five hour render. I don't know. Animations are so like it's just
obviously it's multiplied exponentially. What is it exponential? Whatever the performance
improvements you can make, like even down to fractions of a second can have big impacts over
a you know, feature length film. So for something like this, I would go through my checklist and
I would say, All right, looking at my scene here, can I reduce the light bounces? Yes,
doesn't need portals. I will make sure I use my GPU if possible, make sure I'm using the optimal
tile size. I don't worry. I need to worry about clamping or reducing the samples because they're
already optimized denoising. Yes, I want to make sure that I smooth it out instead of, you know,
having heaps and heaps of samples. Make sure I'm definitely losing using the latest plan
diversion. That's just a no brainer object. Instancing absolutely. If I had for all those
duplicate cherry blossom trees there, if each one of those they were individual single user
objects, I probably wouldn't even be able to render it. It would be so overblown in the memory.
So definitely make sure I'm using that adaptive sub div definitely for the ground and rocks and
things like that. I want to make sure I'm using that offer transparency. Absolutely make sure
that's eliminated from all my nature objects because that's a very common scene where you would see
it strand count. Make sure I'm using the lowest amount of grass possible. Volumetrics. That's
here's an example of like volumetrics like you there's fog on those mountains there.
Do I really need true volumetric fog or can I get away with doing it in the compositor like a
fakery sort of thing where it's not entirely accurate but I wouldn't be paying for it as
dearly. Doesn't need SSI because it's hasn't got any people in it basically. MSI turned on. Yes,
if I'm using an HDR and those small performance improvements, right? That's that's sort of the
checklist that I would run through as an artist if I was doing an animation. Not every single scene
that I make I go through this. It's not like you know a flight manifest you have to go through all
the checklists before you take off or whatever. It's only if you absolutely need to.
Give me a like. No, thank you for watching essentially. This is the end. If you found this
useful do give it a like and I do want to end by saying thank you to these people. Mason Menzies
actually did a whole bunch of the tests basically most of the tests that you just saw a painful
job rendering for two hours coming back rendering again. But he did that so thank you to Mason,
the Blender Foundation for providing the CC source files, Mike Pan, Christoph Souche,
Nick Brunner and E-Marage provided some of those render time test benchmark scenes
and then Rob Garlington for the artwork for this tutorial. But that's it. Thank you for watching.
Hope it was useful and send it to anyone who's got terrible render times.
Thank you for watching. See you next time. Bye.
