Alright, so the first speaker for the afternoon session is Vaughn Pratt, his title is up here and I'll let you read it.
It's a very long title so I won't even waste my time reading it. Hopefully by now you already read it.
Too much of my talk to read it.
Let me move on to the next thing, which is this slide.
We have here a modern day constructive logician standing in front of the painting of probably one of the very first constructive logicians.
If you read his postulates, they're not assertions, they're things like, well, to construct a line segment with two points.
That's the first postulate. In fact, there are more, but I would like to say happy birthday before I say more.
I think I first met you exactly the same day, maybe, even as Anil.
We were both in Moscow, we both travelled up to Lake Titieri, we were both before that trip.
We were just right under one lot of Russian banquet where my children were very embarrassed at seeing me try to copy you in...
How could you?
Three years ago, so thank you so much.
It's gone to the tables.
I wasn't embarrassed at my family.
Let me remind you of what that gentleman on the previous slide, the one on the right, I mean, sent back in the elements, which was around 350 BC or so.
He said that two points determine the line segment. This is in the modern translation.
He didn't use the word line segment. That's how we think today.
So I'm updating all of this.
And the line segment may be extended indefinitely. Two points determine the circle.
And by the way, it's specified that it was done with a compass and that's not necessary, you'll see shortly.
All right, angles of congruence, which is a strange statement.
And inclined lines meet, right?
They tilt it over and they jump into each other.
Okay.
So this business of what you've been wrote, set the time.
It seemed terribly formal and people were so amazed that for many centuries thereafter,
it sort of set the pace for rigor in mathematics, which is amazing.
But then around about 1880, when people started agonizing about things and getting more formal,
they turned around and said, well, wait a moment, that might have been fine for the up to the previous century, but let's now take this up a bit.
We will, as I called it, modernized ugliness.
That term wasn't in use. They called it either foundations of geometry or something like synthetic geometry.
And so we have a series of works, all of which are aimed at giving their idea of how to do it.
And there's quite a variety here.
And by the way, they're all done from a logical perspective.
There's no attempt to use algebra.
In fact, the first sort of thing in that spirit that used any algebra was within the last sort of a century,
one of Tarski's former students who in 1981, and then posthumously ghost written version of the same thing,
which came a book, wrote from affine to Euclidean geometry.
Jeremy Apagard in 2009 was who his colleagues wrote in the Review of Symbolic Logic,
a paper on understanding Euclid's system and trying to make it rigorous but more faithful to Euclid.
So there was a good look at the axioms, look at what Euclid said,
and see whether maybe it was actually more rigorous than the 19th century people thought it was.
And so that's what Apagard et al. was doing.
And Michael Beeson has more recently been doing intuitionistic logic of Euclid with a thing he calls,
an axiom system he calls Euclidean, constructive geometry.
And his heart starts there, anything that's provable in ECG implies that its ruler and compass constructable.
And so all you constructive guys should appreciate what Beeson has done.
Now Smiele's work is closer to our work in that it emphasizes the transition from affine to the full thing,
the full Euclidean geometry.
However, and it's also closer in that it's more algebraic.
But to her, and to one of her co-workers who co-authored earlier papers,
where they're not Tassie, but somebody else.
In fact, she's worked with both Tassie and somebody in Poland, I think.
But her notion of algebra is the same numeric one as informs linear algebra.
So if you come to it and you say, oh goody, somebody's last doing Euclid from an algebraic perspective,
you are disappointed because it just looks like the way that they do it for linear algebra.
So, but that's what we've done.
It was done most notably by Grassman in 1844.
Nobody could figure it out, so he tried to write it more clearly in 1862.
He still couldn't figure it out.
He'd go back and look at it and say, it's incredible.
He invented the whole subject.
But of course, in those days, people weren't thinking in terms of exterior algebras.
They had no idea what that was.
I mean, he wasn't terribly clear.
It wasn't like he used sort of, you know, trying to get crystal clear to everybody.
He just sort of saw it things and had the intuition.
Oh, okay, that's how it works.
And you can see that he had the intuition.
And you can also see that he wasn't communicating terribly clearly.
But people have to give him credit now for inventing the subject.
A simplified version of the subject in terms of vectors was developed independently by Ibs and by Hebbyside
at around the same time.
Hebbyside wrote a series of papers in the electrician.
You can see he's a practical sort of guy.
He's been able to figure out how to turn the quaternion approach of Maxwell's equations
into what we would consider today a more traditional vector-based account of the same thing.
And in the process, Hebbyside simplified Maxwell's 20 equations
down to the four that you get on t-shirts.
If you're at MIT, mandatory t-shirts.
Right.
And Gibbs is parallel to the same thing except his background is more semi-dynamics rather than electricity.
But both of them needed vectors for their respective efforts.
Okay, so the goal of the present work is to make Euclid's synthetic geometry no longer the opposite of algebraic.
We want to make it just as algebraic and hence constructive as Descartes' analytic geometry has become.
But while respecting Euclid's avoidance of numbers.
You see, that was the thing that Schmielaft missed out on, that when she waited algebraic,
she said, well, algebra is all about numbers.
We know that from Bould, this beautiful algebraic logic.
We only realized a half a century later that it could be, Bouldian algebra could be about numbers.
In fact, it's a Bouldian ring.
Up to that point, it was just a Bouldian lattice.
And the idea that it could actually be about numbers never occurred to anybody.
In fact, it is Bouldian logic.
It's really the algebra of arithmetic, one, two, an exclusive order and multiplication.
Okay, so, right.
Oh, I wanted to say that the thing that makes algebra constructive
is that you don't get these existential statements that characterize this sort of logic where they say,
oh, it's something rather.
And what Gürtel and what constructive solutions in general,
so, in particular, Pusch, is this idea that you really want to take these existential quantifiers
and scolomize them.
Well, the algebra does that from the accent.
It just says, we'll scolomize everything that we need to talk about,
and then we don't need to use existential statements.
It's not in the algebraic sort of the core, the algebraic core.
So that's what we're doing here.
We want an algebraic core such that there are no scolomies.
We don't need to scolomize anything because we've done it in advance.
Okay, so rational numbers have been presumably in use for thousands of years before Euclid.
And Max Deem, who co-authored a rewrite of Moritz Patches,
from the Zungen on geometry in 1926, and he is after Pusch first written it.
And then in an appendix wrote that the absence of numbers in the first four books of the elements
might have been a reaction of the Greeks to the then recent discovery of irrational numbers.
And before then, everybody would have been happily using Cartesian coordinates for millennia
to do their geometry.
And so this got around the big concern about Cartesian coordinates that are all square root of 2.
What the heck is that?
So that's not half square root of 2.
So let's try and do things in a way that doesn't trip over these irrationalities
or doesn't force us to sort of come so close to the irrationalities to see them quite so closely.
So that's what's more or less Max Deem that was that one there.
Okay, so here's the five postulates again.
So the line segment, two axiom, two postulates.
The circle, the right angles, and the two lines that are leaning towards each other
is called the fifth postulate, which everybody has heard of.
They may not know what the first two to the fourth postulates are,
but everybody knows what the fifth postulate is, even though you could only put it last.
Okay, so here's the same thing that may be more constructed with algebra.
So two points to the line segment, namely their convex hull.
And I'm going to formalize things in such a way that it'll be obvious what that means.
On the other hand, it obviously shouldn't be in the first position
because there's going to be a lot of machinery coming up there.
So we're not going to start with the first postulate for that reason.
And that happens, by the way, in line algebra.
You do not start with the reals or the rationales, you start with the energies.
And so that's what we're doing, we're reorganizing you to look more conventional.
So postulate two, the one I promise we'd start with
is that a line segment a b may be extended to twice its length by making a copy on it.
So that makes it completely constructed.
It's not just indefinitely extending it, we actually make it twice as long.
And that creates not just one segment twice as long,
but it actually creates two because we've copied the starting segment,
stuck it on the end, so they've created two segments, the same as one and the whole thing.
Are you going to take equally length as primitive or actual length as primitive?
The question is because the whole concept of length isn't in here.
Although I haven't given you the axioms yet, I'm telling you the intuitions.
Why don't you wait for the axioms and then re-ask your question.
Okay.
But actually I'll answer that question in about three or four slides.
Okay, two points a b determine a circle, and you might say,
oh, well look, as long as you've got a compass, you can always produce a circle.
So what else do you need?
Ah, but suppose you left a compass at home that you had brought your set square with you.
What would you do?
Right, so what you do is you take, you've got two points,
and you stick the set square in there like that,
and you slide it around and let the tip trace out a circle, right?
Who knows that?
If that's the diameter of the circle, then you can slide the set square on.
So even if you left your compass at home, you still got your set square to draw a circle with.
And so, in fact, we have two ways of doing it,
and the reason that these are here is not because you might have left your compass at home,
but because I actually need this to construct the constructable numbers.
I can't do it alone with a compass.
I have to use a set square as well as a compass with this technique,
in order to construct the constructable numbers purely algebraically.
Okay, all right angles have come to it,
and they arise with a perpendicular.
That makes it a little less mysterious.
So they come from, they also come from,
those are already using it in three,
the last line in three refers to four,
so that suggests it may be forward to proceed three.
And finally, inclined lines meet,
and they meet at the extension of the trapezium witnessing inclination.
So what normally witnesses inclination is a pair of angles such that,
when you add them together, they come to less than 180 degrees, right?
You want these lines to be leading in towards each other,
so you take this angle and this angle,
you add them up, and if they're less than 180,
then the fifth pass here that promises you that these lines will eventually meet.
So here's another way to do it.
Draw a line parallel, starting somewhere here,
parallel to this, and then slide this point up,
until this is now half the length of this, right?
Call that the witness trapezium witnessing the fact that they're inclined to each other.
If they, or if you can't get it to be half the length,
then you say, oh, well, I guess I need to find some other witness trapezium somewhere,
or maybe we're not in the right space or something.
Once you've got that, you just extend each of these to twice their length,
and you have actually created the intersection point
that Euclid non-constructively promises you.
So here's an actual construction of the thing.
So this is more constructive than Euclid in that sense,
and it's using algebra.
So this has actually got all sorts of nice things about it,
and it's incredibly usable.
Like, I've been using this to build balloons and things in three dimensions,
and doing this on the computer,
it's so much easier to think like Euclid did
than to play around with these messy coordinates.
Okay, so Euclid's ordering of his postulates.
He put them in a strange order,
and I'd like you all to say about that slide.
So we're going to reorder them.
So Euler was supposed to realize, pretty much exactly two millennia after Euclid,
that postulates 1, 0, and 5 define affine geometry.
And 3 and 4 expand on that by introducing notions of distance and angle.
Affine geometry, augmented with an origin,
is what we call linear algebra today.
Linear algebra with an inner product gives us distance and angle.
The dot product is 0,
the dot product is 0 there at right angles,
and the square root of the dot product of things,
gives you something with itself,
gives you its length.
So this separate student slide passing us into the affine part,
1, 2, 5, plus 3, 4 gives you the inner product portion.
Okay, so postulates 2 and 5 are independent of any notion of density,
just like the integers are,
and so logically we would put them first today.
And so 2 is a prerequisite for 5,
because I can't really talk about 5 without a notion of extension,
as you saw just here a minute ago.
Okay, so that means that we've got to order 1, 2, 5, that's forced it now,
and they define a self-contained discrete affine geometry
as a geometric counterpart of a Boolean group.
So it's postulate 5 that makes them a Boolean,
and we'll see what happens when you relax the Boolean condition
if I ever get to the end of the talk.
Okay, postulate 1 introduces density in terms of energy centroid,
that's going to be an operation that I defined for you informally and inductively,
but the actual formal definition entails no induction.
It will simply be the expansion of the induction,
giving the set of equations,
it will have to be an infinite set,
because I've expanded out the induction,
and I'll be able to find an exitization.
So that's the affine portion.
Truly, it's just two operations, extension and centroid.
Okay, so beyond infinity, beyond affinity.
Right, so the other one was to affinity and beyond.
So beyond affinity, the same reason it makes postulates 3,
if it's powerful and makes it a problem trial,
we need two operations, because it's really so powerful that we can't do it with one.
The concept is so powerful, I mean.
The idea of a compass is not strong enough.
We need the set of square and the compass.
Okay, postulate 4, by comparison,
is easily disposed over the single total operation.
So that's why we put it first,
and so you can see there that we've got 4B43,
and that's the final order,
and that is forced on me by these considerations.
Okay, alright, so here they are.
So there's five postulates, five operations,
and you might want to match them up objectively, but you've done it.
What happens is postulate 3 steals an operation from postulate 5.
Postulate 5 doesn't need its operation,
so it generously gives it to postulate 3,
which is so strong that it actually needs two operations,
so it's the carry one.
Alright, so operation 2, extend AB to C,
extends AB to AC class,
and so operation 1 is simply the centroid of endpoints.
It's a finitary operation with arities from two onwards.
The operation perp ABC
drops a perpendicular from the point C to the line AB.
Now here we get to the two complicated operations.
This defines the concept of a circle in two different ways.
So we have, first of all, norm of ABC,
and what that's doing intuitively is it's taking 3 points ABC.
It's using two of them to define the circle in the manner of Euclid,
and then it takes a point C somewhere,
anyway, inside or outside the circle,
anywhere except sitting on A itself,
and it just drops the raid from A to C,
intersects it here and says,
okay, we've normalized AC to the length of AB.
So you can think of it either as a thing that creates circles,
so it creates circles in the sense that the image of norm AB
with a varying argument C
traces out the entire circle,
and now we have the other operation, tangent.
So in this case, C, instead of being used,
sort of being normalized onto the circle,
it's sent over to the horizon.
So instead of looking at the nearest point T,
like you're flying a plane around and you look down at the ground,
instead of asking, where would I land if I jumped out of the plane,
you ask, how far can I see?
And so we're looking at this tangent point T,
and that forms the right angle here,
and that's where the set square comes in,
because there is now implicitly a second circle here,
whose diameter looks like that, right?
And so what we're doing implicitly is we're intersecting
a circle with diameter AC with this other circle AB,
and so there's really multiple ways to think about circles.
Okay, so, genetic spaces,
we are now putting on our algebra hat,
and we are thinking in pure algebra terms.
So up to now, we have this, oh by the way,
I'm probably down at the bottom here, there's,
oh it isn't, okay, anyway, I'm abbreviating everything.
Oh yeah, there we go.
So the abbreviations E, C, P, N, T
are the obvious ones, for example,
like Perk, Neumann, Tangent.
Okay, so, genetic space is an algebra structure,
but the binary operation X, Y,
obviously not commutative, nor associative for that matter,
and if you eventually think of it as the extension
of the statement AB to a third point C,
and it satisfies these conditions.
X, X equals X, that's the importance of,
this gets around the question of what happens
if the lines have to be distinct.
Now you can't do algebra, of course you can do algebra,
you just say if they're not distinct, then something happens,
and namely, X, X is really a point, not a line.
X, Y, Y, that's associative to the left,
so do your X, Z up here is X, Y,
one more point, that's X, Y,
and now turn around and go back, right?
Go back to where you started.
That answers Harvey's question,
that answers Harvey's question,
I'm struggling with everybody's name here,
because mine goes blank with names.
That answers Harvey's question,
namely, we just simply say that the distances are the same
in this manner.
It's like group theory, right?
This is sort of a variant of group theory.
Okay, and here's a bit that makes it a billion,
no, actually, this bit does not make it a billion groups,
it's just basically here.
Namely, we have a right distributivity principle,
which is this, right?
These buttons are not humanly engineered,
if you memorize what they do.
Here was I, okay,
whoops, that's the wrong button too,
this one, there we go.
Good, okay.
This one, yeah, that's right, there we go.
Okay, so what this is doing is it's saying
given a point X, given points X, Y, and X, Y, right?
So you can think of that as sort of marching along,
and there's the third point in some geodesic.
So take a point Z over here,
and reflect X through there, you get XZ,
here's Y, it goes through there, that's YZ.
So you'd like to know where,
what happens to XZ, YZ?
Well, it goes over to XZ, YZ, can you read sideways?
I can read sideways, that's amazing.
And that should be equal to XY being projected through Z.
So in other words, you've taken a geodesic,
reflected it, or inverted it through a point,
and that should be another geodesic.
That's what that's saying.
Okay, so the canonical example is the underlying set of a group
equipped with the binary operation X, Y, and this X, right?
It's two arguments.
And you'll find that that satisfies these axioms,
even if it's not abelian.
Okay, and there's also a concept of Kwan-dol
that we will see after Gavin Wraith,
and Kwan-wraith, and Kwan-wraith,
agonized over this.
Kwan-wraith kind of got things off in the wrong foot,
but Wraith's intuition was this.
Kwan-wraith said, oh, you've got this.
Wraith didn't argue.
And so if you've ended up with a notion of Kwan-dol,
it's really based on this intuition,
and that there are two separate concepts of the pair,
which is all very confusing in the literature.
Okay, the free geodesic spaces have the following property,
that every geodesic term over a set of variables
is equivalent to one containing neither parentheses
nor adjacent repetitions.
And that accounts for everything.
So I'll now tell you the free spaces.
As a corollary, if it's two variables,
then they code the integers as follows.
The generators X and Y here can be understood as zero and one.
The next step is two, then that's three and four,
and then if you run the whole thing backwards,
you get the negative numbers.
X and Y, zero and one, if you read it,
if you read a term, the parity is on the left
and the sign is on the right.
So more like the audituring for first to write
is binary numbers.
But that's quite exact, it's not exactly binary arithmetic.
And I'll use the notation X, one Y equals Y,
X to Y equals XY, X to Y equals Y,
X to Y is so on,
there's no immediate way to refer to the points along that line.
Okay, so the intuition, geometrically,
is that X and Y is n times as far from X as Y.
So I've got a way of talking about integers now.
So every pair of points generates a discrete geodesic in this way,
and in a free geodesic space,
all the geodesics are either singletons,
that's the degenerate case,
because the two points are the same,
or they're kind of the infinite,
and they're generating what amounts to the integers.
Okay.
So it grows a geodesic space satisfying WX,
YZ equals WY, XZ.
Anyone recognize this field? Do you recognize this?
Phil Scott.
Yeah.
Yeah, this is the interchange axiom.
Yeah, this is the interchange axiom from category theory
when you're doing two categories,
but actually it arises all over the place.
There's lots of situations where you don't have commutativity
and yeah, in this case,
in the category we do have that,
but we don't even have that here.
This is a situation we have neither associated with nor commutativity,
where it's just a little useful principle,
and it expresses Euclid's fifth postulate in both directions.
Euclid only said that if you incline them towards,
then they intersect.
The converse is that if they intersect,
then it must be because they're leaning towards each other,
and Euclid thought that by Proposition 14 he proved it.
If you look at the proof of Proposition 14,
you'll see that he wasn't thinking
about some of the weird spaces like Sears
that could provide a counter-example to his proof,
and so his proof is buddied in that respect,
and so he didn't really prove the converse to Proposition 5 the way he thought.
We need both directions.
And the commutative interpretation is flatness,
and now we just hit the median groove,
which is the characterization of flatness
in the geometric algebraic geometry.
The first postulate strains into both equations
as a single equation.
Okay, and that's what it grows.
So a grove is a flat geodesic space, right?
Geodesic spaces were before we had that axiom,
and oh, and incidentally,
it implies the right distributivity axiom,
so it's not like we've got a fourth axiom here.
It just replaces that weaker principle of inversion
that says that a geodesic thing reflects to another geodesic.
So three axioms, and we've got a concept of the grove.
Okay, so I'll skip this one because it's kind of fun,
but we don't have time for it.
It just shows how you can use
interpret the interchange law
as actually constructing this witness trapezium.
It does it by taking an arbitrary triangle A,
whose base is the base of our desired triangle,
and building enough machinery using the...
Let me just fill this thing out here.
This is the whole thing.
Oops.
This is badly engineered.
Okay, let's see if I can get this right.
Yes!
There we go.
Our fifth puzzle of EF and HG,
you can extend it to this.
So what A, B, R, C, D, this is the interchange law.
What that's saying is that if you extend EF and HG,
they both arrive at the same point,
which is the point of intersection.
So that's the given job I've got to pass that.
Right.
Okay, now that we've got the centroids,
that gives us the density.
So every finite, non-empty list of points of groves
has a set of centroids to find that the set might be empty,
or it might be infinite.
So if you took a sphere,
you took the north pole and the south pole,
and you asked, what's the centroid of the north pole
and the south pole?
There's a set of points around the equator.
So you might have a lot of centroids.
So a singleton is its own set of centroids.
There's going to be the basis for the inductive notion.
And now if we have a non-empty list of N minus one points,
then C is a centroid of gamma, X.
So gamma X is just gamma with another X tacked on the end.
These are lists.
Gamma is a list of points.
When gamma has a centroid,
satisfying BNC equals X.
And who at BNC was?
It was move C out N times as far as BC.
So you've got a point.
So example, let's take the centroid of a triangle.
So if I have a triangle here,
and I want to know where is the centroid of that triangle?
Well, I start by asking,
what is the centroid of the base?
And then I draw a line here,
and I say the centroid is going to be one-third of the way
up the median there.
And so what I've said when I say there's B,
there's the centroid,
and here's the point at the top, A.
And that was BNC, I suppose, or something like that.
And so here's my point B,
the centroid of the base of the base.
Here's my centroid of the whole triangle.
And three times BC is equal to the point A.
So what we're getting now is something where,
because we're working with lists and not sets of points,
we can have repetitions in the list.
So if I ask for the centroid of X, X, and Y,
that's giving X double the weight of Y.
And so I end up with a point between X and Y,
or A and B or whatever it is,
such that A has been preferentially weighted by a factor of two,
and so I end up with a third.
And if I can get a third,
what kind of mathematics would not allow me to get any rational?
Right?
It has to be very advanced mathematics.
Right, so clearly I have directions.
All right.
So let's see.
Double-trick.
That's even once.
Let's see what other complaints do I have about this system.
Here we go.
Okay.
One of them makes a count.
Heal me all the time.
Another complaint is it gives me twice when I clicked it once.
All right.
So centroidal growth.
The growth of centroidal,
when every finite non-empty set of elements has a unique centroid,
so a unique existence, right?
That's the criterion to be a function.
So that means that in a centroidal growth,
centroid is actually an operation,
an energy operation.
So the first theorem is that the full subcategory of growth
consisting of the centroidal growths
is equivalent as a category
to the category fq of affine spaces over the rationals.
Let's say, but wait a moment,
all we've done here is we've written down some equations.
How could you possibly get a category in power
for the field over which you're working, right?
What about affine reals, right?
What about the real line?
Isn't that a model of these equations?
Well, it is.
Except that when you ask about
what are the homomorphisms doing to it,
well, they notice that you can pick out any rational sublime
and swing it away from the rest of it.
And so you notice that, oh, the topology is missing.
What we've got is uncountably many copies
of the rational line interleaved with each other,
and they're not connected.
So really what we've got is an affine space
of uncountable dimension and not an actual real line.
And that's why I can get away with saying
that this is actually equivalent to the category
of the affine spaces over the rationals.
Okay, second theorem.
Energy centroid is, for each end,
is defined as a family of operations
satisfying two equations per arity.
And so that makes the centroidal growths
a variety in its own right.
Well, that's not surprising.
I mean, I really got that in the first theorem.
But all this does is it says what the language is
that makes it a variety in its own right
as opposed to simply borrowing from the language
of affine spaces.
And then I can use my language in place of
the language of affine spaces.
So that means I've got my language in my language.
My language is basically all of the
normally weighted linear combinations
over the rationals.
And so I can say things like,
oh, yeah, that was the backward button.
Let's see, one of these is,
b3c equals a.
Yes, you're right.
So, no, that's not where I should be.
You could probably click twice or something.
Let's see.
That's forwards.
That's forwards.
I did it twice and it did it once.
Sometimes I do it once and it does it twice.
Let's see.
Where was I?
Oh, yes.
Which button now?
Oh, yes, that button.
Good.
My intuition is not geared to this answer.
Okay, so 2y minus x is the extension
operator, right?
Give me extend xy.
That's 2y minus x.
What about x over 2 plus y over 2?
That's, by the way, these are the
normally weighted ones, right?
2 minus 1 is 1.
And so the weights are adding up to 1.
A half plus a half.
That's 1.
Now, what's that operation?
Well, that's binary centroid.
There we go.
Okay, so language of centroid all grows
is extension and centroid.
Analogy.
Boolean, lattice and Boolean rings
have two separate languages.
One is logical.
One is numerical.
But they define equivalent categories, right?
Boolean, lattice and Boolean rings are
the same category of two equivalents.
Let's see.
Give me money.
Where does this button?
Yes.
Does anyone have that slide?
Okay.
I probably never wrote it.
I need to go back and write something there.
Okay.
Good one.
Yeah.
Good.
So I'm going to do the operations beyond,
right, these are all the good theorems
about affine geometry.
So we're going to move on now.
So there's the language.
There's three operations.
So we've got more operations if you
count centroid as one operation.
Perp ABC yields the point of the
line AB.
Can you all visualize that?
Everybody should be able to visualize that.
I didn't draw any diagrams because
it was too much work, not because
I needed to visualize it.
In general, ABC determined a plane
as a subspace of the equidian space.
Only if they're convenient would that not happen.
And that's going to come out for sure.
Okay.
There is this button.
Yes.
So norm ABC yields the point nearest to C
on the sphere with center A and radius AB.
That's just Euclid's way of drawing circles.
So you can think of AB as setting a scale
for all unit vectors.
And by moving C around,
you trace out where all the unit vectors are.
And it's tracing out the sphere,
where radius AB.
Because we don't know anything about dimension.
We haven't said anything about dimension.
So this could be in a horribly high dimension.
It might be in an uncannably dimension space.
You and I might be in an uncannably dimension space.
We have no idea, right?
We can see.
We have ways of constructing at least three dimensions.
And if you're a physicist,
you can probably construct several more.
And most of us are more normal in that.
And you can get up to three.
Or four, if you look at your watch.
That's what you're probably doing by now.
Okay.
Here's the next one.
And it's likely you can end the last one.
Tangent ABC is the nearest point T to B,
satisfied A, hence all,
following equivalent conditions.
Here's the tangent point from C
onto the sphere AB.
Look at the horizon in however many dimensions
you're looking at.
So there's this sub-sphere, which is the horizon.
It might be a circle if you're in three dimensions.
If you're in two dimensions,
as you could imagine, it's off to B.
It's just a pair of points.
And you take the nearest one to B,
if that's well-defined.
Okay.
So another one is T is on the sphere,
formed as the intersection of the sphere with radius AB
and the sphere with diameter AC.
That's the same thing.
No.
AB is the hypotenuse of a regular triangle
with a triangle beside AT equal to AB.
That's the one that's the set-squared point of view
when you left your compass at home.
So these are all just equivalent ways
of the same definition.
So these operations are going to call them
ECP and T.
I forgot that I told you that before,
so I'll do it again.
Okay.
Independence and base of the sub.
And the sub-space is,
well, what else but a sub-algebra?
Isn't that wonderful?
That's how you do it in linear algebra.
So now we just say sub-space is a sub-algebra.
Oh, that's neat.
Isometry is isomorphism.
Oh, that's different from linear algebra.
Linear algebra doesn't even have such a concept,
unless you stick in a product
and if you have some way of saying
what it means to respect the inner product,
and in fact, isometry then does become isomorphism,
but inner product is a little strange
in the sense that it's sort of got
a bit of a contravariance in that
people tend to conveniently gloss over,
but when you take the inner product,
point it forwards, and the other one
from category 30 is pointing backwards.
Most people don't see that.
Grassman, however, saw it.
Grassman saw things in incredible depth.
That's just amazing.
A set of points is independent
when no proper subset generates the same space.
It's not easy to say.
Spherical.
When its members lie in a common sphere,
which can be said formally.
When there exist points A, B, such that
for all members C and A, B, C, people C,
that's when you're using the radius definition,
or you could be using the diameter definition
in which case it's C, A, C, B, people C.
Euclidean basis.
Well, that's a spherical independent set.
Okay.
And you'll notice, by the way, that I haven't said anything
about whether these bases are going to be used
barycentrically or catechimally,
which brings me to...
Well, by the way, then I should point out here.
Actually, that's the next slide.
Before I get to that, let me just point out this thing.
In red, in this infrared table,
we're working in some subspace of space.
And from a constructive standpoint,
we have no need of the concept of the whole space,
partly because it's going to be a long time
constructing uncountably many things,
things that are uncountably many dimensions.
So you just put up with the fact that
even though it seemed like
we were trying to wriggle around
the Upward-Lowenheim-Skollum theorem,
we haven't really, because
we do have these uncountably dimensioned
spaces as models, so we can't prevent them.
There's no need to work in them
if you're not working in them, correct?
If you have any mechanisms
of getting to the whole space,
so you just work in some subspace.
You never talk about the whole space,
even constructive speaking.
Okay, so the difference
in barycentric and catechimally
is a language one.
Nothing to do with anything to do with equations
or anything, such a pure language one.
Namely, it's the present of a constant O,
the origin, in the language of the letter.
The Equational Theory
is only different by virtue of
being able to say more,
but only as a conservative extension, right?
We have conservatively extended the language
with a constant O and nothing else.
So the rectangular shape
of the pyramid in Joseph and most city buildings
since, but not, sort of, you know,
if you look down to the backwards at the beginning,
you'll see round huts, and if you look into
Mexico, you'll see round pyramids, and
that's quite a strong shape. In fact,
there's a very good reason for making things round.
They're very strong in self-reporting.
If you look at rooms, because you've got
a more out-of-the-lab structure in mind,
you discover that rooms don't pack neatly
into circular buildings.
And so you're encouraged to start laying things out
in a more packing-oriented way.
As Frank Lloyd right noticed,
that works for hexagons, and if you're in Stanford,
you can go visit its hexagon house,
but even that is a pain in the butt
for most builders who really, really
prefer rectangular buildings.
One would assume that ever since
at least the pyramid at Joseph, and maybe
before, that they've been working with
Cartesian coordinates, and this
strange thing from Euclid was
a new development that totally
revives people's thinking to say,
we'd better start thinking rigorously
instead of using these terrible Cartesian coordinates.
Okay, so
an n-element basis,
so we're going to assume the latter
because it's more familiar, but it works the same way.
Everything I have to say here carries
over to the barycentric case. I'm just
not going to talk about it because most people
are used to the other case, so
it'll be more familiar. So an l-element
basis generates an individual space.
An axis of a basis is the space
generated by an element of the basis,
and that element serves as a unit vector
for that axis, and remember that I said
that the basis had to be spherical.
So all the vectors, unit
vectors whose length is the radius of that
common sphere, or the diameter
depending on which of the two definitions
you're working with. Okay, the grand
Schmidt process. All axes are
symmetric, given the basis
for you wanting to begin. The i-th coordinate of the point a
is the projection of
a onto the axis obi.
You knew that.
I'm sure
you weren't paying attention in geometry class.
So I'm going to cut these in
and let you go into geometry. So
since we're always working in the subspace
that means that we aren't guaranteed
the new points that we construct are in
that subspace. We might
visually keep constructing and find that
you will actually start to know where they came from, right?
If you actually start with a free algebra
not generated by three things, then
you obviously wouldn't need to mention a subspace
or a three-dimensional if it's Cartesian.
But if somehow or other somebody hands
you a point, you can still find
its coordinates. But
you better check that it's in the space.
If somebody handed you a point that's not in the
space, they might take you by surprise.
So you can check that. What you do is you
see whether you recover that point.
And if you do, then it's in the space.
And hey, you've got a new dimension.
You didn't know about that before.
And you call that, you could use that
to define a basis. And you
project it, oh, that should
P is the type of, that should be N of
E A, because we're trying to normalize
the new point to being
having the same length as all the other elements of the basis.
And that's the grand-chip
process, basically.
The full grand-chip process, not both the normalization
process, except done constructively,
namely whenever you need it.
Okay, Euclidean metric.
Since all axes are isometric,
any one of them can serve
as a ruler to establish a metric. And the following
one refers to the vector.
Okay, so
what we can do, basically, is generate
a deductible line in two terms.
The addition
and subtraction operations of
constructability.
Just affine operations.
We want to do multiplication, division
and square root. So if
we could just do
division,
we could get multiplication from that, obviously.
So it's enough to give
how to divide, and that's how you divide.
If A and B realize A, B on some axis,
then this term will realize
A divided by B. And if you
draw B and C realizing A plus one and A minus one,
then this term will realize
square root of A and we're done.
Okay, let's move on to
non-euclidean geometry.
So the idea here
is to take input fifth
and rewrite it using the terms
in this form. That's an equivalent form.
Um,
let's see.
Okay, go back and forward.
There we go.
Take that right.
Yes.
And then the pointer is this one. Yes.
Right, so we're restating it as
WXYZXYZ equals W.
Now here are the variance.
Truncate this
and let it term to
WXYZ, WXYZX,
WXYZXY, WXYZXYZ.
That, by the way, is the fifth postulate, right?
WXYZ,
X, YZX.
And I claim that
the models of these things
have Gaussian curvature whose sign
is the equation number minus six.
So if you subtract six here,
that's zero. The Gaussian curvature
of the space is zero.
Above, it's positive.
Okay, I've got the same backwards.
Oh, dear.
Yes, above it's positive and below it's negative.
I didn't proofread this very well.
I'm going to be right up to five minutes
for the total.
Okay.
Let's see if this works. Yes.
Okay, so this is what the geodesic plane,
the free geodesic space on three generators
looks like. Remember, we haven't got
the fifth postulate anymore, so we don't
have any way of tying things together.
What those variants do
is they tie things together as follows.
Let's home in on a portion
of this, that's the center.
And what the
equation is doing is it's taking some random
point there and saying it's not going to be equal to somewhere
around here. Now, if you do
X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z, and so on,
you will walk around here
and if it's X, Y, Z,
then you stop there. If it's X, Y, Z, X,
you stop there. If it's X, Y, Z, X, Y,
there. If it's X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z,
which is the fifth postulate, you stop
there. Now, for each of these,
what that does is it ties
together this space in a way that makes it a
coherent, conventional
polytope that has either
positive, zero, or negative
Gaussian curvature.
So here you get the octahedron, here you get the
cuboctahedron. All these things, by the way, have
equations. So you might say, there's lots of things
I know, but most of them don't have
equations. These ones do.
The icosahedron.
The icosahedron
is the last one you get before you get
planarity. And that's
who's postulate. Further
lengthened, you start
getting into the hyperbolic spaces.
And people had known to do algebra
back in the days when they were fighting over
this, and people were advising
like, who is it?
Who is the other
Robert Chesky, and then
who's the other guy?
Volga's father had worked on this.
Volga's father advised Volga
not to play with this stuff, because
it would just kill his career. But if he'd known
this, it would be so easy.
Okay, here's
category three, and that's it. Don't worry
about it. This is just locating various
things. That's the category of geodesic
spaces. That's what you get when you put
in your postulate.
You can regard that as a reduction in
language from a billion groups. You can regard
this as a reduction in language from groups. In fact
I gave you what the reduction was early on
by saying x squared to the minus one in x.
And it ties in with
other categories, like the category of rings.
That goes for the billion groups. There is no category
in this corner because there's no such thing
as a ring over a non-belian group.
Rings are always over a billion groups.
Here's Boolean algebras. Here's a slight weakening.
The same one is you get from going from rings
to billion groups. Sets are down here.
There's a nice little loop in here.
In fact, if you define a group,
if you don't want to teach that theory, what you
can do is this stuff instead.
And you say that a set is
a geodesic space
satisfying x, y equals x.
That's what a set is.
So you start out, you get everybody's intuition
going. And they
understand all this stuff.
That's one of these things that are so badly connected.
It's just a bunch of points.
It's so bad.
Yeah.
So this is somehow more easy to grasp
than the concept of the set.
Could it well be?
I had no idea.
But anyway, a set is just
you just simply put into the group.
So if you go down here, for example,
if you go from a billion groups to groups,
you get an adjoint where
going up is the free adjoint that is the
abelianization. Going down is the opposite
where you just add a little language
and string things. And I better stop here
because I see my hook coming at me
at high speed.
I have a suggestion. What's the
idea? That's an interesting thought.
I'll get back to you tomorrow.
All right.
Thank you.
APPLAUSE
Let's take a quick
question or even two.
There are any?
Yeah, I would say so.
Yeah.
I understand that
what you are talking about is not
official.
It's not used for
education.
Well, in the other rooms,
it's all the same.
We have to worry about the intelligence
that we are talking about.
So I can't get to where
Arthur's mind works.
I can't get to where Arthur's mind works.
I can't get to where Arthur's mind works.
I can't get to where Arthur's mind works.
So everything is fine.
Everything is fine.
So Arthur Hades was on the
unconstructive land just like people
do.
This is as effective as you can get,
and that immediately just doesn't come up.
One more question.
So is this talk a special
case of the alphabetization
of mathematical subjects?
Yeah, absolutely.
I would like to think in a hundred years' time
that people would look back and say,
bold out the first one,
improved on what's going on.
It wasn't until your former, probably
teacher's teachers, I don't know,
because he was a zhigalkan.
A zhigalkan was the first one.
I say that's the end of it being in Russian.
You get to see these things first.
Ten years later, a stone who saw everything
incredibly bad finally got the same insight,
independently.
So very better.
Thank you.
