Good day, grade 12s!
I hope you are ready for the next lesson about the processes used to make fertilizers.
We already saw how distillation is used to extract nitrogen from the air to make ammonia.
This ammonia is then used to make a number of other fertilizers.
Now we will learn about the Haber process in detail and go on to examine the Ostwald
ant contact processes too.
The Haber process is used to form ammonia.
Here, hydrogen is made to react with nitrogen to form ammonia under special conditions.
To ensure economically high yields of ammonia, which will be about 15%.
In order to get an economically high yield of ammonia, a reasonably high pressure of
200 atmospheres is used to favor the forward reaction.
The temperature should be approximately 450 degrees.
But remember, the forward reaction in ammonia production is exothermic.
Therefore, a high temperature actually favors the reverse reaction.
So the high temperature is a compromised temperature between getting an economically
viable maximum yield and an economically viable rate of production of ammonia.
Basically, the high temperature is to quicken the formation of ammonia.
Finally, an iron catalyst is used to speed up the overall reaction, keeping production
costs down.
Now that we know how to get a high yield of ammonia, let's see how this ammonia is
used to produce different fertilizers.
Let's continue with Adrian.
In the next step on the flowchart, ammonia is used to make nitric acid.
This is called the Ostwald process.
There are three chemical reactions in the Ostwald process.
Let's examine each of them in turn.
The first step of the Ostwald process is called the catalytic oxidation of ammonia.
Ammonia reacts with oxygen to form nitrogen monoxide and water.
The balanced chemical equation is 4NH3 plus 502 goes to form 4N0 plus 6H2O.
The reaction is exothermic.
Ammonia and oxygen gas enter a reaction chamber filled with a mesh containing a platinum rhodium
catalyst.
At first, the catalyst is heated to start the process.
Once the reaction begins, it produces enough heat to keep high operating temperatures of
between 800 and 900 degrees Celsius.
The pressure on the gases in the reaction chamber is kept at 3 to 4 atmospheres.
Under these conditions, about 95% of the ammonia is oxidized to nitrogen monoxide.
The second step of the Ostwald process takes place in the same reaction chamber as the
first step.
Nitrogen monoxide from the first step is oxidized to form nitrogen dioxide.
This second step of the Ostwald process is called the oxidation of nitrogen monoxide.
The balanced chemical equation for this reaction is 2NO plus O2 reacts to form 2NO2.
This is also an exothermic reaction.
After the first two steps of the Ostwald process, not all the nitrogen monoxide has converted
to nitrogen dioxide, so the mixture of gases is cooled in a condenser to less than 100
degrees Celsius.
Water vapor formed in the oxidation of ammonia condenses into liquid.
This water absorbs some of the nitrogen dioxide to form nitric acid.
This third step is called the absorption of nitrogen dioxide into water.
The chemical equation is 3NO2 gas plus H2O liquid goes to form 2HNO3 aqueous plus NO gas.
This is also an exothermic reaction.
Unfortunately, a large amount of nitrogen monoxide and nitrogen dioxide remain unreacted
in the condenser, so special distillation towers are used to convert the unreacted gases
into nitric acid.
In the distillation tower, a fine spray of deionized water is released from the top of
the tower.
The unreacted nitrogen dioxide is drawn up from the bottom of the tower and dissolves
in the water.
There are trays arranged around the edges of the tower to collect the solution of nitric
acid that is formed.
But nitrogen monoxide is also formed in this reaction, and remember there is still unreacted
nitrogen monoxide from the initial catalytic oxidation of ammonia.
So how do industrial chemists solve this problem?
Well, they draw oxygen into the bottom of the distillation tower and keep the temperature
of the gases at 50 degrees Celsius and the pressure at 9 to 10 atmospheres.
Under these conditions, the excess nitrogen monoxide oxidizes to form nitrogen dioxide.
The nitrogen dioxide dissolves in the water to form more nitric acid.
Now let's go back to our flow chart to see what happens to the nitric acid.
Nitric acid and ammonia can react together to make ammonium nitrate, which is used as
a nitrogen-based fertilizer.
In the first step of this process, an aqueous solution of ammonium nitrate is formed.
The ammonia liquid neutralizes the acid to form a salt solution.
In the second step, water is evaporated from the solution to form granules of solid ammonium
nitrate.
Finally, once the granules are formed, substances such as magnesium oxide, magnesium nitrate
and calcium oxide are added to them as coatings.
The role of these coatings is to prevent the ammonium nitrate from absorbing too much water.
In a very similar process, ammonia can react with sulfuric acid to form ammonium sulfate,
which is also a useful fertilizer.
The chemical equation for the production of ammonium sulfate is 2NH3 plus H2SO4 goes
to form brackets, NH4 close brackets twice SO4.
There is one final process that we need to examine.
In this process, ammonia is used to produce urea.
Urea is produced on a large scale across the world.
It has a nitrogen content of 46,4 percent, the highest percentage of all common solid
nitrogen-based fertilizers.
Urea is produced by reacting ammonia with carbon dioxide.
There are two steps in the process as shown in these chemical equations.
Let's review the big picture so far.
We start by collecting nitrogen from the atmosphere and then fix it in the harbor process to form
water soluble ammonia.
Next, ammonia is used to make nitric acid and then nitric acid and ammonia are used
in many different processes to make all the nitrogen-containing fertilizers we need.
The Ostward process leads to the formation of nitric acid, which reacts with ammonia
to form a common fertilizer called ammonium nitrate.
The contact process focuses on the formation of sulfuric acid, which reacts with ammonia
to form ammonium sulfate fertilizer.
The other fertilizer that is formed is urea.
This is formed when ammonia reacts with carbon dioxide.
The flow diagram shows the formation of the common nitrogen-based fertilizer we just discussed.
Besides nitrogen-based fertilizers, we also get the phosphate-based fertilizers and potassium-based
ones.
Phosphate-based fertilizers are formed when phosphate rock reacts with sulfuric acid to
form phosphoric acid.
Phosphoric acid reacts with ammonia to form superphosphate fertilizer.
These superphosphates are soluble in water and can be absorbed easily by plants.
The nitrogen-based fertilizers are also soluble in water, making them absorbable too.
Other known fertilizers are those that contain potassium salts, also known as potash, when
used as fertilizer.
Common-based fertilizers include potassium nitrate, KN03, and potassium sulfate K2SO4.
Extensive use of all these forms of fertilizer could have a negative impact on humans and
their environment.
Fertilizers often lead to problems such as nitrogen saturation, groundwater pollution,
deutrophication, and soil acidification.
High concentrations of acid in soil could end up in our water stream and groundwater.
This means there could be a high concentration of nitrates in the water that humans drink.
In humans, a high concentration of nitrate in the body could lead to a shortage of oxygen
in the organs and tissues.
Fertilizers in the body get converted to nitrates by oxidizing iron atoms.
With fewer iron atoms, less oxygen can be carried in the blood.
Shortage of oxygen could be fatal to humans, especially babies and older people.
The same thing can happen to plants, fish, and other animals.
Deutrophication is an excess of nutrients in water.
This is due to over-fertilization, sewage waste, an increase in nutrients in an ecosystem
like nitrogen and phosphate, and burning of fossil fuels such as coal at sassel.
The impact of deutrophication can be seen on land and in water.
And water rapid and excessive growth of algae occurs.
When this algae dies later, it becomes food for bacteria that deplete the oxygen in the
water during respiration.
Fish and other organisms die from low oxygen.
On land, weeds grow at the cost of indigenous plants.
This leads to a change in the diversity of species, thus ecosystems change.
Soil erosion is often a result due to the absence of natural vegetation.
Manure from feedlots and milk stalls can be removed before it runs into surface water.
Manure can be used as organic fertilizer.
In this way, nutrients will be recycled.
The diet of stock animals can be adapted to their needs, so decreasing their excretion
of phosphates.
Planting of specific vegetation next to rivers and the shoreline can limit the inflow of
pollutants.
In this way, we can conserve our wetlands.
Thank you for joining us.
And it is time for you to do the TOSC video found at www.mindsearch.co.z for its slash
learn.
Goodbye.
