Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 10, The Road of Reactions.
In this lesson, we want to answer the question, How fast is it?
We want to ask that question for chemical reactions.
And we'll see that the thermodynamics of the system are not sufficient to tell us which reactions are fast and which are slow.
Let's think about how fast is it in a context with which we're very familiar.
If you drive your car down the highway, you know how fast it is going.
Your speedometer tells you how many kilometers per hour or how many miles per hour you're moving down the road.
If you're a highway patrol officer, you can consult a radar gun to see how fast a car is moving.
But if you're a casual observer standing on the side of the road and you have a stopwatch,
you can determine how fast a car is moving if you know how far apart two points along the road are
and you measure the time that it takes for the car to travel between those two points.
The speed of the car, or its velocity, or its rate of motion, is calculated by taking the change in its position,
the distance it travels, and dividing by the time it takes to travel between those two points.
If we want to talk about the speed, or velocity, or rate of a chemical reaction,
we need to have an analogous calculation.
In a chemical reaction, instead of measuring the distance traveled,
we measure a change in concentration of one or more reagents or products.
And we still determine the rate by measuring the time it takes for that change in concentration to occur.
The formal study of the rate of chemical reactions is called kinetics.
Way back in lesson one, we talked a little bit about using indicator dyes
to detect the amount of acid or base present in an aqueous solution.
If you add a drop of the indicator dye phenolphthalein to a solution of sodium hydroxide,
you immediately see a bright pink color develop where the drop meets the solution.
The phenolphthalein starts out as a colorless reagent,
but when it encounters sodium hydroxide, it transfers two protons to the hydroxide
and forms water leaving behind a charged, rearranged phenolphthalein molecule, which is bright pink.
This reaction happens essentially as quickly as the collisions between the phenolphthalein and hydroxide ions permits.
This reaction is fast.
If you keep watching the bright pink dot for a moment, however, its color will begin to fade away.
It appears that a secondary reaction is occurring.
A quick experiment using a more concentrated or less concentrated solution of sodium hydroxide
shows that the fading part happens more quickly when the concentration of sodium hydroxide is higher.
These observations are consistent with the relatively slow formation of a triply negative and again rearranged product,
which is not pink colored like the initial product from the first step of the reaction.
In this little discussion, we've demonstrated several things about chemical kinetics.
One is that many reactions happen in a stepwise manner,
and sorting out the steps is one of the challenges that chemical kinetics face.
The other is that we need some kind of a marker to be able to track the rate of a chemical reaction.
And in the case of phenolphthalein, the color of the intermediate product
is what we can track very easily externally from the solution.
Most of us know too that chemical reactions happen faster as you increase the temperature.
You could run the phenolphthalein test at high temperatures to test that out in the case of phenolphthalein.
The first step, the formation of the pink intermediate, is so fast even at room temperature
that you're unlikely to see any change in its rate when the temperature of the water is increased, say 10 degrees centigrade.
But the second fading step will be faster when the solution containing the sodium hydroxide
is at a higher temperature than it was at the first test.
Let's consider a slightly easier to conceptualize reaction, the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
You can buy hydrogen peroxide at any pharmaceutical store, and it comes in a dark bottle.
The peroxide H2O2 is an aqueous solution, and when it decomposes, it forms water and oxygen gas.
In the laboratory, you can monitor the rate of decomposition of hydrogen peroxide
by watching the pressure in a closed system change over time.
As the O2 gas is produced, the pressure will increase.
We can demonstrate that oxygen for sure is the product of this reaction using what's traditionally called a splint test.
If you light a small piece of wood on fire and blow the fire out just so things don't get too interesting,
and put the splint in a decomposing mixture of peroxide,
if the peroxide is decomposing quickly enough, the oxygen will reignite the splint and a nice flame will result.
The splint test is a confirmation for the production of oxygen.
Just for the record, there are two other gases that are commonly tested for using a splint test as well.
One is hydrogen, which is explosive when exposed to a splint,
and the other is carbon dioxide, which we know puts a fire out.
So a splint test can have one of three results.
A glowing splint put into a container in a reaction mixture which is producing oxygen will reframe
the splint will return to a nice flame condition.
A glowing splint put into a chemical reaction which is producing hydrogen gas
will have a nice little explosion and a good pop, sort of like the pop out of a champagne bottle.
But a reaction that's producing CO2 gas will simply put the flame out.
So splint tests are pretty popular for identifying the gas products produced in a variety of chemical reactions
in a standard general chemistry lab.
The reason that you can buy peroxide at a pharmacy is that it doesn't decompose very quickly under normal conditions.
In fact, if you open a brand new bottle of peroxide and try the test, the splint test on it,
pretty much nothing will happen.
It's a pretty sad commentary.
On the other hand, it reminds you that the peroxide is not decomposing so quickly in the bottle
that what you're buying is water with oxygen above it.
If you want to be able to use the splint test to monitor the decomposition of peroxide,
you need to add some other material to the solution.
Almost any biological product, a piece of apple or raw potato, a piece of raw meat,
or a drop of blood from a pricked finger will cause immediate bubbles to form in the peroxide.
And the system will become hotter, and you might possibly see a color change occur.
The biological products in this case are acting as catalysts to facilitate and speed up the chemical decomposition of peroxide.
This little overview provides us with a framework for systematically studying reaction kinetics
and also highlights some of the challenges.
The method we use to study the rate of chemical reaction must be customized to the specific reaction in which we're interested.
To examine the kinetics of phenolphthalein, we can watch the color of the phenolphthalein change
by using a method of optical spectroscopy.
In optical spectroscopy, we would monitor the absorption of the phenolphthalein over time
in order to correlate the absorption of visible light with the concentration of the colored species phenolphthalein.
It's worth noting that compounds that appear red to your eye in fact absorb the complementary green color light.
We can correlate the amount of green light absorbed by phenolphthalein with the concentration of the intermediate in the reaction mixture.
If we can monitor the concentration of the phenolphthalein intermediate over time,
we can calculate the speed of the reaction by taking the change in concentration over any time window.
But if we want to monitor the peroxide decomposition, we can't use color to do it.
We need to use the pressure of the gas phase oxygen produced.
So if we have a pressure gauge and a container that we can seal the peroxide in that is strong enough to resist the pressure change,
then we can monitor the pressure change over time and determine the rate of the reaction by taking the change in oxygen pressure divided by time.
So we have a more general definition of rate as the changing concentration of any species divided by the change in time.
The units on rate then for a chemical reaction could be moles per liter per second or kilopascals per second.
In chemistry so that we can be clear what we're talking about, we're always going to define the rate of a reaction to be positive.
That means if we're looking at a reagent which is being used up in the course of a reaction so that its concentration is decreasing over time,
we define the rate of the reaction to be the negative change in concentration divided by the change in time.
If we look at the reaction peroxide for a specific example here,
it takes two peroxide molecules decomposing to form two water molecules and one oxygen molecule.
The stoichiometry is two to two to one.
Every time two peroxide molecules decompose, one oxygen molecule is made.
That means if we are watching the oxygen pressure, when we report the rate of the reaction,
the rate of formation of the oxygen is half the rate of formation of water and half the rate of decomposition of the peroxide.
In order to make sure that we're all talking apples to apples, chemists have defined the rate of chemical reactions
to be one divided by the stoichiometric coefficient in front of each of the species
so that we can define the rate of the decomposition of peroxide as one half times the rate at which the peroxide itself is decomposing,
one half the rate at which the water is being formed, but equal to the rate of the oxygen formation.
Chemists know that to write a balanced chemical equation that one over the stoichiometric coefficient
gets multiplied times the rate of formation or decomposition of that component
so that the rate of the reaction is the same no matter which reagent or product you're looking at.
In the laboratory, it's difficult to quantitate the rate of peroxide decomposition using natural products like a piece of apple or a piece of beef.
The chemical constituents of the apple and the beef are not as well controlled as the concentration of a chemical catalyst could be.
So most laboratories looking at the decomposition of peroxide will use a chemical catalyst.
In this case, we could use potassium iodide.
Potassium iodide is a salt and can be used in known concentrations to affect the rate of decomposition of peroxide.
As we've said, we could watch the rate of this reaction by watching the pressure of the oxygen gas produced over time.
If we make a graph of the pressure of the oxygen over time, we see that at first the pressure appears to be increasing linearly in time.
But eventually, as the peroxide gets used up, the rate of production slows down and the pressure versus time curve begins to turn over and become close to horizontal.
The rate of the reaction changes as the initial concentration of peroxide is used up.
This observation is consistent with lots of chemical reactions where we see that the rate of the reaction depends on the concentration of the reagents.
If we want to know the rate of the reaction for the decomposition of peroxide at any particular time, we find the rate of the reaction by finding the slope of the pressure of oxygen versus time graph.
Remember that the slope is the rate of change in the concentration divided by the change in the time.
The kinetic analysis of a chemical system generally involves some applications of principles that we've learned in mathematics courses.
Although we've described the process of following the decomposition of peroxide over time and watching it slow down as the peroxide is used up, most chemists do not conduct kinetic experiments that way today.
A more popular way to monitor chemical kinetics is called the method of initial rates.
In the method of initial rates, some marker in the chemical system is observed over a very short period of time after the reaction is initiated.
And because the reaction only proceeds for a small period of time, it's easy to monitor in the lab, and the concentration of the reagents can be considered constant.
There's also no complications from any further reactions from the products that are initially formed from the reaction we're interested in.
So in an initial rate study of the decomposition of peroxide, we would have a fixed concentration of the potassium iodide catalyst,
and we would conduct the experiment in some kind of a container that would keep the temperature of the reaction mixture constant, because we know that temperature affects the rates of reactions.
If we conduct the reaction with 0.1 molar peroxide, we might use the marker as when a certain pressure of oxygen gas is produced, say 10-tore.
Remember that 760-tore is equal to one atmosphere, so we'd be looking at a small change in pressure against the base pressure that we started with.
And this would be easy to measure in the laboratory and would not require us to have any fancy equipment.
A rubber stopper in the top of a flask is sufficient to contain 10-tore of pressure.
If we measure the time it takes to make 10-tore of oxygen using 0.1 molar peroxide, and then we measure the time it takes to produce 10-tore of oxygen using 0.2 molar peroxide,
we see that doubling the peroxide concentration halves the time that it takes to make that fixed amount of oxygen gas.
That means that the rate of the reaction has doubled when we doubled the concentration of the peroxide.
If we make a graph of the rate of the reaction versus the concentration of the peroxide for several different concentrations of peroxide,
we see that the rate changes linearly with the concentration. The graph is a straight line.
Of course, this analysis requires that we keep the concentration of the potassium iodide constant.
If the rate of the reaction versus the concentration gives us a straight line, we can write a mathematical equation describing that straight line
as the rate equals a constant times the concentration of the peroxide.
This is called the rate law for the reaction.
And notice that we're not watching the concentration of the peroxide over time anymore,
but we're actually plotting the rate at which the reaction occurs versus the concentration of the reagent we started with.
If we then perform a second set of experiments where we keep the concentration of the peroxide constant,
but we let the concentration of the potassium iodide change in a systematic way,
the same graph of rate versus concentration of potassium iodide turns out to also be a straight line.
In the terminology of chemical kinetics, we say that the rate of the decomposition of peroxide is first order in peroxide concentration
and first order in potassium iodide concentration, or second order overall.
At 25 degrees centigrade, the rate constant in the rate law, rate equals constant times the concentration of peroxide times the concentration of Ki,
is 8.3 times 10 to the minus third per mole per liter per second.
This rate constant is what we usually compare between reactions in order to determine which reactions are fast and which are slow.
A rate constant of 10 to the minus third for an overall second order reaction, first order in peroxide and first order in Ki,
is a relatively moderate chemical reaction rate.
Let's emphasize here that the rate law has to be determined experimentally in the lab.
The stoichiometry of the reaction does not tell us anything about how quickly a reaction happens.
Notice that the catalyst in this case, the Ki, does not appear in the reaction mixture.
But if we don't have any Ki present, the reaction doesn't happen.
This further emphasizes that rate laws need to be determined experimentally and do not have any relationship with the stoichiometry of the reaction.
The measurement of kinetics is an important feature in lots of chemical environments.
When I was an undergraduate, I worked on a NASA contract to measure the kinetics of degradation of polyamic acid precursor resins.
The polyamic acids were used as the raw material to make the polyimids, which form the heat tiles on the space shuttle.
But the real insight in kinetics is when it reveals not just how fast a reaction occurs, but the steps, the mechanism by which the reaction occurs.
We have already had an indication that the reaction between phenolphthalein and hydroxide occurs over several steps.
And in fact, most chemical reactions occur in stepwise fashions.
Let's look at a macroscopic example so we can understand how the steps affect the kinetics of a chemical reaction.
What if you're working at a chair factory?
In order to make a chair, somebody needs to connect a seat to a back to four legs and two arms.
And at the end, one chair is made.
If you have a modern assembly line kind of approach, the fellow who puts the seat together with the back might be a lot faster than the fellow who puts the seat and the back together with four legs.
The addition of the four legs would be a great limiting step in the construction of the chair.
In the same way in most chemical processes, there's a step in the reaction chain that is slow.
And it's the slow step in a chemical kinetics that determines the overall rate at which products can be made in any chemical reaction.
For example, if we look at the peroxide NKI reaction and try to figure out how it actually happens, we know that the rate law shows that the reaction is first order in iodine and first order in peroxide.
Even though the stoichiometry said that two peroxides produce two waters and one O2 gas.
The rate law gives us some insight into what actually has to happen for this reaction to occur.
And in fact, the first order kinetics of the peroxide and iodide indicate that the rate determining step in the decomposition of peroxide
is when one peroxide molecule interacts with one catalytic molecule, in this case the KI.
From our previous discussions, we have seen that the formal charge on the oxygen in peroxide is minus one.
But we know that oxygen prefers to have an oxidation state of minus two.
So a reasonable mechanism for the rate determining step might be that the I- attaches to one of the oxygens in peroxide and transfers its extra electron to it,
causing the oxygen-oxygen bond to break and producing HOI and OH- as intermediates.
If the HOI then collides with another peroxide to form O2 and regenerate I-
along with making an H plus and a water, but that reaction happens quickly,
the overall reaction rate is determined by the rate at which the iodide, ion, and the peroxide molecules collide with each other.
In the late 1800s, 1894 to be exact, one of the seminal studies in kinetics was performed.
The reaction between hydrogen gas and iodine gas to produce HI was studied in the gas phase and also in solution.
The reaction between hydrogen and iodine was observed to be second order, first order in hydrogen and first order in iodine.
The second order reaction means that one hydrogen molecule and one iodine molecule slam into each other and directly form the two HI products.
However, when the reaction between hydrogen and bromine was studied, it was quite a different set of results.
You might remember from looking at the periodic table that iodine and bromine are right next to each other, both of them halogens on the right hand side.
You might expect that the reaction between hydrogen and iodine and the reaction between hydrogen and bromine would be quite similar to each other, but in this case that is not observed.
The kinetics in fact between hydrogen and bromine turn out to be very complicated.
Instead of a simple first order reaction, the kinetics have square roots and squared powers, very complicated system.
The kinetics are clearly not first order in hydrogen and first order in bromine.
Indeed, today we say that the reaction between hydrogen and bromine proceeds via a five step process.
The five steps are called elementary reactions and the five steps are considered radical chain reactions.
In the first step, the bromine molecule slams into something we don't have to care too much what and splits into two bromine radical atoms, neutral atoms.
Once that happens, the bromine is desperate to find an electron to fill its open valence shell.
It finds it easiest to get that extra electron by hitting a hydrogen molecule forming HBr and a hydrogen atom.
That step is called a propagation step, which follows the initiation step of the bromine falling apart.
The hydrogen atom produced in this propagation step can then again react with another bromine molecule to form a second HBr and leave behind a bromine atom.
In another step, the hydrogen atoms react with the HBr product to form H2 and another bromine atom.
And then the two bromine atoms can recombine to form the Br2 reagent that we started with.
These five steps, the bromine becoming two bromine atoms, the bromine atom plus H2 making HBr and H,
the H plus Br2 making HBr and Br and the H plus HBr making H2 and Br
plus the recombination of the two bromine atoms in reverse of the initiation step,
can be combined to give the overall stoichiometry of the reaction H2 plus Br2 produces two HBr.
But because there are five steps in the process, the slow rate limiting step gets to determine the kinetics.
And figuring out which one is the slow rate determining step was one of the great breakthroughs in modern kinetics.
Because we're not interested in pursuing the higher level mathematics here, we're going to leave this mystery for further investigation.
However, I do want to review the basics of the kinetics that are encountered in a general chemistry course.
In addition to the first order processes that we've already discussed through the decomposition of peroxide,
there are two other standard formations of elementary reactions that are considered.
One, which is close to the initiation step in the H2Br2 reaction where the Br2 falls apart, can be considered a zero-eth order reaction.
In the peroxide decomposition we've considered, we saw that the reaction was first order in peroxide and first order in the catalyst.
That meant that if we doubled the concentration of either reagent, we doubled the rate of the reaction.
But in other elementary reactions, rates can be seen to be independent of the concentration.
And when a rate is independent of concentration of the reagent, we call that a zero-eth order reaction.
Other reactions depend on two molecules of the same type slamming into each other to initiate the reaction.
We call those reactions second order reactions.
And if we experimentally observe a second order reaction, we see that doubling the concentration actually increases the rate of the reaction by a factor of four.
So the order of the reaction tells you the power to which the concentration is raised.
In the mathematical equation, rate equals a constant times the concentration to some power.
Let's talk for a second about first order reactions since their mathematics are the simplest.
One way to characterize a first order reaction is to report the time it takes for half of the reagents to be converted to products.
In first order reactions, this time period called the half-life is a constant independent of the amount of stuff we start with.
One of the principal examples of first order reactions is in nuclear decays.
The rate at which nuclear materials decay is usually monitored by observing particles, alpha particles, beta particles, or gamma rays that are emitted as a part of the decay process.
If we have a set of nuclei, say uranium nuclei, that are undergoing a radioactive decay, let's start the experiment with 100,000 uranium nuclei.
After a time period we would call one half-life, half the nuclei have decayed into products, leaving behind 50,000 uranium nuclei.
Over the next half-life, half of those 50,000 nuclei will decay, leaving 25,000 nuclei behind.
And over the next half-life, those 25,000 nuclei half again will decay, leaving 12,500 behind.
You can see that a graph of the number of nuclei left at any time versus the time period gives a smooth curve which decreases more and more slowly as time goes on.
The behavior of the first order kinetics, where half of the reagents always decay over the same time period, is mathematically characterized as a logarithmic behavior.
If you take the natural log of the number of particles left at any time and graph it versus the time that has passed, you will get a straight line with a negative slope.
The slope tells you the rate constant for the first order reaction.
The first order nature of nuclear decays is what allows us to do nuclear or radio-dating of radioactive materials, and we've discussed that in a previous lesson.
Okay, we've looked now at some of the factors that affect the kinetics of chemical reactions.
In particular, we've seen that kinetics depend on the concentration of reagents.
But we want to look at one other factor which is also important.
When the temperature of a reactant system is increased, the rate of virtually every chemical reaction known increases as well.
Why does that happen?
Let's remember our description of the distribution of molecules as a function of temperature.
The average velocity of molecules increases with temperature, and the breadth of velocities that the molecules have increases with temperature as well.
So a high temperature chemical system has both a higher average velocity of its molecules and more molecules with very high energies than a cool temperature system.
If you think about what happens when two automobiles collide with each other at low velocity and compare it to what happens when two automobiles collide with each other at high velocity, you can get a pretty good picture of how chemical kinetics works.
Two molecules traveling at low velocity can collide with each other and sort of pop off each other like two cars in a parking lot might bounce off each other when they collide.
There might be a little damage in the bumper, but nothing serious will happen.
On the other hand, if two cars traveling down the highway collide with each other and both are moving 60 miles per hour, we know that the initial cars do not come out of that reaction encounter unscathed.
Molecules are the same way. If two molecules collide with each other at high velocity, the probability of getting products out is much higher than if they collide at low energy.
In the terminology of chemical reactions, the activation energy is provided by the collision.
The more molecules that have enough activation energy to get over the activation barrier, the faster a reaction will happen.
So we've seen now that thermodynamics can be measured experimentally, that kinetics can be measured experimentally, and that we have a mathematically formal definition of entropy as the number of ways in which chemical systems can arrange their energy and their molecules.
All of these together tell us whether reactions happen or don't, and now we know that the energetics of the system can control whether the reactions happen fast or slow.
At the end of the day, it's the height of the activation barrier which determines the rate of the reaction, not the stoichiometry and not the overall thermodynamics of the system.
In the next lesson, we'll talk about what happens when reactions are reversible, when reagents can form products, but those products can reverse and form the reagents that we started with as well.
Those systems are considered to come to chemical equilibrium, and that will be the topic of our next discussion.
This ends lecture 10.
