Elemental Matters and Introduction to Chemistry, Lecture 11, Equilibrium.
In the last lesson we talked about the rate at which chemical reactions occur.
In this lesson we're going to consider chemical equilibrium. Chemical equilibrium,
an externally measured quantity, maybe the pressure or the concentration, appears not to change over
time. However, in the chemical system at the molecular level we need to remember that the
behavior is just as dynamic as ever. The good analogy for chemical equilibrium in these days of
just-in-time manufacturing is an ideal just-in-time manufacturing plant. In that plant the raw materials
come in on one side at the exact same rate that finished products go out on the other side.
In the middle then the same amount of material is always on the manufacturing floor and if we're
just monitoring the amount of material on the manufacturing floor it looks like things are
not changing. But we know that raw materials coming in and finished products going out
are continuing to happen. That's our analogy for chemical equilibrium. It's very much a dynamic
process. In chemical terms we would say that equilibrium is reached when there's no net change
in the concentration of a reagent or a product over time. Of course a chemical system can appear
to be an equilibrium because the rate at which it's changing is too slow for us to detect it.
How could we distinguish this very slowly changing chemical system from one that is truly
a chemical equilibrium? One way to do that is to apply Le Chatelier's principle. Le Chatelier was
a French chemist who suggested that a chemical system at equilibrium always acts in opposition
to any change that we impose upon it. In other words chemical systems at equilibrium are a lot
like obstinate two-year-olds. Whatever you want them to do they do the opposite. Let's take a specific
example. In the laboratory you can use anhydrous calcium sulfate as a drying agent. Calcium sulfate
is an ionic solid and the anhydrous description means that there's no water absorbed in the solid.
But calcium sulfate can absorb water molecules and it can keep sensitive samples dry.
Occasionally the calcium sulfate is impregnated with a small amount of cobalt chloride. The cobalt
chloride is blue when it's dry but turns pink when the system absorbs water molecules.
This displacement of the Lewis base Cl- by water is enough to change the environment of the cobalt
ion and produce the color change. But the color change is completely reversible. If you put the
calcium sulfate with a little bit of cobalt chloride in it in a damp environment in a humid
environment the calcium sulfate absorbs the water. The water displaces the chloride from
around the cobalt and the sample turns pink. Put the pink stuff in a dry environment perhaps an
oven and the waters will evaporate their places will be taken by the chloride ions again and the
compound will turn blue. The color is easy to see and it will change back and forth as the
environment changes. The chemical reaction that describes this process is cobalt chloride 4
minus 2 plus 6 waters forms cobalt hexahydrate CO H2O6 plus 4 chloride ions. How this looks
shortly is principal describe the behavior we observe. Let's say we try to add some water
to the system. The system says like a two-year-old I don't want that water so it puts the water
into the cobalt water complex displacing the chloride ions and changing the color.
We can use the relative amounts of blue and pink material here to characterize the equilibrium
in this chemical system. In fact just the same way that we use the color changes to monitor the
rate of chemical reactions in the previous lesson we can use the color change to monitor the
concentration of reagents or products in equilibrium chemical systems just the same.
In order to mathematically describe a chemical equilibrium we usually start by thinking about
the forward and the reverse chemical reactions. In order to describe the mathematics of a chemical
equilibrium we remember that the rate of the forward reaction the reaction making products
from reagents must equal the rate of the reverse reaction the rate at which the products are
reforming the reagents in order to have a system that appears not to be changing in time. The
mathematical formalism then is fairly straightforward. We describe the rate of the forward reaction
as the rate constant k times the concentration of the reagents in the kinetic law in the rate law
raised to their appropriate powers and we describe the rate of the reverse reaction
as the rate constant k for the reverse reaction times the concentrations of the products
raised to their appropriate powers. One of the interesting things about chemical kinetics
is that whereas the kinetics of a system need to be measured experimentally
for the rate orders to be decided when equilibrium is reached all things sort of come out in the
wash and one can write an equilibrium expression to describe any chemical system as the concentration
of the products raised to their stoichiometric coefficients divided by the concentration of
the reagents raised to their stoichiometric coefficients. So in the reaction for the decomposition
of peroxide to water that we've discussed previously two peroxides decompose to form two
waters and an oxygen the equilibrium expression describing the reaction says that at chemical
equilibrium the concentration of the water raised to the second power times the concentration of the
oxygen raised to the first power divided by the concentration of the peroxide
raised to the second power is a constant the ratio of the rate constants in the forward and
reverse direction and that constant is called the equilibrium constant. The equilibrium constant
then shows us roughly the ratio of the concentration of products at equilibrium to the concentration
of reagents at equilibrium. We can discuss the range of possible concentrations as an introduction
to the scale of chemical equilibrium. For example in the decomposition reaction of peroxide chemical
equilibrium is reached when essentially all of the peroxide has been converted to water and O2
therefore the concentration of the products in that math expression is huge compared to the
concentration of peroxide that is left behind. The equilibrium constant is a very large number
possibly as high as 10 to the 23rd. On the other hand some reactions produce sort of equal amounts
of reagents and products an acid base reaction where the acid is a weak acid might fall into
this category. So for instance if we measured the concentration of acetic acid molecules in a
solution of acetic acid in water we find that the acetic acid is only partially dissociated to form
acetate ions in H3O plus and the ratio of the concentration of the products to the amount
of acetic acid reagent left over when we reach a chemical equilibrium is somewhat less than one.
Other chemical systems produce essentially no products and at equilibrium are present
strictly as reagents. Under those circumstances the equilibrium constant of the reaction is
closer to zero than to one perhaps 10 to the minus 23rd for a reaction that doesn't produce any
appreciable amount of product at equilibrium. So we have a range in the scale of chemical
equilibria that ranges from 10 to the minus 23rd for a ratio between products and reagents
to 10 to the plus 23rd for the ratio between products and reagents. That's a huge scale
to try to organize in one formalism but the formalism of chemical equilibrium allows us
to organize all this material into one mathematical structure.
Let's look specifically at some examples of applying Le Chatelier's principle to understand
chemical equilibrium. Take a system like acetic acid which is a weak acid which dissolves in water
and partially ionizes. We can detect the presence of acids in solution using indicator dyes like
phenolphthalein which is a natural product derived from living things or we can use a home version
of phenolphthalein which is to extract the coloring agents from red cabbage.
Take a small head of cabbage and put it in your blender and add just a little bit of water
and blend it briefly. You can strain the resulting mush and get a liquid which normally appears red
or purplish red in tap water. The compounds which are called flavins are extracted from the cabbage
and provide a wonderful set of colors to monitor the pH or acidity of a variety of solutions in
your kitchen. You can test the pH of any water soluble sample by taking a small amount of the
red cabbage water and mixing it with any other solution you want to test. Why are we discussing
dyes in the middle of a discussion about equilibria? Because of the color change, the color change of
the dye allows us to have a built-in measure of what's happening in the chemical system
and it provides an easy window for us to understand how chemical equilibria works.
If we add dye to a test solution, we can look at the color and see how much of a particular
form of the dye is present. For example, if you have some red cabbage juice and you mix it with
vinegar in your kitchen, color is quite a bit different than if you have red cabbage juice
that you mix with a little bit of soap solution from your sink. The soap solution is essentially a
base and the vinegar is essentially an acid and the color changes in the red cabbage juice to
reflect the change in acidity or basicity or the pH of the solution that results.
What we would observe if we started with our pure tap water where the cabbage juice is red
and we added just a small amount say of vinegar is that we would see just a small color change.
But the color change once it was accomplished by the addition of vinegar would be stable
long-term in the water solution. The presence of the acid in the vinegar has shifted the
equilibrium in the flavin from the red cabbage and the color change that results allows us to
measure the relative concentrations of the dyes in the water. You might expect the pH of vinegar
solution to change by a factor of 10 if you increase the concentration of the acetic acid
by a factor of 10 in the water solution you were testing. But in fact, chemical equilibrium
means that that is not what happens. In a system at chemical equilibrium the concentration of the
products divided by the concentration of the reagents stays the same. In acetic acid which
is a weak acid the concentration of the acetate ion times the concentration of the H3O plus ion
which result from the decomposition of the acetic acid means that there's two products in the
reaction and really only one reagent the acetic acid molecule. Because there's two products and
one reagent increasing the concentration of acid by a factor of 10 does not increase the equilibrium
concentration of the H plus by a factor of 10. The equilibrium constant for an acidic solution
gets a special name. It's labeled a capital K with an A subscript. The capital K which is
used to describe chemical equilibrium you'll remember is the ratio of the small k's used to
describe the rate constants of the forward and reverse reactions. So capital K is the ratio of
the reverse rate constant over the forward rate constant. In chemical notation the equilibrium
constant gets a subscript which tells you something about the chemistry of the equilibrium
being described. For instance if we're discussing a weak acid we put a small a subscript next to the
k. K a describes the equilibrium involved with distributing a small acid in an aqueous solution.
Kb on the other hand describes a weak base in an aqueous solution. The acidity or basicity
of an aqueous solution goes back to the chemical equilibrium established by pure water molecules.
A pure water sample has a very small amount of water molecules which have
undergone a disproportionation. Two water molecules combine and form H3O plus and an OH minus.
In pure water at 25 degrees centigrade the equilibrium established produces
1 times 10 to the minus 7th molar concentration of H3O plus and 1 times 10 to the minus 7th
molar concentration of OH minus. The product of these two concentrations 1 times 10 to the minus
14th is called the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of water and is given a special
name because of its importance in chemistry k sub w is 1 times 10 to the minus 14th. In any
aqueous solution it is always true that a system at equilibrium has the concentration of OH minus
times the concentration of H3O plus equal to 1 times 10 to the minus 14th. This equilibrium of
water then underlies all of acid base chemistry. We've discussed the difference between strong
acids and weak acids before but with equilibrium we can give a formal definition. A strong acid
according to the Bronsted-Lowry definition is when where all the hydrogen ions from the acid
are transferred to water molecules. Adding a strong acid to water then increases the H3O plus
concentration until it's exactly equal to the concentration of the acid we put in the solution.
So if you walk into a lab and find a solution labeled 0.1 molar HCl we know that HCl is a strong
acid and that solution then contains 0.1 molar H3O plus but the system is still at chemical
equilibrium and so even in the strongly acid solution which contains 0.1 molar H3O plus
there is still some OH minus hydroxide ions present in the solution but they're present
to such a small extent that the concentration of the H3O plus 0.1 molar times the concentration of
the OH minus has to equal the constant the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of water
1 times 10 to the minus 14th. The concentration of the OH minus then in this strongly acidic
solution is 1 times 10 to the minus 13th molar. It's a very small quantity but it's not zero
when we're talking about samples which contain a mole 6 times 10 to the 23rd total species.
The description of a chemical then as an acid or a base doesn't mean that the H3O plus or the OH
minus is the only component present in the solution. It just means that the equilibrium of water has
been shifted so that the H3O plus is the dominant member of the partnership in an acid
or the OH minus is the dominant member of the partnership in a base.
When we put the strong base sodium hydroxide in water we know that sodium hydroxide is
completely soluble and dissolves in water and therefore the concentration of sodium hydroxide
that we put into the system defines the concentration of OH minus present at equilibrium.
The excess OH minus consumes some of the H3O plus and if we have a 0.1 molar solution of OH minus
that means we have 1 times 10 to the minus 13th molar H3O plus in that same solution.
We say the pH which is the negative log of the concentration of H3O plus present at chemical
equilibrium is 1 for the H3O plus solution and 13 the negative log of 1 times 10 to the minus 13th
for the NaOH solution. These two pH ranges represent the limits of a typical set of pH
measurements that you would do in a chemical laboratory. The pH of pure water of course
because there's equal quantities of H3O plus and OH minus is considered to be 7.
So we have a scale now which allows us to monitor the chemical equilibrium shifts
that occur in acid and base solutions between pH ranges of 1 and 13 through pH 7 which is when
there's equal quantities of H3O plus and OH minus present. If we add the weak acid, acetic acid to
a sample of water, the pH that we measure is not what we would predict from the concentration
of the acid. We see that the acid is only partially dissociated. It's called a weak acid
because the acetic acid molecule comes to a chemical equilibrium that produces some acetate ions
and leaves some acetic acid molecules behind. As a matter of fact the equilibrium constant for
acetic acid is 1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth. That means that in any solution of acetic acid
the concentration of the acetate ion produced by the dissociation times the concentration of the H plus
ion also produced by the dissociation divided by the concentration of the acetic acid left behind
at equilibrium is equal to 1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth. This is the mathematical formalism
that allows us to calculate the concentrations of acetic acid, acetate ion, H3O plus and OH
minus present in any equilibrium mixture containing water and acetic acid. The equilibrium
calculations that one performs in a general chemistry course are pretty challenging for many
students but you just need to remember that we're going to take a very artificial approach
to how the equilibrium is established because it facilitates an easy mathematical calculation.
In our example let's assume that we have a 0.1 molar solution of acetic acid. What's the pH of
this solution? If we already know the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of acetic acid
we can set up a table that allows us to take the initial concentrations of acetic acid that we've
established this system with, let the chemistry happen and calculate what the system evolves to
so that it reaches a chemical equilibrium. And it's worth saying for a moment that most
acid-base equilibrium processes happen just about as quickly as the water molecules in a water sample
collide with each other. So on the scale of chemical processes these are very fast equilibrium.
In the case of a 0.1 molar solution of acetic acid we imagine the situation where we have 0.1
molar acetic acid before any of it has reacted with the water molecules in its solution. At this
time we established the initial concentration of the acetic acid the acetate ion and the H3O plus
as 0.1 molar, zero water and zero H plus has been produced by the dissociation of the acetic acid.
However that system is not a chemical equilibrium. In order to get to chemical equilibrium
some of the acetic acid has to dissociate. If we call the amount of acetic acid that dissociates
to get to chemical equilibrium x then we see that x moles per liter of acetate ion and x moles per
liter of H plus ion are produced every time x moles per liter of acetic acid dissociate in water.
At equilibrium then we could take the original concentration of the acetic acid 0.1 molar,
subtract the x moles per liter that had to react to get to equilibrium and end up with 0.1 minus x
moles per liter of acetic acid left over when the chemical equilibrium is established.
On the other side of the reaction we see that if x moles per liter of acetic acid have reacted
we've made x moles per liter of acetate anion and x moles per liter of H plus. Using the equilibrium
constant we can set up an equation that we can solve because it has only one variable the variable
x which we've been able to use to describe the concentration changes in both the reagents and
products because of the chemical stoichiometry of the reaction. The equilibrium constant calculation
says that the equilibrium constant for acetic acid 1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth has to equal
the concentrations of the products x times x divided by the concentration of the reagent left over
at equilibrium 1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth minus x. If you're mathematically sophisticated
you'll see that this is a quadratic equation that a constant is equal to x squared over a
number minus x. Most of us can solve quadratic equation using our calculators in a pretty
straightforward way but those who feel uncomfortable with mathematics should realize a simplifying
assumption that can occasionally be made. If acetic acid is weak enough that not very much of it
dissociates to get to chemical equilibrium then the denominator in the calculation we've just
set up the 1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth minus x is almost exactly equal to 1.8 times 10 to the
minus fifth the original concentration that we started with. We know it's not exactly equal
or the x would be zero and if x is zero we haven't reached chemical equilibrium but if just a small
amount dissociates then in comparison to the original concentration we don't see much change
and for many types of calculations in chemistry especially for weak acid or weak base transitions
it's okay to simplify the mathematics and perform a calculation that says the equilibrium constant
1.8 times 10 to the minus fifth equals x squared over the concentration of acetic acid we started
with. That is a much easier mathematical problem to solve. We just multiply the equilibrium constant
times the initial concentration of the acid and take the square root and that gives us the
amount of acetate anion formed to get us to chemical equilibrium. It also gets us the amount
of H plus that was added to the original water solution but since the water itself produced
only 1 times 10 to the minus seventh mole per liter of H plus in its disproportionation we
generally ignore that as a contribution to the H plus concentration and say that the pH is equal
to the negative concentration of the H plus produced by the dissociation of a weak acid.
If we start to look at this problem from the other side if we look at the product side instead of
the reagents we could set up a solution where instead of adding acetic acid to a water solution
we added its conjugate base acetic acid anion and acetic acid anion if we wanted to find some of it
in a bottle on a prep shelf in a chemistry lab would be combined with a cation to balance its
charge. So let's say we took some sodium acetate and dissolved it in water. Sodium acetate is as
most sodium salts are 100% soluble in water and so we end up with a solution which contains sodium
ions and acetate anions. Notice that the 100% solubility means that the equilibrium constant
for the reaction sodium acetate goes to sodium ions plus acetate ions is infinitely large that's
what 100% dissociated means. If we have a solution which contains acetic acid anion the acetic acid
anion could take the hydrogen from water and form acetic acid giving us the reverse of the
reaction we talked about a minute ago. In this reverse reaction the acetic acid anion taking
the hydrogen from water leaves behind a hydroxide ion so the acetic acid anion is called the conjugate
base of the weak acid acetic acid. A weak-based equilibrium is described by the equilibrium
constant k sub b for base and it turns out that for any weak acid there's a conjugate base and
the strength of the conjugate base is inversely related to the strength of the conjugate acid
such that the product k a of the conjugate acid times k b of the conjugate base is always equal
to k w the equilibrium constant for the dissociation of water. In the case of acetic acid anion
when sodium acetate is put into water the acetate anion reacts with the water forming
acetic acid leaving behind OH- and the equilibrium constant that describes that equation
is approximately 5 times 10 to the minus 8. 5 times 10 to the minus 8 times 1.8 let's round that off
to 2 times 10 to the minus 15th is equal to 1 times 10 to the minus 14th the dissociation
constant for water. This discussion is meant to emphasize that the balance that occurs in a weak
acid or a weak base solution. The relative concentrations of the acid and base form can
be tweaked slightly by adding a strong acid or strong base to the solution but in any acid base
equilibrium the ratio between the conjugate base and the conjugate acid is always established
by the equilibrium k a for the acid under consideration.
What happens if we make a solution which contains both a weak acid and its conjugate salt so acetic
acid and sodium acetate both put in significant quantities into one solution. It turns out that
solutions prepared like this that contain significant amounts of both a weak acid and its
conjugate base are significantly different in their behavior than solutions which contain only
a weak acid or only a conjugate base and the reason goes back to Le Chatelier's principle.
You can think of the addition of the conjugate base to the weak acid as an example of Le Chatelier's
principle if you write the dissociation for the acid as the chemical equation describing the
behavior of the system. Weak acid plus water produces its conjugate base plus H3O plus and at
equilibrium we know that a weak acid produces only a very small amount of conjugate base and acid iron.
However if we come back and put in a appreciable quantity of sodium acetate in a solution of
acetic acid we are disturbing the acetic acid equilibrium and the acetic acid equilibrium
does everything it can to minimize the amount of acetic acid anion that's present. Unfortunately
there's just not enough H3O plus around to react with the anion to form acetic acid and so the
equilibrium is a little bit stuck. The presence of extra acetic acid and acetic acid anion in the
same solution means that if we add a small amount of strong acid or strong base to the solution
there's a reagent there to react with it and we see that solutions made by combination of weak
acids and their salts resist a change in pH that is not possible for a solution which contains
only a weak acid or only a conjugate salt. Le Chatelier's principle tells us that if we add
a little bit of acid to a solution containing both an acid and its conjugate base that the
acid we add will react with the conjugate base and form some more acetic acid in this case.
That transformation means that the extra acid added doesn't stay in the equilibrium solution
and the pH doesn't change even though we've added extra acid to the equilibrium solution.
The solutions made by mixing a weak acid and its conjugate salt are called buffers
and buffers play a critical role in all living systems by controlling the range of pHs
that the system experiences even when it's under attack from external sources of acid or base.
Because it's the ratio between the acetic acid anion and the weak acid acetic acid
that determines the buffer behavior of a system biologists usually refer to a quantity called
the pKa of an acid as describing a buffer solution. Recall that the pH is defined as
the negative log of the H3O plus concentration. In the same way the pKa of a buffer solution
is defined as the negative log of the Ka, the equilibrium constant that describes the acid
dissociation in the buffer. If you set up the equilibrium expression Ka equals the concentration
of acetate anion times H3O plus divided by the concentration of the acetic acid molecule
and you take the negative log of both sides you get the negative log of Ka on the left.
On the right hand side the rules of logarithms allow you to separate the logarithm of the
product of the acetate anion concentration times the H plus Ka concentration divided by the acid
concentration into two components. The first component is written as the negative log of the
concentration of acetic acid anion over the concentration of acetic acid and the second
term is written as the negative log of the H3O plus concentration. So we see that in translation
we get an equation that says that the pKa of a weak acid in a buffer is equal to the negative log
of the concentration of the acetic acid anion divided by the concentration of the acetic
acid molecule plus the pH. Biologists use this equation in a slightly rearranged form to allow
them to calculate the pH of buffer solutions. The pH of the buffer solution is the pKa of the
acid that you used plus the logarithm of the ratio of the acetate anion over the acetic acid
and if you form the chemical system by placing both acetic acid and sodium acetate in the same
container then you can make a buffer with a pH somewhat close to the pKa equilibrium constant
but it will resist any change in pH when you add an acid or a base and that's the part the resistance
to pH change that is essential for living systems. In an earlier discussion we said that proteins
were created by stringing together series of amino acids. Amino acids have very interesting
acid base properties because one end of the molecule the amino end looks like a weak base
ammonia and the other end of the molecule the acid end looks like a weak acid acetic acid
and so the acid base behavior of a system containing a protein is critical in determining the structure
and energetics of the protein. In fact under certain circumstances if the pH of a solution
containing a protein is changed sufficiently you can denature the protein that is remove the
possibility of non-covalent interactions between various components of the protein
and the whole structure of the protein will fall apart. This kind of a transformation
is a critical component in both diseases and in the analysis that biologists use
to analyze the protein structure of living systems. We'll come back to the question of
biological systems again in a later lesson in this series.
This ends lecture 11.
