Elemental matters, an introduction to chemistry, lecture 12, moving electrons, an introduction to oxidation reduction.
In this lesson, we're going to talk a little bit about redox reactions and how they're useful in modern society.
We've already defined a redox reaction as one in which the oxidation state of two materials is changed.
For instance, in the rusting of iron, we saw that iron was oxidized in this process from neutral iron to iron plus three,
and oxygen was reduced from neutral oxygen to oxygen minus two.
In this case, the charges don't really represent the charges but represent what's called an oxidation state.
The oxidation state of the element reflects whether or not it has all of the electrons that nature gave it or has traded or transferred some of them to a partner.
And many of the standard reactions that we are familiar with can be viewed as oxidation reduction reactions, including all the combustions of hydrocarbons as well as the rusting of natural metals.
If you turn things around a little bit and pass an electrical current through a sample of water, you find that bubbles will form.
So let's think about this for a second. You have a source of electrical power and two electrodes, one called the anode, one called the cathode.
The two electrodes are pieces of metal, and if you violate all the rules your mother ever taught you and stick an electrical current in a vat full of water,
you'll see that bubbles form at both electrodes.
In particular, let's consider that we're going to connect an external source of electrical current up to two pieces of metal,
and the two pieces of metal will be submerged in the water at two different physical locations.
At the location where electrons are being provided to the metal, the electrons react with water and form hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions.
And at the electrode where electrons are being produced, taken away, if you will, from the reaction, the water decomposes through a different process,
producing oxygen gas and four hydrogen ions and four electrons.
You can perform this electrolysis of water without too much high end equipment at all in a laboratory.
The electrolysis is considered to happen in an electrolytic cell, and if you want to collect the oxygen and hydrogen produced by the electrolysis of water,
you need to do the two halves of the reaction in two different containers so that the oxygen and hydrogen can be isolated from one another.
The two separate containers are usually called the cells, the cells of an electrolytic cell,
and in order to complete the circuit in an electrolytic cell, you need some kind of a connector that will connect the cell containing the anode to the cell containing the cathode.
The connection piece needs to allow ions to flow freely, and is generally a piece of paper or some kind of a system that can support the free motion of charged particles through itself.
We know that some reactions that transfer electrons just happen.
For instance, if we put a piece of copper metal in a solution of silver nitrate and wait for a little while, we'll see a gray precipitate form.
The copper metal will dissolve and form a blue copper nitrate solution.
This is an easy process to see, and it indicates to us that the copper is being oxidized to form copper plus two ions,
while the silver, which is silver plus one ions in silver nitrate, is being precipitated as solid silver metal at the bottom of the beaker.
The reaction between copper and silver nitrate is spontaneous, and in the terminology of electrochemistry,
we say that copper is a more active metal than silver, because copper will replace silver in an aqueous solution.
In our discussion of types of chemical reactions, we said that we could get electricity from chemical reactions,
and we even described building a small battery of pennies, nickels, and pieces of paper towel that were soaked in electrolytes,
solutions that contain charged particles, and which allow the charged particles to move freely within them.
It's a simple concept from the penny and nickel stack to envision separating the copper and the nickel components physically from one another,
and that separates the oxidation and reduction parts of the redox reaction into two halves.
If we go back to our copper and silver reaction example, we could have a piece of copper metal, a copper electrode,
submerged in a copper sulfate solution. Copper sulfate, you'll remember, is an ionic compound, which is soluble in water,
and the copper sulfate solution has a beautiful blue color.
On the other half of the oxidation reduction process, we could take a silver electrode, solid metallic silver,
and suspend it in a silver nitrate solution. The silver nitrate solution really just looks like water,
and you wouldn't know it contained ions unless you tested its conductivity.
If we take these two electrodes and connect them through an external connection,
we'll see that the copper will spontaneously want to oxidize, producing copper plus two, and releasing two electrons,
which would like to travel to the silver ions in the silver nitrate solution and precipitate them out by neutralizing them to silver metal.
However, very quickly as this process begins, we see that there's a charge buildup,
and the charge buildup prevents further electron motion, because the electrons that are transferred build up a negative charge
and repel any further electrons from moving towards the silver electrode.
Therefore, we see that in order to complete the circuit, we need a bridge for electrical charges to be able to move around
and keep the circuit neutral at all points along it.
In a typical laboratory environment, we use a salt bridge to make this final connection,
and a piece of filter paper soaked in sodium chloride solution is a perfectly good salt bridge,
although there are many more sophisticated versions out there.
When we set up the two halves of the copper and silver redox reaction in two separate pieces,
that system is called a galvanic or voltaic cell.
It's a spontaneous reaction that occurs, and it provides electrons which move through the external circuit.
This scenario, this engineering scenario, allows us to harness the electrons and their motion through space to do electrical work external to the cell.
When we go back to look at the electrolysis of water, we see that we are using an electrical power supply to drive that reaction
in the opposite direction from which it would spontaneously like to go.
We can use an electrolytic cell, a non-spontaneous cell, as a way of storing chemical energy for future use,
and in fact, fuel cells under development today for use in automobiles as well as in more exotic applications do just that.
They take electrical current, convert water into hydrogen and oxygen, and then store the hydrogen and oxygen for future use
when they'll be released to recombine producing electrical current, which can do work in the external atmosphere.
The tendency of an atom to either accept or donate electrons is considered to be measured by the reduction potential.
In the cell between copper and silver, we can measure a voltage that's produced between the copper electrode and the silver electrode.
That cell potential is experimentally measurable and tells us something about the tendency for copper metal to transfer electrons to silver ions.
The cell potential turns out to be the sum of two contributions.
The willingness of the copper to give up its electrons is one contribution, and the willingness of silver to accept electrons is another contribution.
The cell potential is a combination of the potential of the two steps involved in making the voltaic cell.
It's possible to consider connecting multiple cells together.
For instance, zinc turns out to be a more active metal than copper, and if we set up a cell so that zinc metal is in contact with zinc nitrate,
remember that zinc is a plus 2 ion, so zinc nitrate is ZnNO3 plus NO32.
The other cell connected in the system is copper metal in copper nitrate.
We see a spontaneous reaction which will transfer electrons from the zinc metal producing zinc plus 2 ions,
and the electrons produced can be absorbed by the copper plus 2 ions in the aqueous solution to produce copper metal.
So we have sort of a series of things here. Zinc is more active than copper, and copper is more active than silver.
If we string a zinc copper cell together with a copper-silver cell, we can get a standard electrical potential from this combination of reactions,
which is the sum of the potential of the zinc copper reaction plus the potential of the copper-silver reaction.
In order, again, to be able to compare apples to apples, chemists usually determine the standard, what's called the standard electrode potential of a redox reaction
by comparing it, the reaction of interest, to a standard hydrogen electrode.
In a standard hydrogen electrode, H2 gas is converted to 2 H plus ions and 2 electrons in the oxidation half of the cell.
If you connect this standard hydrogen electrode with any other of the systems we've looked at, copper and copper solution, silver and silver solution, zinc and zinc solution,
you can see the relative ability of the metal to reduce compared to the ability of hydrogen to undergo an oxidation.
Experimentally, we measure the standard reduction potential relative to hydrogen and define the sign of the production potential to be positive when the hydrogen is oxidized and the metal is reduced.
If we measure a zinc half cell, a copper half cell, and a silver half cell relative to the standard hydrogen electrode, we find that the silver reaction, silver ion plus electron goes to silver,
has the standard reduction potential of 0.779 volts compared to the standard hydrogen electrode.
On the other hand, if we use zinc and look at the reaction, zinc plus 2 plus 2 electrons goes to zinc metal.
The potential is actually reversed compared to the standard hydrogen electrode and we measured as minus 7.63 volts.
Copper is somewhere in between. Remember that zinc was more active than copper and copper was more active than silver.
And so copper lies in the middle and copper plus 2 reacts with 2 electrons to produce copper metal at a standard potential of 0.337 volts.
The half cell with the more positive standard reduction potential will always be the cathode of a combined cell and the half cell with the lower or more negative electrode potential will always be the anode.
If we want to drive the reaction in the opposite direction from the spontaneous direction just defined, we can do that.
We just have to provide electrical work from some external source.
So we see that redox reactions are at least conceivably completely reversible.
And if we have a spontaneous chemical reaction, we can use that to provide us with a source of electrical current to do work outside of a cell.
Or we can turn around and provide an external source of electrical work to drive a non-spontaneous reaction and provide storage of the energy converted from electricity into chemical storage through reversing a spontaneous redox reaction.
Probably one of the most familiar half cell setups is the battery of your automobile.
The battery of your automobile is called a lead acid battery and it produces enough voltage to start your engine.
The two half cell reactions in a lead acid battery involve the reaction of lead oxide with sulfate ion, that's PBO2, a solid, plus sulfate SO4 minus 2 in aqueous solution.
And it has to be in an acidic solution, there's 4H pluses and two electrons.
So the combination PBO2 solid plus a sulfate ion plus 4 hydrogen ions plus 2 electrons is converted to lead sulfate, a solid, plus 2 molecules of water.
The lead here has gone from having an oxidation state of plus 4 in the lead oxide material to an oxidation state of plus 2 in lead sulfite.
Therefore the lead has been reduced.
Lead sulfate in the other half reaction the lead sulfate accepts two electrons to produce lead metal and release the SO4 as a free species.
So in this reaction the lead goes from a charge of plus 2 to lead 0, 0 for lead solid.
The reduction potential for the reaction of lead oxide to form lead sulfate is 1.658 volts.
The potential for going from lead sulfate to lead metal is minus 0.356 volts.
Therefore we see that in the spontaneous arrangement the lead oxide is the reduction half of the cell and the lead sulfate is the oxidation half of the cell.
Overall the reaction would be estimated to produce approximately 2 volts of energy.
Automobile batteries are considered to be 12 volt batteries. How do you get 12 volts from this battery?
Clearly the standard potential cannot accommodate that.
However the potential of the battery system is variable depending on the concentration of the components in the system.
In a 12 volt battery the electrodes are grids of lead metal suspended in sulfuric acid.
When the battery is fully charged a set of the electrodes is filled with lead sulfate and the other with a mixture of lead sulfate and lead oxide.
Because the automobile battery involves lead sulfate on both halves of the reaction we can recharge it when it discharges.
Recharging involves providing an electrical current external to the battery to reverse the normal spontaneous direction of the battery reaction.
That's what your alternator does when you drive your car down the road.
It provides an electrical current which recharges the lead acid battery that you use to start your car.
The work that can be extracted from electrical system from a galvanic cell is determined by taking the amount of charge usually measured in Coulomb's C that's moved across the poles between the anode and cathode of the battery times the potential energy difference between the anode and cathode.
The electrical work from a zinc copper cell then can be calculated by taking the difference in the potentials which is approximately 1.1 volt times the current that flows across the electrodes.
The more current that flows the amount of charge that flows the more work can be done.
The work available from electrochemical cell can be calculated though without monitoring the current that flows or how long it flows or what the potential voltage is.
The potential work the work available to be done by the battery can be calculated by N the number of electrons in each half reaction, F a constant called the Faraday constant and E the cell potential which is the standard reduction potential of the battery.
The constant F has a numerical value of 9.65 times 10 to the fourth Coulomb's per mole.
In a cell where two electrons, two moles of electrons are transferred for each mole of reaction the work to be done is twice the work compared to a cell where one mole of electrons is transferred between the anode and the cathode.
From a more theoretical standpoint we can connect the thermodynamic quantity of free energy to the cell potential and this connection illustrates our terminology that certain cells are spontaneous reactions and others are non-spontaneous but it can be driven.
Remember in our discussion of thermodynamics we said that the quantity the Gibbs energy was the amount of theoretical work that could be done by a chemical process.
In a cell the cell potential allows us to calculate the theoretical amount of work that can be done and this is exactly identical to the change in Gibbs energy for the system.
So the maximum amount of work the N times Faraday's constant times E the voltage is defined to be equal to the negative Gibbs energy of the reaction.
Remember that systems are spontaneous when they can move in a direction that will minimize their Gibbs free energy.
So anytime you have a negative G in the reaction that describes the reaction that means the reaction is favorable and spontaneous.
A positive voltage for an electric cell describes a spontaneous process and a negative voltage calculated for an electric cell describes a non-spontaneous process, one that has to be driven externally.
Of course between positive and negative we find Gibbs energies of zero and electrical energies of zero and systems where E is zero or delta G is zero are considered to be a chemical equilibrium.
If we look at our silver copper cell and set up alternating containers of silver nitrate holding silver electrodes and copper sulfate holding copper electrodes connected by salt bridges which contain either potassium nitrate or sodium chloride.
We can generate a copper silver cell and observe the spontaneous reaction where copper transfers its electrons to silver ions.
The voltage in the copper silver cell is calculated from the standard half potentials for the copper and silver half reactions.
Again the silver ion combines with one electron to make silver metal with a potential of .799 volts and copper combines with two electrons to make copper metal with a potential of .337 volts.
We see therefore that the spontaneous direction of a cell made of copper and silver is for the copper metal to release electrons and provide them to the silver which precipitates the silver ions out of the solution.
And the driving voltage for this cell arrangement is in the neighborhood of .6 volts.
However as the reactions proceed the concentration of copper ions and the concentration of silver ions in the solutions will change over time.
And as we move away from the standard definition of standard potentials as being at one molar concentrations of silver and one molar concentrations of copper ions in solution we see a shift in the potential associated with the transfer.
Let's take a second here and talk about the concentration of pure copper metal or pure silver metal.
Remember that we've defined concentration to be mass per unit volume or moles per unit volume when we talked about solution chemistry and molarity.
When you have a pure metal or any pure solid substance the mass per unit volume is the same it's an intensive property of the material.
It doesn't matter whether you have a tenth of a gram of copper metal or a hundred grams of copper metal or a million tons of copper metal.
The concentration of the copper determined as its mass per milliliter or its moles per liter is unchanged by the quantity of the metal that's present.
Therefore when an electrolytic cell is run while the ions change concentration the solid metals either formed or consumed are not changing their concentration as the reaction proceeds.
When copper reacts the copper metal volume goes down as the copper metal mass goes down and so the concentration doesn't change.
That means we only need to consider the concentration of the ions in these two half reactions when we look at the impact when the cell runs over time.
The relationship between the potential of the cell and the charge on the ions in the cell is called the Nernst equation.
The Nernst equation says that for any cell the potential that the cell has at any time is equal to its standard potential labeled with a superscript of zero minus RT R being the gas law constant and T the temperature in Kelvin
divided by NF where N is the number of electrons transferred in a balanced reaction and F is the Faraday constant times the ln of Q.
Q here is standing for the reactant quotient and the reactant quotient is just the same as the quotient we calculated for an equilibrium system the concentration of products divided by the concentration of reagents each raised to their stoichiometric coefficient.
But Q refers to a situation where we may not actually be at equilibrium.
What we see then is that the voltage of an electrolytic cell changes over time as charges move from one electrode to another.
If we plug the constants into the Nernst equation we get a numerical value of the coefficient in front of the log Q term which turns out to be 0.059 volts divided by N the number of moles of electrons transferred.
We get this number by plugging in the value of R and F and considering the temperature to be 298 Kelvin or 25 degrees centigrade.
We can then watch the cell potential change as the concentration of ions in the cell changes over time and in general the cell potential will decline over time as the reaction proceeds in its spontaneous direction.
The Nernst equation allows us a window to calculate thermodynamic quantities from electronic observations on redox reaction cells.
Because the voltage of the cell is related both to the standard voltage associated with the cell and the concentration of the reagents contained within the cell.
Since the voltage measured for the cell is related to the standard production voltage of the components of the cell and the concentration of the ions within the cell, we can calculate what happens when the cell potential becomes 0.
When the cell potential becomes 0, the ratio of the concentrations of ions in the cell in the battery cell itself is related to the standard voltage calculated earlier for the cell under standard conditions.
This definition of equilibrium has been used extensively to actually calculate the delta G of some chemical reactions.
When the cell potential is 0, the delta G of the reaction is considered to be minus RT times the logarithm of K. Remember K is the equilibrium constant and the ratio Q in the Nernst equation becomes K when we reach an equilibrium scenario.
So the standard electrode potential allows us to calculate the equilibrium constant for any reaction that we can put in the cell.
And the logarithm of K, the equilibrium constant, is equal to N, the number of moles of electrons transferred, times the Faraday constant, times the standard voltage, divided by RT, the gas law R, and the temperature.
This relationship is very important in biological systems. Many biological systems depend on the transference of electrons to provide both energy and chemical reactivity to the biological system.
Unlike standard chemical systems where we define the standard state to be one molar concentration of H plus, one molar concentration of copper nitrate, one molar concentration of zinc sulfate, in biological systems we have a problem if we define a standard state relative to one molar concentrations.
And in particular, most biological systems are active at pH is close to 7. A one molar solution of H plus, of course, produces a pH of 0. And so the electrostatic scenarios active in biological systems turn out to be quite different than the electrostatic scenarios that are quoted as standard conditions in chemistry.
This shift in the standard reference state for biological systems compared to chemical systems is one of the fundamental differences in the way that chemists and biologists talk about electron potentials and reduction potentials.
And we have to be careful when we make predictions about biological systems based on chemical measurements that we have corrected appropriately for the shift in the standard state. The biochemist standard state, as it's called, depends on everything being measured relative to a pH of 7.
In other words, in neutral water. Whereas in chemistry, the standard state is one molar, a pH of 0. Remember that we defined chemical potential of standard cells relative to the standard hydrogen electrode.
And the standard hydrogen electrode had a one molar concentration of hydrogen ion. But in biological systems, the standard electrode has a one times 10 to the minus seventh molar concentration of hydrogen ions. And this provides a difference in the electrostatic potential for essentially every reaction that happens in biological systems.
Many textbooks distinguish between potentials measured relative to the chemist standard state by using E capital E with a zero superscript for the standard state. And biological standard states are capital E with a superscript zero and a little apostrophe to the right of the zero to refer to the standard state in biological systems.
Another possible complication in biological systems is that many chemical processes, oxidation processes in particular, take place in the presence of oxygen and are calculated relative to the presence of oxygen. But many biological reactions occur inside of cells and inside the body and those reactions occur in the absence of oxygen.
The oxidation process needs to find another reservoir for electrons than oxygen in a biological environment where oxygen is excluded.
Biological systems generally engage in a cascade of reactions which systematically transfer electrons from one location to another. This cascade of coupled reactions can allow non-spontaneous processes to happen in a biological system when one step, non-spontaneous step, is coupled with a second so that the overall process is spontaneous.
We discussed this earlier when we talked about the thermodynamics of some biological systems and saw that specific steps in a biological process might be endothermic and therefore not particularly favored. But when they were coupled with a secondary reaction which was highly exothermic, the overall process could happen spontaneously, despite the endothermicity of the first reaction.
We've seen that we can combust hydrocarbons and oxygenated hydrocarbons easily and produce energy. However, we can also allow oxygenated hydrocarbons to undergo redox reactions and extract the energy through a different route.
In organisms which consume oxygen, glucose is oxidized through a net reaction that converts the glucose into CO2 and water.
Whereas the direct combustion of glucose can occur in the lab, in the human body the combustion of glucose happens over several steps and a substantial amount of the energy is extracted not as heat but as electrostatic potential and moves electrons around in the biological system.
The stoichiometry of glucose oxidation in a non-oxygen atmosphere inside the human body depends on the combination of glucose molecules with water molecules rather than with oxygen.
And through a process called glycolysis and an application of what's called the TCA cycle, the glucose and water combine to make the CO2 that you would expect from standard glucose oxidation and 24 hydrogen ions and 24 electrons.
This oxidation happens completely independent of the presence of any oxygen and the electron transport is the pathway by which the electrons from glucose are transferred to oxygen.
The electrons transferred in the human body are generally stored in a compound called NADH which can provide an energy source for the biological system to use at a time distinct from the consumption of the glucose molecule.
In this discussion of oxidation reduction chemistry we've discussed making batteries by harnessing the power of spontaneous chemical transformations, discussed slightly the use of fuel cells as a way of storing electrical energy in a chemical environment
and ended up talking about biological systems which can store chemical energy in very elaborate storage devices.
If it hasn't occurred to you before this should provide another example that a lot of modern chemistry is trying to mimic biology in its approach.
The idea that instead of simply burning glucose and using the heat immediately that we might control the oxidation of glucose and store that energy for future use is one we'll see is applicable in modern 21st century science in a way that it has not been exploited over the past several hundred years.
