Welcome, and thanks for joining me.
My name is Satyaan Davidas, and I am a professor of mathematics at Williams College.
And we are about to embark on an amazing journey in the study of shapes.
But what kind of shapes do we care about?
Our ideas can be applied to anything, ranging from the kinds of clouds that you see in the
sky, whether it be big puffy clouds or thin wisps, to the types of shapes of mountain
ranges, smooth rolling hills or steep jagged points, to the designs of cars and trucks
and airplanes, to even patterns of ties and shirts like I'm wearing.
We want to identify, to classify and quantify these shapes.
Now why do we care about shapes?
The most important lesson that we can learn in these entire series of lectures is that
shapes determine purpose.
Form and function are interrelated.
Consider a coffee cup, a simple object as an example.
Do you know the coffee cup has a little divot on the side where you can put your fingers
through so that your fingers don't have to touch the hot cup of coffee?
At the same time, the shape of the cup has a groove inside it where you can pour your
hot liquid.
So you see the form of the shape determines its function.
This doesn't have to apply to something as simple as a coffee cup.
It applies to everything you see, to airplanes, to buildings, to trees.
Have you ever noticed that there are different types of trees?
Some of them are extremely tall and these are usually located in the middle of a dense
forest.
They're trying to fight their way to the top to get the light in terms of the foliage
coverage in the forest.
On the other hand, some trees are broad in fields and in planes where they have room
and they're trying to expand to collect as much light as they can for photosynthesis.
Shapes are also needed for technology.
They're the most basic digital camera that we have, have facial recognition software.
They can look at the shapes that appear in the camera and the software can analyze where
a person's face and eyes are so they can focus right to the point.
Much less compared to the high level of security that's used in airports and by the military
nowadays.
Well mankind has always had a fascination with patterns and shapes appearing in art,
design, architecture and photography.
Leonardo da Vinci was a master at this where he blended math, art and nature seamlessly.
You noticed that he never considered at one point of his life worrying about art and another
worrying about math or engineering, they all blended perfectly together where he never
saw the divide between these different worlds.
Now near the end of these lectures we will consider how artists have struggled with some
of the basic ideas of shapes.
But most importantly we are about to bring in the power of mathematics to understand these
shapes.
The math we work on is completely unlike what is classically considered math and what you
might even be comfortable with which is a good thing.
My goal is to take you out of your comfort zone.
It's the fairly new field of study which actually pushes the frontiers of research and hopefully
pushes you in new ways.
Moreover, we look at numerous unsolved problems during our adventures that are absolutely
easy to state and understand and has baffled the greatest mathematical minds so far.
Now this is not meant to intimidate but to encourage the sense that we can all play the
game each one of us.
We don't need to have the training of the great mathematicians and scientists in order
to understand the problems.
Maybe we'll be able to approach these problems from a fresh perspective to see things that
nobody has seen yet before.
This is one of the goals of these lectures.
Well our focus will be shapes particularly in nature.
This will be our motivation and this will be our guide.
But you might be wondering why study shapes in nature when there's so many other things
out there.
What is it that's so amazing about nature that we should worry about?
But first of all, it is crucial for both preserving and living in nature to get a greater understanding
of how nature works, to actually preserve nature in a time especially like today and
at the same time to understand what nature is really about.
To study the shapes of nature will give us a glimpse into this perspective.
The study of nature has also opened up numerous doors for civilization, in particular their
advances in the sciences and in technology.
Let me give you a snapshot how technology and nature fit together.
First, technology tries to understand nature's designs, such as dragonfly wings.
It works so beautifully on a dragonfly, why does it do so?
What is it about the particular shape of the wing that makes it so efficient on a dragonfly?
This is one of our goals to imitate and understand nature in this way.
Secondly, technology tries to mimic nature's designs.
Consider the hypodermic syringe needle.
This is exactly motivated by and mimicking snake fangs.
The designer and inventor of the Velcro was motivated by thistle birds that they happen
to walk across in the middle of their forest.
These thistle birds sticking on their genes motivated this idea of a Velcro.
So again we see that technology tries to mimic the nature in front of it.
The sonar that we see in submarines motivated from bats and even a camera lens you find
in the simplest and cheapest cameras try to mimic the complexity of the human eye.
Nature, it turns out, is ahead of the curve and we are trying to push the frontier of
what we can do, seeing what nature has already done.
Now the main reason, the number one reason I believe for focusing on nature as we will
see is that nature is the ultimate optimizer.
Let's consider something quite simple, like soap bubbles.
Have you ever wondered why when you blow a bubble that it doesn't come in the shape
of a cube, why is it that the bubbles always come over and over and over again in the shapes
of perfect spheres?
Why doesn't the bubble come in the shape of a doughnut?
Well, it turns out that nature is doing its ultimate in optimization.
It is using the least amount of surface area, which is the soap film that you are giving
to it, to capture the most volume possible.
It's capturing the most air.
So we see that nature is optimizing in the best way possible.
Thus we see that nature is an extremely complicated system.
It offers us far more than what it is obvious at first glance.
Now I believe that objects can be seen in several different levels.
Things our level in size are the most obvious ones.
These are the ones many of us identify with when we say nature.
For example, trees and pine cones and mountains and insects, these are all the examples I've
already used today.
Now this is a scale that we can understand and observe and actively influence.
Consider something like a mountain or something as small as an anthill.
Both of these things are extreme compared to our size, but yet at the same time we can
wrap our minds around this.
We do understand what an anthill looks like and its size, and we do understand what mountains
look like and their size.
We can climb mountains, drive around mountains, fly over mountains, bore under mountains.
We do have the ability to grasp mountains and anthills.
Here you see nature also appears at the micro level.
We see this for example in the structure of DNA and molecules and revolutionary ideas
like string theory.
These things are operating all the time, though beyond our sense of space and distance.
We see that in our bodies our cells are replicating over and over again thousands of times.
And yet we cannot see this operation.
DNA is being copied and replicated thousands of times.
And yet we cannot understand fully this powerful operation at this micro level.
Now this happens in shapes appearing in the other perspective in terms of the macro level
with planets and suns and black holes and even the shape of the universe itself.
So we see we can have our perspective where we understand it.
We can have the perspective of the shape of nature in a micro level and we can also talk
about it in an enormous level.
We cannot understand what it means to talk about size and distance at this enormous scale
of light years.
And yet nature operates here all the time as well.
Now what does all of this have to do with mathematics?
You know I have been talking about nature for the past few minutes but doesn't it seem
like this kind of a talk on these lectures are designed for a biologist, a chemist or
an engineer?
Why a mathematician?
Well it turns out that the problem that we've been worried about has been exposed to mathematics
mostly through the language of numbers.
Many of us understand that mathematics and numbers go hand in hand.
But it turns out that this is not the case in a big picture setting.
Now it's true, numbers do surround us.
The cereal that I was having this morning on the side of the cereal box had different
percentages of information of my daily iron intake and my daily calcium intake.
We see this and we become extremely familiar.
I can look at my watch and tell the time of day, tell the date of the year.
I can read stock market values and numbers just pound our brains with these values.
Other reports in terms of percentages of clouds or percentages of rain.
Numbers also not just surround us in everything we do but numbers also define us.
Our social security number tells us who we are to the government.
Our height, weight, birthdays tell us who we are to one another.
And this is how we hold our information in our minds.
We have also become familiar with manipulating numbers.
Not just surrounding us and not just defining us but we have become masters in manipulating
these things such as simple things like addition and multiplication.
We might have learned in elementary school or even more complicated operations such
as exponentials.
Now we feel good about numbers and equate this with what mathematics really is about.
Mathematicians must be masters at manipulations of numbers.
When we think of more complicated or advanced mathematics and we pause, we think about the
world of equations.
Maybe the great mathematical results are the ones revolving the Pythagorean theorem.
A squared plus B squared equals C squared or the quadratic formula negative B plus or
minus the square root of B squared minus 4ac all over 2a.
Wow, can things get more complicated than this?
What about trigonometry or maybe even calculus equations, derivatives and integrals come
to mind?
What does this have to do with shapes?
Some of the equations that we have mentioned might be related to capturing data about pictures.
Maybe an equation such as x squared plus y squared equals 4 relates to capturing what
the picture of a perfect circle is of radius 2.
Maybe this is how mathematics and shapes are related.
Maybe it's related to equations of parabola and other more complicated mathematical curves
that we can draw on the plane.
But to most of us, this is where many of us end in our pursuit of how mathematics fit
with shapes.
The power of mathematics is that it provides us with a language in which we can understand
shapes far, far beyond numbers.
Consider something as simple as a coffee cup.
How would you describe something like this?
What kind of numbers would we use to understand this kind of a shape?
Or how would we describe a cloud?
The big puffy ones or the thin wispy ones?
Did you talk about the length of the cloud or the volume that the cloud takes up?
That somehow doesn't get to the heart of the shape of the cloud itself.
Or what about a tree?
Maybe we can talk about the branches of the tree or count the leaves or talk about how
the tree approximately looks like maybe a parabola or maybe certain trees look like circles.
But again, we're losing the essence of what the tree is really about.
It turns out that numbers and equations are not enough.
We are not fluent in this language of shapes.
We're trying to say something and yet we haven't learned the words to speak this language.
So a natural thing to say is why not talk about a biologist or a chemist or a physicist?
Who should talk about these lectures?
Well it turns out that mathematicians are the ones unlike these other scientists.
We are the ones who have created and who speak this language fluently.
Something like a tree, which we see all the time, becomes hard to describe without this
language.
The whole of the tree turns out to be far greater than just talking about the leaves
and the roots and the bark itself.
And in this course, we will learn to speak this language over these lectures that are
following.
We will also, at the same time, learn tools to understand shape and to manipulate the
shape just like we're able to do with numbers and equations.
Remember how we can take two numbers, three and four, and put them together and create
a new number, seven, using addition.
We can take three and four and put them together and get a new number, twelve, using multiplication.
Can we do this with shapes?
Can we take two different shapes, combine them in a certain way and get a new shape?
And are there different ways of doing it?
And what are the consequences?
What are the uses?
These operations that we learned in numbers, can they be extended to shapes?
Well in this course, we will use any weapon we can fashion to break through our obstacles
in understanding shapes.
Whether it's a number, we'll use it.
Whether it's polynomials that we learned in algebra, we'll use it.
What about coloring from kindergarten, we'll use it.
There is no idea that it's too big or too small for us to use for our understanding
of shapes to improve using the language of mathematics.
Now there is more to math than providing us with a language.
As we learn this world of mathematics, we find that we're only at the tip of true understanding.
Most of math remains a mystery, even today.
Now if this is the bar of understanding of math, since the beginning of time to where
we are at the end of time, where would you say most people would rate our understanding
of math?
I believe most of the people you would talk to would say that we are here.
We are nearly fully able to understand all of mathematics that there is.
But it turns out, if you ask a mathematician, if this is the math at the very beginning
and all the math knowledge there is, they would say we are right here at the very beginning
of understanding.
We are basically kids in a playground, in a sandbox, learning how to use a rake and
a shovel, the tools of Pythagoras and the tools of the quadratic formula are at the tip
of the iceberg to all the math that's out there that's yet to be discovered.
Each of the results that we have, it turns out, opens up seven more doors than it closes.
And as we solve the math problem, as we're able to dive in, we see that things are far
deeper than they appear.
You know, most of the math that we're exposed to are from an ancient era, from the Greeks,
the Egyptians, the Chinese, hundreds and thousands of years ago.
And the progress of math is slow, based on building on previous works.
All of us have heard about the world of geometry, the math having to do with shapes, while a
new branch of math, relatively from the perspective of time, is called topology, which basically
gets to the heart of shapes.
And it's only in the 1800s and the 1900s that this entire new branch was really studied
in detail.
And even today, numerous unsolved problems lay dormant in this world, which we will
learn and talk about.
At the same time, we'll learn about numerous unsolved problems not just in this world of
topology, but across the way math and nature fits together.
And these thus far have been impossible to prove by mathematicians or by any other scientist
working in this world.
So what makes a great mathematician?
The great ones can solve or make immense contributions to practically any problem they choose.
However, they will be judged on not just how they solved the problem, but the area of research
that they have decided to focus on.
In particular, the great ones are opening doors and breaking down walls and determining
the direction of math research for the next 50 years.
This is what makes them great.
Moreover, the great mathematicians have not only excelled in understanding what is given
in front of them, but to make connections between what was thought to be practically
unrelated fields.
Now in math, the greatest honor you can get is not the Nobel Prize.
You know, there is a rumor that a mathematician had an affair with Alfred Nobel and things
didn't work out.
Thus, the great honored mathematics is something called the Fields Medal.
This is an honor of John Fields.
It's given every four years and one must be not over 40 years old in order to get it.
Unlike Nobel Prizes, which you can get in your 60s, 70s and 80s, after your ideas have
been established for many years, to get a Fields Medal, you must have revolutionized
the field when you're still a kid.
We will look throughout these lectures at several Fields Medalists.
So what makes a great mathematician and what makes great mathematics?
It is the power of abstraction.
Let me give you a simple example.
Mathematicians in the early 1900s began to study the symmetry of objects, such as a cube.
They would take a cube and if you rotate it, you get the same object again.
If you rotate it this way, you get the same cube again.
This study of symmetry was abstracted by mathematics and by mathematicians to this world called
group theory, which we will study in these lectures.
Group theory is the study of symmetries and structure of mathematical ideas, not concrete
objects.
Many non-mathematicians thought that this was absolutely silly, not having a direct
application to the real world.
However, group theory was used decades later for quantum mechanics.
Those which are abstract will be useful for things we never thought possible.
Moreover, it might not give us a better car or a better toaster today, but it will lay
a foundation for a better toaster someday.
Most importantly, mathematics is pursued for its own sake.
It needs no defense.
Of course, this is coming from my absolute unbiased perspective.
The goal of the course is a two-stranded weaving of ideas of nature and mathematics.
Sometimes we'll venture more into the math side than the nature side, mostly since I'm
a mathematician at heart.
And the key interests will be in shapes that are appearing in biology, chemistry and physics
that are motivating our work.
For example, in biology, the shape of leaves will be related to origami designs, how leaves
sprout out based on certain folding properties, determining when to intake light.
And in chemistry, the shape of molecules determine functions of polymers, enzymes, and the DNA
itself.
In physics, the shape of space and even time will determine how light and gravity work
together.
The structure of this course is divided into four groups based on the complexity of the
shapes that appear.
The simplest shapes are based on lines and circles.
And our main concern here will be the study of knots, how you can take a simple piece
of string, tie a knot in it.
And these appear in DNA structures, string theory, knotted molecules, and mutations.
The second step of increasing complexity will be talking about surfaces.
Everything your eyes see is actually capturing a surface of an object.
If you're looking at me, you don't see all of me.
You don't see my heart or my lungs.
You don't even see most of me at all.
You only see the surface of the clothes that I'm wearing.
And if we understand surfaces, it'll grow a great way on how we see and understand the
world around us.
Things appear in origami designs of space telescopes, stent designs of arteries, curvatures
of mountain ranges, tilings of honeycombs, and animal patterns.
One of the examples we can even do is to talk about rigidity.
For example, taking simple rods of balls and joints can be imitated by protein modeling.
You can talk about wind flow patterns, how the wind flows on the surface of the earth,
and how the shape of the earth itself is determining the cyclones and the types of tornadoes that
appear.
After we understand simple shapes like knots and move on to surfaces, we can talk about
higher dimensional objects.
These are called manifolds and are quite difficult to understand even today.
These are hard to understand because unlike surfaces that we see, manifolds are bigger
than us because we are in them.
They surround us.
Examples of ideas of manifolds are related to soap bubbles, packings of clusters, and
Einstein's theory of relativity.
We can even be ambitious enough, which we will, to talk about the shape of the universe
itself.
Now we are going to close these lectures with shapes of superstructures.
These we will try to capture in a meta world, a shape of shapes.
We will struggle with ideas related to particle motions, particle collisions, the space of
phylogenetic trees, fractals, and chaotic systems, and how these are related to weather
forecasting, not just in nature, but economic forecasting conditions as well.
And near the end, we are going to talk about visualizing and drawing on understanding higher
dimensions.
Let's take a look at some of these examples here.
This is a snapshot of a four dimensional object that's been pushed into three dimensional
space.
What does that even mean?
How can we make this or understand its properties?
Let's take a look at this example.
This is a Kalabiyao manifold, a six dimensional object that is again be pushed into three
dimensional space.
What is the purpose of this, and what is the point of us understanding something so complicated?
It turns out that Kalabiyao manifolds appear in string theory, which tell us the foundations
of the world itself.
Well, this course only begins to explore the math underlying these concepts.
However, we will learn basic tools and understand how mathematicians think when they attack
these problems.
The first idea in understanding the language of shapes is the notion of equivalence.
Now we're going to explore this notion more in detail in the next lecture, but let's jump
in to get a taste of what this is about.
What do we mean when we say that two shapes are equivalent?
For example, what does it mean for me to say two vehicles are equivalent?
Does that mean that these two modes of transportation must be of the same kind?
Maybe they need to have the same number of wheels.
Maybe to say two things are equivalent means they must have the same engine, or maybe they
must be the same make and model, or even they must be of the same color.
Well, how can we tell things apart if we have no means of measuring equivalence?
Who determines what is or what is not equivalent?
Now this is the beauty of mathematics.
It turns out we determine what's equivalent or not.
Mathematicians define different levels of equivalence.
We determine whether a ball and a cube are equivalent.
Let's think about this.
If I have a cube in one hand and a sphere, a perfect ball in the other one, are they
equivalent?
Well, in one sense, yes.
They both have this smooth connected surface on one side, and practically a relatively
smooth connected surface on the other ones.
They both have no punctures in them.
But one has these sharp corners, so you feel that it probably isn't equivalent to the
other one.
We again determine whether they're equivalent or not.
We can talk about whether a ball is equivalent to a donut.
In both cases, you have smoothness, unlike the cube and the sphere, but here the donut
has this intrinsic hole in it that the ball doesn't, so maybe they should not be equivalent
to objects.
Something makes us say no, but it's not just the connectedness, it's something deeper,
and here we see us speaking without this mathematical language.
What about a big ball and a small ball?
Are these equivalent?
Again, we need to know more than just wondering about volume or surface area.
We need to get to the heart of what equivalence means.
Now, equivalence depends on what we care about.
It is measured by the lens through which we view our problem.
Different areas of nature call for different lenses.
In situations of micro, macro, and normal scales, we will use different notions.
But each kind of equivalence has its strengths and weaknesses.
There is no one answer that always works.
It depends.
And over the next few lectures, we're going to understand what equivalence means and the
different kinds of equivalences we're going to worry about.
So what have we talked about today?
We have begun our adventure on the shapes of nature.
We've talked about how form and function in nature are intrinsically related, and understanding
the shape of it will help us understand the function of the object we're studying.
We've also seen that nature comes at three levels, not just what we can experience, but
at an extremely small micro level to an extremely large macro level.
Mathematics provides a language to understand these complicated structures.
Thank you, and stay tuned.
