Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
Well, let's start by reviewing what we did last time.
In the last lecture, we talked about why we are interested in the study of shapes, especially
in the study of shapes as it pertains to nature.
We noted that this is useful for everything we do, from arts to technology, whether we
are designing the next high-speed airplane or the one that relates to space shuttles
flying in space, art, nature, mathematics are all bound together.
In particular, the most important thing we learned was that form and function are related.
In other words, the more we start understanding about an object's shape, the more we start
understanding how this works together.
Third, we realized that nature was an amazing optimizer.
We saw this when we related the shape of bubbles, simple soap bubbles, and we saw that nature
tried to optimize the most volume it can based on the given amount of surface area,
the soap film that you have.
And finally, we saw that nature is more than what we see.
It is very easy for us to say nature is about trees and plants and mountains, but nature
operates at two other levels far beyond our understanding, one at the micro level, at
the level of DNA structures, cell designs, and atoms and molecules, even related to ideas
we are going to talk about, motivated by string theory.
And at the same time, nature also relates at the macro level, in worlds that are far
beyond us, in terms of galaxies and star clusters.
And here, the concept of distance isn't extremely small, but it is extremely large, where we
are talking about light years away to talk about distances and movement.
Moreover, we discussed the power of mathematics in terms of how nature fits together in understanding
its shape, and we noted that mathematics provides us with a collection of tools.
Mathematics is more than just numbers, but it is actually a language, a way of communicating
and describing, and when we try to understand how to describe a shape as simple as a tree,
we see that our language isn't enough, we come to a barrier, and mathematics help us
to break through this barrier to understand what shapes are about.
Now this course is broken down by dimension, an idea we are going to talk about later in
this particular lecture, and we go through in increasing levels of complexity as we progress
throughout this course.
And finally what we talked about last time was a concept of equivalence, and this we
framed with the idea of talking about geometry, the world of mathematical shapes, and this
new world called topology that broke through mathematics around 1800 and 1900.
We're going to jump in more detail this time in terms of understanding topology, and what
it means to talk about equivalence.
Well, mathematics itself is broken into several main fields, each with its own set of tools.
Now what I'm about to give you, I'm going to admit is my personal perspective on the
way math is broken down, but I must say that almost any graduate school you attend today
in mathematics will force you to take one of three classes in the areas of analysis,
algebra, and geometry.
And so that's the breakdown that I'm also going to use to model what it means to break
mathematics into pieces.
Well let's start at the very first one.
What is analysis?
Well, analysis the area of mathematics that studies change.
For example, if you're interested in understanding how the speed of an object's chain, whether
it's the speed of a leopard or the speed of a bullet, the way to measure and quantify
this change is through the lens, through the world, and through the language of analysis.
Maybe you're interested in the rate of growth of population, the growth of humans over time,
or the growth of bacteria in a petri dish.
Again we turn to analysis to measure this growth, this rate of change.
Maybe what's interesting, especially nowadays, is to understand stock markets as the world
is built on these financial models.
To understand stock market fluctuations, whether up or down, to measure these chaotic changes
again uses the tool of analysis.
This is the world in which we see.
Measuring global warming, not just over the span of a few hours or days as you would do
for a stock market, but over millions of years, again uses analysis.
Time is not an impediment to understand how analytic systems work for a mathematician.
That's the first main branch of mathematics.
The second one, the second superstar way of breaking mathematics into three pieces is algebra.
Now those who are superstars in algebra, those are the great mathematicians who understand
how to study structure.
As analysis talked about change, an algebraist is interested in the details of the operation,
a meta way of thinking about it.
Let me give you an example.
For an algebraist, operations on numbers, such as addition and multiplication, are what
are exciting, not the numbers themselves.
An algebraist looks at the real number line, pulls back, and sees the bigger picture between
numbers.
The prime numbers, the way you put numbers together, 7 times 1, that there's only one
way to do that.
The fact that there's a structure of what addition and multiplication does to numbers
is what makes an algebraist tick.
We can go behind the scenes to get a bigger picture in terms of how algebraists work.
Remember the example we talked about last time, in terms of taking a cube and rotating
it.
Interesting to an algebraist isn't the cube itself, but the ways the rotations, one way
or another way, can occur.
This structure of the cube is what algebra is about.
The third way of decomposing math into its main frameworks is geometry.
We've all heard of this.
Geometry is the area that studies shape.
This could be very classical in nature, what everyone is comfortable talking about.
Whether this is length, distance, area, volume, size, all of these are geometric ideas.
We can even use ideas in trigonometry, sine and cosine and angles, and we're still in
the world of geometry.
This could on the other hand be cutting edge ideas, ideas in geometry that are in a revolutionary
new setting, which we will talk about later.
Now, it's very superficial for me to say there are only three worlds of mathematics,
analysis, algebra and geometry.
Nowadays, it's far more complicated than this.
Note that there are also combinations and specializations of these fields.
Let's take a world called number theory.
What is number theory?
Number theory is a branch of mathematics that's interested in how numbers work, but this is
a subfield of math, which is in the world of algebra and in the world of analysis.
A number theorist can use the lens of algebra to understand how number systems work, to
see the structures of numbers, or they can use the power and the tools of analysis to
see how the numbers change as you go through the number system.
We will use tools from analysis and algebra for our work in geometry.
As we talked about last time, we'll use any tools we can get.
Now, geometry is a language which focuses on the quantitative, on the amount in which
we measure shapes.
Notions such as length, area and volume deal with these geometric ideas.
Now, the study of geometry has been around since antiquity, and this is one of the main
reasons we teach geometry in all the school systems.
The Egyptians, 2500 BC, came up with an accurate approximation of the area of a circle with
less than one percent error, a stunning result in a geometric setting.
The Babylonians, 2000 BC, created general rules for measuring volumes of solids.
The Indians, 800 BC, came up with geometric approximations of the square root of two.
Chinese, 300 BC, that areas and volumes of numerous objects were measured in very special
ways.
The Greeks at the same time, in 300 BC, came up with ideas motivated and promoted by Euclid,
the Euclidean geometry in which all of geometric structure is now viewed through the point
of construction, starting at points, moving to lines and based on a collection of axioms.
700 AD, the Middle East nations, created a mixture of algebra and geometry, again to
provide powerful new results never seen before.
Now, all our lives, the focus for studying shapes, has been on geometry throughout the
schools.
We learned about areas of triangles and circumferences of circles.
Even all of calculus focuses on the geometry, the shape of curves and surfaces, where length,
area and volume matter.
Of course, I don't want to shortchange geometry because it is fundamental and foundational
for calculation and precision.
You need geometers as engineers, where we actually need to know the angle and the length
and the area of the bridges we're building.
And it is also the key to our size space.
When we talk about mountains, when we talk about ant hills, geometry is the kind of language
we need to compare one to another one.
But it turns out that geometry is quite difficult to use in the micro and the macro worlds.
We'll talk about this in a little bit.
But what about this world called topology, this new branch of geometry, started in the
18 and the 1900s?
Well topology is a part of geometry which focuses on the qualitative, not quantity, but quality.
In other words, the kind of position and the kind of underlying structure that defines
the object.
In particular, the word to associate with topology is the word relationships.
Unlike geometry, this is a fairly new discipline.
It can be traced back to the work of Leonard Euler in 1736.
Now topology, and the way one would think topologically, has existed before.
It's a very intuitive thing.
But it was actually foundationally written and published in Euler's work on the seven
bridges of Cornexburg.
So instead of just telling you what topology is about, let me actually show you by digging
in a little bit deeper in Euler's work.
So here's the city that Euler cared about, Cornexburg, in Prussia, which is now in Russia.
And this city was set on both sides of the Pragell River, and it included two large islands
which were connected to each other maintained by seven bridges.
Take a look at this picture.
Here we see the central island in the middle, an island on the side, and two main land masses
on top and the bottom.
And notice the connections of these islands and land masses by these seven bridges.
This is what Euler had to work with.
Now here is the problem that was given to Euler and to the residents in Cornexburg.
Imagine a friend of yours is a tourist, and he or she is coming to visit you.
And what they want to do is to explore this city.
But if you look at the picture of the city again, notice that what's so beautiful about
the city are the bridges, these seven beautiful bridges linking up different parts of the
city.
So what you want to do is to take your friend on a walk, such that you go through the city
where each bridge is crossed on your walk once and exactly once.
You don't want to cross the same bridge twice.
That's boring, your friend.
On the other hand, you don't want to miss any of the great attractions.
You want to make sure every bridge is hit.
Well, how do we do this?
Well, first of all, notice that we can start anywhere in the city, can start anywhere in
the city.
It doesn't matter what point we start about.
And if you think about it just a little bit, we see that it's not based on analysis or
algebra but on geometry.
That Euler is really interested in shape.
He's not interested in a deeper structure.
We see the structure obviously in front of us.
And he's not interested in change of movement.
It's based on this picture itself.
Euler's work of genius was that he converted the map that you see here to another map,
which we call a graph.
And what it did was it lost all concepts of geometry in terms of distance, but it kept
its relative position.
And that's how we enter into topology.
Let's take a look at Euler's version.
Notice what Euler did.
At every region of the city that is separate and disconnected, Euler uses a little dot,
which we call the vertex.
That's what's important about that region.
But what he emphasized was the bridges.
He de-emphasized the regions because walking around within a region is not exciting to
this particular problem.
But he emphasizes the bridges because that's the key to the problem.
So his previous map of Konigsberg has been now replaced with this other map of Konigsberg.
Now he proved that there was no solution to this problem, that it's impossible for you
to take your friend on a tour of the city that hits every bridge exactly once and it
makes sure you don't cover any bridge twice to bore your friend.
So let's see how Euler proved this.
He said, let's start at any vertex we want, at any region of the city.
Here's the way his thinking worked.
If you're not starting or stopping at any other region of the city other than you start
and end positions, then you must have an edge that goes into that region and at the same
time you must have an edge that leaves that region.
So if you're not starting and stopping at this edge, you need to get in and you need
to get out.
What does this mean?
It means all the vertices, all of these dots which represent these regions of the city
must have an even number of edges coming in and going out, except possibly a two start
and end positions.
So except for these two start and end positions, the number of sticks coming out of a vertex
has to be even.
Notice that every particular vertex is odd of number three sticks on that one, three
on that one, three on that one, and five in this one.
So we see that it's impossible to do so.
No matter what you pick to be your starting and ending position, it's impossible to go
on this walk.
And what Euler did was he ignored concepts of area.
We never mentioned it in our proof of this problem.
He ignored length.
He ignored volume.
He ignored angle.
But yet he talked about the relative position, how things were connected.
So you see the problem is still about shape.
It's still about shape, but not in a geometric setting, but in a topological setting.
And this is the world of topology, where ideas of connectedness and continuity become the
key.
Now this field was not fully recognized until the end of the 19th century, many, many years
after Euler first pushed this result forward.
And at that time it was called geometria citis in Latin, which means geometry of the place
or geometry of position.
Now to distinguish between these two areas even more, consider equivalences of shapes
in geometry and topology.
Equivalence in geometry, what we talked about last time in terms of what it means for objects
to be equivalent.
Equivalence in geometry is based on rigid motions.
For example, if somebody gives you an object, I can rotate that object and still consider
it to be the same object as before.
I can say those two objects are equivalent because they're just off a little bit by rotation.
Maybe I can take an object and reflect it and say that's equivalent.
So for example, my right hand and my left hand would be considered equivalent because
they are mirror images of one another.
They're not too far off.
Or maybe translation is equivalent to our eyes, where you take a cube here and you can
translate it to this position and still call it an equivalent cube.
These are all notions of congruence, where two elements are equal based on rigid motion.
Maybe it's the worst extreme level of equivalence in the geometric perspective.
We can talk about change of scale.
So maybe a small cube can be scaled into a big cube and we can say both of those are
equivalent.
Notice that volume is definitely lost, but the geometric ratios of the objects are preserved.
But to a geometer, a right angle triangle, which has that 90 degrees and 245 degrees,
and an equilateral triangle, which has 360 degree corners, are very, very different.
Now this is good because we need geometers to build bridges and to build the world in
our system.
But it could actually get in the way, like in the Konigsberg bridge problem, if we start
thinking about area and volume and distance, we see that this actually impedes us from
really understanding the heart of the matter.
Now the equivalence in topology is based on a world called isotope.
This is sometimes called rubber sheet geometry.
Here we are allowed to stretch and pull on our object, but we are not allowed to cut
and glue.
Notice if I take an object and stretch it like clay, that the relative position has
not changed.
Of course things are getting further away than before, but the things that used to be
further away originally are now even more further away.
So things are relatively the same.
Things that are close relatively stay close, and things that are far relatively stay far.
And here ideas of connectedness and continuity are important.
Let's consider some examples from a topological point of view.
Is a cube and sphere topologically equivalent?
Well let's think about it.
If somebody gives me a cube, I can take the cube and remember what I have, isotope, rubber
sheet geometry.
I can take the cube and push the corners of the cube in and make it into a sphere.
In this case I can make the cube into a sphere because the concept of relative position is
maintained.
Let's try to classify some of the letters of the alphabet under this notion of isotope.
So here we have the letter C. If I take the letter C, what is it equivalent to from a
topological perspective?
So we see one thing we can do is I can actually take the letter C, straighten it out and make
it into the letter I. I haven't done anything other than stretching.
Now one thing we cannot do in topology is we cannot cut and re-glue.
By cutting, I'm making things that are close now very far.
And by re-gluing, I'm making things that are very far close.
I've changed relative position.
But notice that C is equivalent to I, which is equivalent to J, which is equivalent to
S, and numerous other letters.
But what about the letter F?
If we consider here and look at the letter F, we see that the letter F cannot be made
into the letter C. Well, why not?
Well, F can be made into E quite easily, and F can also be made into T or Y quite easily
because I can stretch and pull.
But I have to eliminate this part where there's three branches coming out of this position.
That captures some data from me that has this concept of relative position of these three
different places coming in together.
Think about the Konigsberg bridge problem again.
You need that vertex where three possible things meet.
Now this idea of equivalence between geometry and topology does not mean one is better than
the other one.
For example, if we want to compare the letter C to I and J, that's great.
If we want to compare F to E, T, and Y, that's great.
But the letter A is distinctive too.
Here note that in the letter A, we have the central circle and these two branches.
So we see that A is equivalent to D, which is also equivalent to R, or to these other
crazy shapes we can create just by stretching and pulling.
In particular, different situations calls for study through geometry and topology in
different ways.
Macro and micro problems are usually too hard for geometry, but it's actually possible
for topology.
Why is this?
Well, we cannot answer questions about size and volume in an area in a macro or microsetting
because this is too difficult in many cases, but we can grasp relative position.
This topology asks for a weaker condition, like the Konigsberg-Bridge problem didn't
ask for a more difficult problem of geometry, but a weaker notion of topology.
It's the right tool for us to do it.
Well, let us close this lecture by turning to a concept of key importance called dimension.
Dimension is the overarching characteristic by which we're going to break down the structure
of this course.
We talked about one-dimensional objects like lines and circles, two-dimensional objects
like surfaces, three-dimensional objects like the shape of the universe.
What is dimension?
It's a buzzword we hear all the time.
We talk about 3D glasses to see the new movie in.
We talk about time being the mysterious fourth dimension.
What is it?
Dimension is simply a number that we associate to a shape.
We broadly define this as the amount of freedom you have.
The smaller the dimension, the less the freedom.
The greater the dimension, the more the freedom.
But we narrowly define this as the amount of information needed to pinpoint your location.
Imagine you're in a zero-dimensional world.
What does this mean?
What would this look like?
It means you know where you are, and everybody knows where you are without giving any information.
Zero pieces of information are needed to know where you are.
But the only place no information is needed is if you lived at a point.
At one spot, thus you have no amount of freedom to go anywhere.
And this, a simple vertex or a point, is a zero-dimensional world.
What about one dimension?
Well, you need a one-dimensional piece of information, which means you need a piece of information
for every point that you are, but only one piece of information is needed.
So consider the real number line.
This is an example of a one-dimensional world.
Say you lived in house number 73.
Your friend calls and asks where you are.
You say I'm at 73.
They know exactly where you are with that one piece of information.
Your friend lives at house negative 4.
You can find out exactly where your friend is with that one piece of information, negative
4.
Now what about a circle?
A circle looks very much like a line, but it looks like it's also a two-dimensional world.
Well, although it takes two dimensions because it has width and height to draw the circle,
it turns out the circle is still a one-dimensional object.
Why?
Because if you lived on the circle, you only need one piece of information to tell somebody
where you lived, just the angle in which you live.
So you can say I live on 14 degrees, I live on 178 degrees, and that tells your friend
exactly where you are on the circle.
Well what about two dimensions?
Well an example of a two-dimensions is the plane.
We're very familiar with this when we were in school, when we talked about the x-coordinate
and the y-coordinate, the x-y-axis.
Well this is two dimensions because you need x, one entire axis to keep track of where
you are in this direction, and you need y, an entire axis to keep track of in this direction.
And so any point on the plane needs two pieces of information, your x-coordinate and your
y-coordinate.
Well what about a sphere?
A sphere again looks like it's a three-dimensional world because it does have height and width
and breadth, but yet a sphere is only two dimensions.
If you live on the surface of the sphere, you see that you only need two pieces of information,
longitude and latitude, and that pinpoints your location on the sphere.
Well what about three dimensions?
Consider our universe.
Our three-dimensional universe needed three pieces of data.
You need to know your x-coordinate, you need to know your y-coordinate, and you need to
know your z-coordinate with height and depth.
But what I want to emphasize more than anything is that dimension is simply a mathematical
construct.
It associates a number to a shape.
You see a shape, you can give a number to it.
You see a sphere, and you can give the number two.
You see a plane, and you can give the number two.
You see a circle, you give the number one.
Thus, dimension doesn't have to stop at three.
We are imagination stops at understanding things beyond three dimensions, which I will
try my best to fix, but dimension does not need to stop at three.
You can imagine a seventeen-dimensional world where you need seventeen pieces of data to
pinpoint your location, and near the end of these lectures we will push into a world
that will need hundreds and hundreds of dimensions.
It's a beautiful thing.
In conclusion, what have we talked about today?
We have continued our adventure on shapes.
We started with looking at mathematics in a big picture setting, seeing analysis, the
study of motion and change, algebra, the study of structure, and geometry, the study of shapes
itself.
We actually zoomed in a little bit in geometry, and we saw that within geometry, which cared
about shape, distance, area, and volume, there's a sub-world that studies shapes called topology.
It's a brand new and young world, and there's numerous problems we're going to dive into.
We also learned that topology is probably the most useful tool in talking about micro
and macro worlds, unlike geometry, which is fantastically useful for the world we live
in.
We noted that geometry had a feel of quantitative study, versus topology has a feel of qualitative
study, something that has to do with relative position.
We also considered equivalence of shapes in topology, where we can talk about the letters
of the alphabet, or a sphere becoming a cube, and we closed with talking about dimension
itself, what this great buzzword was, and it's a simple idea of associating a number
to a shape.
Well, in our next lecture, we begin our adventure with one-dimensional objects called knots.
Stay tuned.
