Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
Last time, we began our study of shapes, and we started with looking at these one-dimensional
objects called knots.
We considered knots and their projections, their shadows on the floor, along with those
crossing informations, which led to the Reitemeister moves, those three great moves that Reitemeister
said.
You can go from any crossing information of one projection to any crossing information
of another projection using these three moves alone.
We then used the idea of three colorability on these knot projections, and this helped
us with our first true result, that knots actually exist.
We were able to tell apart the simple circle, or the unknot, from the shoestring knot, the
trefoil, using three colorability, and using the Reitemeister moves in a beautiful way.
We also showed how knots naturally appear in biology, chemistry, and physics.
Well, today, let's look at why physics should care about knots in a bit more detail.
Last time, we skimmed the surface of those three scientific areas, and I just want to
dig in a little bit deeper.
Well the physics revolution had a powerful impact on knot theory.
Here's what happened from a big picture setting.
In the 1880s, Lord Kelvin, where we get the Kelvin temperature scale, considered knots
to be the atomic model.
This is what I mean by that.
More complicated atoms were represented by more complicated knots.
For example, if you have something as simple from an atomic structure like hydrogen, which
is a light atom, you would associate to it a very simple knot structure.
But something as heavy as oxygen would get a much heavier or more complicated knot structure
for it.
This was Lord Kelvin's idea.
Well, several scientists, because of Kelvin's influence, started studying and classifying
knots.
They thought this is a groundbreaking field, where these visually complicated strings tied
together gave an insight into the how atomic structure itself worked.
Well, interest in this area lasted for about 20 years of research.
And then, Niels Bohr shattered it all.
He and his group of scientists brought a completely different and a better model of the atom,
which we use today.
This model of the atom wasn't based on a knot structure, but it was based on electron
orbitals and a nucleus of the atom, which had protons and neutrons in it.
And soon, physicists completely started losing interest in knots, since they didn't really
capture the world in front of them, and the world around them, then what's the point
of studying knots in the first place anyway?
But mathematicians did not give up.
Mathematicians study for the sake of understanding, and not just for an immediate application
to a real-world problem.
We want to know what is really going on with these pieces of string, and how can we tell
them apart?
Well, with the introduction of string theory, knots again became important to physicists
in the past 20 to 30 years.
Like we talked about last time, string theory believes that everything, molecules, atoms,
subatomic particles, quarks, bosons, everything is governed by vibrations of super small
strings which are looped and knotted together.
Now one of the leaders in the field of string theory, a god in this world, who's written
over 300 research articles, is Edward Whitten.
He is the Einstein Chair at the Institute of Advanced Studies in Princeton, and he's
also a Fields Medal winner.
Remember, a Fields Medal is given to the great mathematician, and yet Edward Whitten won this
as a physicist.
That's because he has revolutionized ideas that relate, again, the concept of strings
back to subatomic particle models.
Now we've come full circle.
Lord Kelvin thought these strings somehow governed the way the universe works in terms
of small objects, and Edward Whitten and his group are thinking that this is probably true
again.
You know, this relationship of math and physics has always had a leapfrog relationship.
Sir Isaac Newton, who, although mathematicians would love to claim him as a mathematician,
was really a physicist, introduced calculus, and used it for his study on gravity.
He needed a weapon to understand how gravity functions, how speed and velocity work, so
he created a mathematical tool.
So you see, physics was already ahead of the curve, and math needed to catch up.
Well later on, Riemann brings in this idea of curvature of shapes, which we're going
to talk about in future lectures.
Now Riemann brought in a curvature of shapes as mathematician, but Einstein later needed
to use Riemann's ideas to talk about the curvature of space and time.
So now mathematics took the lead.
Now Whitten and others have, again, brought in new math ideas in order to promote string
theory.
So you see now, physics has taken the lead.
This leapfrog relationship is a fantastic way of research progressing, one motivating
and pushing the other, like a big brother encouraging the younger brother, taking turns
as to who's better.
It's fantastic.
Well now we understand why physics cares about knots.
Let's actually jump in and look at some mathematical ways of thinking about these ideas.
The first part of this lecture focuses on manipulations of knots with the idea of addition.
Remember what we talked about early on?
We know how to add numbers and put numbers together, but what does it mean to add knots?
Can knots be added together the way numbers can?
Well let's take a look at an example of what we mean by knot addition.
Consider this following picture.
Here you see knot one and knot two.
These are two distinct knots, and the way I'm going to add them together is the following
thing.
I make two cuts on knot one, and I make two cuts on knot two, and throw out those extraneous
strings that I've just cut out.
These are very small cuts on the boundary on the outside part of the knot.
And then I glue those cuts together to get a new knot called knot one plus knot two.
Now here is the most important thing about this knot addition.
It's a very small operation because you only cut on the boundary at small pieces.
And moreover, we introduce no new crossings.
Look at this picture again.
Here if I had cut a small piece from the inside of one knot, and a piece from the outside
of another knot, and now try to glue them together.
Notice that we have introduced these two new crossings.
This is not the way we add knots.
Anytime we put them together, no new crossings can be formed.
And this new knot that we have created is called a composite knot.
It's made up of two pieces.
It's composed of these two pieces.
Now remember, just like numbers, have a special number called zero, where if you take seven
and add to zero, I get seven again.
Is there something like this for knots?
Is there a special knot that if we add to another knot, we always get the original knot
again?
Well, let's take a look at this picture.
Here we see my first knot, but if I add to it the unknot, notice what happens.
If I clip and glue together, the unknot now becomes exactly the string that I had originally
removed.
I can just deform it, rubber, sheet, geometry, push it in, and get that original knot again.
Well, this procedure isn't just mathematically exciting, but it's actually crucial to string
theoretic interactions in physics.
This is how strings collide and new strings are formed.
Well, how about subtraction?
We talked about adding knots, but what about subtraction?
Let me ask you this question.
Is the unknot a composite knot?
What does that mean?
Is the unknot a composite knot?
Well, let's take a look at this figure.
Here we see two complicated knots, knot one on the left, knot two on the right.
Is it possible to take two complicated knots, add them together, and miraculously get the
unknot?
Is this possible?
That they cancel each other out perfectly to get the unknot?
In other words, can we remove the complexity of knots by addition?
Now, we could do this with numbers.
If you're given the number seven, I could add to it a negative seven and cancel out
and get that unknot or the unnumber zero.
But is this possible for knots?
In our guts, as we try to figure this out using real rope or real string, which I really
encourage you to do, you will see that the complexity of this object always seems to
increase.
But thankfully, this is not a proof.
We actually need to do some work to get this.
It turns out we need the power of two-dimensional surfaces to prove that one knot added to
another one will only increase complexity.
In other words, that knottedness of knots cannot be removed like numbers.
There is no subtraction of knots.
Well, just as numbers have the notion of prime numbers, numbers that cannot be broken down
into different pieces, like seven, can only be broken down seven times one, we see that
this notion can be extended to knots, and it's a fundamental idea.
We define a composite knot as the sum of two non-trivial knots.
If you can make a knot from two pieces that aren't obvious, we call it a composite knot.
And a prime knot is not a composite knot.
In other words, you can't break the prime knot up into two distinct pieces.
It cannot be pulled apart this way.
So let's keep this in mind as we go through.
Now one goal in trying to tell knots apart is to find invariants.
What is a knot invariant?
Well, a knot invariant is a property that is assigned to a knot which does not change
as the knot is deformed.
As you pull the knot, as you stretch it, this property is fundamentally built into what
the knot is rather than how the knot looks.
In other words, it's a property that is assigned to a knot projection that does not change
due to righto-meister moves.
If you have a knot projection and if you apply the righto-meister moves to it, the invariant
what you've assigned to the knot fundamentally should not change.
It is something that belongs to the knot itself and it's not based on the way you draw the
knot.
It's not based on the picture of the knot.
In particular, remember last time, we showed that three-colorability is a knot invariant.
It assigns the value yes or no to each knot.
So in other words, given a knot, if it's tricolorable, we give it the yes value.
And given another knot, if it's not tricolorable, we give it the no.
No matter how you draw this knot or how you stretch or pull, the knot itself has a no
characteristic of tricolorability no matter what you do.
Now, a knot invariant can tell knots which are not equivalent.
If two knots are not equivalent at all, we can say, ah, this is a yes tricolorable.
This is a no tricolorable.
It can help us distinguish knots that are different.
But it cannot tell us which knots are equivalent.
Consider this following really silly example.
But let's assign the value one to every knot in the universe.
I claim that this is a knot invariant.
Why?
Because if I have a knot and I've assigned it the value one, no matter how I push it
or stretch it or how I look at the projection, it'll always be one, because it hasn't changed
at all.
I've given it the value one, regardless of what I've done to it.
So you see, this is an invariant.
It does not vary as I pull and change the knot picture.
However, this is a useless invariant.
It's an invariant, but it has no strength to it.
It has no teeth to it.
Well, the fundamental problem in knot theory is to find stronger and stronger invariants.
We want to tell apart more and more knots, somehow like a taste test.
Tricolorability gives our tongue a sensitivity for two flavors.
Is something tricolorable?
Yes, it is.
Is this tricolorable?
No, it's not.
And that's all our tongue is strong enough to detect, yes or no.
The dream is to find a flavor for each distinct knot.
And we call this a complete knot invariant.
Can we train our tongue mathematically to be able to taste each separate knot and have
its own unique flavor?
In this case, we can tell every knot apart from every other knot.
Remember what tricolorability does?
It only breaks up our world into two pieces.
Yes, it is, or no, it isn't.
That's not a very sensitive tongue.
But we want to get more and more sensitive using mathematical tools.
It turns out that this is one of the biggest unsolved problems in mathematics today.
We cannot find a complete invariant.
Now, remember the issues with the trough foil and the unknot.
No matter how many times we moved it around, we cannot prove that the trough foil and the
unknot were different.
We actually needed the power of an invariant to tell it apart, the invariant of tricolorability.
Now, although it only breaks up into two pieces, it's at least strong enough to tell those
two things apart.
And a strong invariant will have great uses in chemistry, in terms of molecular design,
in biology, in DNA structure analysis, and in physics, in string theory, like we talked
about.
Well, we begin by looking at two classical knot invariants, the crossing number and the
unknotting number.
It is a sense of comfort, since it assigns numbers something we're familiar with to knots.
We're associating a number to a knot.
And we already know how numbers work, so this is a good place for us to start.
Now, these two invariants can be thought of as different flavorings in your tongue.
The crossing number can maybe taste saltiness, and the unknotting number may be sweetness.
They're measuring different things, but yet they give us a power to measure in the first
place.
That is what we want.
So, let's talk about the crossing number first.
The crossing number assigns the least number of crossings that appear in any projection
of the knot.
Let's take a look at this picture here.
Note that this picture shows a projection of a knot with six crossings.
Now, what does the crossing number say?
It says it is the least number of crossings over every possible projection.
So, this picture has a knot with six crossings, which means the crossing number is six or
less.
We know this guy has six, but maybe there's a way to move it around to decrease my number
of crossings.
Remember, the crossing number is over every possible projection.
Now, notice, if I do a simple right-of-mice-to-move-one twist, I've decreased the crossing by one.
I get this new picture, which has crossing number five or less.
I've already dropped my crossing by one.
Can I get it to four or less?
Well, if I do a right-of-mice-to-move-two, I've knocked down two crossings at once.
I get a crossing number of three or less.
So, I know this knot, which happens to be the trefoil that we've seen before, is a crossing
number of three, but maybe we can draw it with two or smaller.
Well, here's what we know about crossing number.
It's extremely difficult to find it.
We know what the worst-case scenario is.
You just draw a knot, and you know what the crossing number's worst case is.
But how do you get it to be lower and lower and find the smallest over every possible
projection imaginable?
Well, here's what mathematicians know so far for a glimpse of very low crossing numbers.
Take a look at this picture.
Here we see the trefoil, which is crossing number three.
We know that the trefoil can be drawn with three crossings, and it cannot be drawn with
less than three crossings.
The figure eight has crossing number four, and these two other knots have five crossings
each, and they don't have a name.
We just call them five one and five two, and it's because knots get quite complicated
as they go on.
Well, the main result about crossing number involves alternating knots, an extremely useful
kind of knots.
And a knot is alternating if it has a projection where the crossings go over and under and
over and under and rhythmically repeat as we walk around the knot.
So consider the following picture.
Here we see a knot, and notice as you walk around it alternates crossings from over to
under to over to under throughout the entire knot.
Now we call a projection reduced if there is no easily removed crossing.
So these two figures show examples of knot projections that are not reduced.
So in other words, if you look at the picture, is there an obvious crossing that you can
simply twist and remove one crossing by this?
It's basically a type one right of my strome feel.
Well it's easy to check if a knot is reduced or not, we just look for these obviously simple
crossings.
Well in 1986, three mathematicians independently proved a stunning result.
They said if you have a reduced projection, which is easy to check, and if the knot is
alternating which is easy to check, and if that picture has n crossings, then the knot
itself must have crossing number n.
In other words, there cannot be a projection with any fewer crossings no matter how we
draw this knot.
So if you look at this figure we saw earlier, we see that this is an alternating knot.
It's not reduced, it's the most simple way, there's no obvious twist we have.
And it has 14 crossings.
That means no matter what we do to this thing, it'll always have 14 crossings as the lowest
number of crossings in any projection possible.
So how do addition, which we talked about earlier, and crossing numbers interact?
One of the most famous unsolved problems, and it's still open, and it has been open
for 100 years, is to show whether the crossing number of a knot plus the crossing number
of another knot are related to the crossing number of the two knots added together.
Let's take a look at this picture.
Here we see a knot, K1, it's the trefoil in this case.
We know it has crossing number three.
Here's another knot, K2, it's the figure eight knot, it has crossing number four.
What happens when I add these two knots?
I get a new knot.
Now I know that the crossing number of the first plus the crossing number of the second
is seven.
But what is the crossing number of this new knot that I've created?
Now if I look at this picture, I see that it has seven crossings.
But can I move this picture around and make it drop crossings?
Can I decrease crossings by doing this?
This open problem says that you can't, that the crossing number of one knot plus the crossing
number of another knot equals the crossing number of the new knot you get by adding it
together.
But mathematicians don't know how to prove it.
We've tried it for every knot we can think of, and it always works.
But we don't know why.
Isn't that a stunning fact that we mathematicians, no matter how amazing we are in proving deep
and powerful theorems related to strings and chemistry and biology, can't even prove a
little result like this having to do with knots?
Well, all the knot tables you will ever find that has classifications of all different
knots always classify them based on prime knots, they're always prime, and they're
always based on their crossing number, starting at the three crossing knots at Truff Oil and
getting more and more complicated.
Thus far in mathematics, we only understand knots with crossing number less than around
15 or 16.
That's all we know.
If somebody tells us to understand crossing numbers higher, we kind of run into a forefront
of math research.
This is where we want to use our weapons for, to push our understanding of complications
of knots coming from crossing number.
Well, the second classic knot invariant is called the unknotting number.
Again, just like the crossing number, we're going to assign a number to a knot.
But this number isn't based on crossings, it's based on unknotting.
Let me share with you a really beautiful result.
If you give me the power to change any crossing from an over-crossing to an under-crossing,
or from an under-crossing to an over-crossing, if you give me the power to do this for any
knot that can magically change crossings, then I can guarantee that I can unknot any
knot you can think of.
I can in fact take the most complicated knot and make it into the unknot if you give me
this power.
Why is this true?
Well, first, let's place our knot on a table and start at any point we want.
And let's pretend I just lift my knot off the table at one strand and I'm going to walk
along the table lifting this knot.
Now if I come to an over-crossing, that's great.
It's above anything else, I'm just going to lift it right up in space and keep it floating
in three dimensions, right?
And if I come to an over-crossing, I just lift it up and keep it up here.
But if I come to an under-crossing, remember you've given me this power.
So I'm going to switch crossings and make it an over-crossing and lift it up.
So as I walk along the knot, I keep lifting it up more and more into space.
Notice what happens to the rest of the table.
It's running out of crossings because most of my knot is up here, floating in space.
So we see as I stretch and pull this knot, and if I give the power, if you've given me
the power of switching these crossings, I pull it up and eventually what I come up with
is just an untangled piece of string, which is the unknot.
So given this power to me, I can untangle any knot, no matter how complicated, into the
unknot.
So what is the unknotting number?
The unknotting number is called U of K, whereas the crossing number is called C of K. And the
unknotting number is the least number of crossing changes in any projection needed to make the
knot into the unknot.
So crossing number, remember, is the least number of crossings needed to draw the knot,
but unknotting number is the least number of crossings needed to be switched to make
it into the unknot.
Now unknotting and knotting by changing crossings happens in nature all the time.
You know, DNA is the genetic blueprint of life, and nature uses an enzyme called a topoisomerase
to actually manipulate the DNA, which cuts, changes crossing information, and re-glues
the DNA again.
Now why does nature need to perform this complicated operation?
Because the DNA is crunched in into the nucleus, into the center of the cell.
So you need something to kind of untwist it, to open it up, to cut for replication and
for other jobs you want to do with the DNA.
So nature performs this unknotting operation of cutting and re-gluing and changing crossings
all the time.
Now similar to the crossing number, this is an easy invariant to define.
I've just defined it.
It's the least number of switches for any knot I need to make in order to make it the
unknot.
But just like the crossing number, it's hard to calculate.
Consider the following knot.
Here we see a knot, which has crossing number 8, to show that this is actually the crossing
number is a difficult thing, but let's assume it's already been done.
Now consider these two crossings here and here.
Notice that if I switch these two crossings from over crossings to under crossings and
under to over, if I just change the crossings, I can actually untwist this entire knot and
make it into the unknot.
So I know its unknotting number is 2 or less.
This only guarantees it's 2 or less.
I know I don't need 3 because I already have 2 right here.
But can I do it in 1?
Can I unknot this thing with one twist?
Well it was not proved until amazingly 1986 using some extremely powerful theorems that
the unknotting number of this particular knot is actually 2.
Well similar to the crossing number, the unknotting number also has a famous unsolved problem,
which is, is the unknotting number of the first knot plus the unknotting number of the
second knot equal to the unknotting number of the two knots put together.
And exactly like before, this is extremely easy to show in one direction that we can
show the unknotting number of the new knot is smaller than equal to the two put together,
but we don't know how to show equality.
And similar to crossing number, complexity of unknotting number seems to only increase
when we start adding them together.
Well let's close this lecture by bringing unknotting number and crossing number together.
Does the unknotting number become realized in a projection with minimal number of crossings?
Let me ask that question in a different way.
Does the unknotting number and the crossing number both appear in the same projection
of the knot?
In other words, are they both measuring the same kind of complexity?
They're measuring complexity.
One shows about complexity for drawing, which is the crossing number, and the other shows
the complexity of unknotting, which is the unknotting number.
And our intuition says, if you have a projection which has the least number of crossings to
draw, most likely that's the projection that's going to have the least number of strands
to uncross.
You only have a small number of crossings to work with, so that's a good place to start
for us to start unknotting things.
In 1983, a knot was found which has crossing number 10, where there's only one projection
of this knot which has 10 crossings.
This is the picture right here.
This knot has exactly 10 crossings, and this is the only projection up to just reflection
that has exactly 10 crossings.
Now given this projection having only 10 crossings, it has unknotting number in three
moves in this particular projection.
If I switch three particular crossings in this projection, I can unknot this thing.
But let's look at this picture here.
Here is another projection of the same knot.
Now this thing has 14 crossings, far more than before, but you can show, looking at these
two crossings right here, that if I switch these two crossings alone, I can unknot this
entire knot.
I only need two moves now, not three like the last time.
So thus, although the unknotting and crossing number both measure complexity, they are
measuring very different kinds of complexity.
They're not as related as we think at all.
Now both of these invariants, the crossing number and unknotting number, tell us different
things about knots.
Depends on which equivalence we care about.
We can talk about the simplest projection of a knot.
What do you mean by simplest?
Do you mean the simplest to draw, or the simplest to untangle?
We have these two different ways of tasting knots.
Two different ways of measuring maybe saltiness, if that's what you're interested in, or sweetness.
So we have come up with two classical invariants in knot theory.
They're very easy to define, and they're extremely hard to calculate.
Our invariants are more powerful than three colorability, for example, able to tell more
knots apart, but we can do better.
We have also seen a deeper glimpse into physics and knot theory.
And in the next lecture, we're going to focus on biology and knot theory, and consider multiple
knots put together, called links.
Stay tuned.
