Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
You know, the DNA structure is used to perform a vast number of biological functions.
It is basically the blueprint of life.
And one of the things that DNA does millions and millions of times is to be copied.
Your cells, as they're dividing and multiplying and growing, need to copy the DNA information located in one cell into another one.
But as we've talked about before, the DNA is a tangled mess.
It's packed into the nucleus of your molecule.
How are you going to copy this tangled up structure without causing too many errors?
It's made up of millions of atoms put together.
Well, an enzyme called a topoisomerase alters the topology of the DNA.
One of the first things it does is it comes in, it stretches the DNA at a small local area to be straight so that copying is much easier at that part.
And then it moves into the DNA structure itself.
It sometimes cuts, adds twists, change crossings, or does far more complicated operations based on the kind of enzyme that you're dealing with.
Now, we mentioned this earlier in a previous lecture when we discussed the unnotting number.
Remember how we wanted to cut the knot to change the crossing from over crossings to under crossings and vice versa.
Well, the particular type of action of an enzyme is of high importance and this is a site-specific recombination.
The enzyme aligns the two strands up, cuts the strands open, it then reattaches the ends in a different possible way.
And that's why it's called site-specific since it's a local operation.
It only does it at one part of the entire complicated structure.
Now, when things start going wrong, mutations occur.
In other words, the way the copying should be done, error is introduced in this process and any kind of error is what a mutation is.
Now, of course, our body has a lot of ways of correcting the mutation because errors happen all the time.
Well, today we want to introduce the mathematical version of what mutation would be.
And it is motivated by this idea of site-specific recombination, focusing at this one particular part.
The introduction of the mathematical notion of tangles is one means of understanding such enzyme operations.
Now, this notion of tangles was introduced by John Horton Conway in the late 1960s.
I just want to pause and just share with you a minute about this professor.
Conway is a professor of Princeton and a genius at discovering underlying patterns to complicated problems.
He's the only professor of Princeton that I know who has two offices that are next to each other, one for him and one for all of his toys.
He just is filled, the office is just filled with a collection of lots of different puzzles, trinkets and toys that he works with and that actually is motivating his work.
Now, when it comes to tangles, he was motivated to come up with a notation for knots.
How can one describe a knot in an elegant manner?
Let me rephrase that question in a little bit.
We have names for special kinds of knots and links.
We call some the trefoil, some the figure eight, but then we start running out of ideas.
We say five-one, five-two, six-three based on the number of crossings, the crossing number of the knot itself.
But is there a nice way to describe a knot that you've just drawn on a napkin to a friend over the phone?
Can you call them up and describe them in an elegant way other than saying,
well, what about going under? No, I mean over and then move it around.
It's kind of an awkward way of doing it.
And this is the motivation for Conway's work on tangles.
It turns out this is also useful as we're going to find out to describing the mathematical way of thinking about mutation.
Well, we begin with the definition.
What is a tangle?
Well, a tangle is a part of a projection of a knot or link around a circle, crossing it exactly four times.
Let's take a look at this example here.
Notice here, I don't care about the rest of the knot or the link that's located around this tangle.
I only care about that circle that's surrounding this tangle.
This is exactly the issue we had with the right-of-meister moves, where we locally focus in on one part.
But for Conway, his part is based on four special strands that come in.
And these four strands have corners.
So we have the northwest corner, the northeast corner, the southwest corner, and the southeast corner.
So these four corners can come in as four strands, and any complicated operation can happen inside,
and they leave in these other two strands.
So one of the properties we can do with tangles is we can move them around using the right-of-meister moves that we did with knots,
except for one condition.
We can move them around only inside the circle.
So we say that two tangles are equivalent if one can be made into the other by right-of-meister moves within the circle.
Take a look at this example.
Notice here I have this tangle.
It might look a little complicated, but I'm performing right-of-meister moves within the circle to convert this tangle into this other one.
Notice I did a right-of-meister move one twist, and then I can just stretch the strings out by doing a couple of right-of-meister two moves
and make it into this tangle over here.
And in this way, these three tangles have drawn are equivalent because I've done all my moves within the circle.
Now we can connect any tangle and make it into a knot or a link by connecting the two northern and the two southern strands together.
If I connect the two northern strands, the northeast and the northwest together, and the southeast and the southwest together,
then notice I have a closed-up system.
Now sometimes you might end up with links, or sometimes you might end up with one complicated knot.
Now Conway's notation is based on starting with the simplest tangles and building and constructing to get more complicated ones,
just the way we would build numbers.
We start with the simplest numbers, and we can get more complicated ones by adding and multiplying numbers.
Now for Conway, there are three main types of tangles for us to focus on.
Let's take a look.
There's the infinity tangle, and the infinity tangle has two vertical lines coming down that connects the northeast to the southeast and the northwest to the southwest.
There's the zero tangle, which is these two horizontal lines, and then based on these two tangles,
Conway said you can come up with the n-tangle, where n represents any integer that you want.
For example, a two-tangle is simply a tangle which has two twists in it.
So you take the zero tangle that we have, and you just make two twists.
But at the same time you can also have the negative two-tangle, which is two twists the other way.
Now how are we supposed to know which the negative two is and which the two is?
Well there's a simple example that we can think about which is based on slope,
just like we did last time when we talked about the Jones polynomial.
Each time you twist, you look at the over-crossing.
And if the over-crossing has a positive slope, that means you're going to get a plus in your value for the tangle.
If your over-crossing has a negative slope, you're going to get a minus.
So this example right here will give you a plus two twist because it has two positive slopes,
and this tangle we'll say is a minus three tangle, has three negative slopes.
So this is the building block that Conway uses to construct any tangle he wants.
So here's the way we do it.
We start with any n-tangle that we have that you want to begin with,
and then we perform rotations and reflections.
Let me give you this particular example.
Let's say we want to build a tangle called the two-three tangle.
Well what we do is first we start with a two-tangle.
That's great we know how to do this.
And then we take the two-tangle, we rotate it 90 degrees, and then we reflect it.
Now when we reflect it, I don't mean rotate it in space, I actually mean reflect the tangle.
Take its mirror image.
All my crossing information changes from over-crossings to under-crossings.
And when I do this, I get this following picture.
I go for my two-tangle, I rotate, I reflect, and the moment I have this new answer,
then I take my right two points, the northeast and the southeast, and then I perform my three-twist.
So I start with my two, rotate, reflect, perform my three-twist, and I get this new two-three-tangle.
Now we can keep going with this. Let's take a look.
With this, I have my two-three-tangle.
What if I want to make it into a two-three negative one tangle?
Well I already have a two-three-tangle.
I can take my two-three-tangle, rotate this entire two-three-tangle, reflect the entire two-three-tangle,
and now when I have my new tangle, my new rotated and reflected tangle,
I can look at my right two points and again do a negative one twist.
And now I have a two-three-negative one.
In this pattern, we can get any tangle we want along Conway's construction,
and these tangles that we get based on this work are called rational tangles.
Now why are they called rational tangles?
It's because it is based on this simple sequence of whole integers.
We take twos, threes, negative ones and get this example,
and we can do far more complicated situations if we keep continuing this pattern.
Now there's an alternate construction of taking and constructing these rational tangles
based on the number of integers in our notation.
Instead of doing a fancy rotate and twist and reflect,
there's an elegant way that Conway has come up with another way of doing this.
So look, what we do is we look at the number of integers in our tangle notation.
If our tangle notation has an odd number of integers, we start with a zero-tangle.
For example, the two-three-negative one has three integers, two, three and negative one,
there are three of them, and so we start with a zero-tangle,
and first we twist right, so I twist two to the right,
and then I twist three in the bottom, and then I twist negative one to the right,
and I keep continuing this sequence as long as I want to until my number sequence is exhausted.
So for my two-three-negative one, I would twist two, three, and then negative one,
and I don't have my two-three-negative one tangle.
There's no rotation and there's no reflection involved anymore.
What happens if I have an even number of integers?
For example, what if I have one negative one two one?
Here I have four things.
With an even number of integers, I start with the infinity tangle, and now I twist bottom.
So I twist one, then I twist right, negative one, bottom, two, right, one,
and I keep continuing this bottom, right, bottom, right sequence.
If I had odd numbers, I would do right, bottom, right, bottom.
If I have even, I do bottom, right, bottom, right.
There's no rotation needed and there's no reflection needed.
So here's another shortcut of getting what you want.
And this is, again, Conway's creation.
Now what can we say about equivalence of tangles?
We already know that two tangles are equivalent if you can use right-a-meister moves
to go from one to the other one that stays within the circle of power, right?
This circle defines what that tangle is.
Is it possible that the notation itself is enough to tell two tangles apart?
In other words, if you come up with a tangle and you have a notation two, three, negative one,
and I have another tangle notation, say I have one negative one two one,
since our notations are different, our integer sequences are different,
does that guarantee our tangles have to be different?
Unfortunately, it's not that case.
The notation is not a complete tangle invariant.
Let's take a look.
Consider this example.
Here I have a two one one tangle and I have a negative two two one tangle.
Notations very different.
Now let's look at the very first tangle here.
The two one one tangle has been constructed this way.
Remember I take the zero tangle, twist two, twist one, twist one.
Twist two on the right, one on the bottom, one on the right.
Negative two two one, I twist two on the right, negatively.
I twist two in the bottom and I twist one.
And I end up with these two tangles based on my construction.
But if you notice here there's that central loop in the bottom tangle
that I can simply twist over and make it into my top tangle.
So we see that although the notation is different,
the tangles are actually the same.
But what is surprising, what is revolutionary about Conway's method
is that he came up with a stunning result based on continued fractions.
It is a beautiful relationship between shapes and numbers.
So let me explain to you first what a continued fraction is
before we jump in to see how this number way of keeping track of objects
relates to tangles.
Here we see if we're given four numbers, four, negative one, three and five,
I can create a continued fraction based on these four numbers.
Now so far this is nothing to do with tangles.
I'm just explaining what a continued fraction of these four numbers is.
Here's what we do.
Given the first number, I take my first number and I immediately make it into a denominator.
So my four becomes one fourth.
Now to this I add my next number.
So negative one plus one fourth.
Now I take this new result and I immediately make it into a denominator.
One divided by negative one plus one fourth.
Now to this I add my next number three.
And immediately I make this into a denominator.
And I add my last number five.
So at the end, given four, negative one, three, five as my number sequence,
I get the continued fraction as five plus one divided by the quantity,
three plus one divided by the quantity, negative one plus one divided by four.
So you see this sequence of numbers that we wrote down kind of written backwards
in a nested formation.
This is a continued fraction.
Now of course we can simplify this fraction.
We look at the very smallest piece.
We start simplifying and reducing using simple algebra.
And we end up with four, negative one, three, five.
That sequence gives us an answer of 28 fifths as my reduced continued fraction number.
Well, what is Conway's amazing theorem?
It states the following thing.
If you're given two rational tangles, then they are equivalent if and only if
their continued fraction values are the same.
What does this mean?
If and only if.
This is a powerful statement.
What this says is that if you're given two rational tangles,
then you have two pictures that are equivalent.
Then we know that their number values, their values are given in terms of Conway's notation
must be giving you the same continued fraction.
Remarkable.
But more importantly, if you're given two tangles with the Conway notation,
if you can find their continued fraction values and they turn out to be the same,
this means that the tangles, the pictures themselves must be the same.
In fact, what this theorem really is trying to say is the continued fraction value
embodies the shape of the tangle itself.
That 28 fifths we came up with last time embodies the shape of the 4-1-3-5 tangle itself.
That fraction value holds all that data in it.
What a remarkable statement.
Let's look at this example to see what I mean.
One tangle is my 5-1-4 tangle.
Here what I do, again, since it's an odd number of objects,
is I take my zero tangle, I twist it five times, on the right, twist it once,
in the bottom, twist it four on the right.
It's great.
Now I create this tangle.
Then I have my two, negative two, two, negative two, two, four tangle.
Here, since it's an even number, I have to start with my infinity tangle,
twist bottom, twist right, twist bottom, twist right, twist bottom,
and finally twist the four to the right.
And both of these values, if you work out the algebra,
will give you a continued fraction value of 29 sixths for the top and the bottom.
Which means, without even having to draw the pictures, these tangles must be the same.
There must be a set of Reitemeister values that takes one into the other one.
Moreover, remember how we can close up these tangles by connecting the northeast
and the northwest together, and the southeast and the southwest together
to get knots or links?
Well, if the tangles are going to be identical,
then their knots and links must also be identical.
This fractional value of 29 sixths holds all of that in it.
In fact, we have seen these two knots before.
The first one was the projection of the knot,
which had ten as the smallest number of crossings we can draw.
It had crossing number ten.
And the second one had the unknotting number of two.
It's the same knot using two different projections,
giving us one crossing number and one unknotting number,
when we talked about that in a previous lecture.
Well, we've been focusing on rational tangles.
Those able to be constructed this way in terms of twisting one and twisting the other
based on this integer sequence.
Of course, not all tangles are rational.
I can take these four strands and do anything I want with them
as long as they stay within the circle.
But there are some great advantages to looking at rational tangles.
The first advantage is that Conway gives us a powerful method
of providing notation for such tangles.
Can you imagine calling somebody?
You can just call them and say, oh, do you know what I'm working on?
I'm working on the five, one, four.
And they can immediately draw that picture based on the notation you give them.
You don't need to explain how this is created in terms of over-crossing and under-crossing.
You can communicate information far more efficiently based on this notation.
Second, we have an elegant method of measuring their equivalence.
You don't need to worry about righto-meister moves
and the complications that would involve.
If you have the notation, that continued fraction number captures all the data.
And moreover, it can be shown that all knots and links obtained from rational tangles
are alternating knots and alternating links.
Do you remember how we talked about alternating knots before?
These are the ones that have an alternating projection
where it goes over and under and over and under as we walked around.
And some beautiful results already exist for alternating knots and alternating links.
So the moment we have these rational tangles that we can construct this way,
then we know all knots and links that we get from these rational tangles are alternating themselves.
Well, we now construct more complicated tangles and try to understand their structure.
The design and construction of tangles beautifully lends itself
for the arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication.
Do you remember we defined how to add knots together,
how to put two knots together by clipping the corners and touching them up?
But we never really figured out how to multiply knots.
We never thought about what it means to multiply them.
Well, for tangles, we can do both.
Addition is simply gluing them together, just like knots.
Let's take a look.
Given two tangles, Tangle 1 and Tangle 2,
what I mean by addition is just connecting the northeast to the northwest
and the southeast to the southwest of my two tangles.
And I've created a new Tangle which has these four edges or four strands coming out of it.
That's great.
Now, what does it mean to multiply?
Multiply is a little bit more of a complicated operation than addition,
but it's an operation we're already familiar with.
Multiplication is the flip-glue operation we learned earlier.
What I'm first doing is that first I'm rotating Tangle T1,
and then I reflect just like what I did before.
And once I do this, I glue my two tangles together.
So my 514 Tangle is really 5 times 1,
and then I take that answer and I multiply it times 4.
So the 514 really encapsulates a multiplication notation for me.
And any Tangle formed by addition and multiplication is called an algebraic Tangle.
Remember, if you can just build it out of these integers, we call them rational tangles.
But if you take these rational tangles and do more complicated things with it,
like addition and multiplication, we call these algebraic,
because we have extended this notion of rationality into these algebraic operations.
Moreover, when you close up these rational tangles
and when you close up these algebraic tangles, we get something called algebraic links.
Well, how closely are these related to the algebraic structures we know of real numbers?
How are these related to addition and multiplications of numbers that we're familiar with?
Well, first of all, addition of numbers has the zero as the identity.
Remember, if you take any number 7 and if you add it to zero, you get 7 again.
Can we say something like this for tangles?
Turns out yes. Let's take a look.
If you take zero plus any number A, notice that this equals A and this equals A plus zero.
What if I take my zero Tangle?
My zero Tangle plus my Tangle T, I just glue it up, equals my Tangle T,
equals my Tangle T with zero added to the other side.
It's beautiful. My zero that I knew for normal numbers turns out to be represented now by the zero Tangle here.
Well, in multiplication, we had something like this also.
Seven times one equals seven equals one times seven.
Seven has this one value which, no matter what I multiply it with,
gives me that original thing again, which is seven.
So multiplication has one as its identity, as addition has zero.
Do we have something like this for my Tangle multiplication?
Well, sort of. Let's take a look.
Here we see my Tangle T and I'm multiplying it to the left by my infinity Tangle.
Remember how multiplication works?
I rotate and then I reflect, I glue together and I get my Tangle T again.
Beautiful.
But what about to the right?
Remember, seven times one equals one times seven.
It needs to work on both sides.
Well, if I take my Tangle T and no matter what I put to the right of it,
for example, even if I put the zero Tangle to the right of it,
I need to first rotate my Tangle T and then I need to reflect it and I glue it
and I don't get what I started from at all.
So multiplication fails in terms of having this identity.
In fact, something called associativity, a property that is so obvious
we take for granted, fails under this multiplication.
Let's take a look.
Associativity is when you take three elements, one, two, three, or A, B, C,
and you put them together.
And associativity says the way you put these three elements together shouldn't matter.
So A times B times C should equal A times B times C.
It doesn't matter how we group them together or associate them together.
Well, for tangles, if I take Tangle T1 times T2
and then I multiply it by T3 after I do T1 and T2,
look what I get with this picture.
First, I need to do T1 multiplication and I get the following thing
with the rotate, reflect, and glue.
And then I need to rotate and then glue to T3.
And then the second part, I get this other picture.
If I do T1 times T2 times T3,
here I need to rotate, reflect, and glue to T3.
And then I need to rotate, reflect, and glue T1 to this answer.
So at the end of the day, the order in which I'm rotating, reflecting, and gluing,
in other words, the way I'm associating my multiplication itself,
something that was obvious for numbers, 2 times 3 times 4.
Well, it doesn't matter if you do 2 times 3 times 4 or 2 times 3 times 4.
Something that we took for granted turns out to be not obvious at all.
In fact, it fails for tangle multiplication.
Thus, although we have some algebraic power, more than not,
because in knots we only learn how to add things together.
Now we have addition and multiplication.
We cannot abuse the system.
We don't have too much power.
Multiplication works, but we don't have this identity, this beautiful number 1.
And multiplication indeed works,
but we don't have something as obvious as associativity itself.
Now, based on this understanding of tangles, we can finally discuss mutations,
what motivated our work from the beginning.
Now, there are three possible mutations of a tangle that we can do in a knot,
and they are all mutants of one another.
Let me explain this in a picture.
Here you see one particular snapshot of a knot,
and I'm looking at a tangle, T1, inside this knot.
Here are the three different operations that I can do to T1,
and all three operations will result in three different kinds of knots,
and all of them are called mutants of one another.
For example, the first thing I can do to T1 is I can take it, cut this tangle out,
I can reflect T1 vertically,
I get this new picture, I want to say reflect it vertically,
and I glue it back in.
This knot has, of course, changed because I've ripped T1 out, a part of it,
sort of a little piece, a heart of the knot out,
I've reflected it vertically and I've glued it back in.
This new object is called a mutant of my previous one.
I can also take this T1, this tangle inside my knot,
I can reflect it horizontally,
and then I can get the answer and glue it back in.
This is also called a mutant of T1,
and the last thing I can do is I can take this object,
I can reflect it vertically and horizontally,
and if you do this, you'll notice that all I've done is I've rotated it 180 degrees,
I've taken my tangle and by doing reflection and horizontal reflection and vertical reflection,
I've actually rotated my tangle 180 degrees,
this is also a mutation of my first one.
This is the mathematical way we're trying to capture what happens to these DNA structures.
We're saying if you take this tangle and rip it and move things around and put it back in,
you've mutated the tangle, mutated the knot itself.
Now there are two extremely famous knot mutants,
and they're called the kinoshita tarasaka mutants,
and here's what they look like.
These are the two pieces of the puzzle and notice,
I've taken my first knot, I've taken a tangle from my first knot,
and I've reflected it horizontally,
and when I do this, I glue it back in,
and now I get these two knots which are different,
but they're mutants of one another.
Unfortunately, mutation operations are extremely hard to distinguish.
Remember amphichirality for knots when we reflected the entire knot?
Even here we struggle to find out how two knots are or are not the same,
and the Jones polynomial helped us.
Well, mutation only reflects and rotates not the entire knot,
but just a part of it, making it much harder to tell it apart.
They cannot even today be detected by anything we've done so far.
Not even something as powerful as the Jones polynomial
can tell these two mutant knots apart.
Thus, this is something we really want to do for DNA analysis
from the mathematical point of view,
and this shows the difficulty of mutation,
both in mathematics and nature,
and we see that greater tools are needed to crack this problem.
So what have we done today?
We've looked at the idea of mutation from a biological perspective,
tried to mimic it into math,
understand tangles and the way algebra of addition and multiplication
could possibly help us,
and basically have come to the problem,
although tangles are beautiful to communicate information,
we still don't have enough weapons to solve more detailed problems.
Thank you for joining me, and stay tuned.
