Welcome back. And thanks for joining me again. This is our tenth lecture together. And for
that, we move from one dimension, worrying about knots and tangles and braids, to now
two dimensions. We have covered a lot of material in the world of knots and links. Remember how
we talked about coloring, to arithmetic of adding and multiplying these objects from tangles,
to braids and the notation of groups, to the powerful polynomials we get from the Jones
polynomial and even to mutations. Well, today we move on to two dimensional objects, which
we call surfaces. Surfaces are the most important of all shapes I believe to mankind. This is
because our eyes capture and study the surfaces of objects all around us. Now, all the objects
around us are 3D. This podium is 3D. I am a three dimensional being. But what you see
of me is only the two dimensional part. You only see the outer shell of what I am. If
you look around from where you are sitting or where you are watching this, you will see
everywhere three dimensional objects surrounding you. But yet, you are only able to observe
the two dimensional surface of that object. Now, the simplest and most prevalent surface
in mathematics is the sphere. It is a great test example. It is simple to study. And if
we have a good understanding of the sphere, we might begin to get a better understanding
of more complicated objects. Now, this starting lecture focuses on what I believe to be one
of the greatest theorems in the study of the sphere. It states as follows. No matter how
we cut up the sphere into pieces, there will be a deep relationship between the resulting
pieces. Of course, I am being vague here, but the idea is that something is going on
about the sphere based on the pieces of the puzzle that you get informing the sphere.
Now we just want the outside 2D shell of the sphere. So every time I mention words like
the sphere or a surface, remember we are not talking about the inside regions at all. Just
the two dimensional outer shell, an infinitely thin layer that is coating it. In other words,
what your eyes are seeing when you are looking at the sphere, that is shell of it. Now we
start with the representations of the sphere which we are most familiar with, especially
as kids, notably polyhedra. Now what are polyhedra? You have seen examples of these before. Here
is a cube made up of a lot of flat pieces, kids toys that we can play with. Now polyhedra
are isotopic to spheres. We talked about this earlier, but what isotope means again
is rubber sheet geometry. If you are given a sphere, you could push and pull, no cutting
and gluing is allowed. You can push and pull and stretch the sphere and make it into the
cube. Similarly, you can take a cube, pump air into it and inflate it and make it into
a sphere. So these are all isotopic in terms of this rubber sheet geometry. But the advantage
of working with polyhedra is that they have these finite number of faces which are all
flat. They also have these corners, the vertices of the polyhedra and the faces and these places
where the two faces meet called the edges. These three ways of breaking up the polyhedra
into vertices and edges and faces gives us a better way of approaching a sphere, more
tractable because it has to do with numbers again. We can try to count the number of corners,
edges and faces of the polyhedra. The most famous of all polyhedra are the five platonic
solids. What are they? Well these are the tetrahedron. We have made up of these four triangles.
The cube made up of these six squares. We have the octahedron made up of these eight triangles.
We have the dodecahedron made up of twelve pentagons and we have the icosahedron made
up of twenty triangles. Now what makes these objects special? Well they are called regular
polyhedra which means they satisfy two conditions. First of all if you notice for any of these
platonic solids, any of these regular polyhedra, we notice that all the faces must be identical.
They're all triangles or they're all squares or they're all pentagons and if you notice
all of those objects are regular. In other words this is an isosceles triangle. All the
edges and angles are the same and similarly for the cube we have all the squares that make
up the faces of the cube are the same. Ninety degrees perfectly formed and being identical.
The second thing we notice about the platonic solids is that the same number of faces must
meet at every vertex. For example here we see the octahedron at this corner at this
vertex four triangles meet but at every corner at every vertex four triangles meet. So these
two conditions of being made up of the same pieces of the puzzle that are regular and
glued exactly the same way at every corner makes them the platonic solids, makes them
regular polyhedra. Now as for the name Plato wrote about them in 360 BC in his work Timaeus
where he associated each of the solids to an element of this world earth, air, fire
and water and the fifth solid possibly being the cosmos itself. Johannes Kepler believed
them to embody nature itself. He took Plato's ideas one step further. In Kepler's work Mysterium
Cosmographicum the Cosmographic Mystery was published in 1600 where here Kepler took
these five platonic solids and nested one inside the other one separating each one
of them by a sphere. So he took a small sphere he nested a platonic solid around it. He took
another sphere platonic solid another sphere platonic solid and he kept doing this until
he had nested all five platonic solids with six spheres the smallest sphere on the inside
and then all the other ones between with a sixth on the outside. He believed the ratio
of the nesting of these five solids bounded by these spheres corresponded in ratio to
the then known six planets of the solar system. His idea was that these six spheres that were
capturing the platonic solids kept track of the solar system in a beautiful way. Well
Kepler later abandoned this idea when he realized that the orbits of the planets are
not circles but they're turned out to be ellipses which Kepler became famous for and
as more planets became available as scientists were able to discover more of these this concept
of these five platonic solids somehow capturing this information went away. But for us we
notice that these also appear in nature not just in keeping track of cosmology and all
of these deep ideas in space which it does not turn out to do. But tetrahedra, cube and
octahedra for example these three platonic solids appear as crystal formations in nature
all the time. And in 1904 a German biologist named Ernst Henkel found radiolarians which
are protozoa having detailed mineral skeletons in the shape of things like the acosahedra,
dodecahedra and others. These shape these platonic solids are somehow intrinsic to nature
they show up very naturally because of their beautiful symmetry. In fact outer protein shells
of numerous viruses that we know of form regular polyhedra. For example the deadly HIV virus
has the structure of the acosahedra itself. Well let us prove why there are only these
five. And we are going to prove this purely by construction. Let's take a look here. Now
let's actually try to build these objects by construction and prove that we only get
five of them. Here's how we do it. We have a collection of different pieces that are
all regular. Here's some triangles, here's some squares, here's a pentagon and a bunch
of their friends, some hexagons. Let's see what we can do. First of all we know that
the sides of the puzzle, the sides of these platonic solids have to be polygons. This
is the smallest polygon there is. You can't find anything smaller than a three sided triangle.
There's nothing called a two sided polygon. So let's take some of these triangles and
see what we can do. Remember the construction. These are all perfectly equilateral regular
triangles and these are all regular squares, regular pentagons and regular hexagons. So
we have the first condition of regularity met. So the only other condition we need to
worry about is the fact that the corners, the vertices have to have the same number
of pieces around each one. So let's take a look. So if I start building this, we can
see that with two of these triangles put together, that's not a vertex here yet. So I need to
add another one. So let's add another triangle here. And if I add the third triangle, we
get, actually it's sharp enough for it to actually bend all the way around and get this
extremely sharp vertex at this point. And this formation with three at this corner is
exactly what gives us the tetrahedron when we close the last one up. Great. That's how
the tetrahedron is formed. We added three at this corner. Well, the other possibility
we can do is we can try to add four at this corner. So let's try to add four and see what
we can get away with. So if I add four at this point, working diligently and faithfully
with toys, we have four at this corner. They're all regular. Condition one is met. Four at
this corner. And you can see it works. It actually locks together in place. And if we
do this on the other side, we get exactly the octahedron. That's the second object that
we can get from this. Let's try five at this corner. So putting a fifth one here, locking
it into place with five of them. Here we get, again, something that works. And if we complete
this entire object five at a corner, it perfectly fills into my icosahedron, the one with 20
sides. Okay. Let's keep going. Why stop here? Let's keep going. Let's try six at a corner.
Excellent. Perfect. Wonderful. My giftedness is in construction, it turns out. So if I
put six at a corner, I don't have a vertex. I don't have that vertex anymore. It's flat.
In fact, it looks like I have these hinged edges, but there's no corner there to speak
of. So six is not possible. And if I try another one, now this becomes certainly not the corner
that we want at all. So the most I can ever do with triangles is that I can get either
three, four, or five. And those are three out of my five platonic solids. Great. My triangles
are done. And now let's move on to squares, the next size I can worry about. So it squares
again, if I take two of these pieces of the puzzle and try to fit it together, my squares,
two isn't enough. I need three to actually start building a corner. Let's take my third
one here, build this. And we see with the third, it works beautifully. And I get actually
the corner of a cube. That's another platonic solid. We've done three with my triangles.
I have my fourth one with my cube. Now let's be ambitious. Let's try to get four in a corner.
And if I do this, then you see that four in a corner with a cube is again flat. The angles
add up 90, 90, 90, 90 to 360 degrees. So four gives me this flat object. I can't do any
more than four, four already has this flatness. So I can only get one out of this one. So
I have three from the triangles, one from the squares. And now let's try these pentagons.
If I try a pentagon, again, we need at least three to get going. And it actually works out
that you can actually snap three of these together. Great. And if I do this, this is
the formation of a dodecahedron, the one with 12 sides. But now if I try to put four of
these pentagons together, which I really want to see how much I can push, you notice
that they won't lie flat. In fact, they don't even have a corner anymore. It's an awkward
shape. So we're done with pentagons. Three, and we get one. We get three from triangles.
We get one from squares. And we get one from a pentagon. Let's keep going. Why not? Let's
try a hexagon. And in a hexagon, we can fit two, we can fit three. Remember, we need at
least three to start getting any kind of corner. And three shows that it's completely flat,
that the angles add up to exactly 360 degrees. I can't do anything with this, much less four
isn't going to work out either. So there's nothing I get with a hexagon. And any other
shape beyond this is completely going to hurt me because of the fact that the angles are
too much. Even in hexagons, the angles are too much. So what have we talked about? We
have right now shown in a rough approximate way by construction that there are only these
five platonic solids that are possible. But if we look a little bit closer, it turns out
that there's more to the platonic solids than we think. Consider, for example, the cube.
The cube has three faces meeting at one corner. Well, the opposite or the dual of the cube
turns out to be the octahedron. The octahedron has four faces which are triangles which meet
at a corner. So you see the four for the number of faces and three for the triangle. It's
a four-three combination. But this one has three faces that are squares. Three faces meeting
at a corner. Each one has four sides. This is a three-four combination, a four-three
and a three-four. They're dual to one another. They look different, but they're capturing
somehow the same data. And similarly, we know there's this sense of duality between these
two objects. Here we have five-sided things, three-meeted at a corner, five-three. Here
we have three-sided things, five-meeted at a corner, a three-five. So here's this duality
we have again for this. Well, what about the tetrahedron? It's three-sided, three-meeted
at a corner. But three-three is the same thing as itself. It's its own dual. So not only
can we form these five platonic solids and show there are only five of them, but there's
this duality that exists between them. Now, an amazing pattern exists for polyhedra. It's
as follows if we look at it for the platonic solids in particular. If we count the number
of vertices, edges, and faces of a platonic solid, we always get that the number of vertices
plus faces equals the number of edges plus two. Let's take a look. The tetrahedron here
has four vertices, four corners, plus four faces, that's eight. The number of edges it
has is six. Well, six plus two is eight. Eight equals eight. Beautiful. Let's try a cube.
The cube has, what do we have? It has eight corners, eight vertices, plus six faces. Eight
plus six is fourteen. But it also has twelve edges. Twelve plus two is fourteen. Well,
what about the dodecahedron? The dodecahedron here has twenty vertices, we can count them,
and twelve faces, that's thirty-two. And if you count the number of edges, you get thirty
edges. Thirty plus two is thirty-two. So there's this beautiful relationship for these platonic
solids. Vertices plus faces equals edges plus two. Now this is a beautiful property. Why
do these solids have this property? Is it because they're regular or they're highly
symmetric? Well, it turns out Leonard Euler around seventeen fifty discovers that this
relationship, vertices plus faces equals edges plus two, doesn't just hold for the platonic
solids, it holds for every polyhedra possible. Now Euler is one of the greatest mathematicians
of all time, along with Archimedes, Newton, and Gauss. He lived for less than eighty years,
but he wrote enough mathematics to fill seventy-four volumes of work. More than any mathematician
ever, he was prolific. Recall the seven bridges of Koenigsberg problem we talked about earlier,
that was due to Euler. This formula, vertices plus faces equals edges plus two, is called
Euler's formula in his honor. But notice that it is not a geometric formula. It has nothing
to do with the angles or area or length of sides, but it's a topological one. It governs
the ways these objects can partition or cut apart spheres. Remember all the platonic solids?
In fact, all of polyhedra are approximations of spheres using flat sides. So this formula
is something about a sphere itself, and thus it's topological. Now let's try to prove this
formula and show that it always stays true. Here's the way the proof goes. We're going
to begin with any polyhedron possible. Pick a dream polyhedron of your choice, one of these
platonic solids, or anything you want to come up with. We need to show for that this polyhedron
you picked, any polyhedron possible, vertices minus edges plus faces equals two. I'm just
going to move the E from one side of the equation to the other. So vertices minus edges plus
faces equals two. Well, each polygonal face that you can possibly imagine, it doesn't
matter whether it's a pentagon or a square or anything you come up with, each polygonal
face can be cut up into triangles. But I'm actually changing the numbers. Let's see what
happens. If a face is not a triangle, I'm going to add an edge from one vertex to another
one, cutting that face up into a triangle. Now, as I start cutting this big face into
smaller triangles into pieces that are triangles, what am I doing? If I add an edge, I've increased
my edge value by one. But at the same time, every edge I've added, I've increased my face
value by one. Remember, what used to be one face, by adding this edge, now I get two faces.
So this increases the value of E, but it also increases the value of F for every edge I add.
But in the formula V minus E plus F, remember, if E goes up and F goes up, nothing has changed.
Thus, my V minus E plus F value, if I take my polyhedron, the one you give me, and cut
the faces up into triangles, I haven't changed this value yet. That's the first thing I'm
going to do. Now, what I end up with is a polyhedron made up entirely of triangular faces.
I'm going to pick one of those triangular faces, remove it, and set it aside. I want
you to remember this for later that we've done this. I'm going to take my hand, put
it in the triangular face, and do a rubber sheet deformation, stretch this out, and lay
it flat on the plane. Now, the faces and edges get deformed, but the count does not change.
We have the same number of faces, the same number of edges, and the same number of vertices.
Now, keep in mind this triangular face that I've taken out for later. Now, here's what
I'm going to do. Since the one I have now on the plane, this stretched face of my polyhedron,
is made entirely up of triangles, I'm going to start deleting triangles one at a time.
And there are three possible ways I can do this. My triangles can come in three places.
I can have a triangle where one of its edges is on the boundary like follows. Now, if I
delete this triangle, what happens? I lose that edge on the boundary. If I've deleted
it, I've just lose that edge on the boundary. I've lost an edge, but I also lost the triangle
itself. That's a face. I've lost an edge, I've lost a face. But E and F of opposite
signs, that means my value, V minus E plus F, doesn't change. But what happens if my
triangle on the outer part of the region, remember how I lost the one with one edge
on the boundary, what if now I pick a triangle on the outer part of the region with two edges
on the boundary like this? Now, if I delete this triangle, I've lost two edges, but at
the same time I've lost that tip, that vertex, and I've lost the triangle itself. So my
V and F decreased by two, and E decreases by two. But V and F have the same sign, and
E has an opposite sign, so again, perfectly it cancels out. My V minus E plus F formula
does not change if I delete one of these kind of triangles. Well, there's only one other
triangle I need to worry about on the outer boundary. Either I have a triangle with one
edge on the outer boundary I can delete, or a triangle with two edges to delete, or the
third case, if I have a triangle with three edges to delete. I delete this edge, which
looks like this, but here notice two vertices are deleted, three edges are deleted, and
one face is deleted. That's my V minus E plus F formula still remains the same. So what
are we left with at the end? We are left with one triangle at the very end, which has three
vertices, three edges, and one face. Great. V minus E plus F, three vertices, three edges,
that's one. But remember that triangle that I threw away in the beginning to make it stretch
and put down? That's another face. So at the end of the day, I have three vertices, three
edges, and two faces. So thus, V minus E plus F equals two is what I end up with. But during
the entire process, my value V minus E plus F never changed. So if at the end of the day
I have V minus E plus F equals two, that means it must have been equal to two during the
entire process. And I did this for the polyhedron you gave me, the most generic polyhedron you
could think of. That means it must be true for every polyhedron possible. I can perform
the same operational method of breaking into triangles, taking a triangle out, laying it
flat, and deleting these outside triangles so I have one left. What a stunning result,
beautiful result. No matter how you build your polyhedron, the number of vertices, and
the number of edges, and the number of faces have to be in this balanced position where
V minus E plus F always equals two. This is Euler's remarkable result. Now we're going
to use this formula numerous times throughout our lectures. Consider the following applications
to chemistry based on this formula, notably to the molecules called fullerines. Now what
is a fullerine? A fullerine is basically a family of molecules formed entirely of carbon
atoms. So if you take carbon atoms, put them together in certain ways, you get these objects
called fullerines, and these fullerines mostly appear in the shape of spheres. Now they were
discovered in 1985 by Robert Curle, Harold Croto, and Richard Smalley, and they cleverly
named it after Buckminster Fuller and his geodesic domes that he's extremely famous
for. Why did they name it after these domes? Because these objects, as you put the carbon
atoms together, start taking the shape of these polyhedral structures, these polyhedral
domes. Now because of this, these three scientists were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
in 1996 for this discovery. Now the most famous fullerine is the C60. It's called the Buckminster
Fullerine, again to honor him. So what does, excuse me, so what makes a fullerine? They
are made up of carbon atoms where each atom has exactly three bonds coming to it. So if
you take a carbon atom as your building block, you have to put three bonds or three segments
coming from this thing. And we know we can build this fullerine based on this structure.
Moreover, the faces must be pentagons or hexagons, and this is determined by the chemistry properties.
In other words, you have these vertices to be now your carbon atoms, your edges are your
bonds, and then the faces that you get after building these atomic bonds, these structures
are going to be made up of pentagons and hexagons. Now I want to show you a stunning result.
These kind of fullerines that you can get based on this property, where every vertex
has three bonds coming out of it, every carbon has three bonds, and you get pentagons and
hexagons. No matter how you do this, you will always have exactly 12 pentagons in every
such fullerine. It's remarkable. It doesn't matter if you start building it right now,
if you start building it out of the most complicated structure of carbon atoms possible, as long
as it satisfies those two conditions of making it out of carbon atoms with three bonds coming
at every corner, and you only have pentagons and hexagons to deal with, every possible
shape must have exactly 12 pentagons. Let's take a look. We begin by letting P be the
number of pentagons and H to be the number of hexagons. My goal is to convince you that
P must be 12, that it can't be any other number but 12 pentagons. I'm not going to tell you
anything about the number of hexagons. That's not what I'm interested in. I want to convince
you 12 pentagons is the only thing possible. Well, let's see what we can do. How many faces
do we have in this polyhedral structure made up of carbon? Well, we have the number of
faces to be P plus H, the number of pentagons plus the number of hexagons. That's the only
kind of structure we have here, restricted by chemistry. Well, what about the number
of edges? Well, each pentagon gives me five edges and each hexagon gives me six edges.
So thus, if I take every pentagon P and multiply it by five, five P, and if I take every hexagon
H and multiply it by six, six H, I get the total number of edges. But I've double counted
because if I take a pentagon and a hexagon, they have to glue along this edge. That means
from a pentagon's perspective, I've counted this edge. And from a hexagon's perspective,
I've also counted that edge. I'm double counting my edges. So I see that five P plus six H equals
two E, two times the number of edges. Well, what about the number of vertices? Well, each
pentagon has five vertices. Each hexagon has six vertices. So five P plus six H gives
me the total number of vertices. But again, I've over counted because if you look at a
vertex, remember how three things meet? Because if the bonds that are three of them, it cuts
it into three faces. That means I'm triple counting a vertex. This vertex is counted
from this face, the vertex is counted from this face, and I'm counting this vertex from
this face. So five P plus six H equals three times the number of vertices. I'm triple counting
the vertices. So now I have three formulas. F equals P plus H, five P plus six H equals
two E, and five P plus six H equals three V. So if I put all of these together, I know
I can use Euler's formula because I've come up with a polyhedron. This is the fullerine
I'm working with. Euler's formula says, well, vertices minus edges plus faces, no matter
what kind of polyhedron you have, it doesn't care about hexagons or pentagons. No matter
what you have, it's going to be vertices minus edges plus faces equals two. But what do I
know about vertices? Let's start substituting. Six V, I can plug in my V and multiply this
whole equation by six. So instead of a V minus E plus F equals two, let me have six V minus
six E plus six F equals 12. But I know what six V is. I know what three V is. So six V
must be 10 P plus 12 H. Let me plug that in. I know what six E is because two E is five
P plus six H. So six E is 15 P plus 18 H. I'm going to plug that in. And the third one
I know is six F. Well, an F, the number of faces, is P plus H. So six F is six P plus
six H. I plug my formulas, my three formulas I got from the fullerine, into my Euler formula.
And I can simplify all of this. And I simplify it. Notice what happens. The 10 P minus 15
P plus six P cancel out. And I'm ending up with just P alone. And my 12 H minus 18 H
plus six H all cancel out. And I'm just ending up with no H's. So I get my new, at the end
of the day, formula P equals 12. What a beautiful result. This says that no matter how we build
our fullerine, as long as it's made up of pentagons and hexagons, we will always end
up with 12 pentagons. In fact, the dodecahedron shows an example of this. This is, in some
sense, a very special fullerine. It's made up of all pentagons and no hexagons. And we
see that the number of pentagons is 12. There's a very special example of this beautiful result.
If you look at your everyday golf ball, you'll notice that these golf balls have exactly
the same property we're talking about, where there must be exactly 12 pentagons on each
golf ball. As long as the golf ball has these divots made up of pentagons and hexagons,
no matter how many divots you have, 1,000 divots, 100 divots, 383 divots, 12 of them
must exactly be pentagons, and the rest must be hexagons. We were able to get this stunning
result of fullerines and simple things like golf balls based on a use of Euler's remarkable
formula. We have begun now our study of surfaces. We have left the world of one-dimensional knots
and links and moved on to the two-dimensional world of surfaces. We've started by looking
at polyhedra in specific to platonic solids, and then we step back and look at polyhedra
in general and got Euler's stunning formula. We've also proved, using Euler's formula,
one of these beautiful results with consequences to fullerines and to nature. Stay tuned for
the next exciting lecture.
