Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
What began as studying the shapes of the Earth has led us to the classification of all possible
shapes of surfaces.
This has even helped us to get a better understanding of knots, these one-dimensional objects,
using two-dimensional tools.
We now turn back to the Earth again to study more about its properties, but this time our
interests are in its wind flows, how the currents of wind flow on the Earth's surface.
We talk about how we can model the flow of the wind and how the shape of the Earth itself
dictates the properties of how the wind flows behave.
We ask the following question, it might seem like a silly question, but it's quite deep
it turns out and not obvious to figure out.
At any instant in time, is there a place on Earth where there is no wind?
Is that even possible?
Must wind always be flowing at every point?
Or can there be a place on Earth where there is no wind?
Well, we begin with a study of something very different than what we've been attacking
and looking at, which are called vector fields.
So far we've only been studying static objects, things that don't move, a particular genus
two surface, a particular trefoil.
And now we are going to study movement.
Now vector fields appear in the world of analysis, vector field, a field of movement.
Remember how we've broken down mathematics into three groups, algebra which studies structure,
geometry which studies shape, the world we're in, and analysis which studies change.
Now vector fields belong in the world of differential equations and calculus because that's the
world that measures these changes.
It fits under the umbrella of analysis.
Now we are going to move from algebraic topology because we've been caring about shapes and
topology from an algebraic viewpoint, from a viewpoint of structures of shapes to analytic
topology which is shapes mixed with change.
We're going to switch the lenses in which we're going to look at the world.
We're still going to study topology about shapes, but we're going to use a different
set of tools, not the tools of structure, but the tools of change and see what happens
when we consider this problem from this perspective.
Now let's look at a classic example coming from differential equations to understand what
vector fields are really about.
Let's consider a field where owls and mice live.
That's all that's happening in this field, the populations of owls and the population
of mice.
Now there is a relationship between the number of mice and the number of owls and here's
the way the relationship would be modeled in its population.
As the mice population increases, the owl population does as well because there's more
mice for them to eat.
Well as more owls are born and raised, well they start eating more mice.
Well this causes the mice population to decrease.
If the mice population decreases, then there's not enough mice for the owls to eat, so the
owl population starts to decrease.
If the owl population starts to decrease, then now more mice can be born, so the mice
population starts to increase.
So visually we can take a look at this as the following diagram.
Here you see a picture of the mice population increasing and decreasing and then increasing
again related to the owl population.
So you see the horizontal axis is the mice and the vertical axis is the owls.
Now notice the owl population is again dependent on the mice population and vice versa.
And this is an example of the predator prey model resulting in a vector field, these collection
of arrows that tell you how the mice population and the owl population change as you follow
these arrows.
If mice increase, then owls increase.
And then if owl increase, mice decrease, then on and on and on.
Now notice we picked a generic population to start with and that's what gave us a circle
of possibilities.
If we picked a different population, a different population of mice for example, then notice
what happens.
The same pattern happens except now you have a bigger circle surrounding this one.
The arrows are still flowing, the vector field flows in the same direction.
And a bigger circle would give you a different feel again surrounding this one.
Now a smaller circle is formed with a different population near the central point.
Now notice as we pick populations closer and closer to the central point called a fixed
point that there is a stability that ensues between the mice and the owl populations.
The central point, this fixed point, is a place of no movement at all.
Why is there no movement?
The mice population and the owl population are perfectly balanced.
There's no change needed because the number of mice being born is exactly compensated
with how the owls are eating the mice.
So in the mouse aisle, in the owl mice example, this is where there is a stability in the
system.
And these points are also called the zeros of the vector field.
This shows a concrete example from nature where vector fields naturally appear here.
Now we've been looking at vector fields on the plane.
As you notice, this is an example of these flows on the plane.
And now we move to the interplay of vector fields and shapes.
Now that we have an intuition of what vector fields are about, let's see what happens when
we consider vector fields on surfaces.
Well a natural way to get a vector field is the gradient method.
The gradient method imagines that you're just flowing from the top of the surface and
gravity pulls the vector field down.
Now let's consider examples of this on the sphere.
Now think of this as the flow of water on the sphere itself.
Let's take a look.
Here we see a sphere with a gradient vector field on the sphere.
The water is starting at the top of the sphere at North Pole where you'd start pouring the
water and the arrows tell you the flow, the flow of the vector field itself.
As it flows to the South Pole.
Now what if you have a torus, a genus one surface, and I'm holding it up vertically.
If I have a torus, this example is a little bit more complicated.
If I pour the water on top, then the water can travel in two separate ways.
I mean you have a 360 degree way of movement, but there are these two key ways of moving
where the water flows on the outside rim, goes directly to the bottom of the torus,
where it can flow 90 degrees to that outside flow, it can flow to the inside genus of that
torus.
And once it gets there, the water collects and it splits and flows through the other
way of the genus, all around that genus.
And then it flows again from that point all the way to the end.
So there are these two kinds of flows that are happening on this torus.
There's the flow that goes right to the bottom and these ones that kind of stop and turn
directions and move the other way.
Now if we count the number of zeros, if we count positions where water actually comes
to a stop for a little bit, we see on the sphere that there are two zeros because there's
the starting point and the ending point where the water begins to flow and the water ends
the flow.
On the torus we see that there are four zeros.
There's the very top of the torus where the flow begins from, and there's the very bottom
of the torus where the flow ends in, but there are these two middle points where the flow
comes in and stops and then switches directions.
Comes in and stops and then switches directions.
So you need the vector field comes in and it has to stop there to actually switch so there's
a zero there.
There's some stability going on.
These are places of perfect stability where these zeros are, where we move off of them
and we are carried by the flow.
Notice what happens.
As you come near that stability point, if you come exactly along the direction you're
coming, you have to stop to change directions.
If you come not exactly at it, directly head on.
But a little bit to the side of it, you don't go near that zero point at all, but you come
very close and then you turn and then you flow down.
Well what can we say about zeros of vector fields in general?
Well consider different vector fields on the sphere.
These are the ones that come from the gradient flow where gravity pulls it down.
But let's look at other examples.
Here we see three different examples of vector fields on the sphere.
The first one is that the flow is flowing left to right.
It's going around the equatorial flow of the sphere.
So again we see that here we have two fixed points.
We have these two stability points, the north pole and the south pole, as the wind or the
water flows around the sphere.
Here's another example of the sphere.
Here there's that one central zero, one central zero of the vector field or a fixed point,
and the water or the wind flows around that zero all the way till it goes through the
long part from the north pole to the south pole, and then it spins around this way.
Notice this flow is continuous.
There's no break in the flow, it beautifully flows from one to the other one.
Same thing can be said about the previous example.
The flow of wind and water is continuous.
But look at this third example.
Here all my flows are gradient flows going from the north pole to the south pole.
The water's flowing except for this red arrow that's flowing from the south pole to the
north pole.
Now this is not a vector field because the flow here is not continuous.
Things flowing in one direction near it have to also flow towards that direction.
You can't have wind all flowing downstream and all of a sudden one gust of wind flowing
upstream right in the middle of it without being a swirl, a change of wind in that area.
So all these arrows pointing down in the vector field are great as long as you don't have
anything coming up immediately there.
These have to be continuous flows.
Now these are just a few classic examples of flows on the sphere and there are numerous
ones that we could come up with and some are extremely complicated flows.
Think of all possible wind flow currents of the earth right now flowing and changing and
some stopping and moving.
It's quite complicated.
We ask again this question, does every vector field on the sphere have to have a zero?
Does it have to have some place where there's no wind going or can we have it so wind is
flowing everywhere all the time on the sphere?
We have seen examples with places where there are two zeros on the sphere and we've seen
this previous example where there's only one zero on the sphere.
Can we be clever enough to have no zeros on the sphere?
Is there something about the sphere that governs its properties of zeros or are we not being
clever enough?
Well to find out we need to understand the zeros of vector fields a bit better.
First notice that there are different kinds of zeros of vector fields.
Consider some classic examples.
There's the center of the zero of a vector field.
It's like the center of a hurricane and the flow goes around it.
It's called the center.
Obvious reasons.
There's a source where from the center point the flow goes from it.
This is the north pole of the sphere and the flow out of it that we talked about earlier.
There's the sink where the flow comes to that fixed point.
This is the south pole of the sphere under the gradient vector flow.
There are other examples like the dipole where there's a center fixed point and the flow
goes around on either direction.
There are other examples like the saddle where at the center point flow east and west away
from it but the north and south come right towards it.
An example of a saddle visually could be something like this.
Like the saddle of a horse where you can see the water flowing towards the center of this.
You can imagine a torus right here.
This is a genus of the torus where the water flowing in and the moment it comes to the
center it switches gears and flows east and west again.
We have seen all of these on the sphere and the torus.
The dipole for example shows up in terms of the magnetic flow of a bar magnet.
We want to measure these zeros quantitatively other than just walk through pictures.
This is what mathematics does.
We see something important like these zeros and we want to understand it and quantify
it more and go behind the scenes.
We did this with knots.
We did it with braids and surfaces and now we want to do it with flows.
Now we define the index of a zero of a vector field as follows.
Given a source here's what we do.
Let's take the source as an example that we're going to study with.
We draw a small disc and neighborhood around the zero and what we do is we choose the top
most point of this disc and we notice the vector flow direction at this top most point.
Now as we move around the circle clockwise around this neighborhood I drew notice how
much this vector field changes when we return to where we began.
So notice at this source I'm pointing straight north.
Now as I walk around this circle notice how my arrows have changed.
It's pointing north and then it rotates.
It rotates clockwise.
It keeps rotating.
Now with the south I'm pointing straight down and when I come back again I've rotated
a full 360 degrees clockwise thus my index value is one because as I go clockwise once
I get a whole clockwise turn.
In general each time the arrows turn once clockwise I give my index value one to it
and each time the arrows turn once counterclockwise I subtract one from the index value.
Now let's consider some other examples.
Let's look at the sink.
Here my arrows are pointing in.
So my north part of my circle my very top it's pointing down and as I start going clockwise
this arrow changes actually turning clockwise again and when I'm all the way in the south
it's pointing straight up and as I go back to the north again I have a full clockwise
turn.
So again around the sink my index is also one because as I go around my arrows change
a full 360 degrees clockwise.
What about the center?
Well you can have a center where the flow flows counterclockwise and again if I start
up the north and walk around it flows clockwise around this circle around this neighborhood
so that's a plus one.
What about a center that flows clockwise around it?
Again if I take my north part and measure the flow direction there and walk around notice
my arrows change a full 360 degrees clockwise again.
So for my source my sink my centers in both directions I get value of plus one.
Well what about my dipole or my saddle?
Let's take a look at those.
For my dipole if I'm facing the north part of my circle I face left right I'm facing
west and as I start turning clockwise my arrows turn clockwise very fast because of the dipole
movement.
By the time I'm at the south pole I'm already at a full 360 degrees and so if I go back
again to the north pole I've completed two 360 degree clockwise rotations.
So my index value is plus two.
Now let's look at my saddle.
If I'm facing at the north of my saddle around this local area small region and neighborhood
around this point I'm facing straight south.
Now as I walk clockwise around this neighborhood my arrows start turning counterclockwise.
So by the time of my south pole I'm facing north but I've gone in the counterclockwise
direction.
So by the time I come to a full 360 degree spin clockwise my index is negative one because
I've spun my dial 360 degrees counterclockwise.
So these are the examples we can do to get the index of some zeros.
In general the index measures how wind behaves close to my zero point.
It's a mathematical approximation.
Of course notice that my source and my sink and my centers all got value plus one so it's
not a powerful measurement to tell everything apart but at least it gives you a good measurement
to differentiate those values from the dipole or the saddle.
Now another way to calculate the index is to use polygons in a clever way.
Instead of drawing circles around my regions I'm going to focus on drawing polygons around
my region.
What I want to do is around my sink, let's start with my sink because my arrows are pointing
in as an example, around my sink let me just draw a square.
Now instead of drawing a circle around it I'm going to place this polygonal square around
a zero.
Now any polygon can be used.
I just chose a square as an example.
However, the one important fact is that we must make sure that all my arrows point in
and or out along each edge.
I don't want any arrows being parallel to my edge.
So if you ever have any arrows pointing in or out from your zero you want to make sure
you pick a polygon so nothing points parallel to the polygon.
Each edge must be measuring something going in or out and that's easy to do.
You can pick any size polygon you want so you can always do this.
So for my square for example I'm going to place the zero at the center and notice if
this is a sink if all my arrows are going in here's what I do.
I place a one at the number one in the middle of my polygon for my fixed point and I place
a one at any vertex of the polygon if the vector feels points inside the polygon at
that vertex.
So in my square example notice that all four corners of my square I have my arrows pointing
in because this is a sink so I place a plus one values at all four corners.
Now I place a minus one along any edge if the vector field points inside the polygon
there.
Again for my square example all four edges are pointing in so now I place a minus one
at every edge minus one, minus one, minus one and minus one.
Now what is the index?
I've just done this little trick to show you what to do with the center point you get
a plus one and all the vertices and all the edges get values depending on if it's pointing
in.
To get the index we just add up all the numbers inside my polygon it's that simple.
Let's add up all my numbers again.
I get one, two, three, four, five positive values, one, two, three, four negative values
so my total index is one exactly what I got before.
Perfect.
Now let's try it for something else.
Let's try it for a saddle.
Here's my saddle.
I'm going to pick a square again.
It's pretty simple to do.
Let's try a square and let's see what happens.
I put a one inside my saddle at the center of the square because every value that's a
zero gets a one for it for free so my inside guy gets a one.
Now my four corners, my four vertices all my arrows notice from the flow they're flowing
out.
Nothing is flowing inside my square so none of those guys get any values.
What about my four edges?
Well my top and bottom edge those arrows are pointing in so I get a minus one for each
one of them.
On the other hand my right and left edge those are flowing out so I don't get anything.
So I have only three numbers in here the negative one for the top edge the one in the middle
and the negative one for the bottom I add it up my index becomes negative one.
Exactly what I had before.
Let's try one more.
Let's take a hexagon and put it around a source.
So I put the one in the middle because the one in the middle is always given for free
for a zero of a polygon.
Now every edge and every vertex all my arrows are pointing out so nothing gets a value.
That's the only thing I have inside my polygon is that one that I started off with and so
my index is one.
Exactly what I did earlier.
Notice that the polygon method of finding the index is a discrete version of my continuous
version.
Remember the continuous one was about how my clock rotated as I walked around the circle
it's a continuous way of doing it.
Discrete version means you can break it up and start counting things for a computer scientist
somebody who wants to calculate things fast the discrete version is much better because
you can plug these finite number of values into a computer easier versus a continuous
one which might be beautiful for mathematicians to study but might not be easy to compute
for a computer.
We now show a deep relationship between zeros of vector fields and the shape of the surface
the vector field flows on.
Now we have seen several vector fields on different surfaces we looked at vector fields
different ones on spheres and we looked at vector fields on the torus.
But now the vector fields have a different value they have an index associated to them
they're not just zeros there at those points they actually have these indices we've given
by these calculations.
What happens if we add up the indices of all the zeros over my entire surface?
Look at this example of this vector field on my sphere it has two zeros one at the north
and one at the south.
But both of these zeros are a center zero that means I give it a plus one value of my
index at top plus one value of the index in the bottom and if I add all my indices
up I get a plus two value over my entire sphere great.
What about this example of a sphere I have an index on top and an index in the bottom
this is the gradient vector field like the water flowing from top to bottom the top point
is a source that's where my water is coming from I get a plus one the bottom point is
my sink that gets a plus one so my total value is two again but what about this one
of the sphere where it's a dipole remember it just swirls around from that point all
the way down going from the north to the south pole coming back up again it only has one
zero the dipole but the index of the dipole is two so my total value over all my zeros
is two again all my spheres of value two what about my torus let's take my torus now let's
do the gradient flow from the top to the bottom the top now I have four zeros so the top is
a source plus one the center one is a saddle remember it comes in and then flows out again
it's exactly like this example we have here it comes in and flows out again so here's
the saddle at the top of my torus and then here's the saddle at the bottom of that genus
of that torus and then the very bottom of this torus is a sink so I get one source negative
one negative one for my two saddles one for my sink total value is zero well what about
a genus two surface if you look at the genus two surface and make it flow again from top
to bottom we start with a one we start with a negative one for that first saddle negative
one for the second saddle negative one for the third part of the saddle negative one
for the fourth part of the saddle and one for that sink at the end add up all these values
I get negative two my spheres all give me two my torus gives me zero my genus two surface
gives me negative two glory glory as you can see what we're really finding is the Euler
characteristic and this beautiful structure that the Euler characteristic of the surface
that the surface is homeomorphic type that what it's fundamentally made out of is somehow
controlling the indices of my vector fields whoa this stunning result is called the Poincare
Hoff theorem now for any vector field on a surface s the sum of the indices of all the
zeros of the vector field no matter what vector field you pick the sum of the zeros of all
the indices must be the Euler characteristic this is a deep relationship on how the way
flows can move on a surface and is globally governed by the shape of the surface itself
now we give a proof of this result right here live due to William Thurston now Thurston
is a feels metal winner one of the great ones we've talked about earlier and he's one of
the greatest topologists and geometers of the 20th century we will certainly talk about
a more later when it comes to three dimensional objects but first let's actually look at
his proof the thing we do in the beginning is that given any surface let's pretend it's
a sphere for now we partition that surface any way we want let's take a look what Thurston
does is we partition the surface in any way we want as long as we observe a very simple
condition first we place a polygon we place a polygon any kind of polygon you want on
each of the zero of the vector field so around each zero you place a polygon it could be a
pentagon it could be a square it doesn't matter at all but remember that if you have
that vector field on that surface no vector can lie parallel to an edge of the polygon
so if you're given a sphere as our example is so far if you're given a sphere then no
matter what vector field you pick on the sphere you pick all the zeros you place a polygon
around each one but make sure the polygon you pick has no edges parallel to it and if
there is an edge parallel to it just pick a different polygon and you'll always find
one that works great that's my first thing the second thing is now that each one of my
zeros of my vector field have a polygon around it kind of protecting it look at the rest
of the surface and just cut it up into triangles just partition it up it doesn't matter how
you partition it I don't care about the rest of them my heart is focused on the indices
so you place a polygon here and you partition the rest and now here's what we do we place
a one on each vertex a negative one on each edge and a one in each face of my partition
so all my polygons around my indices get a one it's great all my triangles get a one
all my edges everywhere get a negative one and all my vertices get a one this is nothing
to do with the flow this is purely on the partition now look what happens when I sum
up all these things well if I add up all the vertices which give a one all my edges which
is a negative one and all my faces which is a one I get the Euler characteristic of course
this is exactly how we get the Euler characteristic and it doesn't matter how I cut the triangle
up or how I partition this or which polygons I pick by our theorems earlier the Euler
characteristic does not depend on the partition it depends on the surface itself so now that
I have my partition protecting these indices and I partition things into triangles I place
my ones along the vertices my ones negative ones along the edges and my protected regions
have a one at the center of those faces and all my triangles have ones at the center of
those faces here's what we do now we bring in our flow we now flow we now place the flow
on top of our surface any flow you want when we do this here's what happens the flow starts
to push the values I have on my surface around here's what I want to do I want to push the
value one at each vertex remember each vertex there's a one there out my flow has to push
my vertex in somewhere right my arrow has to be taking that vertex and pushing it in
well I want to take my vertex that has value one and push it into the face the field points
to wherever the flow points to push it into that face again right now I want to take my
value negative one that's along each edge remember nothing is parallel to it all my edges
have a flow going perpendicular to it somehow I want to take or not parallel doesn't have
to be perpendicular I want to push the value negative one at an edge into the face the
field points there now consider each triangle notice there are two cases there are two ways
flows can come into a triangle since the triangles have no fixed point in them remember all my
fixed points are protected by these polygons my triangles have no fixed point in there
so the flow that's coming in has to get out so one way that can happen is two flows can
come into a triangle along two edges and can leave along one edge or a flow can come in
along one edge and leave along two remember nothing can stay in the middle so it can flow
in two in and one out or one in and two out it's great so what happens well if you look
at the first case when two comes in and one goes out then the negative one along this
edge gets pushed in the negative one along this edge gets pushed in and the one at this
tip vertex gets pushed in but everything else gets pushed out so we only have those three
values so I have that one value of given to the center of that polygon because it's a
face that's not moving anywhere the face sticks there and then the negative one and a negative
one from this edge and the one from this vertex I look at the total sum I get zero so this
triangle gives me zero value towards anything well what about my other triangle where that
one comes in two splits well the one coming in gets that negative one for that edge but
since everything else is leaving nothing gives me anything else so thus I have a negative
one for this edge and a one at the center so my total is zero thus the sum of all values
in any triangle based on the flow is zero and each polygon which contains that fixed
point that I protected is exactly the index of the zero I calculated remember the indices
that we talked about using the polygonal method this is exactly how we find those indices
so what happens I place these numbers the ones negative ones and ones all over my polygon
based on Euler characteristic and the sum of the count one way gives me the Euler characteristic
but the flow does not introduce new numbers nor does it delete new numbers it just moves
it around by the flow and all my triangles are zero valued but all the flow concentrates
my Euler characteristic values into these polygons where the source or the sink or
the dipole had these attractions but those values are exactly the indices so that's it
that's the theorem itself that's top the total sum in one count is the sum of the indices
but this is just the Euler characteristic in disguise and we have the following immediate
consequence if we're on a sphere with Euler characteristic to there must be at least two
excuse me there must be at least one zero in any vector field on the sphere since something
must be contributing to the index alternatively using our wind flow formulation there's always
a location on earth with no wind there has to be because the sum of the indices must
be the Euler characteristic which is two moreover if a vector field on a surface has
no zeros then the surface must be a torus but the Poincare theorem tells us more if there
happens to be a cyclone somewhere on earth we see this is a fixed point of index one
it's the center but the Poincare theorem says that there must be another fixed point
somewhere also because you need to add up to two so if you have a cyclone there's something
else going on it's going to give you a sum of two indeed the Poincare theorem cares only
about the homeomorphism type of the surface consider this figure here we see examples
of wind flows on the surface of a sphere or the surface of this tangled up torus in both
cases if you count the indices of the sphere to be one and one negative one in the middle
and two at one in the bottom the sum is two and this complicated torus which is just a
torus tangled up it could be one and one at the points the top negative one and negative
one in the center negative one and negative one at the bottom and one and one it gives
you zero these gradient flows or any flows you can think of regardless of the shape is
based on the homeomorphism type of the surface itself this is something mathematics does
what we did was related vector fields to the zeros instead of trying to solve a problem
about just how flows work on a sphere we generalize to a harder problem and come up with an answer
that does far more I hope you join me next time as we push our ideas of surfaces even
more in talking about curvature see you next
