Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
The natural world around us is extremely complicated, from leaf formations to protein
foldings to DNA entanglements to quantum fields and physics.
Well, one way to get a grasp on perplexing shapes and designs is to approximate them
using simpler shapes.
How can we try to approximate a leaf?
How can we try to approximate a tree?
Now, if we can fully try to understand the shape of a tree itself, we need intensely
powerful tools layered upon layer of data.
First at the time, we have been studying surfaces that are smooth and continuous.
This is how we came up with Gauss-Bonnet's ideas.
But now we move into discrete geometry.
Now what is the purpose of discrete geometry?
Well, first, it provides us with a world of approximations.
We've already seen this in the world of polyhedra, which approximates fears.
Now, polyhedra, or the platonic solids as specific examples, you see are actually isotopic
to spheres, but from a geometric perspective, which is the lens we want to look at today
in terms of area, volume, and length, polyhedra aren't exactly perfect spheres, but they
come pretty close to making things look spherical.
The deep theorem in mathematics says that any surface, no matter how complicated, no
matter how high the genus is, can always be approximated by a discrete surface.
In other words, no matter how complicated your surface is, you can come as close to
that surface as you want to if you pick a discrete polyhedral surface small enough with
small enough triangles and small enough faces to come close to that surface.
This approximation is fundamental in the world of computer science.
Calculations, for example, can be done much more easily in a discrete setting where you're
worried about polygons, and polyhedra, and vertices, edges, and faces than in a smooth
continuous setting since this is how computers accept and manipulate data.
If you try to feed a smooth surface into a computer data system, it's hard for it to
understand and easily accept what it is.
But if you give it data based on points and lines and triangles and pentagons glued in
certain ways, it's far easier for the computer to do this.
A computer is designed to handle points, lines, polygons, than smooth surfaces where curvature
varies continuously.
The influence of discrete geometry ranges in nature from protein modeling to even ideas
in facial recognition software, surface reconstruction, robot motion planning, and so much more.
We even considered the discrete setting the last time in our previous lecture when we
closed with looking at that Gauss-Bonne theorem from the perspective of polyhedra.
So thus, our lecture today will focus on simple notions of just polygons, the building blocks
of discrete geometry.
Now, you might be thinking, we've already studied polyhedra, these surface-like approximations.
Why go back to polygons, something I've understood since I was a kid?
Well, what does it mean for two polygons to be equal?
Well, from a geometers perspective, two polygons must not only have the same area, but the
same features as well.
For example, two polygons must have the same angles.
They must have the same side links, and so on and so forth.
In other words, they must be congruent, they must be perfectly identical.
We now define a new notion of equivalence of polygons.
And here's what we say.
We say two polygons, P and Q, are scissors congruent, not congruent, but scissors congruent,
if P can be cut up into smaller polygons, where these pieces can be rearranged to form
the polygon Q. So let me say that again.
Two polygons, P and Q, are scissors congruent, or equal, this new concept of equivalence,
if one can be cut up into smaller pieces, where these pieces can then be rearranged
and be made into the other polygon.
So what does it mean for two polygons to be scissors congruent in a concrete setting?
Which polygons do we know are scissors congruent to one another?
Well, let's take a look.
Let's actually try to show scissors congruent for some examples.
Over here, we start with a triangle.
And this is 90 degrees at this corner, 245 degrees at this corner.
And again, this is just an approximation for a demonstration.
But I want to know whether this triangle is scissors congruent to some square.
Is there a square out there that's going to be scissors congruent to this triangle?
Well, notice the notion of scissors congruence here.
What I want to show is to use a pair of scissors to cut this triangle into pieces, rearrange
the pieces, and to get that square.
So let's try it.
I'm going to cut it straight down the middle, draw this perpendicular bisector straight
down, and I'm just using a pair of scissors and straight line cuts.
And now I can rearrange the pieces here, and you can form a square.
Now notice this square and this triangle must have the same area, because as I make
these cuts, I cannot throw away any pieces.
I must use all the pieces of the puzzle to reconstruct the other one.
So if I had a particular area before, I'm going to end up with the same area again.
Now what about some shape like this?
Is this shape scissors congruent to a square?
Let's pick a square as an example.
Is there a square of the same area as this region, this red region, that scissors congruent
to it?
Well, let's try.
Let's see if I can pull this off.
What if I start cutting here, cut off a little triangle at that corner, and I'm going to
cut off another triangle at this corner, third triangle at this corner, and a fourth triangle
at this corner.
Doesn't look much of a square so far, but as you probably guessed, I probably have practiced
this before, but if we can fit each of those triangles in these corners the way I've cut
them, all I'm doing is I'm cutting this piece, I'm just swinging it over, and I'm cutting
this piece, and I'm just swinging it over, you get a square.
So for these two particular examples, I can take that triangle and make it into a square,
I can take this cross-shaped object and make it into a square.
Notice that in both of these cases, the two polygons are not congruent.
The square was not congruent to the triangle in the geometric sense, and the square was
not congruent to the cross in the geometric sense.
This notion of equivalence, two polygons being equivalent in this way, is a weaker notion
than congruence.
So scissors congruence is a weaker form of geometric equivalence.
It looks like homeomorphism was a weaker form of isotope when we're comparing surfaces.
Well notice that we only allow a finite number of straight cuts.
If you allow me to have infinitely many cuts, then I might as well use integration from
calculus.
Remember, my goal is to think of it from a computer science perspective.
What would a computer accept as data?
It can accept as many cuts as you give it, but you can't say cut it forever.
It doesn't know what to do with that concept of forever.
So we can cut it a million times, 20 billion times, but I cannot say keep doing this forever.
I need to have a finite number of cuts to work with.
And I also assume that no area is lost from the cutting.
Remember, whatever I started with before, at the end of the day after I cut and rearrange,
I must end with the same area at the end of the day.
I cannot throw pieces away.
So given two polygons, how do we know whether or not they are scissors congruent?
Of course, if two polygons have different area, they cannot be scissors congruent.
There's no way I can take a polygon of area one, cut it up and make it into area two.
I can't make area appear and I can't throw away pieces.
So we know they must have the same area to be possible candidates for scissors congruence.
But if they have the same area, can we always make the two polygons scissors congruent?
Is area that powerful of a measure?
If not, if two polygons have the same area but they're not scissors congruent,
then what characteristics are we looking for?
Angle, side lengths?
Let's take a look at these examples.
Here we see three polygons, all of equal area.
One looks very spherical in nature.
The other looks like a jagged comb.
And the third looks like a piece of a block made out of 90 degree corners.
Can I make all of these into each other?
Since they all have the same area, is there a way I can take that almost spherical polygon,
the first one, cut it into pieces and make it into the comb?
Can I fit my polygon, the spherical one, into small enough shreds so they fit into the tips of the comb
and yet have exactly the right pieces left over remaining to lock the rest of it out?
Exactly fitting to get the second one and to get the third one?
This simple problem gets to the heart of discrete geometry.
It forces us to find out what polygons are really about.
Is it really about area or something else going on?
But we will try to build some tools we can use to answer this problem one way or the other.
First, let's consider the simplest polygons to build some simple, intuitive reasoning.
Our first result will show that any triangle can be made into some rectangle.
Consider any triangle you want.
The first thing I want to do is I want to place the longest side as its base on the floor.
And once I have the longest side on the floor, I'm going to take a horizontal cut exactly half way up this triangle.
So I have a triangular top and then I have this quadrilateral that it's sitting on top of.
Remember, I can have as many cuts as I want, but it has to be a finite number of them.
So I take that horizontal cut and then I draw a perpendicular bisector straight down.
It's a plumb line from the very tip all the way to this halfway point.
That cuts my top triangle into two little triangles and I just swing those two little triangles around
and I get this perfect rectangle.
It's the same kind of swinging I did to go from that cross example to that square.
So this shows given any triangle you want, I can make it into a rectangle using a finite number of cuts.
That any triangle and any and some rectangle are scissors congruent as long as they have the same area.
I can take this triangle of area one and make it into some rectangle again of area one.
Well, my second result says that any rectangle you give me can be made into any other rectangle I want of the same area.
So first we show that a triangle can be made into a rectangle.
Now I'm going to show that your rectangle can be made into my rectangle as long as they're the same area.
So here's the setup.
Here we have two rectangles, rectangle one and rectangle two.
And rectangle one, let's say, has height one and length one.
And rectangle two, say, has height two, length two.
Now, we're going to assume that the height of one and the height of the other are actually different.
Because if they were the same, then they must have the same length, they must have the same area.
And so there's nothing else to talk about.
They're already congruent.
They don't even need to worry about scissors congruent.
So now I'm going to assume that the height of the second one, h2, is going to be smaller than the height of the first one.
The first one's taller, but remember they have the same area, right?
That's what we're trying to, that's what we're assuming in order to show the scissors congruence.
So that's the length of the first one has to be smaller than the length of the second one.
So we assume h2 is less than h1, which could be less than or equal to l1, which is going to be less than l2.
Then what do we do?
Well, we want to be a little careful about the second rectangle that it's not too long and skinny.
So here, since length 1 is less than length 2, then r2 is longer than r1, but we don't want r2 to be too long.
We don't want it to be extremely long and skinny.
So what I do is, if the length of the second one is bigger than twice the length of the first one,
the second one is bigger than twice its length.
If it's so long, I'm going to cut the second in half, and I'm going to take that two pieces and stack one on top of the other one.
Now I have a rectangle half the length.
So, and if it's still too long, I cut it again and I stack it.
I cut it again, I keep doing the stacking formation until the length of the second one isn't too long and skinny.
So at the end of the day, by doing this procedure, I get h2 is less than h1.
It's less than or equal to l1, which is less than l2 exactly like before.
But now I'm going to make another condition that this last l2 is less than 2 times l1.
That the length of the second one isn't too long.
I'm going to chop it and stack it up till it's not too long.
Now once I do this, look at what I need to do next.
I put my two rectangles and I stack them flush against each other.
And I take a slice from the northwest corner of the one rectangle to the southeast corner of the other rectangle, and I draw this diagonal slice.
And when I do this, this cuts my rectangles, my two of them that I've stacked flush against each other into pieces.
Now the reason I'm able to make this cut and have this cut stay within the two rectangular regions is because the second rectangle isn't too long.
If it was extremely long, then this slice would not work.
So I push the second rectangle, keep doing the stacking trick till I have this rig set up.
So when I do the slice, I get the following pieces.
Rectangle one, according to this slice, cuts into three pieces.
You have this pentagon, which I'm going to call C, and you have two triangles, A1 and B1.
At the same time, rectangle two gets three pieces from these cuts.
I get a pentagon, I'm going to call C again, and I'm going to get two triangles, A2 and B2.
Now notice that these pentagons, these C's from rectangle one and rectangle twos are identical.
They're both the same piece because they're overlapped right on top of one another.
What I'm going to show you is that all these pieces are the same.
In other words, the C from one and C from the other are the same, which we already know,
but I'm also going to show you that A1 and A2 are the same piece and B1 and B2 are the same piece.
And if I can do this, then I've basically convinced you that the rectangle one can be made into rectangle two with just these cuts.
And rectangle two is just arbitrarily given to be the same area as rectangle one, but any length and width you wanted, as long as the areas were the same.
So how do we do this? How do we show that area one and area two, those two triangles are identical?
Well, if we consider the triangle A1 and A2 in the bigger triangle T as shown here, we see that A1 is similar to T.
They're similar triangles. They have the same scaling.
And the same way, A2 is also similar to T.
So let's look at A1 in detail.
A1 has height H1 minus H2, the height of the big rectangle minus the height of the little rectangle in terms of heights.
But what is the length of A1, that triangle? I don't know.
But the height of T is H1 and the length of T is L2.
It's the longer one. Remember, T is that big triangle we get.
So thus, since A1 and T are similar, I can do the following thing.
H1 minus H2 is to H1 as x, the length of this A1 piece, which I don't know, is to L2.
There's this ratio because they're similar triangles.
So thus, if I solve for x to solve for the length of A1, I use some simple algebra.
I cross multiply and then I notice this one thing.
L2 times H2 is actually the same thing as L1 times H1 because they're both the area of those rectangles.
And I know my rectangles were the same area.
So I can use the substitution.
Once I cross multiply and once I factor things out, I substitute in and then I recombine like terms and notice my H1's cancel.
And I'm left with my value of x.
The length of x, which is L2 minus L1, is exactly measuring the length of that small triangle.
But this length of that small triangle is exactly the length of A2.
So it turns out that A1 has height H1 minus H2 and length L2 minus L1, but A2 has length L2 minus L1.
But I know that A1 and A2 are both similar.
They're both similar to T, which means they're similar to each other, which means they're the same.
So I have shown that those pentagons, the C's, were identical and now I've just shown that the A triangles, A1 and A2, are identical.
And using the same argument I just did, you can show that B1 and B2 are identical.
They're congruent.
And thus, we have proved that any rectangle can be made into any other rectangle using simple scissor congruence.
Now, we are going to pause and prove a statement we have used several times in other lectures, something I've kind of swept under the rug.
And the statement is, any polygon can be triangulated.
Given any polygon, I can cut it into triangles by taking my pencil and putting it at one of the corners of the polygon
and drawing a line to the other corners of the polygon.
This is what a triangulation means.
It's a diagonal to go from one vertex to another vertex, which breaks the polygon into triangles.
Now, we use this result, for example, for Euler's formula for polyhedra.
We needed to cut it into pieces and show that every edge I draw cuts the face into two pieces and it increases an edge.
We use this many times before.
Now, there are two main reasons I want to prove this.
Although it might seem obvious, it takes some work to actually show.
And secondly, the way we prove it uses visual ideas motivated by computational geometry.
A bit different than just theoretical mathematics.
So I want us to learn this new way of thinking about stuff.
So consider the following polygon here.
If I can find just one diagonal for this polygon, just one diagonal that goes from one vertex to another vertex,
that stays inside the polygon, I claim I'm done.
If I find one, I claim I'm done.
Why?
Because if you can always find one, here's what you do.
You take the polygon, you draw that one, it shatters into two smaller polygons.
Well, but you just told me given any polygon, you can always find one.
Well, that means each one of the smaller polygons must have a diagonal in there.
Great, I draw one for each one of those.
That shatters those into smaller polygons.
But you told me each polygon that you give me, there's always one diagonal.
So I take a diagonal, I throw it in there for each one of those, it keeps shattering.
I do this over and over again, and I'm left with triangles.
That's all, it's the smallest piece you can get.
So if I can always show that every polygon in the world has at least one diagonal,
I can just use this method to show I can always triangulate things.
But how do we know there's always one diagonal for every polygon in the world?
I just need to find one, and I've automatically gotten an entire triangulation's worth of polygons.
So how do I find that one?
Well, look at the beauty of this proof.
It's very different than the mathematical proofs we've been thinking.
It's the way a computer scientist would think.
So let's take a look.
Let V be the smallest point of my polygon P.
V be the lowest point you can find.
And since it's a point on my polygon, it has two vertices on either side of V,
because it's part of a polygon.
So let A and B be the two vertices on either side that's adjacent to V.
Now draw a line from A to B.
If this line is a diagonal, boom, I'm done.
That's it. I found the one diagonal.
But what if this line isn't a diagonal?
In other words, what if some part of the polygon wraps back inside and comes back out?
So when I draw this line, it leaves the polygon, which does not make it a diagonal.
Well, if it leaves the polygon, here's what I do.
I take that line A, B, and I just move it down.
Keep it parallel all the way down, and I place it at V.
Now I started at V, and I slowly sweep up.
Do the sweeping method from V all the way towards my A, B.
And as I sweep up, I must hit some point called X first.
There must be a vertex I hit first.
Now if I don't hit anything, and if I go all the way to A, B, then I have my diagonal.
But if I hit something, then that point X, you can draw a line from X to V,
and there's my diagonal.
Perfect. What have we shown?
We've shown every triangle can be cut up by scissors,
congruence, and made it into some rectangle.
We've shown that any rectangle you give me by scissors,
congruence can be made up into any rectangle I want by the fact that they must have the same area.
And finally, we have shown that any polygon can be triangulated.
It turns out that we have all the tools we need to prove a stunning theorem.
The Boullier-Garowin theorem states the following thing.
Any two polygons of the same area are scissors congruent.
Can you imagine any two polygons?
No matter how crazy they are, as long as they have the same area,
you can take a pair of scissors, cut these into finite pieces,
rearrange it, and get the other one.
This means that the only quantity to measure scissors congruence is area.
We don't need to worry about length or angles or distance.
Area is enough.
All these crazy shapes we talked about earlier are scissors congruent.
Now the proof of this theorem is as follows.
Given your polygon, P, and my polygon, Q, here's what I do.
First, I cut each polygon into triangles.
Can I do this? Absolutely.
I have the power of cutting each polygon into triangles. Great.
Now I take each one of my triangles and I convert it into some rectangle.
Can I do this? Absolutely.
I can take my polygon first, I shatter it into triangles,
convert each triangle into some rectangle for your polygon P and my polygon Q,
and then I take each one of these rectangles
and I'm going to convert it into the rectangle of my choice
as long as it has the same area.
So I'm going to convert all of your rectangles into the rectangle I want,
but my rectangle must have base length 1.
I don't care about the height.
So all my rectangles have base length 1
and its height is whatever you need it to be so the area works out.
Now what do I have?
I've taken my polygon, shattered it into triangles,
converted each triangle into some rectangle,
converted those rectangles into the rectangles of base length 1,
and I'm going to stack up all these rectangles
to get a super rectangle of base length 1
and the height of this super rectangle is exactly the area of the polygon
because it's base times height.
Remember, we haven't lost any area.
So thus, I've converted your polygon into this rectangle, base 1, height area,
and my polygon, I can do the same procedure of taking my polygon
and making it into a rectangle of base 1 and height the area.
So I've made your polygon into the same object as my polygon
and thus I can make yours into mine.
This proof of the Bolia-Gerwin theorem is not just theoretical.
It's not just there exists a method to do it way,
but it's a practical constructive proof.
You can build it today.
You can actually go and test this procedure on any polygon you want.
It is a proof we built with our own hands.
Now this is a very rare mathematical phenomena
where we are usually just interested in true-false statements.
Can we or can't we do it?
However, this constructive proof we did today,
although a little different than previously,
is highly useful and needed in computer science.
Now I want to close this lecture
by extending this idea of scissors congruence
into three dimensions.
So the question is, can I take a three-dimensional object,
one of volume one, and another three-dimensional object
of a polyhedron, another of the same volume, volume one,
and if these two 3D polyhedra are of the same volume,
can I cut this with a saw and rearrange the pieces
and make it into this one?
We were able to do it for polygons.
An area does this work for polyhedra and volume
with blocks of wood.
Can I cut a block of wood, rearrange the pieces,
and make it into the other one?
In probably the most famous speech in all of mathematics,
Professor David Hilbert in 1900 spoke
to the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris.
Here he announced what he believed
to be the 23 problems which would define mathematics
for the next 100 years.
The third of his 23 problems stated the following.
Is it possible that two tetrahedra
would the same volume not be scissors congruence?
Is it possible to have two tetrahedra of the same volume?
He didn't worry about polyhedra in general, right?
Two polyhedra being volume scissors congruence.
He just said, can you just have two tetrahedra
be scissors congruence or not?
In other words, he asked the question,
is volume the key ingredient like area was for polygons?
Well, unlike polygons, which have one notion of angle,
polyhedra turn out to have two notions of angles.
For a polygon, there's only the corner angles
that we talk about, but for polyhedra,
we have these other angles.
There are two ones.
So the first one called the face angles of the polygons
make up the polyhedra.
So given a polyhedra like this cube,
we have this angle at this corner,
the 90 degree angle of the square.
Well, there's also another angle called the dihedral angle.
And for a cube, for example, the dihedral angle
is the angle formed between the two faces.
It's this angle between the two objects right here
that forms this dihedral angle.
So if two faces meet, this angle and the way they meet,
the angle in which they're formed,
is the dihedral angle of a polyhedra.
So for a polygon, we only had one notion of angle
to worry about.
But for polyhedra, we have these two notions.
We have these face angles, the angles on the face
themselves, the 490 degrees that show up in the polyhedra.
And we have these angles between the edges.
Excuse me, the angles between the faces
along these edges that show up as the dihedral angles.
Well, Max Dain, Hilbert's PhD student,
solved this problem in a few years after 1900.
It was cleaned up with some of the errors corrected,
and it's now called the Dain-Hadwiger theorem.
And this is a complicated result,
but I want to state it roughly as follows.
Here's what it says.
If two polyhedra, P and Q, have different kinds
of dihedral angles, then they cannot be scissors congruent.
So the dihedral angles will get in the way
from them to be scissors congruent or not.
In other words, volume is not enough.
But what do we mean by different kinds of dihedral angles?
Well, we care about dihedral angles
up to fractional multiples of pi.
Let's take a look at two examples.
These two examples are two tetrahedra
that are in the skeletal structure of the cube.
So I'm taking my cube, I'm looking at the base
of my cube, that's square,
and I'm cutting the base into two pieces.
I look at one of those pieces, which is a triangle, right?
That's the base of both of my tetrahedra.
They have the same base.
Now look at the height of this tetrahedra.
The one on the left has height.
The height of the tetrahedra is placed
over the 45 degree angle of this 45, 45, 90 triangle.
Now the one on the right has the same height.
It's the same height as the cube for both of them,
but it's placed on top of the 90 degree position
of the 45, 45, 90 triangle in the base.
They both have the same base.
They both have the same height.
They both have the same volume.
But however, they are not scissors congruent.
Volume is not enough.
Now why is this?
Well, because the Dain invariant,
what Dain-Hadwiger theorem says is you want to measure
or taste the kind of dihedral angles you have.
If you look at the left tetrahedron,
you will see that there are two of these edges
here and here that have dihedral angle of pi over four.
They're 45 degrees.
And these three edges here, here, and here,
their dihedral angle, the angle formed
by those two faces meeting,
are exactly 90 degrees pi over two.
And this long edge that goes from one corner
to the other corner of this cube,
the long part of the tetrahedron, is pi over three.
So notice all of these angles, pi over two,
pi over four, pi over three,
are all parts of rational multiples of pi,
fractional parts of pi, a half a pi,
a third a pi, a quarter pi.
But on the right tetrahedron,
we have these three edges here, here, and here
that are obviously dihedral angle pi over two.
They're 90 degrees,
because they're exactly parts of the cube themselves.
But these three edges, the dihedral angles there
turn out to be arc tangent of square root of two.
Now, it is a proof from number theory
that arc tangent of square root of two
is not a fractional multiple of pi.
You can't take pi and multiply it by a simple fraction
and get arc tangent of square root of two.
Thus, since the dihedral angles of these two tetrahedra,
although they have the same base
and they have the same height,
are not the same because they have different kinds
of dihedral angles, you could never cut one up
and rearrange it and make it into the other one.
Now, this lecture gives us a taste of discrete geometry,
focusing on some ideas of proofs and some on intuition.
We built many things from scratch
and yet we were able to use all of these by construction.
We also defined a new notion of equivalence,
which turned out to be just area in disguise for polygons.
However, for polyhedral, the three-dimensional objects
turn out to be far more complicated than just volume.
Well, next time, we'll push your ideas
further in the world of geometry.
Stay tuned.
