Welcome back and thanks for joining me again.
The previous lecture was concerned with shapes as seen from the perspective of computational
geometry.
How somebody in the computer science industry or in the computer science world would work
with polygons and manipulate those polygons.
It focused on cutting polygons and rearranging them to get other polygons.
Well, this lecture brings the focus on the particular problem of not cutting and gluing,
but folding.
Folding exists in one dimension.
Linkages show up in robot motion planning and in machines, and linkages, such as this,
where you have balls, where the vertices are, and joints and rods controlling how these
move show up in not just robot motion planning, but in protein folding.
You can imagine how proteins emerge in certain ways and be folded in different perspectives,
which we're going to talk about later.
But notice that this is just a one-dimensional phenomena.
I just have vertices and edges in three dimensions that are moving around, just like we had knots
and links.
Excuse me.
Except now, instead of a continuous perspective of knots and links, I have a discrete geometric
perspective where I can count the number of vertices and notice how the angles change
as I move the linkage around.
Well, that's folding in one dimension, but folding in two dimensions also exists.
This is folding paper, origami.
For example, leaves of plants rely on origami folding to appear at the right time of year
for light absorption.
If a leaf is held inside before it appears too long, then it doesn't get enough light
and the plant suffers.
On the other hand, if the leaf slowly grows and absorbs light as time goes on, it might
get too much light for the plant.
And again, the plant suffers.
So what plants do is they pack their leaves in certain origami folds.
So when the right time of year comes, they unfold quickly to absorb exactly the amount
of light at the right time.
Scientists at Oxford have used origami to create and design new stents.
Stents are something we put inside arteries to open up passages.
And what we want to do is we want to take a small object that's easy to put in and make
it into a big object that's able to open up to allow the blood to flow better.
So these concepts of stent designs have been getting a great influence from origami folding,
from traditional methods of folding pieces of paper.
In fact, currently, engineers at MIT have created materials at the nano-scale level,
a level that is extremely small, and they have then folded these nano-scale materials
into three-dimensional shapes, exactly like the way you'd fold paper.
And like the brain, with these extra-folded layers on the cortex, they believe these nano-scale
level foldings will promote faster information flow, mimicking the way our brain itself is
designed.
Robert Lang, one of the world's top origami designers and artists, has worked with NASA
to fold telescopes the size of a football field.
Can you imagine a telescope the size of a football field in space, the amount of information
it can gather?
But the big question is, how do you take it there?
How do you take this telescope and put it in space?
Well, if we can take the telescope and fold it in certain ways and package it into a space
shuttle, and unfold it, you can actually transport this.
But again, the key is, we don't want to fold it too much, because those crease lines where
those foldings occur is exactly where information is going to be lost.
So we want exactly the right kind of folding, so the packaging is efficient.
In fact, package design and industry is an important cost-saving tool for storage and
for shipping.
If you want to send something over an empty box for storage, why send the entire box with
the empty volume in it, might as well fold it flat using origami design, send it over,
and then unpackage and refold it the way you'd want.
So you save a lot of storage and you save cost-saving values for shipping based on simple
things like origami folding.
Now this subject is far too vast to touch base on every use, so we've just given you
a glimpse of how useful it is to think about and understand origami folding, whether it's
one-dimensional folding of linkages or two-dimensional folding of pieces of paper that motivates
these beautiful results.
Let us begin mathematically by looking at folding of one-dimensional linkages.
It is modeled by a rod and joint motion.
A powerful use of one-dimensional linkage by this motion is protein folding.
So again, the bar and joint motion is exactly what we talked about.
You have a bar or a rod and a joint or the vertex, the vertex edges we had before, now
have intense flexibility as we move in three dimensions.
And again, this is what scientists are now using, this method of just vertices and edges,
bars and joints and rods to model proteins.
But what is protein folding?
Well protein folding is the process by which a polypeptide chain folds into a 3D linkage.
So you basically have a chain exactly the way we construct it.
But as this chain is produced, it starts to become folded.
Now ribosomes build proteins from the genetic instructions held within the DNA and the RNA.
And each protein begins in an unfolded state.
So a protein, as it's being built, begins as a straight linkage, just a straight bar.
So as it emerges and comes out of this ribosome state, we see that the amino acids interact
with this and produce foldings of the protein.
As it starts emerging and as it starts being created, the amino acids bombard this protein
and actually start bending it.
The resulting 3D folded protein is determined by the amino acid sequence that bombards it.
Now for proteins, the correct 3D folded resulting linkage is essential to its function.
Failure to fold into the correct shape produces inactive proteins.
In other words, form and function are related once again.
The 3D linkage you get at the end of the day, the 3D protein that is produced in the way it is created,
in fact tells the property of the protein itself.
Moreover, several diseases are believed to be resulting exactly from incorrectly folded proteins,
such as Alzheimer's, mad cow disease, and cystic fibrosis.
All of these simply come from proteins that are folded incorrectly.
So we see understanding of proteins is a huge field today from biological, computational, and mathematical perspectives.
First to model it simply with this ball and joint and rod system is a naive way of thinking about it,
but it turns out that that's exactly where we are.
That is the forefront of research.
This is what the best mathematicians and scientists and computer scientists are thinking about right now.
This field is very young.
Now, since we cannot dive into protein folding, we focus on a very simple question based on one-dimensional linkages.
We ask the following question, when can linkages lock?
A linkage is a collection of rods of fixed length where the joints are allowed to move, exactly the way we talked about before.
And a linkage is unlocked if any configuration of a linkage can be deformed and made into any other configuration.
Think of the analog to knots.
In other words, if I'm given a linkage here, it's unlocked if I can make it do anything I want.
On the other hand, a linkage is locked if there's some certain positions you can get to the linkage that you cannot move out of to get to any other position.
It's in a locked state.
We study linkages in two dimensions, in the plane, and in three dimensions in space.
Consider linkages in three dimensions, since this is the closest to a not-theoretic field we can have.
A linkage in 3D is almost like a piece of string you can move, but from a geometric, a discrete geometric setting.
Can linkages in three dimensions lock?
Well, it has been proven by Jason Cantorella and Heather Johnston in 1998 that linkages can indeed lock in 3D.
The proof is based on the knitting needle example as we see here.
Consider a linkage of five segments of length 9, 2, 2, 2 and 9 in this trefoil position you see in front of you.
So we see that the six vertices, these five segments form six vertices.
The joints are going to be labeled 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
V0, V1, all the way up to V5 could be our five vertices.
Now, in this particular configuration of these lengths of 9, 2, 2, 2 and 9,
I am going to prove to you that this configuration cannot be unlocked.
You cannot move this linkage around this bar joint rod system and unlock this thing.
Now, why cannot it be unlocked?
Here's the proof.
Now, what we do is we begin by drawing a ball of radius 4 centered on the midpoint of the middle segment.
Remember you have a segment of 2, 2 and 2?
Take the middle two segment, take the center of it, take that point and draw a ball of radius 4 right around that point.
Now, by our construction, the points V1, V2, V3 and V4 are inside this ball during any configuration of our linkage.
Those four middle points have to be inside it.
Why must they be inside it?
Because if it's a ball of radius 4 and if you're picking the middle of that center one,
then that other center part has length 1 and then the extra rod only has length 2.
Remember it's length 2, 2, 2.
So you have 1 and a 2, that's only a 3 length.
Even if it's stretched out straight, it's only a 3 length.
On the other side, you have a 1 and again a length 2.
So stretched out, it's only a 3 length.
They could never leave a ball of radius 4.
So you see, no matter what you do with those vertices 1, 2, 3, 4, they're inside this ball.
During any configuration of our linkage, we have this inside our ball.
Now, since the length of the ending rods are 9, remember it's 9, 2, 2, 2, 9.
Since the length of the ending rods are 9, the diameter of the entire ball is 8.
Remember it's radius is 4, so its diameter is 8.
But 9 is bigger than the diameter, right?
9 is even greater than the diameter than the points v0 and v5 must be outside this ball.
Why?
Because v1 through v4 are inside and imagine any points on the inside are v1 through v4.
They're stuck inside.
And if you put a stick of length 9, well, even if v1 through v4 at the extreme end,
even if you put a stick of radius 9, it's going to be farther than any diameter of 8.
This length of 9 is going to stick out.
So 1, 2, 3, and 4 are inside.
We know 0 and 5 are outside.
Here's what we do.
We connect the 0 and the 5 with a very long string.
And make sure you keep the string outside of the ball.
Now what do we know?
The points are inside, 1, 2, 3, and 4.
0 and 5 are outside the ball.
And you have this thing connected by a string, which is also outside this ball.
If somehow we can unlock this linkage by moving the points in here inside this ball,
then look what we have.
We can make this trefoil knot, which is what you see here in front of you, into the unknot.
If you can unlink it, you can make the trefoil into the unknot.
But by tricolorability from one of the earliest lectures,
we proved that the trefoil and the unknot are different.
Thus, this linkage can never be unlocked.
It must always be in this locked position.
Well, a big unsolved problem currently, which seems quite simple,
but again is quite elaborate to even think about in terms of the weapons and machinery needed,
is the following.
If all our rods are of the same length, can the linkage lock?
Remember here, our rods are length 9, 2, 2, 2, and 9.
But what if everything has to have the same length?
Then can you have any positions like this where things lock up?
We don't know.
We have no idea whether this is true or not.
Now, let's move on to linkages in two dimensions.
Can two-dimensional linkages be unlocked?
What does this mean?
A two-dimensional linkage is exactly like a three-dimensional linkage,
except I'm going to take my two-dimensional linkage and put it flat on the table.
So given a flat two-dimensional linkage of different lengths,
again, the bars and the rods can move on the table,
can I always untangle and un-move these around to get a straight line?
Is this possible?
This is called a carpenter's rule problem because a carpenter has a ruler
that usually flips open and exactly looks like a linkage.
So it's modeled on this carpenter's ruler.
Let's take a look.
Given examples like this, or this, or this,
do any of these examples show positions that are locked?
Or is it always possible for us to move the configurations of bars and rods around
on the piece of paper, on the plane, to unlock it?
Well, we can move things in 3D just like knots before.
They can't cross each other, but we can move them.
So in that discrete setting, can I move these linkages and open them up?
Well, this problem was opened for 25 years before being solved in 2003
by Robert Connolly, Eric Demain, and Gunter Rote.
Now, this turned out to be part of Eric Demain's PhD thesis at the University of Waterloo.
After this, in 2001, just a little bit, he entered MIT as a faculty at the age of 20,
the youngest faculty ever.
Just a few years after this, in 2003, Eric Demain was awarded the MacArthur Fellowship.
It's called the Genius Award.
You were given half a million dollars by the MacArthur Foundation.
No questions asked for being brilliant.
And for promoting science and society as a whole,
because they want to make sure money is not an object for you to push with your knowledge.
Now, we are going to see future, and excuse me, in future lectures,
we are going to see other MacArthur Fellowship winners as well.
Now, the theorem states that there are no locked chains in the plane.
Eric Demain's result, along with the others,
showed that no matter how you look at chains in the plane, you can always unlock them.
This theorem is actually quite difficult and extremely intricate to prove.
It is based on something called expansive motions,
where a method is found such that the distance between every two vertices of the linkage never decreases.
In fact, as you're doing this, it seems the distance either stays the same or always increase.
And if you do this, the linkage just unravels and opens up beautifully.
But to prove this is beyond the scope of these lectures.
Well, let us now consider folding, not one-dimensional linkages,
because we're not folding bars anymore, but let's consider folding paper, two-dimensional pieces of objects.
This is called origami.
Now, origami has a rich history.
The word origami comes from the Japanese word, meaning fold, oru, and paper, gami.
Origami itself was probably established with the first creation of paper around 100 A.D.
And origami grew in Japan, spreading throughout Japan in the 12th and 13th centuries.
By the 17th century, origami had become a pastime in Japan.
The boom in origami in the 20th century is due to Akira Yoshizawa.
Now, what Akira Yoshizawa did was he introduced the origami notation of dashes, dots, and arrows in his 1954 book New Origami Art.
Now, similar to mathematics, a language is now created.
Remember how we came up with a language for tangles, and a language for braids, and a language for groups?
Well, now we have a language based on his work on origami folding, and this enabled people to do powerful things.
They were able to translate and transmit information about origami folding that couldn't have been done before.
Instead of talking to someone on the phone trying to explain what your knot was, now you can give them a braid notation.
And instead of talking to someone explaining what your origami folding is, you can give them this beautiful origami language notation.
Now, consider what we could do with braids, again, once we have this notation.
Now, we want to define the basics of origami folding in a rigorous way.
A fold should be something that's isometric, in the sense that it preserves distance.
Iso, the same metric, distance, same distance.
In other words, as I fold, I cannot stretch the paper or tear the paper.
I have to preserve the distance as I'm folding.
A paper cannot also self-intersect during the foldings.
It cannot pass through itself, right?
So, I cannot tear the paper, I can only fold it and keep the same distance of what the object was before,
and I cannot self-intersect the paper, make it go through itself somehow.
A fold on a piece of paper is part of a crease line,
and creases may come in two forms, mountains or valleys.
Visually, valleys are notated by dashes, and mountains are notated by dashed dots.
Here, we see a simple square piece of paper, and I have these dashed dots representing this mountain,
and these three dashes representing the valleys.
So, I can take a piece of paper like this, and I can fold it and actually construct exactly this folding pattern, this crease pattern that I have.
Just taking your classical double fold of a square piece of paper, look what happens.
We have one mountain fold, we see this high mountain peak right here, and three valleys, they're all the three valleys.
So, this fold of this piece of paper is exactly what we see here in this notation.
Now, the entire set of creases form a crease pattern, meeting at a common vertex.
These endpoints, so this vertex here is where these creases meet.
So, we can have complicated transmission of information based on this pattern, like this.
Here, we have the crane, notice the mountain fold and the valley fold creases,
and this is the classical crane from the Japanese origami folding,
and we can also have something like this, which is the base of a frog.
So, this is the frog base.
You take this, you fold it flat, and you use this to build the origami shape of a frog.
Now, the world of origami can be broken down into two worlds, design and foldability.
These are the two overarching themes when we think of the word origami and the world of origami.
Origami design concerns itself in folding a given piece of paper into something having a particular shape.
This is what most of us think of in terms of origami.
A master of origami design, who we've already talked about earlier, is Robert Lang.
He has created masterpieces, such as the Black Forest Cuckoo Clock from one piece of paper.
The ratio of the paper that is needed to fold this object is around 10 to 1.
In other words, it's usually good to use a piece of paper 10 feet long by one foot wide.
This is what you need to actually build this object,
and the piece, this Black Forest Cuckoo Clock, involves hundreds and hundreds of folds.
And his tools, Robert Lang's machines that he uses to do these foldings are his fingers for physical folding,
but he uses geometric and mathematical tools in doing these foldings, which people thought were impossible.
Math has opened doors to create such beautiful designs that once were impossible
because of the language of the fold and the power of mathematics behind it.
Now notice, we are starting to blur the lines between art and science and mathematics,
and we will come back to this in a later lecture about how art and science and mathematics indeed fit together.
Now the other world of origami isn't design, but it's foldability.
Origami foldability concerns itself in asking which crease patterns, though frog base or the crane that we saw before,
which crease patterns can be folded into an origami pattern that uses exactly the creases on the pattern.
Which of these objects, given a crease pattern, can you actually fold?
Now we came up with this crease pattern because I actually made it.
I actually created this by folding it, but what if somebody, a friend of yours or a bitter rival,
gives you a crease pattern they designed based on mountains and valleys, just in randomly assigned places.
You don't know whether this is a real origami folding pattern or just something they made up, randomly chosen at all.
You're just given it, and your job is to make something from this thing, fold it exactly so that the mountains and valleys line up
exactly the way the crease pattern tells you to line up.
In other words, can it be folded flat?
Can I actually take this pattern and fold it the way I want it and actually get a flat structure?
Now we know a mountain, right here, we know a mountain, valley, valley, valley fold is possible for this piece of paper.
Now the question is, can I have a mountain, valley, valley fold at this point here?
But what about a mountain, valley, mountain, valley?
What if I want this to be a mountain and this to be a valley, but I want this to be a mountain and this to be a valley?
What if I want to switch this valley fold into a mountain fold?
Is this possible?
Well, let's take a look to see what happens.
If I take this, here's my mountain fold.
If I try to make this into a mountain fold also, that's great.
Here it is, fantastic.
I've made two mountain folds and two valley folds, but I need to fold this flat.
So how am I going to fold this flat?
Let's see.
And notice as I try unsuccessfully to fold the flat, I need to actually make new creases to try to make this folding work to try to make this flat.
These double mountains have constrained me as to what I can do.
So remember, I cannot make new creases.
This is the only crease information I'm given.
So you see this is impossible.
I cannot do a mountain valley, mountain valley.
Well, what about a mountain, mountain, mountain valley?
Is this possible?
Well, if you look, it is possible to do a three mountain and one valley because I did this exact same fold as I did before where I had one mountain and three valley.
I just switched the piece of paper around and now I have three mountains and one valley.
This is actually possible too and I can't flat fold this.
So given some kind of a piece of paper with information like this, how do we know which ones we can succeed in and which ones will not be able to be folded flat without new creases?
This is important again and gets the fundamental core of origami foldability.
Now there's a classic result called the Maikawa theorem of 1989.
It says that the number of mountain and valley folds around each vertex must differ by two.
So let's take a look here.
Remember my classic original foldings where I had one mountain and three valleys.
The difference between three and one is two.
What about the previous examples we looked at earlier?
For example, for this frog base, if you look at the very central vertex, you see exactly one, two, three, four, five, six valley folds and eight mountain folds.
The difference between eight and six is two.
What about at this corner?
Here you see three mountain folds, one valley fold.
The difference between three and one is two.
You can check every vertex here in this frog folding pattern or you can check it for the crane and you see it satisfies this theorem.
Now this theorem does not say that this is sufficient.
It just says that it's necessary.
In other words, this is the bare minimum that you need to make sure things work out.
At every vertex, the difference better be two.
But what if at every vertex the difference is two?
Does that mean we are guaranteed it works?
Not at all.
This is the bare minimum you need.
You still have to check other conditions.
Now do we have an answer to guarantee when a crease pattern can be flat folded?
Consider a simple problem like this.
It's called the map folding problem.
A simpler case of the crease pattern folding.
Given a rectangular piece of paper, I'm going to partition, cut apart this rectangular piece of paper by a grid where each edge of this grid I'm going to randomly choose a mountain or a valley fold crease.
Such that at every vertex, the difference between mountain and valley is two.
So you can look at it.
It's just a pure grid, vertical and horizontal lines.
No complicated folding.
Just straight, classic folding.
It's called the map folding problem because this is how you fold away your roadmap.
Now it turns out a quick check will ensure that whether it satisfies this Maui-Kawa's theorem, that in fact every vertex does indeed have the difference of two.
But again, this does not guarantee foldability.
It just guarantees that this is the first condition you need to check.
Now it was recently proven that the map folding problem is an extremely hard problem to solve for a computer.
In fact, it's proven that it's one of the hardest problems to solve for a computer.
In other words, there is no quick check other than basically trial and error.
This is why it's hard for us to refold roadmaps.
Have you ever gotten frustrated trying to put a roadmap back together again?
That's why if it's hard for a computer to check through all the possibilities, it's hard for us to go through it one at a time.
Now I want to close this lecture with a powerful use of origami folding.
It comes in the form of the one-cut conjecture and it stays as follows.
Draw a polygonal shape on a piece of paper.
Is it possible to fold the piece of paper, make one straight cut and cut out the polygonal shape?
The piece you have in your hand will be on the paper and the drawn polygon will be on the floor.
Let's look at some examples just to see what I mean by this.
Here I have a piece of paper with a triangle drawn.
Is it possible to fold this piece of paper, make one straight cut such that at the end of the day
my triangle is on this table but the rest of it is untouched in my hand.
So let's do this here.
Take my piece of paper, let's see if I can pull this off live.
So remember what I'm trying to do is I'm trying to make sure all the lines of the triangle match up in one spot exactly
and I get nothing else but the lines of the triangle and here I am going to try to make one straight cut.
And when I do this, in my hand is this sheet of paper and here falling on the floor is the triangle.
So let's try it for something more complicated.
Let's try it for a rectangle.
Let's see if we can do this.
Well let's fold this here and again I'm trying to match up all my edges, all these edges of these folds on one line
and exactly one line so that nothing else comes here.
So if I do this folding, take my pair of scissors, I'm making a cut, I open it up.
You see there's the rectangle there inside and this is on the floor.
Now some of you might be thinking is it because I'm extremely gifted and the answer is I am.
But what about something like this?
Is it possible to make folds so that with one cut this complicated ring falls down?
What about something that looks like this?
Is it possible?
Remember these are all straight line edges to make one cut so that this works.
This is way beyond my skills and this problem was called this one cut conjecture.
It was originated by Martin Gardner in 1960 in his Scientific American column
and the idea has a similar feel to the scissor congruence method of cutting just like we did before
but here we only have one cut but we have the power to fold.
Notice that this depends on lining up all the edges on that one line which of course is based on folding.
Now it turned out that this one cut conjecture became a one cut theorem.
It wasn't a conjecture anymore but it was a theorem itself and it was proven in two very different ways
and both of which involved Eric DeMaine again.
He collaborated with other mathematicians and scientists to prove it.
Now we have come a long way today all based on folding.
We started with folding and locking one dimensional objects in two dimensions
and one dimensional objects in three dimensions, these linkages which were motivated by protein folding
and we ended the one dimensional section with the carpenter's rule problem.
We then folded two dimensional pieces of paper due to origami
and we ended the two dimensional section with the one cut theorem.
Well the next lecture enters the world of polyhedra again
and moves from this idea of foldability and flexibility of what we did today into rigidity.
Stay tuned.
