Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
We've been considering point clouds in the plane and using them to partition the regions
into triangles, triangulations, and boronoi regions.
We've also seen the ways computer scientists think, while this lecture moves from geometric
tilings into topological tilings, but once again we will run into computers.
The tilings and patterns of animals and plants are filled with color and design of almost
infinite possibilities.
Whatever patches on animals such as the giraffe, a leopard, or the back of a tortoise, the
purpose of the coloring, etchings, or shading patches is to make them distinct or to make
them blend into the environment.
As we will see today, although complexity can know no bounds, we find that simplicity
has natural mathematical limitations.
We have talked a lot about geometry of partitions of the plane, but what can we say about topology?
We do have Euler's formula which provides a relationship on edges and vertices and regions
in the plane, but can we say more, especially when dealing with colors and patterns of regions?
This is the question we ask today.
In a collection of patches on the plane, what is the least number of colors needed so that
two patches that are next to each other must have different colors?
Two patches adjacent with the same color look sort of like the same patch from a distance,
so thus we want to force the patches that are next to each other to be different colors.
But if one patch is here and another patch is far away with numerous other patches in
between, then they are certainly allowed to have the same color if you choose.
So we can color each patch a different color, and if we do so, each patch will have its
own special color, and two patches that are next to each other will of course be different
colors because they have their own special color for each patch.
But that seems like we're using a lot of different colors.
Can we be more efficient, more creative?
Now let's consider particular examples of this problem, but instead of looking at the
entire network of patches on an animal or different structures of the back of a tortoise
that we'll have to deal with, let's look at just one region at a time.
Let's focus locally from the perspective of one region and look at its surrounding patches.
If we have one region here, let's call it region one, and if there's one surrounding
region we need two colors.
If we have two regions overall, one in the middle and one surrounding it, two colors
are needed, one for each.
And if we have one region in the middle and two surrounding that, then we need three colors,
one for each region.
What if we have one region in the middle and three surrounding this region?
Regions two, three and four.
Notice here we need four total colors, one for each separate region.
We need the region two to be its own color because two touches three, which touches one,
which touches four, since it's touching everything else, it needs to have its own color because
if it was some other colors, some other region's color, they would just blend in.
But here's what remarkably happens if you have five regions, one in the middle and four around.
You would think that you would need five colors, one, two, three, four and five.
But look, here in this region five, I can actually use the same color as two.
This two is not next to it at all.
And remarkably, if we take a look at this example, only four colors are ever needed from one
region's perspective.
Look at region one.
As long as you alternate colors of two, three, two, three, two, three, all the way around,
except when you get near the end, you might have to put in another color four to keep
yourself safe.
You see that the worst case scenario of as many regions as you want around one region
always requires just four at the most.
So notice that this problem about coloring that we saw from this local perspective is
an issue with topology, not geometry.
It does not have to do with area or length or size, but it has to do with relative position.
So let's begin by looking at the history and motivation of this problem.
Historically, this problem dealt with coloring countries in a map.
Our motivating central patch example shows that we only need four colors from a local
case.
From the perspective of one country, four colors are needed.
But what about a complicated network of countries?
This is a global problem.
Now, from the local issue four, but what is the number of colors you will at most need
from a bigger perspective?
And this became known as the four-color conjecture.
It says the following thing.
Can any map be colored using just four colors where no two adjacent countries share the
same color?
Well, let's pause and think about this.
First of all, I want to say, is this an important question?
It actually turns out to be quite useless in the drawing of maps or to the makers of quilts
and mosaics.
Why is it useless?
Because nowadays, and even in the past, we've had numerous colors at our disposal.
We know how to make dyes of different colors.
So restricting ourselves to four colors seems an artificial constraint.
However, on the way to understanding this problem, numerous practical problems have
been solved related to communication and neural networks.
What do I mean by this?
Well, what's underlying this issue is the shape, the topology of adjacency.
It's close to each other, and how can we distinguish one from another one?
If you look at the surface of your brain, you have these neurons that are firing all
the time from one to another one, transmitting information.
And if we can understand more about the structure of maps on a plane, this might give us insight
into how adjacency and information is transmitted in the brain itself.
But this is the power of mathematics.
Problems which we think are not important lay the foundation to pushing our understanding
of shapes and patterns in far new ways.
So let us consider what math has to say about this problem.
We begin with this elegant result.
The result says the following thing.
Every map you could ever imagine that has ever been drawn before has to have at least
one country in the map with five or fewer neighbors around it.
This must be true.
Now notice, this has nothing to do with coloring.
It's just about any ways maps can be drawn on the plane.
It's a topological information about the plane itself, not relevant about coloring.
Now what we're going to do is we're going to prove this result, and we're going to use
contradiction.
This is a mathematical construct we've studied earlier.
And what we're going to do is we're going to assume this result is false, and we're
going to come up with something that's going to give us a contradiction, which means this
result must have been true in the first place.
Let's take a look.
So in order to prove this by contradiction, we're going to assume that each region has
six or more neighbors.
So what does this do for us?
Well, if each region has six or more neighbors, then from the perspective of the regions,
let's count the number of edges.
Each region has six or more edges.
Well, but each region touches another region to form that edge.
That means each edge is counted twice, one from this region and one from this region.
So we get the formula 2 times the number of edges, 2e is greater than or equal to 6 times
the number of faces, these regions, 6f.
But now instead of counting it from the perspective of regions, let's count this from the perspective
of vertices.
Remember, three regions meet together or more might meet together to form that vertex.
But if you want to count the number of edges from a vertex perspective, then each vertex
has at least three edges coming out of it, because three regions meet there.
So then from the vertex perspective, we have that 2 times the number of edges is greater
than or equal to 3 times the number of vertices, because each edge has two vertices, one on
this side and one on this side.
Now we can use Euler's great formula again.
We have 2 equals v minus e plus f, that's Euler's formula.
But if you look at v, we can solve our second equation and solve for v, and this becomes
2 third z.
We can use our first equation to solve for f, and this becomes 1 third e.
So then we get 2 equals v minus e plus f, which is less than or equal to 2 third z minus
e plus 1 third e.
But if you look at this and add the ease up, we get 0, which means if we plug it into
Euler's formula, we get 2 is less than or equal to 0, which is a contradiction.
Something went wrong, and what went wrong was our assumption.
We assumed that every country has six or more neighbors.
If that's false, there must be a country out there with five or fewer neighbors.
Using this lemma, which has nothing to do with coloring, we get the six color theorem,
which states that every map can be colored with six colors.
What a beautiful result.
That means no matter what map it is, whether it's an artificial map you created, a map
from the Lord of the Rings, or a map that exists in the world today, you only need six
colors to color the regions, so that two regions that are next to each other must have a different
color.
So this is a global result.
It's not just a local result.
This is true for the map, the entire map itself, and the proof of this is by contradiction.
Let's take a look at it again.
So we assume that there are maps that cannot be colored with six colors.
We're going to assume what we want to prove is not true, or we're going to try to find
a contradiction.
So we assume that there are maps that cannot be colored with six colors, and among all
the maps that exist that cannot be colored with six colors, we're going to choose the
map with the smallest number of countries.
So we have all the maps in front of us that cannot be colored with six colors.
We pick the one with the smallest number of countries.
If there's a tie, if several maps have the same small number of countries, it doesn't
matter which one we pick.
Just pick one of those, which is the least number of countries possible.
Now we know this map with the smallest number of countries cannot be colored with six colors,
but if we have one fewer country, then we can color it with six, because this is the
one that cannot be colored with six colors with the smallest number of countries.
And now we use our previous lemma.
Remember what our previous lemma says?
There is a country in every map with five or fewer neighbors called this country C.
So here's my map, smallest number of countries possible, which cannot be colored with six
colors.
If I were to choose from my previous lemma, my country C that has five or fewer neighbors,
maybe it's going to look like this, and I'm going to erase an edge between these two countries.
And when I do that, I have one less country, and since I have one less country, this map
can be colored with six colors.
So I'm going to color the entire map using six colors.
Let me do this.
When I do this, then around this country C, I might have colors like this, one, two, three,
four, and five, those five colors around it, right?
Maybe the entire map is using six colors in special ways, but I'm just focusing around
this one.
But look what I'm going to do.
Now that the entire map is colored with six colors, I add that edge back in that I erased.
But now I have colors one, two, three, four, and five all around it, but that central country
has no color, and I'm going to use my sixth color to color it.
When I redraw this line, I'm able to use that spare color for this.
So we color this map, which needed more than six colors, with only six colors, which means
there's a contradiction.
Remember, the map we started with was the smallest one, which couldn't be colored with
six colors, and now I did it.
Thus, it was impossible to have such a map in the first place.
It's great, it's great, but can we do better?
We use six colors, can you bring it down to five?
Remember what we did previously?
We had used Euler's result vertices, edges, and faces built in there to get this beautiful
result about maps with six colors.
Euler tells us about five or fewer neighbors, and it's this machine that gives us the sixth
color theorem.
This is the guy under the hood in my car that's making it all work.
And to get fewer than six colors, I need to be more clever than Euler's formula.
The major breakthrough was made by Alfred Kempf in 1880.
He created a beautiful way of studying colors on maps using chains of colors.
This led to the remarkable five color theorem.
Now here's a proof of his five color theorem, and again it's a proof by contradiction.
So we assume, just like before, that there are maps that cannot be colored using five
colors, and just like for the sixth color theorem, we choose the one with the smallest
number of countries.
So in front of me is a map that has the smallest number of countries that cannot be colored
using five colors.
Now I'm going to find a contradiction somehow with this thing.
Now we know this map, again, must contain from our old lemma that we started this lecture
with, it must contain a country with at most five neighbors.
So what would this look like?
Let's take a look.
If my country has four or fewer neighbors, then here's what I do.
I do exactly what I did before.
I remove that edge.
I color the regions all around it, one, two, three, and four.
Now I reinsert that edge, and now I have an extra country in the middle that I need to
color, but remember I can use up to five colors, so I picked out as my fifth color.
Great.
Since we have one less country, we can use this extra color, and we're done.
But this only works if my country that I picked has four countries around it or less.
But what happens if the country that I picked happens to have five countries around it?
In the worst case scenario, all countries around this central country might be using
all five colors.
So if I take my country, remove that edge like I did before, create a bigger country,
and start coloring things, one, two, three, four, and five, cut that country back in again.
Now look at this country in the middle.
There are five neighbors around it.
It's possible to have a country with five or fewer neighbors.
So here, if I have five, my worst case scenario, then I need a color for the middle one.
And I don't have a sixth color.
I'm trying to prove the five color theorem.
So we're stuck.
And this is why Euler doesn't help us anymore.
We need more creativity.
So to help us tackle this issue, we need to introduce the method of chains of colors.
What does this mean?
Let's take a look.
The first thing we do is we notice the five colors around this country see.
Remember, seize the country without a color.
It needs a color desperately, but I've used all my five colors around this country.
So what do I need to do?
Remember, the entire map is colored.
Everything is done.
It's zooming in on this one country, and if I can figure out a color for this, I'm set.
I've got my proof by contradiction.
But how can I get a color for this to show I can still color this map?
Well, let's pick two colors around this country see that are not next to each other, say red
and blue.
Look at this country here, colored red, and this color blue, and they're not next to
each other.
Now we consider all red, blue chains of countries.
So I look at the red, and I go and find the next blue country that's next to it, and the
next red countries that are next to those, and on and on and on.
But I'm looking at blue, red, blue, red, blue, red chains around this.
Now look at the top part of this chain.
Look at the red, and there's a blue.
It branches off to a red on either side, and then it branches off to blue.
If I focus here, what happens if I switch all my reds into blues, and all my blues into
reds for my chain?
Remember, there's a chain on top that goes from my red blues that touches my red country,
and there's a chain in the bottom that starts and touches my blue country and has this blue
red chain.
So I look at just one of the top chains, and I switch all my reds to blues and blues to
reds.
And if I do this, look what happens.
The greens and the yellows and the oranges are not affected.
They don't care if it's a red or a blue, as long as it's different than them.
So you just switch all the reds to blues and the blues to reds, but look at it from the
perspective of C.
My country C, since I've switched my blues to reds and reds to blues, has two blues
next to it now.
The bottom one has remained a blue, but the top one, the red, has become a blue, and all
the blues have become reds.
So now I have this extra color to use.
Red was never used.
I picked red for my country C. I'm thrilled.
It feels like we're done, but it turns out we're not.
We get into a trap if we think it's over.
Here's what could happen.
What if the reds and the blues from the top chain and the bottom chain form a loop and
they actually connect up?
Now look what happens.
If I switch my red to a blue from the top chain, it causes a literal chain reaction of
colors which changes my red to a blue around my country C, but since I'm switching all
my reds to blues, it changes my blue back to red again in the bottom.
So now I don't have that free red color to use.
My reds become blues, but unfortunately my blue in the bottom has become a red.
Now we look at the shape of the plane itself and we notice this remarkable thing.
If around my country C of a chain of reds and blues going around, it must trap some
colors inside that chain.
So now let's look at my orange-green chains of countries.
If you look at my orange-green chains to the right of this country C, I can switch all
my oranges to greens and my greens to oranges, but you notice they can never connect up to
the orange greens on the other side because my red blue has cut them off with my chain.
So my switching my oranges to greens and greens to oranges, you notice around my country C
I have a red and a blue, I have a yellow, but now I have two greens.
So my orange becomes free and I can color my country C using this color.
So we assume that this map cannot be colored with five colors.
Remember the assumption we made.
And now we have proved that we can use by this method of chains and subtlety that we
can actually color it with five colors.
Thus, we've reached a contradiction and what the contradiction is, is the following thing.
We thought that there were countries, excuse me, we thought that there were maps that you
could not color using just five colors.
That was the contradiction, so every map can be colored using five colors.
Note that we never really used the fifth color in this map.
We worried about the reds and the blues and the oranges and the greens, but the yellow
never got used.
This causes us to wonder, can only four colors be needed?
So how many colors do we really need to color any country?
We know four colors are definitely needed in the local condition, but can we get four
colors for the global condition?
We've used Euler to prove the sixth color theorem.
We just used the idea of chains to prove the five color theorem.
Can we get a four color theorem?
That is a dream of dreams.
That means the local condition and the global condition are actually the same.
And amazingly, after 150 years, a revolution in mathematics occurred that this is indeed
true.
A four color theorem exists.
So how was the four color theorem proved?
How was it solved?
It turns out, using a computer.
Kenneth Apple and Wolfgang Heiken reduced the four color problem to checking several
examples.
Now, these aren't just silly examples of maps.
There were almost 2,000 special cases they needed to check in order to show the four
color theorem was true.
Now, these weren't 2,000 maps of countries, but 2,000 special properties about maps of
countries.
They used a supercomputer at the University of Illinois to do the calculations.
And their proof was completed in 1976.
Indeed the slogan, four color suffice, became the math department's postal meter slogan
for the University of Illinois.
And their work was received with joy and doubt, since it was the first great result to need
a computer program to solve.
Moreover, and this is the most important thing from a math perspective, it did not provide
us with a deep understanding of ideas.
We know what Euler is about.
We know what chains of colors are about.
We see the construction of the proof taking place.
But a computer just spitting out an answer saying, I've checked 2,000 cases and life
is good, doesn't tell us anything about the underlying topology of what's going on.
Mathematicians wanted a deeper understanding and we didn't get it and we were frustrated.
In 1997, over 20 years later, four mathematicians, Robertson, Sander, Seymour and Thomas, provided
a much simpler proof.
It was based on the same ideas and still used computers.
However, it only needed to check about 600 cases and takes a few hours to check on your
home computer.
Now almost all mathematicians are satisfied with this result.
Probably the most important reason being that in 20 years we have come to a greater understanding
of what computers are about and why their usefulness is needed.
So far we've been thinking about coloring patches on the plane.
Now, seen in a different way, we've actually been thinking of coloring patches on a sphere.
To see this, consider if you have a patchwork on the plane, you take the outermost boundary
of the map, the huge region that's infinitely big, and you can just wrap that around the
sphere.
And it turns out all the issues on the plane turn out to be identical to issues on the
sphere.
All our arguments about Euler and chains that work for the plane also work for the sphere.
Thus, we can have this new result which says any partition of the sphere, any way you want,
can be colored with only four colors.
Beautiful.
Now, how does a mathematician think?
What happens when we try to color patches not on a sphere, but what about on a torus?
What about on a surface of genus 2 or a surface of genus 12?
Can you imagine a world of a genus 12 surface where there are countries which need to be
colored, maps on those worlds, not maps on simple spheres that we worry about?
Well, remember how we constructed a genus G surface?
We said a genus G surface is actually made up of a 4G-sided polygon which gets glued
together.
The genus 1 surface is a 4-sided polygon, a square, and we can build the torus from
a square.
Similarly, a genus G comes from a 4G-sided polygon.
So we can take our polygon, draw our maps on the polygon, and start gluing it to get
our genus G surface with our maps on that.
But as G increases, more and more gluings need to be made, which means that countries
that are over here and over here, which might have the same color when you color it on the
plane, when you glue them, these same colored countries might be touching, which means now
you have to make them different colors.
So instinctively, more countries are allowed to touch one another, and thus most likely
more colors are needed to color the maps of a genus G surface than just a normal sphere.
So let's start by considering the torus.
Now recall that the Euler characteristic for the torus is vertices minus edges plus
faces equals zero.
Remember the sphere is equal to two, but the torus equals zero.
And using this, we can show that every map on a torus has at least one country with six
or fewer neighbors.
Now we can use the same ideas as above to show that at most seven colors are needed on
a torus using the Euler version.
Remember what we did?
The Euler version on the sphere gave us the six color theorem, and the Euler version on
the torus gives us the seven color theorem for the torus.
Remember how the six color theorem became a five color theorem because of creativity
and then became a four color theorem because of the computer?
Can I take the seven color theorem on the torus and use creativity and drop that down?
Let's take a look.
A torus can be drawn in a different way.
If I take the torus and cut right on the top, I can open it up to an annulus, a disc with
a hole in it.
And if I glue the inside of the hole to the outside of the hole, I get the torus again.
Now if this is a way of drawing the torus with this gluing map, then look at this particular
configuration.
Consider this map on the torus.
I've drawn seven countries on the torus.
And look at country number one.
Country one touches country two here, and it touches country three here, and four here,
and five here, and six here, and seven here.
In fact, country one touches all seven countries.
In fact, this is true for all of the countries.
Every country touches every other country in this map of the torus.
What does this mean?
Remember, we have the seven color theorem for the torus using Euler, and it turns out
you can't drop it down to six or five like we did for the sphere because this example
shows that seven colors are actually needed.
We need seven colors because every country touches everything else.
So for the torus, we have something called the seven color theorem, but for the sphere,
we have something called the four color theorem.
What a beautiful jump, and what a beautiful structure the sphere has that the torus doesn't
have.
Well, in general, Percy Hewood proved a beautiful result for surfaces of genus G. Let's take
a look.
We have the following calculations he has.
He gave us this formula, which said if you take one half times the quantity seven plus
the square root of one plus 48 times G, take your answer after you do the square root and
all the multiplication and look at the smallest whole number that's right next to this thing.
So if this number gave you 7.82, you pick the number seven because it's that whole
number that's right there.
Then this will give you the number of colors needed for a genus G surface.
So for genus one, you get seven colors, which we see if you plug into this formula.
Genus two, you get eight.
Genus three, you get nine.
All the way up to genus nine, you get 13, and you can keep calculating this.
He showed one needs at most this many colors.
This is the worst case situation you need is what Hewood showed, but he did not show
that one needed all these colors.
He didn't show that you might be able to simplify it more.
Now we know for the Taurus, you need all seven colors, but do we need all 13 colors for the
genus nine surface?
Or is there a clever argument for a genus nine surface that you don't need 13 for?
In other words, as we reduce the number of colors on the plane from six to five to four,
can we reduce these numbers?
Well in 1968, Ringel and Young's proved that these were the best we can do, and their proof
is based on an elegant case by case design.
Thus, for any genus G surface, we have a coloring theorem.
For the sphere, we have a four color theorem, and for Taurus, we have a seven color theorem,
and for any genus G, based on the works you see here, we have this beautiful formula that
tells us exactly the number of colors you need, and you will not need any more colors.
So what have we done in this lecture?
We have talked about the underlying structure of patterns and the topology of coloring.
We pushed beyond Euler to get not six colors, or the idea of chains to get five colors,
but the inclusion of computational exhaustion to get four colors.
Our next lecture looks at tilings in the three dimensional world, with some stunning applications
to designs and bubbles.
Stay tuned.
