Welcome back. Thanks for joining me again. Today, we're going to talk about efficient
packings. Now, we've already talked about packages in terms of origami where you can
take a convex polyhedron, cut it up along edges or along edges and faces and lay it
flat and how how manufacturers want to be efficient in terms of how they ship goods on packages
instead of wearing about three dimensional packages, you can you can ship it flat on
two dimensional surfaces. But today, our focus is not on the efficiency of the package itself
but the packing of the goods in it. It is the inspiration to one of the most famous questions
dealing with optimization. Optimization problems deal with getting the most out of a given situation.
For example, financial analysts optimize profits for companies. Given the restrictions they have
in terms of what the companies do, the analysts try to get the most profit out of it. We have
talked about how nature is the ultimate optimizer where soap bubbles, for example, optimized
trapping the most volume of air given the restriction of that amount of soap that you've blown to create the bubble.
Well, today, we will consider questions in optimum optimization related to nature. For example,
we will look at whether bees are efficient in creating honeycombs which are hexagonal in their
shape or whether the seeds of pomegranates are mostly shaped like dodecahedra. Our adventure,
however, begins with Johannes Kepler. In 1611, Kepler asked the following question. What is
the most efficient way to pack identical spheres as tightly as possible in space? We have seen Kepler
in his ideas related to the platonic solids. Remember, Kepler was the one who thought there was a
relationship between the ratios of the platonic solids to the ratios of the planets themselves.
And he is most known for discovering the elliptical orbits of the planets. Well, Kepler claimed that
the best arrangement of stacking spheres is the one used to stack pyramids of oranges. For example,
just look at the pyramids of orange configuration you see in your grocery store. It's called the
grocers packing. This is the Kepler conjecture. Is the grocer packing the most efficient way
of packing spheres in space as long as all the spheres are identical? It's a simple question,
and it requires some of the most sophisticated mathematics ever created. And that's what we
want to look at today. To understand the deeper issues behind Kepler's conjecture, let's start
instead of three-dimensional space and spheres sitting in there with two-dimensional ideas and
looking at disks. So the two-dimensional version of Kepler's problem deals not with spheres,
but with just flat disks on the plane. So let's take a look. So we just start with coins or objects
that are perfect disks of the same size on the table, on the plane. And first of all, we have to
assume that there are infinitely many of them spread over an infinite table, but we're just looking
at a small snapshot in what's going on here. So what does it mean to arrange the coins efficiently?
Well, that means we want to arrange them the tidest as possible, giving us the least gaps
between the coins. So here's an arrangement for you, but let's try to be more creative than just
a random arrangement, and let's actually try to build an arrangement. So what if I start stacking
my disks next to one another like this? And the other stacking I'm going to put right under here,
exactly like this. And this kind of a stacking structure is called a square lattice packing.
And it's called the square lattice packing, because you can see if you take the centers of
all the disks and connect them up, you get squares. And it feels like they're these squares that are
tiling the plane. Well, this is one way of doing it. But notice the efficiency here is how much
area of the table is showing, because we want to be, we want to be packing as much
of the disk material as we can without exposing the table. Well, what if instead of a square
packing, we just do this, I just shift all my disks a little bit over. And notice now,
what used to be a big gap in the center of these things has closed up a little bit. And this is
called the hexagonal packing, hexagonal lattice packing, because notice that you have this
hexagonal structure that starts showing up as you do this. Well, which is better? Is the square
one better? Is the hexagonal lattice better? What about this? What about a random structure?
Who says that the hexagons are the squares with the perfect lattice tiling structure has to be
the best? Maybe a random structure is far better. Remember, we're not tiling just a small area.
We're tiling an infinite plane with infinite of these perfect disks. Well, how can we tell
which is the best other than a gut instinct? It looks like the hexagon looks pretty good compared
to the square, but that's just the eyeballing it. They're infinitely coins for me to deal with also.
Well, again, we turn to mathematics because it gives us the tool to measure this quantitatively.
Remember now, this is the world of geometry, not topology. We're in geometry because we actually
need quantity such as area and distance and how much it how much of the table it covers,
not just position of next to each other. Geometry is now the tool that we're going to use.
And we need to look at this question through the lens of a Geometer. Efficiency of packing compares
how much area the coins cover compared to the total area they could possibly cover on the table.
And this mathematical measurement is called density. It's the area of the coins divided by total
area possible. It's a percentage, right? Area that the coins cover divided by total area possible
gives us this percentage and we want to make the density as large as possible for the best
efficiency, the higher percentage coverage you have, the better your packing is, the more efficient
you are. So let's consider the density for the square lattice packing. If we choose a tiling region
where the corners are the centers of the disks, then we can use this region as a stamp to stamp
the entire plane. And I will get the entire square lattice packing from the stamp. So thus, if I
understand this small local region, I understand the entire packing because of this beautiful
tiling lattice structure. Now, if we assume the radius of a disk is one, then the total area
of the square that we see is four, because if the radius is one, then the sides have length
two each, two times two is four. But what is the area of the disk covered in this square tiling
region? We see it's made up of four pieces of a circle. And if we fit those four pieces together,
you get the entire circle. So thus, the radius being one will give us the area of the disk to be
pi r squared, pi one squared, which is pi. So the density of the square lattice packing is the area
of the coverage, which is pi, divided by the area of the total possible, which is four. Pi divided
by four gives you about 0.7854 or 78.54%. It's pretty good. Now, let's consider the density
for the hexagonal lattice packing. Here's what it would look like. Now, again, we choose a tiling
region where the corners are centers of disks. Now, here, our region looks like a rhombus,
looks like a parallelogram. Now, if the radius of a disk is one again, then we see the area
covered by the disk is still pi. Notice that in this parallelogram, it has four pieces of a disk.
And if you take those four pieces and rearrange them and turn it around, it actually forms an
entire circle. It's perfect. So the area is pi that's covered by the disk. But how much total
area does this disk have that it's trying to cover? Well, that's the area of the parallelogram,
which is base times height. Now, the base of this parallelogram is two, because the radius of each
disk is one. One plus one is two right there. But what's the height? Well, if you look at the
height, we have to use Pythagorean theorem for this triangle right here. It's one for the base.
It's two for the hypotenuse, which means the height is square root of three. Thus, the density
is pi, which is the amount that disk covered divided by the area of the parallelogram,
which is base times height, two times square root three. And if we do this calculation,
we get 0.9069. 90.69%. This is remarkable. This is great. Compared to the 78.54% of the square,
this hexagonal lattice packing is fantastic. Remember, the best we can do is the density
of 100% complete coverage. So around 90% is pretty good. But can we do better
than our hexagonal tiling? Well, in 1773, Lagrange showed that if we have a tiling
lattice structure, this hexagonal tiling is the best. And in 1940, over 150 years after
Lagrange, the Hungarian mathematician Laszlo Fiestoth proved the hexagonal packing is true
in general. Compared to any random tiling, compared to any way you can arrange it,
the hexagonal one is the best. We now turn our attention back to 3D, back to Kepler's
conjecture in the packing of spheres. So let's start with a bit of history for this great problem
of mathematics. This question first came into existence by Sir Walter Rale, who was known for
the colonization in Virginia and the expeditions and searches for El Dorado, the mythical city of
gold. What a start for one of the most beautiful problems in all of geometry. Rale asked his
assistant, Thomas Harriet, to help him find a method to quickly count stacked cannonballs,
to see how many cannonballs a particular stacking has, just by looking at the shape of the pile.
Well, Thomas Harriet solved this quickly because he was a mathematician at heart, and he asked what
the most efficient way to store cannonballs was. He didn't just want to know the count, he wanted
to know can you do it better. And he wrote to Johannes Kepler about this question. And Kepler
made this famous into his conjecture. Kepler had a fascination with nature from the macro level to
the micro level, and he wrote a little booklet called The Six Cornered Snowflake, which deals
with several beautiful problems. For example, he asks, why are the petals of flowers mostly
grouped in fives? Turns out the answer is the golden ratio. He asks, why do snowflakes have
six corners? Turns out the answer is low energy chemistry. And he also asked two other questions,
which we're going to look in, where he says, why are honeycombs hexagons? And why are the
pomegranate seeds mostly shaped as dodecahedra? We'll talk about the last two questions later,
for they have powerful mathematical notions built into them. But moving from the historical,
let's now turn back to the mathematical aspect of the 3D sphere packing. As we did for the 2D
packing of coins, let's consider some density calculations in three dimensions. Now this is
based on experimental data where thousands of balls are placed in a very large box. And although
this is not an ideal framework, it gives us a good approximation of infinite balls and infinite space.
So what do these calculations give us? Well, if you have a perfect cube stacking where you have
the balls arranged into a cubical lattice structure, we get a 52.7% density. And it's extremely
unstable structure, because if you have a cubical structure of oranges, and if you push an orange,
notice they're just landing exactly on their tips, at the bottom of an orange touches the top.
So can we do better than this cubical structure? Well, randomly throwing oranges into a ball,
excuse me, randomly throwing oranges or balls into this box, this very large box,
shows an experimental data of about 55 to 60% density of balls, far better than this cubical one.
In fact, if we shake the box a bit, if we actually allow our experiments to do this,
we increase this all the way up to 64% density. And the grocer's orange packing,
the one that you see at the grocery store, the perfect 3D hexagonal packing, has density about
74.05%. Now this is not as good as the 90% of the packing of disks we got by hexagons.
But remember, that was 2D. Can we do anything better than this 3D Kepler's idea of this orange?
Kepler claimed that it was this grocer's packing that was the best, but he never proved it.
So it has become Kepler's conjecture. But what about for other lattice arrangements?
What if our base is a square, where we place balls in the center of this adjacent to four,
and not to three like the hexagonal method? It seems like this will be dense. Let's take a look.
So if you're my oranges, and if I place my oranges such that instead of the grocer's packing,
I have four oranges stacked next to each other in my base, and then I put my other orange in the
middle, where this central orange is touching four other ones, notice I have not the cubical
structure where these oranges have to be floating on top, but they can actually land inside these
holes. So you have this structure of a square lattice in 3D. But is this possible? It feels
like if I just do the same 2D trick by moving these oranges a little bit over, and then putting
them on top, now notice one orange touches three other oranges instead of four other oranges as
before. So it feels like we're getting more in 3D by mimicking this hexagonal structure.
Well, look what Kepler was able to show. He showed that the density of both of these structures
weren't just the same. He actually showed the structures themselves were the same.
On the left and on the right, you see the same packing structure. But look at the way these
balls are marked on the left. You see that this is really the square structure where we take a
square packing of the orange and put one in the middle where that orange touches four of them.
But look at the one on the right. It's the same structure as the left. But if I highlight these
balls, you see an hexagonal packing, the grocers packing. So you see not only do they have the
same densities, they're the same. Both of those structures I just showed you are the same. Now
this is very counterintuitive. In 2D, we had the squared lattice structure and the hexagonal one,
and they were very different. But in 3D, this kind of tiling becomes the same. In fact,
almost 300 years after Kepler in 1883, William Barlow re-studied this method and showed the
same conclusion as Kepler, but he was a crystallographer. He was seeing it from a natural
perspective in the sciences. Remember in 2D, the hex packing was far better. In 3D, life becomes
extremely confusing. What other craziness can happen? And how can we possibly try to prove the
Kepler conjecture? Well, similar to how Le Grand showed the 2D lattice packing, the person who
attacked the 3D version is once again our hero, Carl Frederick Gauss. Gauss around 1830 was able
to use beautiful ideas in algebra to show that the grocers orange packing was the best lattice
packing. In other words, if you had a pattern that repeated in 3D, the grocers one was the best.
With the lattice 3D packing established, what about the general version of the Kepler conjecture?
What about if you just had a random collection of oranges rather than a perfect lattice structure?
David Hilbert in 1900, 70 years after Gauss, considered this one of the greatest problems
of the 20th century. It became Hilbert's 18th problem in his list of 23 problems that he posed.
Remember, problem number three, we've already heard about David Hilbert before,
problem number three was his scissors congruence problem. Whether you can cut up
polyhedra and rearrange them in 3D, which his student, Max Dain, showed was not always true.
So this became one of the great problems of the 20th century.
Lazlifyas Toth, who we've already talked about, who had solved the 2D version of the Kepler conjecture
of the disks on the plane, he could not crack the 3D version, though he tried.
However, he did pave the way of thinking about the correct approach to the problem.
And here's this method. Instead of thinking about infinitely many spheres,
he said consider just one sphere. Look at its neighbors. You're going to get about 12
neighbors around that guy. And consider its neighbors, neighbors. You're going to get around
40 more of that. So great, we now have spheres, but how do these sit in three dimensions?
Well, he said if you take this one, if you look at the 40 around it, look at the 12 around it,
look at the 40 around it, each one has three degrees of freedom. And instead of studying
the spheres themselves, he said look at their Voronoi regions. Here are Voronoi regions of
disks in the plane, which gives you convex polygonal structures. And here are Voronoi
regions of spheres in 3D. And Fias Toth's method was consider the Voronoi structure
of these objects and study them. Now, in terms of numerics in three dimensions,
if you have about 12 spheres around it and 40 around it, say we have about 50 spheres we have
to worry about. Each sphere being in three dimensions has three degrees of freedom. So 50
spheres times three degrees of freedom, that's 150 variables. And what do we want to do? We want
to move these spheres around, move these balls in space around, controlling all the 150 variables
at the same time, so we can maximize density using this method of Voronoi partition. Now,
consider this graph here. Now, this graph is a graph with just two variables, x and y. And for any
given two variables, x and y, it gives you its density position. You already have this three
dimensional world. You have a surface sitting in this three-dimensional world based on x and y.
And somehow on the surface, you're trying to find the maximal density. Now, we need to do this
for 150-dimensional world. How can we possibly do this? Well, the answer comes from Thomas Hales,
a mathematician who started seriously thinking about the conjecture around the mid-1980s. And he
approached it using the same framework outlined by Fiestoth, but more ideas were needed to solve
this beast of a problem than just a rough outline. Now, instead of looking at the Voronoi cells,
which is the intuition that he had in the beginning, which is the most natural to do,
Thomas Hale also looked at the dual of these objects. Hales considered the Delaney tetrahedralizations.
So given a point cloud in three dimensions, we can connect the dots just like we did for points
in the plane, and now we can get tetrahedra. Remember how the Voronoi diagrams and the
Delaney triangulations were exactly conveying the same information? This happens in 3D as well.
And Hales used this idea to talk about Voronoi structures and their Delaney tetrahedralizations.
But what's the big deal? Why talk about tetrahedralizations? The advantage is that tetrahedralizations
are all made up of the identical piece. They're all tetrahedra. Around 1995, about 10 years of
thinking hard about this problem with new ideas here and there, Hales had a stunning breakthrough.
He combined Delaney and Voronoi into a new method, used this method into finally attacking the 150
dimensional problem, and in 1998, Hales used a computer software based on intense linear
programming methods to finally solve the Kepler conjecture. Now, similar to Apple and Hakin,
who came up with the computer method for the four-color problem, computer once again became the
tool to crack this. And even today, most mathematicians feel that computers are a necessary evil
that will be needed now and then, but Hales still believes that computer proofs will be vital to
the progress of mathematics in the 21st century. Only time will tell. Well, we have been focused
on the Kepler conjecture, on packing spheres in space, and finally, Hales's remarkable breakthrough
says, the grocer's packing is the best. So let's now turn to some questions which Kepler asked in
his six-cornered snowflake book, dealing with some questions in nature. Why are honeycombs hexagons
and why are the pomegranate seeds shaped as dodecahedra? Let's now convert our problem of
packing with perfect circles and spheres into a question about partitions, about cutting up space.
What is the most efficient way to partition space into equal volumes? Here, the regions are not
packed like spheres with holes in it, but they completely take every part of the region up.
It's like imagining you take the sphere, pump it up with air, so it fills up every part of it.
Again, the question focuses on efficiency. We want to partition space into equal volumes,
infinitely many equal volumes of infinite space, but we want to use the least amount of material
possible. Think of this as soap bubble structures. If you've ever taken a box filled it with soap
bubble, excuse me, filled it with bubble fluid and this blue bubbles with a straw, you see this
structure of the way the box gets partitioned into regions, each one looks like a little convex
polyhedral part. What is the best structure we can get? It is in this context of partitions
where we look at Kepler's question about hexagonal honeycombs. It is indeed the 2D version of this
partitioning problem and it's called appropriately the honeycomb conjecture. So here's the question.
Why are honeycombs hexagonal? Is the hexagonal structure and arrangement of honeycombs the best
way to partition the plane into equal areas? This question was amazingly open for 100 years,
just like Kepler's conjecture. And a bit over six months after solving the Kepler's conjecture in 1998,
Thomas Hales had the proof of the honeycomb conjecture. This guy is remarkable. Two huge
unsolved problems in geometric optimization, done. Except this time, Hales' proof was only 20 pages
long and purely math rigor. It was not related to a computer proof at all. Everyone is happy,
including bees, since it proved that the nature of the bee structure of the hexagons is the most
efficient. Or is it? If we think about it a bit, we see that the honeycombs are not 2D hexagon
shells, but the honeycombs that the bees are in are actually three-dimensional structures. Bees
need to go in there. Each beehive is made up of three-dimensional cells with a hole in it so the
bees can go in. Their designs look like the following picture. Now these can be made to fit
together next to each other with a hexagonal prism structure on the sides, with three square
caps on top. Now the hexagonal prism structure enables them to pack sideways, and if you turn
one of these upside down, the squares match perfectly with the other squares to lock to form
a beautiful beehive structure. Now Hales recently showed that bees know best in two dimensions in
terms of hexagonal shells to enter the comb, but how can we prove this is best in 3D? Well,
amazingly in 1964, far before Hales, Fiestoch made this a moot point. He came up with the
following design. Here you have hexagonal structures on the side just like before,
except instead of three squares, you have two hexagons and two squares. And if you use this
method, packing the same volume as previously, then it was shown that you need 0.3 percent
less wax to make it. Bees are not as efficient as we think. So is this new design that Fiestoch
came up with the best? Well, this is still an open problem. Nobody still knows. Well, the world of
partitions in two dimensions gave us the honeycomb conjecture, and two three dimensions with a
boundary, a place where the bees can go in, gave us this open problem. What about a three-dimensional
partition of space itself? Can we take all of space, break it up into three-dimensional pieces,
in a beautiful way with equal volume, but minimizing that surface? Well, this is called
the Kelvin problem. And we begin with a bit of history. We have seen Lord Kelvin before. It was
he who believed that atoms could be represented as knots, and we also get the Kelvin temperature
scale from him. Well, just as vibrations of material create sound, Kelvin believed that
light is also created by vibrations. But vibrations of what? Well, he believed that space was filled
with a foam-like object called ether, which allowed light to travel, vibrate through it.
But what shape was this ether that was filling space? Well, in 1887, building on the theory of
soap bubbles, Kelvin believed space was tiled by what he called the tetracaidecahedron. It is now
shortened to, thankfully, the Kelvin cell. And here's what it looks like. The Kelvin cell is made
up of six squares and eight hexagons. And the Kelvin cell can actually be used to elegantly
partition space. And Kelvin conjectured that this is the best way to partition space into regions
of equal volume using the least amount of surface area, the boundary of the cell. However, Kelvin
had no proof, and this became the Kelvin conjecture. In fact, Kelvin was so smart at that time that most
people believed him even without a proof. They just thought he was a genius, and it had to be true.
So what has become of this great problem, which is over 100 years old? In 1993,
Professor Dennis Ware and his student Robert Phelan had a breakthrough idea. Why should space be
tiled with one kind of tile? Why do you only have to pick one shape that you have to use over and
over again? Why can't you use two shapes? Remember, the only condition placed on us is that it must
have equal volume. It doesn't say anything about what the shapes must look like. But Ware and Phelan
came up with two tiling objects. They picked a dodecahedron. It wasn't a perfect regular dodecahedron,
but it had those 12 pentagons that we wanted, and a new object they came up with, which had
12 pentagons and two hexagons. That looks like this. And these two objects were used to tile space.
Two of the dodecahedra, along with six of these new polyhedra, together form a superstructure
called a cluster. And these clusters partition space beautifully. Here's an example of their tiling.
Now, moreover, they partition space into equal volumes, but if you actually measure the surface
area you need to build these objects, it turns out to be about 0.3% less than Kelvin. Wow,
a structure that is better than Kelvin that captures the same volume, equal volume in space
everywhere, and it's more efficient. This is how efficient Phi is Toth's method was in overcoming
the B designs for honeycomb. That 0.3% is all it needs in this world of geometric optimization.
Yet, even today, it remains unproven whether the Ware Phelan structure is the best. We know it's
better than Kelvin, and it's the new leading candidate. But there is something in the Ware
Phelan structure's favor, however, to make their structure the candidate for optimal partitioning
of the space. It turns out this structure appears in nature. It is found as a crystal
structure in chemistry, where it's usually called as the type 1 cal rate structure. A clath rate
is a chemical structure consisting of one type of molecule trapping and containing a second type
of molecule in polyhedral cages. For this reason, it is sometimes called a cage compound. Now,
gas pipelines in the Arctic are sometimes clogged with these clath rate crystals of ice.
Linus Pauling, a double Nobel Prize winner in his 1960 book The Nature of the Chemical Bond,
contains a diagram of a clath rate with the same topology as Ware Phelan. It even shows
a tiling of space using this structure. It's amazing how much nature holds in our mysteries
that we don't know about. Indeed, the Beijing Olympics has the Ware Phelan structure designed
right into the water cube. Take a look. This aquatic pool where Michael Phelps shattered
world records is designed after the .3% record breaking Ware Phelan structure over the Kalman
structure. As a mathematician, I like to think the geometry of the building provided the inspiration.
Well, we have just tasted the world of geometric optimization based on packing and partitions.
It is a very different world using novel tools which are difficult to understand.
The world of computers makes a more prominent role here as well, where 100-year-old problems
are broken by records smaller than 1%. Now, our next lecture moves fully into three dimensions
as we start our explorations of the nature and shape of the universe. Stay tuned.
