Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
This lecture continues our adventures in the world of three manifolds.
Last time, we talked about using the familiar tool of multiplication to build manifolds in three dimensions.
We explored some examples of manifolds and realized how they depict possible shapes of the universe.
We also realized that we could not get all three manifolds for multiplication, but we could get them from gluing polyhedra.
Faces of polyhedra and their identification give us every possible three manifold.
Faces gluing, along with understanding cosmic microwave background radiation, could be the key to find the shape of the universe from our intrinsic perspective inside this three manifold, called the universe that we live in.
But how well do we know three manifolds?
You know, for surfaces, we had a complete classification theorem.
We knew their genus, their boundary, and their orientability completely classified what kind of surface you were in.
Can we say something like this about manifolds?
Well, this will be part of our quest today.
Remember, our focus will be on three manifolds with finite volume, which are orientable and without boundary, no place that you can come to the edge of.
So let's begin with one of the most important mathematical properties of three manifolds, tetrahedralization.
Now, recall that each surface can be triangulated, that we can break up a surface into triangles, glue them together to get that surface, and this is what we use to compute the Euler characteristic of that surface.
Remember how we counted the vertices, edges, and faces of that triangulation of a surface?
Well, in the 1950s, it was proved by Edwin Moyes that every finite volume three manifold, the kind that we're looking at, can be tetrahedralized.
In other words, they can be broken up into finite numbers of tetrahedra that glue together to form the three manifold.
Just like every surface can be triangulated, every three manifold can be tetrahedralized.
Now, this is a deep result and not to be taken lightly.
It has some powerful consequences, which we now turn to.
Now, based on this, we can officially prove what we just stated last time, that every finite three manifold comes from gluing sides of some polyhedron.
Let's take a look at how this proof would go.
Let M be my manifold and give it some tetrahedralization.
So M's the name of this manifold, I'm going to give it some tetrahedralization. I know it has one.
So start with any tetrahedron of this tetrahedralization of my manifold. Pick one and hold it in your hand.
Now, choose an adjacent tetrahedron that's next to this in my tetrahedralization.
Choose one of the tetrahedra that glues to this.
I'm going to pick it up and I'm going to glue it to this one.
I'm going to pick another one and glue it to this structure that I'm building.
Just pick a tetrahedron in here that glues to one of the faces of the structure.
Glue it. Pick another one that glues to one of the faces of the structure.
Glue it and continue this process.
Now, what will we get at the end?
We will get some possibly wild-looking polyhedron, as I glue one at a time,
until I completely exhaust all the tetrahedra in my tetrahedralization.
Now, this object that I get at the end, this structure, will be homeomorphic to a ball,
since there will be no genus.
This object won't have any genus because only one face of the tetrahedron is glued at a time.
Remember how you need to get a genus.
You need to glue this side to this side at the same time to get that genus structure.
Since we're gluing one at a time, we're going to have some ball,
and this ball will have triangular faces as its boundary.
Now, gluing these faces of the ball, which is triangulated to one another,
on the original tetrahedralization structure, will give me the entire three-manifold itself.
In other words, I have thought of a new way of constructing this three-manifold from gluing,
by picking one tetrahedra at a time, and by doing this, I actually get a polyhedron
with triangular faces as boundary, and if you glue these boundary faces,
allow them to fully glue the way I should, I actually get the three-manifold.
Well, for two dimensions, triangulations led to the Euler characteristic.
We had vertices, edges, and faces, which we had V minus E plus F.
Now that we have this beautiful tetrahedralization, can we do something like this for three dimensions?
Well, it turns out that the Euler characteristic we have been looking at
is but a shadow of a deeper reality coming from the world of algebraic topology,
algebra and topology meeting.
Poincare noticed that the power of Euler, and he generalized it to arbitrary dimensions.
He came up with the Poincare Euler characteristic, a generalizations of Euler's idea
for surfaces to arbitrary high dimensions.
So assume for now that we are given an n-dimensional manifold,
and can be as big as you want it to be, and it's made up of vertices,
edges, faces, V0 vertices, V1 number of edges, V2 number of faces,
V3 number of chambers, and on and on all the way up to Vn number of n-dimensional chambers,
whatever they may be.
Then Poincare said that the generalized Euler characteristic is V0 minus V1 plus V2
minus V3 plus V4 all the way up to Vn, and you just alternate your sign.
This actually turns out to be a topological invariant.
So you see Euler, the Euler characteristic we've been studying about is just for surfaces,
and it beautifully extends to any dimension you want.
Indeed, for surfaces, if we're given an orientable surface without boundary,
then the Euler characteristic is so strong and amazing
that it completely determines the topological type of the surface.
Thus for surfaces, Euler characteristic is extremely powerful.
So how good is the Euler characteristic for three manifolds?
Let's start with some computations on three manifolds that we know and take a look about
and what this Poincare generalization of the Euler characteristic looks like.
Let's look at the three-dimensional sphere.
Note here that the three-dimensional sphere is made up of two balls glued together.
So I actually have two balls, but the sphere, the two-dimensional sphere around each of the balls
is actually the same. Remember, you glue them together and they become identified.
Now let's cut open one of these spheres into this particular decomposition,
and I'm going to cut the other one into the exact same decomposition
because I need to glue them together.
And now let's actually plug in into this Euler characteristic, this generalized version.
Note here, the number of vertices I have is two vertices right here, one and two.
The number of edges I have is one, two, three.
I'm thinking, wait, what about these other two vertices on this sphere
and these three other edges on this sphere?
But remember, they're going to be glued together.
So you're only going to have one copy at the end of the gluing.
So I have two vertices, three edges.
How many faces do I have? Two-dimensional regions.
I have one here, two here, and three here.
Great. And how many chambers do I have?
How many three-dimensional chambers?
Well, I have one chamber here in the ball of the first kind
and another separate chamber here in the ball of the second kind.
Remember, the chambers don't get glued, just the boundary, just the spheres do.
So now let's plug it into the formula.
The Euler characteristic is two vertices minus three edges plus three faces
minus two chambers equals zero.
So the Euler characteristic of the three-dimensional sphere is zero.
Remember, the Euler characteristic of the two-dimensional sphere was two
and now we've computed it for the three-dimensional sphere, which is zero.
It turns out that if you partition these two balls into any other way you want
and glue them together, you would get the exact same value zero.
Poincare showed that it was indeed an invariant.
What about the three-dimensional torus? Let's take a look.
Remember how the three-dimensional torus was obtained by gluing a cube
on the faces of the cube we identified?
So now let's see what happens when we compute its Euler characteristic.
Well, if I take my cube, notice that if I glue the right face and the back face,
this front face right here and the back face together,
then all the edges along the sides, these two edges get identified
and these two edges get identified.
Similarly, if I glue this left one to this right one,
again, these two edges get identified and these two.
Indeed, all four edges, by this gluing, all get identified.
So thus, I have one set of edges, just one edge,
representing all the movement of up and down.
Similarly, I have another set of edges moving left and right
and then I have another set of edges moving back and forth.
Indeed, I only have three edges after I'm done with my gluing.
In a similar way, you can show that you only have one vertex.
All of the eight vertices of the cube at the end of the day after you glue them all
get identified into one vertex.
And indeed, you can see that you will have three faces.
The front, back become one, the left, right become one
and the top, bottom become one.
And you have that one interior chamber.
So the Euler characteristic become one vertex minus three edges
plus three faces plus one chamber, which equals zero.
This is not good.
Remember how the Euler characteristic helped tell the two-dimensional torus
and the two-dimensional sphere apart?
Well, now I get zero for the three-dimensional torus and the three-dimensional sphere.
Well, let's consider one more example.
Consider the two-dimensional sphere multiplied by the circle.
We saw this picture before when we constructed it last time.
Now, what I need to do is I need to partition, cut up the interior of this object
into valid chambers.
Right now, I have this entire three-dimensional blob of territory,
but I need to break it up into chambers that are each homeomorphic to balls.
So when I do this, I'm going to take these three fins to cut it up.
You can choose any way to partition it.
I'm just choosing this way.
And if I do this, note how many vertices I have.
I have two vertices on the inside sphere and two vertices on the outside sphere,
but the inside and the outside get identified, so I only have two vertices total.
The number of edges, it turns out, I have on the shell of the sphere,
I have three edges, one, two, three, but I have those two extra edges connecting them,
so I have a total of five edges.
And what about the number of faces?
Well, I have three faces on the shell of the sphere, one, two, three,
but I also have three faces in the fins, so that's a total of six.
And this cuts my sphere times my circle into three chambers.
So let's try the Euler characteristic.
Two vertices minus five edges plus six faces minus three chambers equals zero.
Again, zero.
What's happening here?
Are we running into bad luck?
Do all of these special cases just happen to work out to be zero,
or do all three manifolds have Euler characteristic zero?
Well, that would be frustrating.
And if so, can we somehow prove this?
Well, we do know that all manifolds come from gluing faces of polyhedra,
but this does not help us in terms of getting the number of vertices, edges, and faces
to really understand Euler characteristic of how these polyhedra glue.
So in order to understand what is happening here,
we need to build manifolds from a fresh perspective.
Remember how we glued two balls together to get the three-dimensional sphere?
Each solid ball was a three-manifold with boundary,
and we removed the boundary by gluing them together,
and the boundary disappeared because you can go from one ball into the other one
without ever encountering this boundary.
This forms our motivation.
What happens if we glue two solid tori together instead of two solid spheres?
Maybe we'll get something else.
Well, before we do this, we need to take a step back
and look at the torus a bit more in detail.
A torus has special kinds of curves.
Here we see that a torus has a meridian curve,
which is the short way to go around the torus,
and the longitudinal curve, which is the long way to go around the torus.
In general, we can also draw other curves in the torus called the PQ curve.
And a PQ curve is one which wraps in the meridian direction P times
and the longitude direction Q times.
So, for example, this picture shows the three-two curve on the torus.
It wraps around the meridian three ways as it goes around the torus,
and as you complete this curve around the torus,
it has gone along the long longitudinal way two times.
Now, we can now use these curves on the torus to perform our gluings.
We glue two balls together to get the three-sphere,
and these curves to help us glue tori together.
It's a beautiful idea.
So, we start with two solid tori.
Let's take a meridian of one solid torus
and glue it to the longitude of another solid torus.
If I take one solid torus,
we glue this meridian curve to this longitudinal curve,
and I'm going to glue this meridian curve to this longitudinal curve.
In fact, all the meridian curves between these two meridian curves
must glue to all the longitudinal curves between these two longitudinal curves.
So, what happens?
Well, I can actually cut these two meridian curves out
and take all the meridian curves between it,
forming this chunk,
and actually move it over and fill in the genus of the second solid torus
because the meridian curves perfectly glue in this way
to the longitudinal curves.
So, we're going to cut out a chunk of the first solid torus,
making this solid torus now homeomorphic into a ball.
It's lost its genus because I've ripped this off.
And the second solid torus,
because of the gluing, its genus gets filled in,
making this into a ball.
It turns out that I'm, at the end of the day,
gluing a solid ball on one side to a solid ball on the other side.
But we learned in our previous lecture
that no matter how we glue two solid balls together,
we always get the three-dimensional sphere,
which means if I take two solid tori,
glue the meridian of one to the longitude of the other all the way around,
I get a three-sphere in a different way.
Beautiful.
Now, let's try our gluing in another manner.
What if I glue a meridian of one solid torus to a meridian of another
instead of meridian to longitudinal?
Meridian to meridian. What do we get?
So here when I do this, notice that this meridian of the solid torus
gives me an entire disk that it bounds.
And the meridian of the other solid torus gives me an entire disk that it bounds.
So if I'm gluing the meridian to the meridian,
I'm gluing the boundary of one disk to the boundary of the other disk,
but that gives me the two-dimensional sphere.
So that particular boundary gluing gave me a two-dimensional sphere.
But I have a circle's worth of them to do
because I have to go around the entire solid tori for both of them.
And when I do this, I get the two-dimensional sphere times an entire circle.
I get the two-sphere times the circle.
Beautiful. Now I've found another way to build these guys.
Now, how about something more complicated?
Well, we can glue the meridian of one solid torus to the PQ curve of another.
Just arbitrarily draw the PQ curve of your choice.
And when we do this, it's quite difficult to actually visualize
because when the three-manifold world, it results in a space we haven't studied yet
called the lens space.
And it becomes the PQ lens space,
a class of three-manifolds that are beautiful and very important.
Now, our idea of gluing two solid tori can even be generalized further.
So consider two solid genus G surfaces and glue their boundaries in different ways.
So instead of gluing two balls together and two solid tori together,
let's take two genus G surfaces and glue them together.
Now, these solid surfaces are sometimes called handle bodies
since they're three-dimensional bodies with handles.
It looks like jugs with handles.
There exists the following wonderful theorem that every orientable three-manifold
with finite volume comes from such handle bodies.
Everything comes by gluing handle bodies.
Said in a different way, we get the following thing.
Every manifold contains in it, every three-manifold in it contains a surface of genus G
which when we cut out along this surface results in two handle bodies of the same genus,
one that we have in our hand and the other that's left over.
And this structure that every three-manifold is based on two solid-filled genus G surfaces,
this structure is called the Hagarge splitting of the manifold
because you split the three-manifold into these two pieces.
And it's named after Paul Hagarge, a Danish topologist who introduced the idea in his 1898 thesis.
Now, amazingly, we can prove this statement with our knowledge of three-manifolds.
We have learned that much to actually do this.
Let's take a look.
Remember, at the start of the lecture, we proved using the fact that all manifolds can be tetrahedralized,
that every three-manifold comes from gluing faces of a polyhedron itself.
You can take a polyhedron and glue the faces and you get it.
We now prove that every manifold has a Hagarge splitting.
In other words, all manifolds come from gluing two handle bodies together.
But how can we do this?
The answer, once again, lies in the tetrahedralization of three-manifolds.
So, here's the way the proof goes.
Let M be our three-manifold with some tetrahedralization.
Now, for this tetrahedralization, consider just the vertices and edges.
Let's pretend you're inside the three-manifold.
It has some tetrahedralization, it breaks it up into tetrahedra,
and I just want to look at the vertices and edges.
It's kind of like a skeletal structure of this three-manifold.
And what I want to do is I want to thicken the vertices and edges up a bit,
and it looks like you're actually getting a handle body.
There's this solid stuff that gives you a thickened, skeletal structure of your manifold.
We now will build a dual, kind of an opposite to this handle body,
and the way I'm going to do this is the following thing.
At the center of every one of your tetrahedra, I'm going to place a vertex.
And if two tetrahedra are glued along a face,
I'm going to connect the vertex at this tetrahedra to the vertex at this tetrahedra.
Connect them up by an edge.
So this dual tetrahedralization, excuse me, this dual gluing,
will give me another structure in terms of exactly the first kind of skeletal structure we had.
The first was a collection of vertices and edges.
Now, I have another collection of vertices and edges.
And just looking at thicken the first object, I want to thicken this second object.
And if you thicken both of them, perfectly notice that they will fill up the entire three manifold.
Moreover, both of these handle bodies fit together.
And indeed, it turns out that they both have the same genus.
Thus, we're able to use our tetrahedralization to cut open our three manifold into two handle body pieces.
There's the original skeletal structure we get from the tetrahedralization.
And there's the dual skeletal structure we get in terms of the gluing.
And they both represent the two different genus G surfaces.
It turns out that this Hagar splitting that we just discovered and we just proved
is exactly what we need to prove a surprising result about three manifolds.
Remember how our Euler characteristic computations kept giving us zero as the answer for everything we tried?
Well, it turns out that all three manifolds which we care about, finite, orientable, and no boundary,
all of them have Euler characteristic zero.
Now, we know that every three manifold has a Hagar splitting into two solid genus G handle bodies.
And we know that the handle bodies will glue along the surface.
Thus, we can partition this genus G surface into vertices, edges, and faces any way we want.
And we know that the vertices, edges, and faces of just the surface of the handle bodies
will give us an Euler characteristic of 2 minus 2G.
But to actually get the Poincare generalized Euler characteristic, we need to actually have chambers.
Now, for a genus G surface, we don't have any chambers inside.
The chambers themselves inside is one big chamber which has a genus.
Our chambers are supposed to be homeomorphic to balls.
So what I need to do is I need to slice up the handles of my handle body, cut them open, as you can see here.
And the moment I can cut them open, all of them, then you get an object at the end that's just homeomorphic to a ball.
So what did I do in order to cut them open?
Look what I did.
I needed to add in these extra faces that sliced it up.
And I need to do this for all G parts of my first genus G surface.
And I needed to add all of these for my second one, too.
So what is my Euler characteristic at the end of the day?
Remember, every three-manifold comes from a hay guard splitting.
I use my hay guard splitting to cut it up into two pieces.
Now I'm computing my Euler characteristic for a generic hay guard splitting.
And I see that it's 2 minus 2G is the number of vertices, edges, and faces on the surface.
The two surfaces are identified, so I only need to look at one of those surfaces and get 2 minus 2G.
Plus, I've added in, what have I added in?
G extra faces on one and G extra faces on the other to cut it up.
So I've added in 2G extra faces, that's plus 2G.
And at the end of the day, I get one chamber here and one chamber here.
So that's minus 2.
So 2 minus 2G plus 2G minus 2 equals zero.
In other words, although the Euler characteristic is an invariant,
it is an absolute useless invariant in three dimensions.
No matter what I do, no matter which three-manifold I pick,
it always has a hay guard splitting.
I can use the splitting to show it will always be zero for the kind of manifolds we care about.
Thus far, we have seen two elegant ways of constructing every possible three-manifold.
We can glue faces of polyhedra together,
and we can glue the surface boundaries of handled bodies together to get every possible one.
Now, to close this lecture, we introduce one final way of constructing all three-manifolds.
And this method is called Dane Surgery,
akin to performing actually real surgery operations of cutting and stitching or gluing.
The name Dane honors Max Dane, who solved the three-dimensional problem of scissors congruence
that we talked about in an earlier lecture on polyhedra.
Well, the beauty of Dane Surgery is that it relates three-manifolds to one-dimensional knots and links.
So let's take a look at the Dane Surgery construction.
We start with a three-dimensional sphere, and here's what we do.
We place a knot in it.
That's great.
The reason we consider the three-sphere instead of Euclidean three-dimensional space
is just for our finite volume reasons.
So all our classical knot theory that we've done in three dimensions,
just think of it as taking place inside the three-sphere.
Life doesn't change here at all.
Now, imagine the three-sphere is made up of jello.
What you want to do is, once your knot is placed inside this three-sphere,
we actually want to drill out this knot from the three-sphere.
We want to bore out this knot from this jello.
Now, this looks like a jello structure with this whole leftover.
So we're left with this thing called the knot complement.
It's what's left over when you remove the knot from the three-sphere.
Now, topologically, we have a solid torus missing from the three-sphere.
That knot is really just a circle just put in space in a different way,
and since I bored it out, it's just basically a thickened circle,
which is a solid three-torus.
So in order to get rid of this boundary for my knot complement,
we need to fill it back in again.
We need to fill in a solid torus back into the missing region,
and thus we're performing surgery.
We're cutting something out and we're putting something back in.
But notice, we have a choice of how we can fill in the solid torus again.
We can put any solid torus back in and take a PQ curve on the solid torus
to the meridian curve of the knot complement boundary.
So I don't have to glue it in a simple way.
I can glue it in a far more complicated way.
And this gives us a new manifold as we perform this day in surgery
on the three-dimensional sphere, drilling it out and filling it in.
Notice, we have two choices of control of what's going on.
We have a choice, a lever, of the knot we can cut out.
That's one control on what we can do.
And we have a choice, another lever, of the kind of gluing we can do
once we cut the knot out.
If for any knot complement, we glue the meridian to the meridian.
In other words, if we bore out a knot for any complement you can think of
and glue the solid torus meridian to meridian,
all you're doing is you're putting things back exactly the way you found it.
So you get the original three-sphere again.
You take the three-sphere, you cut it out and you put it back exactly what you did.
There's nothing exciting.
But we can also do the exact same procedure, not just for knots,
but for links where each component of the link has its own surgery performed on it
with each component getting a choice of its own PQ curve gluing.
So if I have a link with seven components,
I can need to bore out each of the seven components
and each one gets its own gluing PQ structure.
In general, we have the following beautiful theorem.
Every three-manifold that you can think of
that we care about that can possibly describe the shape of the universe
comes from Dane surgery on links in the three-sphere.
You take the three-sphere, you perform Dane surgery on links,
and you can get everything.
Thus we see that the understanding of knots and links
gives us an understanding of three-manifolds
and all possible shapes of the universe itself.
Let's pause a little bit and try to understand surgeries a bit more.
A question was posed in 1908 asking
how much information do knot complements really give us about knots themselves?
Imagine we take a three-dimensional sphere made of jello
and we cut out a knot,
and if somebody just handed us the knot complement
where we're allowed to perform rubber sheet geometry
of stretching and pulling on the knot complement,
will we be able to identify the knot this complement came from?
Another way of asking is this,
can there be two different knots in the three-sphere
with the same knot complement?
How good is the knot complement in telling us about the knot itself?
We would hope that the solution was that the knot complement was very good,
but nobody knew how to prove this.
A solution was finally found in 1989 over 80 years after the question was posed,
and it became a truly remarkable theorem by Cameron Gordon and John Lucia
at the University of Texas at Austin.
They proved that two distinct knots cannot have the same complement.
They must have different knot complement.
In other words, a knot is completely determined by its complement.
If you know one, you know the other.
So, what have we looked at today?
We have understood knots in an amazingly new way in terms of their complements,
but moreover, we have studied three different ways
of constructing all possible shapes of the universe,
gluing polyhedra,
gluing handlebodies,
genus G surfaces,
and we perform surgery on the three-sphere using links.
Other than construction, what about classification of three manifolds?
Do we have a classification theorem for three manifolds
as elegant as we do for surfaces?
It turns out that even with three ways of building manifolds,
it is still a huge open problem for classification of three manifolds.
That is, given that three manifolds,
so far there's no means of cataloging them as we did for surfaces.
Thus, the problem turns to studying invariance for manifolds.
We have seen the Euler characteristic to be useless for three manifolds,
and in our next lecture,
we turn to the world of algebraic group structures
to help us with finding an invariant.
Stay tuned.
