Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
So far, we've been studying three manifolds in order to understand possible shapes for
the universe itself.
We have also seen that unlike surfaces, no one, as of yet, knows a complete classification
of three manifolds.
There are no qualities such as genus, orientability, and boundary components that completely describe
three manifolds yet.
Remember, for surfaces, those three are the only things needed, and immediately we can
understand which surface we're on.
Thus, we need some other weapons to tell three manifolds apart, since a classification doesn't
exist, and so we rely on invariants more and more.
Remember the Euler characteristic, although an invariant, fails to distinguish any of
the three manifolds we're interested in.
They all became zero, and thus we created a fundamental group.
This is an algebraic structure introduced to measure shapes.
The elements of these groups are loops under a new concept of the equivalence called homotopy,
and thus we're able to get a group structure as an invariant to shape itself.
But we ask, how powerful is this invariant?
How good is it in telling apart three manifolds?
For instance, given two three manifolds, which are not homeomorphic, which are topologically
different objects, is the fundamental group strong enough to tell them apart.
It turns out that this is asking too much.
In 1919, James Alexander, the same one who gave us the closure of the braids and equivalence
to knots and links, showed that the lens spaces we talked about before, 5, 1, and the lens
space 5, 2, have the same fundamental group, but they are not homeomorphic.
But although the fundamental group is not a complete invariant for three manifolds, it
is a very useful one in several situations.
It's far better than the Euler characteristic, which failed us completely.
Now one way this happens is in the understanding of knots.
But how can we use the fundamental group to study knots?
Let's think about this.
Let's actually compute the fundamental group of a knot.
Imagine you're given a knot in space.
Remember how we compute the fundamental group.
Given an object, we take a base point on the object.
Let me take a point on my knot itself.
Now I draw loops that start and end at the base point.
Now the only way I can go is along the knot itself to come back where I started from.
In fact, the knotted mess doesn't even matter.
If I'm just given a circle, there's only one way I can go, and if I'm given a knot,
there's only one way I can go.
So indeed, the fundamental group is the number of times I loop around in one direction, or
the number of times I'm looping around in the other direction, which is just the integers.
We saw this for the fundamental group of an annulus, a disc with a hole removed.
You can only wrap around, and that's all you're measuring, which is just the integers.
So it's easy to see that the fundamental group of any knot is also the integers.
Now instead of looking at knots, because they don't tell us anything in terms of a fundamental
group perspective, let's look at knot complements.
Remember what these are.
They are knots bored out of the three-dimensional sphere.
If you take a three-sphere and bore out your knot, imagine the three-sphere is made up of
jello, and you bore this out, the remaining structure is called the complement, what's
left over.
Now recall a theorem from Cameron Gordon and John Lukeley we talked about earlier, which
deals with knot complements.
They proved that a knot is completely determined by its complement.
If you know one of them, you know the other.
Indeed, this three-manifold, the knot complement, is a three-dimensional object.
This three-manifold, the knot complement, is a complete invariant of knots.
This is what Gordon and Lukeley say.
Our dreams have come true.
Isn't this what we've been looking at for a long time?
Our desire to find a complete invariant of knots, and now we have one, the complement
of the knot.
This three-manifold is a complete knot invariant.
But how do we measure this three-manifold?
Given a knot complement, how can we tell which one we're talking about?
Well, the fundamental group comes to the rescue.
We use the fundamental group to study knot complements in order to study the knots themselves.
So given a knot, the fundamental group of its knot complement, the fundamental group
of this three-dimensional object is the complement of the knot, is called the knot group.
Thus, to each knot, we associate a group.
This group measures the knot complement of the knot.
We are thus left with two questions.
First one, how can we actually compute this knot group?
Given a knot, we actually need to compute this fundamental group, or else it's useless.
And secondly, how powerful is this knot group in helping tell knots apart?
Now we know that the knot complements are perfect in talking about and distinguishing
knots, but how powerful is this knot group in helping us talk about knots and their
complements?
Well, let's start with our first question.
How can we actually compute this knot group?
If powerful tools are needed to calculate the fundamental group of just surfaces of
higher genus, how are we ever going to calculate it for knot complements, which are complicated
three manifolds?
If we struggle with two-dimensional surfaces, these three manifolds are going to be quite
tricky.
Well, the answer lies in a method developed in 1904 by Wilhelm Wörtinger, an Austrian
mathematician.
Now, Wörtinger was a powerful mathematician who worked with an influenced Felix Klein
bottle that we heard of, and David Hilbert, who posed the famous 23 problems of mathematics
of the 20th century.
Now, Wörtinger's PhD students included Erwin Schrodinger, who gives us the foundational
Schrodinger equation in quantum mechanics, and Kurt Gerda, who revolutionized logic
in mathematical and philosophical thinking with his incompleteness theorems.
Wörtinger was well-connected and was powerfully influencing many people.
Here's what Wörtinger does.
Given a knot, Wörtinger provided an elegant method to compute the knot group based on
its projection alone.
In other words, just looking at the knot projection, you can just suck the knot group from it.
The information is there.
This is amazing.
Now, before we introduce this algorithm, this method of constructing the knot group from
the projection, remember a way we can express a group.
A group is a collection of letters called generators from which we can create the elements
of the group, which are the words.
Remember we can create all possible words from these generators of the group.
For the braid group, the sigma 1, sigma 2, and sigma 3 moves where the generators of
the braid group.
Not only do we need these letters that form the generators of the group, we also have
a collection of rules explaining which words are equivalent to each other ones.
These are called the relations.
For example, for the braid group, we had the sigma i, sigma i plus 1, sigma i equals sigma
i plus 1, sigma i, sigma i plus 1, the type 3 braid move that showed a relation between
these words.
A set of generators and relations for a group is called a presentation of a group.
You're presenting the group in this particular way.
This is exactly how the braid group was defined.
Now, given a knot projection of a knot, we now describe how to find the Wordinger presentation
of the knot group.
Wordinger provides us with a way of talking about generators and relations, just looking
at the projection of the knot.
So here's what we do.
First, we orient the projection of the knot.
We've done this all through our lives in terms of the study of knot theory.
Second, each strand of the knot projection gets a generator.
And third, each crossing gives us a relation.
Let's take a look.
Each crossing, if you have an over-crossing like this with S1 as one of your strands and
an under-crossing broken up by two strands, S2 and S3, you have a relation S1, S2 equals
S3, S1.
If you have an over-crossing going in the negative slope like this with two under-crossings broken
up with these two strands, S2 and S3, we have another relation, S2, S1 equals S1, S3.
So given each strand as a generator and each crossing giving us a relation, we get the
presentation.
Now, instead of talking about it in an abstract setting, let's look at a particular example.
Let's look at the figure eight knot a knot we're very comfortable with and try to calculate
its Wörtinger presentation of the knot group.
So here's my figure eight knot and notice it has four strands.
It has strands A, B, C and D. And there are four crossings, one, two, three and four.
Thus, my group, my Wörtinger presentation of this group is generated by, it's an alphabet
created by four letters, A, B, C and D. And since there are four crossings, each of these
crossings gives us a rule.
So let's take a look at this crossing first.
This crossing, if you turn your head and point the orientation the right way, you have a
negative slope for the over-crossing and we get, since this is A and this is C and this
is D as your three different strands, we get the relation DA equals AC.
This other crossing down here, we have a different set of collections of generators.
Notice that B is the over-crossing here, the positive slope and you have A and D underneath
it.
So here we have the relation BA equals DB.
And we can look at the other two crossings and we can get relations such as BC equals
CA and over here we can look at this and get DC equals BD.
Indeed we can summarize the knot group as follows.
It's made up of four letters that are all the generators.
Every possible word you can make up with A, B, C, D, A, B, B, C, D, B, B, A.
That's one of the elements you can get generated by A, B, C and D. As long as you have these
four relations, anytime you see a DA you can switch it to an AC and vice versa and you
get BA equals DB, BC equals CA and DC equals BD.
That is my knot group for the figure eight knot, beautiful.
This procedure works for any knot.
Given a knot, we take a projection of the knot, we compute the knot group and this is
the fundamental group of the complement of the knot.
What we have just done is giving us the fundamental group of the three-dimensional knot complement.
Wow.
Well, what happens when we get a different projection of the same knot?
What if I take the figure eight knot and look at it in a different way, a different projection?
Well, Wordinger proved that different projections of the same knot will give us the same group.
Thus, this is a knot invariant, not dependent on projections, but the knot itself.
So how did Wordinger create this amazing algorithm?
Let's take a look.
This is the way we should think of our knot.
It's actually sitting in three dimensions and remember we're looking at the knot complement.
We're boring this knot out of the three-dimensional sphere.
Now choose a base point in the three-dimensional sphere outside of the drilled-out knot.
So let's just choose this base point P. Now notice that each strand of the knot, which
we've actually drilled out, is not really generating this knot group, but it is a loop
that starts at P and wraps around this drilled-out strand that really generates it.
This is what's going on.
Each strand gets its own generator or loop since the strand, by definition, goes over
all of the crossing.
So notice this particular strand, I can create a generator called A, which starts at P, goes
all the way around loops around it and comes back.
Or I can wrap twice around this strand, that's A squared.
This is why each of those strands gets its own generators.
Now look at this strand down here.
We get another generator called B. It's a different strand than this A, so it gets its
own generator.
Now when each of these generating loops meet at a crossing of the knot, we get Wordinger's
crossing relations.
Now why did Wordinger come up with this particular relations?
Notice here I have the relation S1, S2 equals S3, S1.
What that means is if I take a loop around S1 and then around S2 as I see here, I can
actually pull it down because of homotopy equivalence by these crossings and stretchings
and then stretch it all the way out.
I'm just doing simple deformation and homotopy.
I'm pulling it under using a right of my sort of three looking kind of move, and then
I'm pulling it under the other way, doing another right of my sort of three kind of
move, and then I push it up, cross it over, and I pull it back up to that strand.
And notice I've done nothing different, S1, S2, the loop you see here is exactly by just
homotopy equivalence, the loop structure you see here, which turns out to be S3, S1.
Now what Wordinger proved was that these generators and relations are the only things needed to
completely describe the knot group.
There were no other hidden generators, nor there are any relations.
That was remarkable.
Well, now that we've computed the knot group for a knot, we now turn to the second question.
How powerful is the knot group in telling knots apart?
Well, we have a beautiful theorem.
It says if knot one and knot two are prime knots, and if their knot groups are the same,
the knots must be the same.
This is remarkable.
This is exactly what we wanted.
If the knot groups are the same, the knots are the same.
If the knot groups are different, the knots are different, a complete invariant for all
prime knots.
Now even though the knot group is not enough to tell apart composite knots, remember the
knots you put together when you sum them, this is still a huge result nonetheless.
We've never seen anything like this before in any of our works, polynomials, colorings,
crossing numbers, nothing compared to this powerful result.
Now before we get too excited, I want us to look back at something we glanced over briefly.
What happens when we calculate the knot group for different projections of the same knot?
Now we know by Wörtinger that the knot group is an invariant.
No matter which projection of the knot we look at, we will always get the same group.
However, although the groups will be the same, their presentations might look different.
And in order to explain what this means, let's look at a concrete example.
Let's look at these two presentations.
Consider these two presentations and the question I'm asking you is, are they the same group?
Look at the first one.
The first one is a simple one.
It's generated by one letter, B, and it has one relation.
If you multiply B by itself, you get back to the identity.
Now notice that this group only has two elements.
It has the identity in the group, every group has to have the identity in it, and it has
the element B.
But if I try to make B squared, you get back to the identity again.
So you see that there are only two elements, one and B.
Any combination of those two elements will either give us back one or give us back B.
So that's it.
This is a group with two elements.
Well, what about this other group we talked about?
A, B, such that it has three relations.
A to the fifth equals one, B squared equals one, and B, A equals A squared B.
Well, let's take a closer look at the second presentation.
Notice these presentations are of two possibly different groups, and I want to know, are
they the same, are they different, how can we tell?
Look at the second presentation a bit more.
Well let's just look at the element A.
A equals one times A, obvious, which equals B squared times A, because if you look back,
you notice that one of the relations was B squared equals one for the second presentation.
So B squared times A, which equals B times B times A, which equals B times one times
B times A, obviously, just an identity element, which equals B times A to the fifth times
B times A, because one and A to the fifth are the same.
That's one of the relations for my second presentation, again, which equals B, A cubed
times A squared times B times A, just split up A to the fifth.
Now notice, here I have a B times A next to each other, and when I do that, I can actually
combine this thing, because A squared times B equals B times A, and by doing this, I can
look at this B times A you see in the front, replace it this way, you perform a few more
exactly similar operations, from here to here to here to here to here, and eventually
you get A to the fifth.
Now what is A to the fifth?
Well, that's just identity, that's another relation.
Using my relations over and over again, I have shown that the element A is really the
identity element.
Thus, these two presentations, well, what are they?
Are they the same group?
Are they different groups?
If A is the identity element, I can rewrite my second presentation as A, B, with the relations
A to the fifth equals one, B squared equals one, and B, A equals A squared B, as, well,
now every time I see an A, I can plug in a one, which means I only have one letter to
work with, just B, and every time I see A to the fifth equals one, that becomes one
equals one, that's nothing amazing as a relation, B squared equals one stays the same, and B,
A equals A squared B, becomes B equals B, that's not an amazing relation.
So I end up with B as the element that generates the group, such that B squared equals one.
But this is the second presentation, but I'm getting the first group, which means these
two presentations, which looked very different, become the same group.
Now in this manner, for different projections of the same knot, we will get knot group presentations,
which might look different, but are indeed describing the same group.
Now in 1910, Max Dain asked the following question, called the group isomorphism problem.
Given two presentations of two groups, is there a nice way to check whether both of
them are describing the same group?
You see, if we understand group presentations, then we can truly get our hands around the
underlying groups they're describing.
Well, based on results by Piotr Novikov in 1955, we find out that this is not hard to
do, it's impossible to do.
It has been proven that the knot group isomorphism problem is unsolvable.
In other words, given two presentations, there will never be a nice way to check whether
they're describing the same group.
We have to do it by brute force like we did and try to get lucky.
There's no beautiful method.
So what does this mean for us as we worry about knot groups?
Well, although the knot group is a complete invariant for prime knots, it becomes practically
useless.
Given two knots, we can find their knot group presentations, which are complete invariants,
but we have no way of checking whether these presentations are the same.
Given two knots, you're trying to find out whether they're the same or different.
You compute each of their knot group.
You have it in your hands.
It's easy to do, because Wordinger tells you how to do it fast, but we don't know how
to compare them.
We have no way.
We finally are able to solve a problem that has plagued us since our earliest lectures
to get a complete knot invariant, all for the sake of converting it to another problem
comparing knot presentations, these group presentations, which happens to be unsolvable.
Well, consider what we have done, taking a problem about one-dimensional knots, converting
into three-dimensional knot complements, which turn out to be complete descriptions of the
knot itself, then introducing a radical new idea called the fundamental group to quantify
this complement and now being stuck since the way to actually describe this invariant
trips us up at the end.
This is frustrating.
Well, we have been focused on using the fundamental group to understand knot complements.
Let's now pull back a bit to see how this group can be used to understand three-manifolds
in general.
See, computing fundamental groups is not an easy task.
Wordinger provided us a beautiful way of looking at knot complements, but things became far
more difficult for three-manifolds in general.
So instead of understanding all three-manifolds, let's just take a step back and look at the
simplest one, the three-dimensional sphere.
Let's calculate the fundamental group of the three-dimensional sphere.
Now remember how we built the three-dimensional sphere by gluing two solid balls together?
Well, let's try to compute the fundamental group.
You take a fixed point in there, you throw your loop out, and notice if I start pulling
in the strand, if I glue one side of the ball to the other side of the ball, there's this
perfect gluing that comes from the way this three-dimensional sphere is built, and there's
no obstacle stopping me from pulling the loop all the way back in.
There's no self-intersection, that's nothing to worry about, there's no hole in the middle
to stop me, I pull it all the way in, I'm done.
Thus the group, the fundamental group of the three-dimensional sphere is the trivial group.
Just has the identity element in it, nothing else, just like the two-dimensional sphere.
Now understanding the three-sphere might seem truly easy, but it has launched the greatest
problem in topology in over a hundred years called the Poincare conjecture.
We ask the following question.
Are there other three manifolds, which are orientable, don't have boundary and finite
volume just like the way we've been talking about before, which have a trivial fundamental
group?
We know that three-dimensional sphere does, but are there other three-dimensional manifolds?
Henri Poincare conjecture that the three-sphere is the only three manifold with such a property,
and this became known as the Poincare conjecture.
Now if Euler was the father of classical topology, Poincare is the father of modern topology,
born in 1854 in France.
He was not only the strongest mathematician of his era, writing about 500 articles on
nearly all of mathematics, sort of like a gouse of his era, but he was able to make them
extremely accessible to non-specialists.
He was a gifted exposer.
Now as we saw earlier, Alexander showed that the lens spaces 5.1 and 5.2 have the same
fundamental group, but they're not homeomorphic.
Thus the fundamental group is not strong enough to tell manifolds apart.
However, Poincare doesn't ask such a difficult question.
He asks whether it's strong enough just to tell the three-sphere apart from other manifolds.
This is very similar to the Jones polynomial.
Remember what the Jones polynomial does?
So far, the Jones polynomial cannot tell knots from each other.
It's not that good, but it's able to tell the knots away from the unknot.
The only Jones polynomial value you get, which is the trivial polynomial, just 1, is
only for the unknot so far.
So Jones somehow is able to tell every knot apart from the unknot, and Poincare asks the
same question.
This is the fundamental group able to tell every manifold away from the three-dimensional
sphere.
Now this seemingly simple conjecture becomes extremely famous at one time, and nearly drove
all of topology research itself.
Now over the past century, there have been dozens of famous mathematicians who have offered
proofs of this conjecture only to have flaws found in their work.
The errors in the false proofs turn out to be extremely subtle and very difficult to
detect.
Indeed, the Poincare conjecture goes to the heart of understanding what three manifolds
are truly about.
Now the story of what has happened in the 21st century in her own time with the Poincare
conjecture is one of the most beautiful mathematical adventures ever known.
The Poincare conjecture states that the only three manifold with trivial fundamental group
is the three-dimensional sphere.
All of the three manifolds have something more complicated.
Now since this question became quite difficult to solve, mathematicians started looking at
the Poincare conjecture from different dimensions.
The general Poincare conjecture states that the only n-dimensional manifold with trivial
fundamental group is the n-sphere.
Let's take a closer look at this general conjecture.
For the two-dimensional case, we know that the two-sphere has a trivial fundamental group.
It's not hard to show that this is the only two-dimensional surface with trivial fundamental
group.
Now for higher dimensional cases, Stephen Smale in the 1960s proved that the Poincare
conjecture for all dimensions greater than four is true.
He created new tools to show this problem and was awarded the Fields Medal for his beautiful
work.
Now for the four-dimensional case, for the four-dimensional sphere, it was not until
1981 when Michael Friedman proved the Poincare conjecture for this case.
Again new tools were created and needed and again, Friedman was now awarded the Fields
Medal.
It's a revolutionary work that's giving a lot of Fields Medals for people who are working
on this problem.
It's the greatest medals, the greatest honored mathematics.
Well, what about the three-dimensional case, Poincare's original question.
We have the two-dimensional case done.
We have anything higher than four taken care of by Smale.
We have four taken care of by Friedman.
Now we just want to understand three-dimensional manifolds and three-dimensional spheres.
The problem has been open for over a century and it became one of the millennium problems.
In order to celebrate mathematics in the new millennium, the Clay Mathematics Institute
named seven prize problems focusing on important mathematical questions that have resisted
solutions over the years.
The prize is a million dollars to each solution.
The value of a solution for our world with the new tools and new ideas and math that's
created is worth far more than a million dollars.
However, it was a wonderful PR method to get the world excited about mathematical challenges.
It can be thought of, these millennium problems is sort of the 21st century equivalent of
Hilbert's 23 great problems that he posed in 1900.
So what has been happening in the 3D Poincare conjecture case so far?
In the 1980s, Richard Hamilton, a professor at Columbia, believed in a way to control
how three manifolds behave by considering curvature.
He then made a special flow.
Remember how we studied wind flows?
Well, Hamilton made a special flow on these manifolds called the Ricci flow based on curvature.
Now as heat in a hot plate would flow or diffuse through the cooler parts of a plate, as heat
in a hot room would diffuse through the cooler parts of the room, Hamilton designed a way
to make the flow of a manifold move based on curvature.
Now informally, Ricci flow tends to expand negatively curved regions of the manifold
and contract positively curved regions.
This flow worked in many places but ran into problems forming singularities, sort of the
fixed points of the flow.
Hamilton wanted to cut the manifold at certain singularities, perform surgery and then run
the flow again.
But he couldn't understand how the singularities really worked.
In November 2002, Gregory Perlman posted the first of a series of papers on the math archive
server.
Now this math archive server is vital to my own research.
After writing a mathematics paper, it usually takes about six months to several years for
it to actually appear in a journal.
This is due to referees reports that have to read your paper and make sure it's valid
and the journal's backlogs of publication.
So this server is a place where one posts articles to let the mathematical community
know what's going on in an informed setting.
Well back to Perlman, his 2002 paper in the archive showed how he was able to understand
Hamilton's problems with singularity.
Also showed amazing and revolutionary insights into the analytic and geometric structure
of the Ricci flow.
After creating a frenzy in the math community when the dust was settled, it was shown that
Perlman's work based on Hamilton's idea was enough to solve the Poincare conjecture.
In 2006, Perlman was awarded the Fields Medal.
The third Fields Medal based on the Poincare conjecture from dimensions five and up for
dimensions four and now for dimension three, and Perlman declined it.
He stated, to the amazement of the mathematics community, he stated, quote, everybody understood
that if the proof is correct, then no other recognition is needed.
Currently mathematicians are still working on the Poincare conjecture.
Why?
Not because we don't have an answer, but we want to find a simpler answer.
And remember how we used curvature of geometry to solve a topological problem?
What we want to know is there a pure topological solution to it?
Well, we have covered some amazing ideas in this lecture.
Using the power of the fundamental group, we were able to find not groups, a complete
invariant for prime nots.
And unfortunately, these turned out to be quite impractical since we could not tell
apart the presentations of these groups.
And extending the fundamental group to three dimensions brought us to the Poincare conjecture,
a simple problem that was solved by the most powerful methods to date.
And we have seen how understanding the topology of the universe is quite challenging.
In the next lecture, we look at the geometry of the universe.
Stay tuned.
