Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
We have thus far been thinking about objects in dimensions that we can understand.
We started out in the land of one dimension with knots and links, and then we moved on
to the world of two dimensional surfaces.
Well we then considered the topology and the geometry of our three dimensional universe,
bringing in the ideas of Gauss and Riemann and Thurston and Perlman.
Well with the entrance of Einstein, we saw that our three dimensional world cannot be
separated from time, giving us a four dimensional world of spacetime.
Well in this lecture, we push the frontiers once again and enter the world of higher dimensions.
Now this lecture will serve as a foundation for how to understand and wrap our minds around
dimensions higher than three.
We will also rethink the ideas we have encountered so far, such as knots and polyhedra, from
a higher dimensional perspective.
And we also show how such ideas are not just mathematical constructs, but are crucial to
understanding the nature around us from a greater perspective, such as subatomic particle
motions, particle collisions, and the world of phylogenetic evolutionary structures.
All of these can be captured with the idea of higher dimensions.
Well finally, we learn to attack the understanding of higher dimensions, not just mathematically
in a theoretical way, but also visually, something we can understand, we can hold, we can draw.
Well let's begin, let's jump in.
In our last lecture, we discussed our four dimensional world of spacetime, the spacetime
world that was brought together where time and space cannot be separated.
In this world, we were left with a dilemma.
How can the micro world and the macro world be explained when brought together?
How can something small, extremely small in quantum mechanics structure, be explained
at the same time where you're dealing with the structures of a huge object in the macro
world, like the gravitational pull of a sun?
And these are combined in a structure such as the black hole.
Now this was one of Einstein's dreams to provide a grand, unified theory which brought
together both of these extremes in nature.
Well today, there is one stunning theory which offers a possible solution to this dilemma,
string theory.
Now we've mentioned string theory before, but let's actually take a look at what it's
about.
Massive world to cover, but we're just going to peek under the hood to see what it's about.
Now as we progress through the history of science, we see that the smallest objects
studied were once molecules, that's what people thought were the smallest structures.
But then we were able to delve in and see atoms, and then underneath and inside atoms
we saw electrons, and then quarks, so when will it all end?
Well string theory makes a simple and bold assumption.
It states that there is actually a lower limit to the size of particles, no matter how deep
you go, you will hit bottom.
There's something called a lower limit, and these are called strings.
Now the length of these strings, the loops of these strings are about 10 to the negative
33 centimeters, mind blowing small.
And moreover, different resonating patterns of these extremely small strings correspond
to different elementary particles.
The way these strings vibrate and resonate give rise to objects such as the carbon atoms
and oxygen atoms.
And what is most amazing, however, is that string theory theoretically makes gravity
and quantum mechanics work together.
This lower limit on strings, on how small they can be, somehow controls the interactions
of the micro world and the macro world perfectly.
Now there is a remarkable consequence to string theory.
The universe is not a four dimensional one made up of three dimensions of space and one
dimension of time.
If you allow us to believe in string theory, then what the condition that's forced on
us is that the universe has to be a ten dimensional one, nine dimensions of space and one dimension
of time.
Moreover, out of the nine dimensions of space, we have three dimensions of the world that
we can see right here.
But six of the other dimensions, six of the nine, are super small worlds wrapped up.
Remember how we thought about a circle times a sphere?
We took a sphere and every point on the sphere, we placed a circle of possibilities like this.
Here we had a two dimensional sphere with this one dimensional circle giving us a three
dimensional world.
Well instead of it this way, think of our world as three dimensions of the x, y, z coordinates
where I'm standing that has three dimensions, but at each point instead of giving it a circle
of possibilities, I'm giving it an entire six dimensional world of possibilities at
each point.
It's amazing.
These six dimensions are so small we cannot see them, but we inhabit them.
Indeed string theory says that we are nine dimensional creatures.
We're walking in a nine dimensional world, but as my hand moves through the three dimensions
of the x, y, z coordinates, it's actually moving also through the other six hidden dimensions.
Now these six dimensions are very special and they're called Kalabiao manifolds.
Out of the all possible six manifolds we can imagine, thousands and thousands and millions
and infinitely millions of them, Kalabiao manifolds are restricted to about only 100,000 possibilities.
This is remarkable.
The possible cases of what according to string theory are wrapped up inside and locked into
our three dimensional world.
Now here's a model of a Kalabiao manifold.
This is not a six dimensional model.
It's only a slice of it where we can see the intricate structures of what it could possibly
be.
This model was created by Betshiba Grossman.
She is an artist who specializes in struggling with and creating and representing three dimensional
and higher dimensional structures.
She's one of my favorite artists.
It's a beautiful structure.
We can actually hold it physically.
And to me, it gives me an excitement to see that you can actually have something tangible
expressing so much power in higher dimensions.
Now already we see that power of higher dimensions playing a role in nature.
But before going further, let's pull back a bit and review our understanding of dimension.
Remember that the dimension of a shape is just the number of pieces of information needed
to pinpoint a location on that shape.
So we start with a simple question.
How many dimensions does it take to describe the world around you?
Now a natural answer is three.
Since we have three degrees of movement, we can move in the x, y, z directions.
But those are simply the spatial dimensions.
To describe the world around you needs far more than three dimensions.
For example, you need to know not only where you are in the x, y, z three dimensional space,
right now is time also.
It describes my position in time.
So I already need four dimensions.
But the room I'm standing in has a certain temperature to it.
Well, the temperature right now to describe where I am right now, that's another variable.
It's a fifth dimension.
And the barometric pressure in this room, six dimensions.
The light that's hitting my face, seven dimensions, the intensity of the light, the wavelengths
of light that I cannot see.
What about the color?
The color of the jacket I'm wearing.
I could be saying in the same place, in the same time, with the same light, with the same
barometric pressure, but I could be wearing a different color jacket that would be different
in terms of describing where I am in this world.
And the texture of the jacket I'm wearing.
All of these are different concepts of dimension that are needed to describe where I am, each
one keeping track of a different variable.
Now, the concept of dimension is fundamental to understand something like the stock market.
See, each variable, which can possibly affect profit for a company, is a dimension of freedom
that the analysts care about.
The inflation, that's a dimension, that's a variable.
The housing market, the Dow Jones closing number for yesterday, the unemployment index.
All of these different pieces of the puzzle, these variables, are different dimensions
of data.
Now, things get further complicated since these different dimensional pieces of data
become dependent on one another.
The market is not like space and time being independent, but it's somehow like the world
of space time where all these dimensions are blended together and are dependent on one
another.
Well, we have been talking about dimensions in a theoretical setting, but what does it
mean to visualize these dimensions, to actually see them?
I mean, we have a glimpse of it with this model here, but again, that's a snapshot of
a higher dimensional world.
Is there somehow that we can actually see six dimensions in a more tangible way?
Well, let us try to do this for an idea far from mathematics to show how powerful it is
to understand dimension in a different setting.
How about a history lesson, a history lesson of the Russian invasion by Napoleon Bonaparte?
Now, Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Corsica in 1769.
In 1804, he crowned himself as the French Emperor.
In less than a decade, he turned the French army against practically every major European
power there was, and dominated Europe through his beautiful military victories.
Now, his invasion of Russia in 1812 marked a turning point.
See what happens after this?
See, his great army was almost crushed, and since then never fully recovered.
He didn't have the power to have these great military victories in Europe.
In 1813, just a year afterwards, he was defeated at Lipsig and exiled to the island of Elba
in 1814.
He then escaped and returned to power quickly.
But in 1815, in the Battle of Waterloo, he was ultimately defeated.
Indeed, Napoleon spent the last six years of his life under British supervision on the
island of Saint Helena.
Now, given the story of Napoleon, the job that's assigned to us is to visually display
the crucial stage in Napoleon's story, the Russian campaign of 1812.
That's our assignment given to us.
Remember, Napoleon started his Russian campaign in 1812, but he had 422,000 men with him.
But he returned from Moscow, from Russia, with only 10,000 men.
Can we see what happened visually?
What we see here is the work of Charles Menard, and it's titled Napoleon's March to Moscow,
The War of 1812.
It was drawn in 1861, and it is a masterpiece.
Let's look at this beautiful description and illustration in a bit more detail.
We see numbers here depicting the troop strength.
As from the left to the right, Napoleon marches his troops to Moscow.
Notice also this is depicted with the thickness of the line.
You see this enormous brown box of his troop movement starting, but by the time it comes
to Moscow, it's a really small amount.
Many troops have died just getting there on the journey due to the intense cold.
On the way back from Moscow, look at this.
He colors it black to show the troops' return trip, and on the way back, notice how significant
and significantly smaller they become as they return back home.
Indeed, as you can see in this particular crossing, there's an intense troop loss as
they go from one river crossing.
Many died because of the frigid cold.
Moreover at the bottom, you see the temperature marked out on the return journey home.
You see the temperature as this graph that drops down as Napoleon's troops are coming
home.
So we see a geographic setting.
You see this geographical plane.
This is not just a sketch, but it's actually taking place on top of a map.
So what have we seen?
Here we see six dimensions actually visualized here.
The size of the army, that's actually depicted visually, that's one dimension.
The size is a number, that's one dimension.
The location on the map, well, that's two dimensions because you need these two dimensions
of freedom to see how they actually moved.
The direction of the movement, that's another two dimension, because any time you're at
a location, you can travel an entire two dimensions of freedom.
You can go this way, or this way, or this way.
And temperature itself is depicted.
So we see one dimension for size, two for location, two more for movement, and that
last one for temperature, six dimensions.
Edward Tufti, a professor emeritus at Yale, who the New York Times calls the Da Vinci
of data, describes Menard's work by saying, quote, it may well be the best statistical
graphic ever drawn.
Now I want to encourage you to see dimensions in a new way, explore the world around you
and the graphics you see in newspapers and articles to see how dimension is depicted.
Now Charles Menard's work provided us one perspective of how to visualize in higher dimensions.
We're able to see from an extrinsic setting what higher dimensions means.
We can look out and see Napoleon's march in front of us.
But what about intrinsically, what if you're in the world, what does it feel like to talk
about dimension then?
What does it feel like to live in a higher dimensional world?
What does it feel like to live in the Calabi-Aus six dimensional manifold?
How different is it from our world?
In order to do this, we use an old familiar tool of ours to gain an intrinsic experience
and intrinsic experience to be in the world, color.
Now there's one thing to note from Menard's picture and it's his use of color.
Note here that the color served to him as simply an on-off switch.
He had one shade of color towards Moscow saying it's an on and then another shade which
was black away from Moscow saying it was off.
We just use these two colors and that's it.
All his six dimensions were captured in other ways.
But for us, let's be more creative with color as an entire variable of freedom, not just
an on-off switch, but an entire dimension of freedom used to keep track of it.
Well we start by asking some simple questions.
What does it feel like to be a four dimensional being?
I don't want to talk about six dimensions and eleven dimensions, let's just talk about
four.
If we can get this, that's fantastic.
How does this extra dimension, we know we have three dimensions of freedom.
How does this extra fourth dimension give us new freedoms, new abilities?
What can we do as four dimensions that we cannot do as three dimensional beings?
Well instead of trying to describe four dimensional powers to three dimensional beings like us,
it's very hard to understand.
Let's actually practice on demonstrating three dimensional powers, something we fully understand
to two dimensional beings.
If we can explain to two dimensional beings what our powers are like, maybe we'll get
an insight as to how to explain four dimensional powers to somebody like us.
For our three dimensional world, I want us to consider two of the dimensions as a plane.
So remember what I can do, I can do the x, y, z movement, I can move in three dimensions.
But let's just consider two of the dimensions as a plane of possibilities.
But instead of the third dimension as height is going up and down, I want to visualize
this as color.
So in other words, instead of this being height 0 and height 1 and height 2 and height 3,
I'm going to call this, instead of a number, I want to think of it as color.
So this is going to be black, and it's going to get lighter and lighter shade, eventually
until it gets to be white.
So I have my two dimensions of freedom, and I have the spectrum of color.
So this point could be x dimension is 4, y dimension is 2, and height is light gray.
And this point is x dimension is 2, y is 1.
And the height, since it's closer down here, is a little darker gray.
So instead of describing with the third height point as a number, I'm going to describe it
as a color.
Now imagine we are a two dimensional creature with three dimensional powers.
Let's see what would happen.
Now due to a tragic accident over ice cream, we have been taken prisoner by other two dimensional
beings, being locked in a two dimensional prison.
So here's the question.
Can we get out?
Let's take a look.
So here we are in our prison.
This is a two dimensional world.
We're stuck on the two dimensional world.
On the other hand, we have three dimensions of power.
So notice to a two dimensional being, this prison, this box completely holds us in.
If we are this two dimensional being, we cannot leave this box because the rope is bounding
it.
It's completely surrounding everything around us.
So how can I, if I'm a two dimensional being, actually leave this box?
Well since I have three dimensional powers, you can simply say, well just go like this,
and you can leave this prison.
But that's thinking in a three dimensional way.
Let's just tone it down and think of it in another way.
If I am a person who has three dimensional powers, here's what I would do.
The first thing I would do is, once I realize I can't get out my normal way, I actually,
since this is the black colored world, remember this level is one color, and as I go up my
color level changes, this is the black colored world.
I'm first of all going to change my color.
Remember, I have a three dimensional power, so I'm going to change my color until I get
lighter and lighter and lighter.
And now look, in this slice of my three dimensional world, since I've changed colors, this rope
two dimensional wall is no longer there.
Thus I can simply move over, move in my xy plane direction that I normally do, the wall
is no longer there, and now I can change color back from white all the way to black again.
Now this is the power of a three dimensional being in two dimensions, and they can escape
this box.
Now having understood our three dimensional powers in a new light, how does this help
us with four dimensional beings?
Well consider a four dimensional prisoner who we have trapped in a lock tight prison.
So if you have a four dimensional prisoner trapped in our three dimensional box, here's
how they would do it.
Their fourth dimensional power can be again visualized as color.
Here's what they would do.
If I'm the four dimensional creature locked in this box, I see that I have all three dimensions
cut off from me, but I would change my color from black, remember this is the black slice
of my four dimensional world, it has x, y, z and a color.
I would change my color itself from black to a lighter color white, and when I do that
I'm not physically lifting up, that's the z axis, I have this fourth dimension, this
color dimension, and once I'm a different color, this wall which was in the black world
is no longer visible to me, I can't see it, just like the person lifting up.
So thus I can just literally walk through the wall, because there is no wall there.
And once I've walked through, I can bring my color level back down to black.
And it's as if I have immediately disappeared from this world, and just reappeared again
over this world.
Remember what happens when my person walks in the two dimensional setting.
The moment he lifts up into the higher color dimension, he cannot be seen in the two dimensional
world, it's like he's just disappeared.
Now what other powers does this person have?
Well consider what a two dimensional person looks like.
Now many of us will draw a two dimensional person like this.
We usually draw a person like this with the eyes in the inside of the body, but a two
dimensional person needs to have their eyes on the outside of the body like this.
Indeed, the heart is going to be in there somewhere with some bone structure in a two
dimensional setting, and what are the two dimensional clothes going to be?
They're going to be just one dimensional lines, just one dimensional curves.
Just like us being three dimensions or clothed with two dimensional shells of surfaces, a
two dimensional person is going to be clothed by one dimension.
Look what I can do if I, the three dimensional person, can look at this two dimensional person.
Since I have this extra vantage point, I can look and see their heart.
I can see their clothes, I can see their skeleton, I can see their brain, I can see their eyes
in one snapshot.
In the same way, a four dimensional person, a three dimensional person with the fourth
dimensional power, when they look at me, they can see inside of me, they can see my heart,
my brain, my eyes, they can see inside my clothes, under my clothes, everything.
And notice that the four dimensional powers are not an X-ray vision where we look layer
by layer, but a far more powerful one, seeing all the layers at once.
For me looking at this two dimensional person, how I can see everything at once is how they
can see me.
Amazing.
Now I hope this visualization exercise has given us a better glimpse of what it means
to have a fourth dimensional power, to be in a four dimensional world.
Now in future lectures, we will look at much higher dimensions than this.
Well, let us now try to use our understanding of four dimensional powers with an old friend
of ours, knots.
Now knots have been described as taking one dimensional circles, throwing them in three
dimensional space.
Now the different ways they are placed or embedded in three dimensional space yield
different knots.
But what if I placed my circle into four dimensions?
Instead of taking my circle and throwing it into three dimensions, what if I placed it
in four dimensions?
What wonderful world of knot theory would this create?
Well let's use the powers of four dimensions we just considered and apply it to these knots.
Now place a knot in four dimensions.
It's the same one dimensional knot that we always dealt with, but now it has four different
ways of moving.
Now we know that every knot can be made into the unknot if we can switch some of the crossings.
Indeed the unknotting number is the least number of crossings needed to make a knot into
the unknot.
But here's what we do.
I can take my knot which is in four dimensions.
I can look at these two strands.
Now if I color one of my strands, remember the knot is in a particular slice in this
four dimensional world.
I can take one of the strands and change its color just a bit.
Now if I change the color just a bit, the strand no longer sees this other one.
And thus I can take the other strand, the top strand and push it right under it because
it doesn't even see it.
It's not there to its eyes because the color has changed.
And now I can recolor it back again using the fourth dimensional power.
What does this mean?
It means I can change crossings any way I want.
Thus all knots can be made into the unknot in four dimensions without cutting or changing
just by isotope.
What does this mean?
This means there's no knot theory in four dimensions.
Well let's take a step back.
If we throw a circle, embed a circle in two dimensions, there's only one way to do this.
Let's take a look.
If I take my circle and put it on the plane without crossing, remember I want to embed
it.
This is the only way I can do this.
I get the unknot.
So if I take my circle and put it in two dimensions, I get the unknot.
If I take my circle and put it in four dimensions, I get the unknot.
Thus the power of knot theory is that the circles can be thrown into three dimensions
to get the structure.
It is the difference of the two dimensions that gives us this beautiful theory.
Somehow nature captures this jump of two dimensions to give us amazing things like not a DNA,
or entanglement, quantum cryptography, and string theory.
It's a two-dimensional jump that's important.
So from a mathematical perspective, we wish to push this frontier further.
If the key is two-dimensional jump, then what does it take to study knots in four dimensions?
Well that means we need a two-dimensional jump.
So I can't throw a circle in there, I must throw a surface in there.
If I take a two-dimensional surface and throw it into four dimensions, I can talk about knots.
Now let's take a minute to imagine what this would look like for a sphere in four dimensions.
Just like a knot never had self-intersections in 3D, neither can a sphere have self-intersections
when I throw it in four dimensions.
So what can it look like?
It is a world far from intuitive.
Here are two images of spheres thrown into four dimensions embedded.
They have no self-intersections.
It looks like there are self-intersections in some of these places, but remember the fourth-dimensional power.
They're colored differently right there so the intersections don't see each other.
Indeed, the top one is knotted and the bottom one is an unknotted sphere.
Now for four-dimensional beings, they can look at these two images and say,
that's true, I do see the knottedness in the top and not the one in the bottom, but for us, it's completely confusing.
Thus the entire theory of knots can be recast into four dimensions.
This is the world of two knots.
The two leaders in this field are Scott Carter and Masahiko Saito who provided us with these diagrams.
Now looking back to our work in one-dimensional knots,
the foundational idea needed to work with them were their projections.
The rightomeister moves became indispensable for us to convert knot pictures into mathematical proofs.
So here's my question.
Are there equivalent versions of rightomeister moves for two knots, for spheres thrown in there?
And it turns out there are.
And these are called Rosemann moves and there are seven of them.
Let's take a look.
These seven Rosemann moves show how to go from one projection of a two-dimensional object in four dimensions into another one.
Just like we had rightomeister moves, we have these kind of Rosemann moves.
Again, in this higher-dimensional world, it's far harder to grasp what's going on.
Now, how can we get a better visual grasp on such things?
Looking at two-dimensional surfaces in 4D rather than these diagrams that are quite difficult to draw.
Well, it turns out that there's an elegant operation which will help us.
Movies.
Now, what do we mean by movies?
Well, let's consider the ball.
We can describe the ball as the following movie.
If I take my sphere filled in, my ball, I can slice it at different spots and as I move across the slice,
I get a movie structure.
First, I hit nothing, then I hit this point, then I get a small circle, a bigger circle, a smaller circle, a point and I just fade away.
Now, why do I want to take a movie?
Because if I'm trying to explain a three-dimensional object like a ball to a two-dimensional person,
I can describe it by these slices and they understand what each of these two-dimensional slices are about.
Similarly, I can consider a cube and here's a movie of a cube as it's sliced with three squares as I go across in different time periods.
But I can also slice the cube in a different angle.
And if I do this, I get a slice that starts at a point, goes to a triangle, to a hexagon, to a triangle, back to a point again.
Here are some movies of some other surfaces.
So here's the genus two.
We slice straight ahead and you can see how the movie is formulated.
And here is a movie of a knotted torus in four dimensions.
I've taken my torus, what we're familiar with.
I've thrown it into four dimensions and knotted it and looked at the slice.
Now, these two movies give us much insight into four dimensions.
Now, for the movie in three dimensions, we see only unknots and unlinks as our slices.
Remember our genus two surface?
Every time we sliced it, we only saw unknots and unlinks.
Well, here, if we look at the two-dimensional slice of this torus in four dimensions,
we have over and under crossings giving us knots and links.
Indeed, we can convert all our Rosemann moves that we knew about,
those seven Rosemann moves, into movie moves and they look like this.
Now, movies come with their own advantages and disadvantages.
The advantages, instead of looking at an entire two-dimensional surface that you
have to draw in four dimensions, we simply look at a collection of one-dimensional
knots and links.
As we slice the surface, we get a collection of knots and links.
That's the advantage.
We only have to worry about these one-dimensional slices in our movies.
But the disadvantage, as we saw with the cube, is that we can look at the same
two-dimensional knot from different angles, giving us different looking movies.
Remember how we can slice the cube into squares or
slice the cube into those triangles and hexagons?
They're both talking about the cube, but you see it from a different perspective.
So, if somebody gives you a movie of a two-dimensional surface in 4D,
it's hard to know whether two different movies are talking about the same thing.
This feels very akin to presentations of groups where two different presentations
might look completely different, but both describe the same group.
Is there a way out of this for movies?
Well, it turns out that they're actually something called movie moves,
which replaces a collection of frames in one movie by an equivalent collection of
frames, and it would look something like this.
So, these movie moves are looking at different slices of the same kind of object.
And using these movie moves, we can take one particular movie of an object,
replace it with the moves, and get another one.
Now, as we see, things become quite complicated in four dimensions.
Now, what I find truly beautiful is the ingenuity in addressing a dimension
that is typically thought beyond our reach.
We started with a push beyond 3D with Calabi-Aun string theory.
We looked at higher dimensions by looking at the wonderful work of Charles Menard,
and we finally used our ideas and entered the world of knotted surfaces and their diagrams.
In our next lecture, we bring these ideas into the world of higher dimensional
polyhedra.
Stay tuned.
