Welcome back, and thanks for joining me again.
We have been looking at configuration spaces, the space of possible motion of particles.
Well, in order to understand such spaces, we have been focusing in on different base
spaces, the world on which the particles move. We have also considered different kinds
of base spaces. For example, we have looked at particles moving along intervals, particles
moving along circles, particles moving along the plane. Well, in this lecture, instead
of manipulating and changing the base space, we actually manipulate the configuration space
itself, not the base space on which the particles move, but the space of possibilities itself.
Now I want to give you a warning. This lecture pushes us toward a higher level of maturity
in mathematics. This notion of manipulating configuration spaces is a powerful idea and
a sophisticated one. It is advanced in terms of levels of abstraction, where we are actually
looking at ideas at the level of research papers being published today. Now there are
several important ideas related to this field, most notably that of topological quantum
string theories and the world of particle collisions. And on a personal level, almost
all of the ideas we will discuss today have appeared in my own research in one form or
another. I am absolutely in love with the stuff. So let's get started. Instead of focusing
on the world of particle motions, we want to focus on the world of particle collisions.
This is one way we are going to interact with the configuration space itself to get our
hands in there and to manipulate it. Well, we looked at this last time, so let's quickly
review it again. Here we allow the particles to collide. They can actually go past one
another and they can even go past fixed particles. They have no sense of where the other particles
are or whether a fixed particle is. They keep walking as if they didn't even exist.
Now these collisions appeared as lines in our configuration space. Look at this example
here we talked about last time. Here we have two particles on two separate intervals on
the left side and on the right side we have two particles on a triangle of possibilities
on the right side with those three fixed points on a circle. And notice on the left we had
a square of possibilities with those lines of intersection. And on the right side we
have an entire torus of possibilities. This is the square where the sides are identified
with those entire grid lines of collisions. Now these collision lines will be important
to us. Now we are even more ambitious than we were before. We didn't just care about
the collision lines. We are now interested in keeping track of all possible ways collisions
could occur. We don't just want to know whether a collision occurred or not. We want to keep
track of the possibilities. Now in the language of mathematics the different ways of keeping
track of collisions correspond to different compactifications of the configuration space.
The word compactify corresponds in a configuration space setting in terms of particle motions
to keeping track of collisions. Now there are two main types of compactifications that
are interesting for us to study. Let's take a look. Consider an example here of six particles
on an interval. Well the two main types of compactification are the naive compactification
of the Fulton McPherson compactification. Now the naive compactification is what we
looked at in the previous lecture and here we can visually represent it in terms of drawing
parentheses or drawing these tubes around these particles. Now if given these six particles
there is a collision between the first and the second of these moving particles and the
last two with the fixed particle at the end we simply draw and represent these collisions
in terms of these tubes or these parentheses. Now notice this is the collision itself. These
particles have all collided and become one particle inside. The Fulton McPherson compactification
is based on the work of William Fulton and Robert McPherson in 1994. Let's look at what
their compactification is about. What they ask and request of us is the following thing.
It looks similar to the naive in the sense of the first two particles colliding. When
two particles collide if we ask how they collided or the ways in which they could have collided,
well let's think about that. If two particles collide there's nothing we can ask. That's
it. They've collided. But look at this example we looked at earlier for the naive compactification
where these three particles have collided. The two ones that are allowed to move and
this fixed one. In this case if we ask the question how can these particles collide,
well there's a chance that the first two particles have collided first before they collided with
the fixed one or the last one and the fixed one collided before the first one collided
with it. Now in this case we look at nested parentheses. We look at a tubing with a subtubing
inside that keeps track of how this order of collision occurs. So what happens when we
look at collisions under this lens, under this Fulton McPherson compactification lens
and under the naive compactification lens? Well for the naive compactification it's exactly
what we did previously where if collisions occur we just care about them at a superficial
level of collisions and we're not interested in diving in deeper. So let's look at the
two dimensional case. If I have two particles colliding on an interval we see this corresponds
to the triangle, the two dimensional simplex. If two particles just move back and forth
in my base space and they are allowed to collide on this interval we get this two dimensional
simplex. Indeed we can draw it in detail and label all the edges and vertices of the
simplex in the following way. Notice this long diagonal of the simplex of this triangle
is exactly when the two particles collide with each other. The top part of the simplex
is when the right particle has collided with one of the endpoints and the left edge of
the simplex is when the left particle has collided with one of the endpoints. I'm actually
labeling the configuration space. I'm actually labeling what each point in my configuration
space is doing. Now look at the three vertices. One vertex corresponds to when one particle
collides with the left side, the other with the right side. In other words that's the
configuration space, that's the point in the configuration space as these particles moving
one collides this way and one collides this way. That's a corner of vertex in my simplex.
The other two vertices are when these two particles both collide to the left or these
two particles both collide to the right. Well what about the three dimensional case?
Well we saw this earlier. It turns out to be the three dimensional simplex, the tetrahedron.
And again similar to last time we can label all the vertices and the edges and faces based
on these collisions and these tubings that we can draw. Notice this vertex right here
in particular right in front of us, it's when all the particles collide to the right and
this vertex at the very bottom is when all the particles collide to the left. Those are
extreme cases which the vertices capture. Now what about the Fulton McPherson compactification?
Rather than worrying about the naive one, which we already understand, which we already
had taken a peek at, a glimpse at, what about the Fulton McPherson compactification for just
two particles? Well the Fulton McPherson compactification says, great, we care about collisions,
but can we go deeper? Can we ask the next question as to what happens in terms of the
collisions themselves? Let's look inside the configuration space and try to manipulate
it. Well if you look at the labeling we have for the naive compactification of where the
collisions occur, notice these two vertices stand out. That's the only time in the entire
configuration space where three particles have collided. And thus we can ask the question,
how have the three particles collided? Let's take a look at this very top one. Here we
see all three particles, the two particles in the middle, has collided with the particle
on the right. We have this three particle collision, the fixed particle and the two
in the middle. Well one way we can extract information about how these have collided
is we actually reach into the configuration space, which is this triangle, this two dimensional
simplex, and we look at the tip that vertex where all this collision has occurred and
we chop it off, we truncate it. Now this truncation is a configuration space truncation. I'm not
truncating the base space. The base space is simply an interval where two particles are
moving back and forth. I'm not doing a thing to the base space. I'm actually reaching my
hands into the configuration space, the triangle that keeps track of the possibilities, and
truncating it. Now what does this truncating do? Look what happens. It converts my point,
remember that one point which used to keep track of those three particles colliding, the
two particle along with the fixed particle colliding. It now has converted that one point
and it has replaced it with an entire interval of possibilities. What used to be a point
at that corner is now an interval of possibilities. Indeed the top point of that interval, this
new vertex that has appeared, corresponds to when the closer points to the boundary
hit the fixed point, and then the other particle collides, and the other particle of this new
interval I have created, the other vertex, is when the two particles have collided themselves
before they collide to the fixed point. In fact I have an entire spectrum of possibilities.
What used to be a point has now been replaced with an edge, an edge of possibilities keeping
track of this configuration space. Now what about the Fulton McPherson Compactification
for three particles? So we take the simplex and notice we have these two points where
intense collisions have occurred. All those three particles is collided to the right with
the fixed particle. All the three particles collided to the left of the fixed particle.
I want to truncate those. So first I truncate those two because it has a lot of information.
And then you look at those three edges labeled here. Each one of those edges corresponds
to where three particles have collided. Remember the vertices were four particles have collided.
Now I focus on where three particles have collided. Now we need to truncate those edges.
So I truncate it. I actually take my knife and imagine the simplex is made out of butter
and I just slice it off. First I slice off in a deep way those vertices and then I slice
off those three edges and I get the following structure. Notice it converts my points and
lines into faces. It has extracted more information. What used to be a point is now an entire face
of possibilities. What used to be a line is an entire face of possibilities. Indeed if
we zoom in to the four points of collision we see an entire interval of possibilities,
a mini configuration space itself. Now let's step back a bit. My triangle in my previous
example of two particles on an interval, my triangle, my two dimensional simplex became
a pentagon. Remember we chopped off two of the vertices of the triangle which became
a pentagon. And now my tetrahedron, my three dimensional simplex has become this new polytope
which we've never talked about before. Indeed what we are finding is that a new polytope
turns out to be keeping track of particle collisions. The simplex was the naive compactification
and the tetrahedron and the triangular examples of this thing. The simplex is indeed the naive
compactified configuration space version. So the question is, is there a general version
of a polytope that keeps track of the Fulton McPherson compactification of particles on
lines? Is there something in general like this? Now the wonderful news is that there
is and the name of this new polytope is called the asociahedron. It is one of the most beautiful
objects in mathematics and I want to spend some time understanding this mysterious object
from several different perspectives. Now we are entering the intersection of the worlds
of algebra and combinatorics and topology all put together. And we have left classical
mathematics with curvature and homeomorphisms and four dimensional polytopes and indeed
we are entering current mathematics research. So why pick this research area? Well first
of all it's very visual. It brings in numerous areas of algebra and topology and combinatorics
that we've already worked on before and this is my research area. That's why we do it.
But let's consider the asociahedron from an algebraic perspective. Let's step back
and try to build this object algebraically. Now recall one of the conditions of a group
structure is the composition map. Remember given three elements A, B and C in your group
we had the equation A times B times C has to equal A times B times C that associativity
condition of the composition map must be true. Now we have seen this already in several
group theoretic structures such as additions of integers, braid and how we can compose
braids and loops of the fundamental group. Indeed mathematicians started considering
worlds in which this associativity map fails. In what ways can it fail and can we somehow
look at the failure algebraically, topologically, combinatorially? Well let's do this. Let's
consider some examples. If I just have two elements A and B, well there's only one way
you can multiply them. It's just A, B. There is no associativity needed. But what if I
have three elements A, B, C? Well it turns out there are two ways I can do this. I can
multiply A and B and then C and I can multiply A and then B, C. Those are the two possible
ways if associativity fails I need to remember which one is which. I have two possible ways
of doing this. Now what if I have four elements A, B, C and D? Notice here I have five possible
ways I can associate them to multiply them if associativity fails. I can multiply A times
B and then multiply C with that structure and then at the end multiply it by D. Or I
can multiply A times B first, C times D next and then multiply those resulting objects
together. Remember I'm not actually moving the ordering of A, B, C and D. I'm not saying
it's A, C, D, B. I'm keeping the same ordering but choosing the order in which the multiplication
locally in an associativity way works. Now notice for two objects A and B we have one
possibility. For three A, B and C we have two possibilities. For four A, B, C, D we have
five possibilities. Can we say more other than just counting the number of possibilities?
It turns out this algebraic question is just far more than just the combinatorics than
just the counting part. It turns out that we can actually put a topological structure
here. We can actually put shape underneath the picture. Notice here I have my five elements
arranged in a sort of a circular format. But here I can draw an edge between two of these
elements like this. Between the A times B times C times D to A times B times C times
D. I'm going to draw an edge between them. Now why do I draw an edge between those two
elements? Because they're related, they're closer to one another than to the other elements.
Why? Because they share a parenthesis in common. Notice they have the A, B parenthesis in common.
They are only missing the other parenthesis which can maybe go back and forth. Indeed
between the A times B and C times D it shares a parenthesis with the A times B times C,
D. Because they both have that C, D parenthesis in common. In a similar way I can draw edges
between all five of these structures forming a pentagon. Pentagon. We've seen a pentagon
before in this lecture. And this is how the structure starts. Indeed there's this underlying
structure about how things are related, how these letters can be associated based on how
many parenthesis they share. Now we can consider this from a particle perspective. Let's take
a look. In the same way we see as we had the A times B multiplied with the C times D multiplied
multiplying together now I can represent the same object as particle A colliding on the
left with a fixed point and particle B colliding on the right with a fixed point. Indeed the
entire structure of parenthesis that I had earlier can be re-visualized in terms of particle
collisions. Now what about an example with five letters? Well with five letters we get
this structure and you can see you can actually rephrase all your parentheses in terms of
particle collisions. We've actually seen this before earlier. This is the three-dimensional
associahedron. Indeed you can build a model of this three-dimensional associahedron. It's
absolutely elegant. It's beautiful and it has far more structures than what we're able
to glimpse right now. But it's made up of three squares and it's made up of six pentagons
beautifully arranged. Indeed the four-dimensional example of the associahedron. The way we
can parenthesize six letters turns out to be beautiful and here is one example of this
four-dimensional associahedral structure which we're going to talk about later. Now a bit
of history for us to consider. The associahedron was discovered by Jim Stashev in the early
1960s from the topology viewpoint coming up in homotopy theory. And in the 1980s it was
rediscovered by the combinatorics community not knowing that such an object already existed.
It was a different branch of mathematics that didn't even know this branch of mathematics
had already worked on it. Now both of these worlds have met, they've collided and so
much has come out of it. Now on a side note Jim Stashev once remarked to me. He said triangles,
squares and hexagons are common objects in math but a pentagon if that appears in your
research is something to take note of. There's some associativity going on in disguise. Now
recall our study on four-dimensional polytopes. Remember the triangle became the tetrahedron,
became the n-dimensional simplex and it generalized for all dimensions higher than that and the
square became the cube, became the n-dimensional cube and it generalized? Well if the triangle
generalized and the square generalized what about the pentagon? Well the pentagon became
the dodecahedron which became the 120 cell and it just stopped. There was no 5D version
of this object. I personally believe that the rightful heir to the throne of the pentagonal
generalization is the associahedron. The pentagon becomes the 3D associahedron which
becomes the 4D associahedron and these exist in all dimensions. Now there are alternate
ways of thinking about the associahedron. So consider another way of thinking about
parentheses. We have seen these already as collisions of particles and now I want to
relate them to polygons. Now each of these n letters that we have arranged can be now
translated into an n plus 1 sided polygon. So if I have two letters like a and b I can
write that on the sides of a 3 sided polygon, the triangle like this. If I have three letters
a b c I can write that on the 4 sided polygon on a square a b c and leave the one blank.
Indeed all the parentheses that we can do translates into drawing these triangulations
these diagonals of a polygon. So look at this example a b c d can be written as a b c d on
a pentagon with an extra side left blank and if I have an a b parentheses I draw an edge
right here that partitions a b and if I have a a b colliding with a c parentheses then
I draw that partitioning away from d. Indeed all parentheses all these parentheses I can
do for on my letters correspond to diagonalization triangulations of polygons. So how can we
think of the vertices of the associahedron? Well each vertex of an associahedron is a
maximally parenthesized object right that's always we can do associativity. Thus each
vertex of my associahedron is a triangulation of a polygon. So here's an example of this
vertex a times b c the quantity times d becomes this particular triangulation. Here's another
one a times b times c times d. Notice both of these share the a b c parentheses and those
two vertices correspond to these two triangulations of the polygon and the edge that they share
between it corresponds to a flip. Look I take this I take this triangulation of this
polygon I remove this edge and I replace it with this one and I've indeed formed a flip.
So so what does this mean? It means that the vertices and edges of my associahedron is
exactly the flip graph of a polygon. What a beautiful thing. So consider this four dimensional
model again this is the vertex and edge this is the skeletal structure of of the four dimensional
associahedron. Now this model was constructed by by Sam Capella who is a student of mine
at Williams College and and he and I he worked with me on an art studio course he took with
me and and this is a beautiful structure indeed a visual structure that gives me the
space of triangulations of a seven gone. It's a seven sided polygon and every way you can
triangulate a seven sided polygon is captured by a vertex of this object and two triangulations
of a seven sided polygon are connected by an edge if it's off by one flip. It's beautiful.
Well we have related this algebraic world of parentheses to the flip graph from this
computational geometry we studied earlier. Now to show how prevalent the associahedron
is I want to show two completely new ways of looking at this wonderful polytope. Now
thus far we've defined the associahedron as the world of parentheses but how can we
build one? Well it turns out we can actually build it from a simplex. Indeed we've already
seen this when we consider the world of particle collisions. For example for the two dimensional
case we can take the two dimensional simplex truncate those two vertices and build the
associahedron. For the three dimensional case I can take a three dimensional simplex truncate
the two vertices and then the three edges and get the three dimensional associahedron.
Indeed we can view the simplex as the configuration space of particles on an interval and our
theorem says the following. Truncating places in the simplex of maximal collisions going
from low dimensions to high dimensions yields the associahedron. In other words I look at
my simplex in terms of particle collision and I look at the vertices that have maximal
particle collisions I truncate those. Then I look at edges that have maximal particle
collisions I truncate those and on and on and on and if I do this in a beautiful way
starting from the low dimensions from the vertices all the way to the high dimensions
I get to build my associahedron from truncation. Indeed here's a four dimensional version.
I have my four simplex we talked about earlier in previous lectures on 40 polytopes. Now
I truncate my vertices in my four simplex. Now if I truncate a vertex in my three simplex
it becomes a triangle. So if I truncate a vertex in my four simplex it becomes a tetrahedron.
So here I am I take my four simplex truncate my two vertices truncate my three edges and
truncate my four faces and I get this beautiful object which is the four dimensional associahedron.
Now another way to build the associahedron comes from a convex hull. Now I find this
to be one of the most beautiful results I've ever seen and it belongs to a larger class
of objects called secondary polytopes developed by Israel Gelfand, Mikhail Kapronov and Andrei
Zalovinsky. Now we know the three dimensional associahedron comes from triangulations of
a six sided polygon just like the four dimensional associahedron comes from triangulations of
a seven sided polygon. Well let's choose a six sided polygon like this of your choice
and let's label its vertices 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Now choose a triangulation of the six
sided polygon. I know this is associated to a vertex of my associahedron but notice geometrically
what this triangulation does. It actually cuts my object into triangles and it gives
me different pieces of the area. Let's assume that the area of these triangles are labeled
as follows, 2, 3, 3 and 2. Now to each vertex of this polygon I'm going to associate the
sum of the areas of the triangle that it's touching. Let me say that again to each vertex
I'm going to give it the sum of the areas of the triangles that it's touching. So to
vertex number one I'm going to give it the value 5 because it's the sum of those two
areas. To vertex number 2 I'm going to give it the value 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. I'm going
to give it the value 8. To vertex 3 I'm going to give it the value 2. To vertex 4 I'm going
to give it the value 5 and on and on and on. So as I walk through from vertex 1 all the
way to vertex 6 I get a sequence of six numbers. So these six numbers you can think of it as
a point in six dimensional space. So here's what I do. Each triangulation of my polygon
gives a point in six dimensional space. Now since there are 14 triangulations of the six
gone, since there are 14 vertices of my socahedron, there will then be 14 points in my six dimensional
space, all of them based on the geometric area in which the triangulations do. Now I'm
going to take the convex hull of these 14 points and I get the three dimensional socahedron.
This is stunning. The points are based on areas of a hexagon and they are sitting in
six dimensions somehow in a perfect way that we get a convex hull which turns out to be
the socahedron itself. Now this construction of the socahedron, the three dimensional socahedron
in six dimensional space can be generalized to all dimensions, not just the three dimensional
alone. On a side note let's look at the simplex again from the eyes of truncation. Now if
we truncate special collections of faces of the simplex, then we get the socahedron. Remember
we have to pick those two vertices and those three edges for the three dimensional simplex?
But what if we're ambitious and we just truncate all the faces of the simplex? Consider some
examples. Here's a two dimensional simplex, it's just a triangle. I'm truncating all the
vertices. I get a hexagon. Now I have this three dimensional simplex which is a tetrahedron.
Now I'm going to truncate all the vertices and then I'm going to truncate all the edges.
I'm not going to be as picky as I was with the socahedron. Well the resulting polytope
we get when we do this maximal set of truncations is called the permutahedron, not the socahedron.
So what is the permutahedron? Well the name holds the clue. Similar to asociahedron, associativity,
the vertices of the permutahedron correspond to permutations. Take a look. The different
ways I can permute letters gives me the permutahedron. So if I have three letters ABC, all different
ways I can permute those three letters, ABC, ACB, CAB, CBA, on and on, gives me a hexagonal
structure. That's how I got the hexagon last time. Here's the three dimensional case. Always
I can permute four letters, one, two, three, four will give me this three dimensional permutahedron
that we saw earlier from truncating this simplex. Now unlike the socahedron, having been discovered
only in the 1960s, the permutahedron is a classical object having been discovered in the 1910s.
And amazingly enough, my friends, we have seen this three dimensional permutahedron before.
It is the Kelvin cell, which Lord Kelvin claims to be the best way to partition three space
into equal volume. It is this packing using the permutahedron, which the wear, fail, and
structure defeated. Well I truly hope this lecture has pushed you in new ways, enabling
you to taste what current math research is about. And having started with questions about
particle motions and collisions, we have now returned once again to the world of polytopes
and convex hulls and triangulations. Well this time, polytopes provide the algebraic, topological
and combinatorial structure to capture compactifications of configuration spaces. Well in our next lecture,
we move from the world of theoretical physics and particle collisions and apply our ideas
of configuration spaces to theoretical biology and study genetics. Stay tuned.
