Welcome back to the show that tells you you are a quantum computer with free will
at the apex of a hierarchy of conscious beings. My name is Justin Riddle and this
is episode 17 of the quantum consciousness series. In today's episode
we'll be talking about nested hierarchical consciousness, the idea that
information processing is occurring at multiple different scales in your brain
and this information needs to be communicated up and down the hierarchy.
By the end of today's episode we'll ask the question, are you a conscious being
that's composed of conscious beings that's composed of conscious beings add
infinitum? This episode is available on YouTube and an audio-only version is
available on Apple Podcasts and Spotify. If you like what you hear today then
please like this video, subscribe to this channel, leave a comment below or for
the audio listener write a review.
Hey there, my name is Justin Riddle, a little background on myself. I got a PhD
from UC Berkeley in psychology studying cognitive neuroscience. While at UC
Berkeley I taught a course on quantum consciousness for seven years and this
YouTube series is really a translation and extension of that material. Right now
I do research in humans and I deliver magnetic and electrical non-invasive
brain stimulation in order to get a better understanding of the role of
neural oscillations in cognition and how they become impaired in psychiatric
illness. So the topic for today is nested hierarchical consciousness and I'll be
talking about in particular this theory called the nested observer windows
model and this is a model that I developed in collaboration with Professor
Jonathan Schuehler who's at the University of California Santa Barbara
and we've been working on this model for many years now and at the time of this
recording we're currently in the process of submitting it for publication. So to
give you a big overview on what this model is and then speculating on some
of the implications for quantum consciousness and quantum computers in
general at the end we'll be running through the details of this model and
some of the evidence from cognitive neuroscience and some of just the
theoretical motivation for this model and this will really tie into the overall
story of this series but this one is a much more sort of based in the cognitive
neuroscience literature so I'll be doing a lot of talking about that. So here's
the pitch and I'm gonna start off by reading a quote from William James and
William James is really one of the like foundational philosophers, researchers
doing a lot of introspection in the early days of the field of psychology and
so the quote goes like this, we know what it is to get out of bed on a freezing
morning in a room without a fire and how the very vital principle within us
protests against the ordeal. Probably most persons have lain on certain
mornings for an hour at a time, unable to brace themselves to the resolve. We
think how late we shall be, how the duties of the day will suffer, we say I
must get up, this is ignominous, etc. But still the warm couch feels too
delicious, the cold outside too cruel, and resolution faints away and postpones
itself again and again just as it seemed on the verge of bursting the
resistance and passing over into the decisive act. Now how do we ever get up
under such circumstances? If I may generalize from my own experience, we more
often than not get up without any struggle or decision at all. We suddenly
find that we have got up, a fortunate lapse of consciousness occurs, we forget
both the warmth and the cold. We fall into some reverie connected with the
day's life, in the course of which the idea flashes across us, holo, I must
lie here no longer, an idea which at that lucky instant awakens no
contradictory or paralyzing suggestion and consequently produces immediately
its appropriate motor effects. It was our acute consciousness of both the warmth
and the cold during the period of struggle which paralyzed our activity
then and kept our idea of rising in the condition of wish and not of will. The
moment these inhibitory ideas ceased, the original idea exerted its effects.
William James, Principles of Psychology, Volume 2. So what's so fascinating about
this is I think it violates a few different sort of intuitions that we
have about our own experience being a human being. And one of those is this
idea that we have this narrator in our mind. And so we've kind of been told and
we kind of take it at face value that there is this narrative flow to our
minds and that we're sort of witnessing this unfolding of events. We have some
free will, some ability to change that unfolding of events, but we view it as a
single narrative self inside of us. And what this really challenges us to think
about is how when we decide to do things we are sometimes met with internal
resistance. And what is it when you have a conflicting set of ideas in your mind?
I would argue, and the nested observer window model argues, that there's
actually this debate, this collaboration, this dialogue between many different
voices in your head. And it's not really just a single narrative self, but so
much of our inner life of our cognition is really characterized by inner
conflict. Should I do this? Should I do that? That might be fun, but am I wasting
my time? You know, there's all this debate, this internal struggle that we
experience, which is really core and inherent to our lives. Another sort
of intuition that we have that the nested observer window or now model sort of
goes against is this idea that we have sort of a possessive or a feeling of
ownership over our thoughts. We think I created this thought, I am the creative
owner of my thoughts. I am generating and sort of assembling things together in my
mind. And while a lot of times there are periods where we're actively thinking
about something, and we really are assembling these big macro abstract
ideas together, and we're forming new solutions or new concepts out of sort of
more basic concepts. And all of that is going on at this very abstract level. But
in addition, we get many ideas that just pop into our mind. And we sometimes don't
even want ownership of our ideas. Sometimes an idea pops into your head and
you wonder, why did I think that? Where did that come from? And sometimes you even
suppress the unwanted thought, or you're kind of in awe, like where did this
thought come from? And so in the now model, we propose that thoughts do sort of
emerge into your mind fully formed. And even when you are assembling thoughts
together, you're doing so at such an abstract level, that there's so much
built into those concepts already. And even the basic concepts which are there
for you to assemble already have this sort of coming out of nowhere popping
into existence feeling to them, where there's so much that is entailed in
those in those basic concepts, even in the act of assembling. And then the sort
of another or like the final violation of intuition that I'll provide right now,
and there'll be more throughout throughout this episode, is the idea that we have a
limited interface with our own bodies, right? And so the idea is when I decide
I'm gonna move around in the world, that decision to move can sometimes be met
with resistance, or the movement itself might not come out like how I thought it
was gonna come out. Maybe I say, oh, I'm gonna walk over there and then I trip and
fall, you know, face first into the floor. That was not the plan, right? So we are
enacting very abstract action plans into our body. And we're not aware of the fine
motor movements, all the detailed muscle activation that needs to occur. And so
we're really operating at these very high abstract levels. And so there's
limited influence that we even have over our bodies. And another interesting way
of thinking about this is, you know, you can consciously pay attention to
breathing. But when you're not paying attention, you're still breathing. You
know, it's one of those weird flexible acts where you can simultaneously take it
under volitional control, or just let it go on unconsciously. So the argument is
that, you know, you're at the top of this hierarchy of conscious beings, and you
have limited influence on the lower levels beneath you. So that's sort of
from an experiential sense why the now model is sort of challenging the status
quo of how we think about ourselves. From a practical sense, when we do
science, we're trying to understand for the most part the human condition. What
is it like to be a mind? Who am I? What's going on? And of course, there's more
like medical applications or technological applications, but in the
field of psychology, we're trying to understand fundamentally, you know, who
we are. And so in that field, there's many different researchers studying the
phenomenon of the human mind. But some people study fMRI, EEG, these really
macro scale entire regions, activating the blood flow to different regions in
the brain with fMRI. These are macroscopic large regions. With EEG, we're
studying these big electric fields that emerge from the brain and relating
those to cognition. But then people also study neurons, and neurons are
operating at the scale of a thousand times per second, right? So while fMRI, EEG
is happening on the scale of seconds or sub seconds, you know, a small fraction
of a second, but maybe just like one tenth of a second, neurons are
activating at scales at the kilohertz range, like 1000 times per second. And
then beneath that, there's proteins, and there's synaptic interactions or
protein pathways that are that are, you know, processing information in their
own ways. And those are happening another order of magnitude faster, let's say
like the megahertz or even gigahertz range, right? A million times per second or
sometimes even a billion times per second. So there's all these different
scales, and you'll find people that are neuroscientists and they're interested
in the human mind. But they'll study the human mind at so many different scales.
And the question is, you know, we can find some relationship or correlation of
these fMRI and EEG signals to our minds. We find a correlation of neural activity
to our perceptions and our actions. And with proteins, once again, the presence
of a protein or not, or, you know, when light comes into the eyeball, it activates
a protein cascade, and that correlates with the detection of light. So that
also relates to our experience. And so the question is, how are all these
different processes happening at multiple different scales? And the nested
observer window model proposes a unique solution where you can view all of these
different levels as meaningfully processing information, and also sharing
that information up and down across these very different spatial temporal scales,
right? So we have centimeters and seconds, we have millimeters and kilohertz,
and then we have micrometers or even angstroms in the range of megahertz and
gigahertz, right? And so all of these processes seem to be contributing to
our experience. But how do we study these? How do we make sense of these? And it
would be really cool if you could have more interdisciplinary study where
people studying neurons could talk directly with like people using fMRI,
right? It would be cool to have ways in which in a principled manner, the
information or the content being created at these different scales is being
communicated to each other. So that's a lot of the big picture motivation for
the now model. So now I'm going to propose what is the now model
fundamentally. So the now model fundamentally is a way of defining
information integration units, and we call them observer windows. And an
observer window is at a certain spatial temporal scale, and it's integrating
information, and it has sort of a rhythmic processing to that information
integration, which is sort of the time scale, the integration rate at which it
operates. And then within that scale, you have a bunch of observer windows
communicating with each other at the same level. And then you also have
observer windows nested within each other, so that each observer window is
composed of observer windows, and then information is processed up and down
these different scales. And so we propose sort of a unique way of
information integration, which we call mosaic integration. And the idea here is
that we're really leveraging the nested nature of this system. And the metaphor
for what this looks like and the details will need to be hashed out by some
computational model, I would assume. But the idea is that this feels like a
mosaic image, where you can think of an image that's made up of a bunch of
tiles, and each of those tiles is itself an image. But when you're at the level
of a full image composed of tiles, you know, a single gestalt comes out, a
single representation, a single image appears. But then you can zoom into
these tiles, and you'll find that each tile has an image. And that tile is
composed of more tiles. And you can zoom in infinitely, or maybe there's
some limitation on how much you could zoom. But this this form of mosaic
integration is the way that you're able to assemble and build more abstract
representations. And a cool property of this form of integration would be that
you're sort of preserving a lot of the rich detail as you move up to the
higher and higher levels in the hierarchy. Alright, so we have these
observer windows, they have a fixed boundary, a fixed spatial and fixed
temporal boundary on where they are and what they are. And they're integrating
information from their environment. And they're also nested within other
observer windows and processing information up and down this hierarchy.
And so there's a few implications. And so first, I'm going to talk about the
implications for consciousness, where does consciousness fit into this? And then
I'll go into the the details of what this information integration might look
like, and the phenomenon coming out of cognitive neuroscience that that
motivates thinking about this model. And then I'll end talking about how
quantum mechanics might play a role in particular in one of these principles
that I'm going to talk about in a second here. So the question is, where does
consciousness come in? And so one idea is that consciousness is just at the top
level, that you have this hierarchy of observer windows, and you, the viewer are
the highest level, you are the one observer window at the top of the
hierarchy. And there's all these sort of autonomous observer windows at lower
levels or semi autonomous observer windows integrating information. But all
of those are just worker bees. And you are the only one that's a conscious
being and you're the only one that really has the the qualia, the feeling of
being a self. And all these lower levels are, yeah, just unconscious, subconscious,
pre conscious, proto conscious, whatever, you know, fun prefix you want to fit
onto conscious. And this really feels a lot like the global workspace model, or
these sort of emergentist views of consciousness, where you try to describe,
you know, at the level of the whole brain, there's some sort of emergent
property or some sort of being that comes out at this highest level. An
alternative way of putting consciousness into the now model is that there's some
sort of threshold for information complexity, or for the integration of
information to be occurring. There's some threshold for what that looks like. And
then only once you breach that threshold, do you have a conscious being. So here
there would be some level in the brain or in the body, where you have a conscious
being. And above that level are conscious beings nested within each other. But
beneath that level, it's automaton, right, it's non conscious, just processors. The
third and final option is sort of a form of pan psychism, pan, pan, meaning all, and
psychism being, you know, a root of consciousness. So pan psychism, everything
is conscious. And now in the now model, we assert that, you know, not everything
can arbitrarily be called a consciousness. But in the now model, the observer
windows have a biological infrastructure, a boundary that limits what could be a
conscious being. But you're at the top of the hierarchy, and there's conscious
beings nested beneath you. And it goes down and down and down. And all of those
are conscious beings at various smaller and smaller levels. So not quite sure
what the correct answer is. I personally really love this pan psychist model where
all these levels are conscious beings. And we'll come back to this idea a bit
later. But it really does kind of blow your mind. And so maybe I'm just drawn to
it because it is such a mind blowing reality shifting type of way of viewing
yourself as being composed genuinely of conscious beings. You're running the show,
maybe mostly. You're at the top, probably, but there's still conscious beings
beneath you. And you're sort of the CEO of this corporation of conscious beings
directing what to do. But all of these entities underneath you still have a say
they have an input on what gets carried out eventually. And all of your
reality and perception is being filtered through these lower levels. And you're
making decisions at this very abstract higher level. So it's still sort of an
integrated interplay between all these different levels of conscious beings.
Alright, so now I'm going to dive into the three principles of the now model. And
they are synchrony. This is a zero phase lag high degree of correlation between a
bunch of components. And this forms the integration unit forms the observer
window. It is difficult to achieve a zero phase lag entirely correlated system
with high synchrony. Everything is so coupled together that it loses individuality
and it becomes a single entity, right? That is synchrony, the formation of an
observer window. The second principle is coherence. And coherence is a non zero
phase lag coupling between two observer windows. And this is two observer windows
at the same spatial temporal level. So they're both processing information. They
both have their own integration rates, you know, of how they're processing
information. But they can communicate with each other. And it's a weak transient
communication, they form these functional networks of observer windows
communicating with each other. But it's inherently unstable and transient. And you
don't lose the individuality of the of the two observer windows that are
coherent. And then the final and third principle is cross frequency coupling. And
this is once again a weak form of coupling between two observer windows. Except
the catch here is that the observer windows are at different spatial temporal
scales. So you have big, slow, rhythmically integrating observer windows. And
these much smaller, faster observer windows integrating information. And
they're coupled to each other. And once again, the coupling is more weak. And it
happens between observer windows nested within other higher level observer
windows. And this is really sort of the critical way in which information is
transferred up and down a hierarchy, right up and down this this nested
observer window hierarchy. And so we propose that electrical activity really
serves as the lingua franca or the, you know, universal generalizable principle at
play here. And so I'll talk to you today about brain regions or brain nuclei and
neurons. And we, you know, speculate that proteins are also observer windows and
potentially there's higher or lower observer windows also at play here, but
we'll really focus on brain nuclei and neurons. And we'll be talking about
electrical activity as really this universal form of communication, where
even though they're comprised of very different material, and they're, you know,
operating at very different scales, if information integration can occur, using a
common substrate, even though it's at different levels, this sort of
facilitates that communication of information. And we believe that this is a
plausible solution for the protein scale, maybe some intermediary scales and
potentially at even more fundamental lower scales, that electricity or
electromagnetism could be a very fundamental sort of substrate for
processing this information. And it's very apparent that electrical activity
plays a fundamental role in the level of neurons in brain nuclei, which we'll
talk about as examples. So I'm going to start off with our first principle,
synchrony. And synchrony is the formation of an observer window. And so a funny
example or analogy here is if you see a bunch of lights attached to the limbs of
a human, and they're walking through the night, so all you can see are those lights,
you'll witness the movement of a human. But if the human stands still, you just
see a smattering of lights and there's no human form available. And so when we're
studying the processing of information, we do really need to focus on that
process, you know, the movement through time of these biological systems. And
what's beautiful about synchrony is synchrony is really the creation and the
formation of a single unit. And so I feel like this is almost like, like it's
almost like a nuance that you accept, but you don't even realize that you've
already accepted this, is that you call things by their name, you call something
a thing. And in calling something a thing, you're inferring that that thing has a
strong degree of structural and temporal stability. And so synchrony is really
just putting a definition and a label on what that definition of a thing is, you
know. And so a good example is like a protein, we just call it a protein, but
really there's such a high degree of synchronization within the protein that
it acts as a single protein, right? neurons act as single cells. And brain
nuclei act as single brain nuclei. And so how do they do that? Well, just go
through the neuron and nuclei example. But neurons have this phospholipid
bilayer membrane, it acts as a capacitor for the neuron. And so it stores up this
strong electrical potential inside of the neuron. And you reach a point where the
neuron has such strong electrical coupling in its, you know, internally, that it
behaves as if it's a single electrical functional unit. Similarly, a brain
nuclei exhibits these synchronized electrical states, where the entire
nuclei will undergo this single electrical potential. And you can witness
these electrically vibrating fluctuations in the nuclei that you're
observing. And they have these characteristic electrical rhythms that
they exhibit. And these are enabled by a lot of structural properties in the
neuron, or in the architecture of the neurons. Typically, it's called a
phaptic coupling. Essentially, this is when a bunch of neurons are oriented
together, and they undergo their own electrical potentials or action
potentials or firing, as people usually call it. And a lot of these neurons are
oriented so that the electric fields generated within the neurons are then
propagated across a whole population. And so what you see in the wild is you see
a brain nuclei will exhibit these big electric fluctuations that are
basically enabled by all of these parallel fibers in these brain nuclei. And
then they start to serve a functional role and it begins to act as a single
functional unit, similar to these neurons behaving as single functional units. And
so what's really cool is that if you are measuring the electrical potential in
the brain, and let's say we're focusing on this slower frequency range where you
would see brain nuclei operating, you'll have this background activity in your
electrical recording. And when you found a brain nuclei that's forming
some functional area, some functional unit, you'll see this bump, this rhythmic
oscillation emerging from just the background noise of your recording. And
you can be fairly certain that when you see these electrical bumps in your
recording, after running a four-year transform and breaking it down into the
frequency domain, you can be sure that there's some sort of brain nuclei
processing information at this certain scale. And so the brain nuclei have
clearly defined boundaries, and they have a very clearly defined rhythm at which
they are operating. So what does synchrony mean practically or to cognition? And
so this was an idea proposed by Wolfgang Singer called Binding Biosynchrony. And
here we're using this exact concept in the now model. And the idea is that there's
this difficult challenge in psychology called the binding problem. I have a
gestalt representation of let's say a chair. I know what it looks like, I know
what it feels like, I know how to use it, I know what the texture is like, I know
what the color is like, how do I have this single representation of a chair? How
does all this information get bound together? And so Wolfgang Singer proposed
that synchrony forms a natural sort of neural mechanism for how you can have
information coming from different sources, and then it gets bound together
through this synchrony. In the now model we propose that there is a
integration rate that the observer window opens, it accumulates a bunch of
information, and then it binds that information into a single gestalt
representation. And once you have formed it, it exists, and you experience it if
you are that observer window, and then the next cycle a new representation is
generated. And it could be that this is some predictive coding model where
there's sort of a model of the world that gets update periodically, and so
there's an update that kicks in, and so there's sort of a continuity or a
stability through time, or you could view this as sort of these like discrete
refreshes of information with no time between them, it's just now, now, now,
now, there's just an experience now, a gestalt experience now, and another
gestalt experience now, and there actually is no time between those
discrete moments. So it's sort of an alternative framing for what this might
feel like in our conscious experience. So an example I really love is called the
flicker fusion rate, and there was a, you know, this phenomenon has been
studied quite a bit, but there was a cognitive neuroscience study that came
out in the past 10 years or so that was really interesting and impactful by
connecting it to these electrical oscillations. So the idea is that if I
present two flashes of light, very quickly, you will see them as two
different flashes of light. But as the time between the flashes shrinks, you
hit a point where the two flashes are really just one flash now, right? And
so the flashes fuse, you have a flickering light, and then you have the
fusion into a single light. The exact moment where you flip over from two
flashes into a single flash is called the flicker fusion rate. That is the
rate at which the lights switch from flicker into fusion. And there was this
really cool study by Samaha and Postal, who were looking at the visual
cortex, and the visual cortex has, it is, it can be conceptualized as a brain
nuclei with a electrical fluctuation and electrical potential. And this one is
often called the alpha oscillation, and it happens to be around 10 hertz, 10
times per second. And what they found is that there's some variation between
people at what that integration rate or what that refresh rate is in visual
cortex. And so people who have a slightly faster alpha oscillation in visual
cortex, they can actually still perceive the flicker at a smaller and smaller
time scale. So it takes, you know, they have to be much closer for the flashes
to fuse. And the idea is that every alpha oscillation is opening a window,
taking in some information. But if you have a slower rhythm in the back of your
brain, in the visual cortex, then both of the flashes are going to end up in the
same window, and they're going to get integrated together into a fused single
flash. And so this really fits nicely with the now model, where these observer
windows have these integration rates. And this is predictive of the rhythmic
refresh of information in this observer window. And so now we're talking about
this rhythmic refresh rate of these gestalt perceptions in different brain
nuclei. What does this mean for you as a conscious being? What is this rhythmic
refresh rate? Well, we argue in the now model that this rhythmic refresh rate is
equivalent to your perception of time. And so the temporal processing of this
information has a fixed rate. If you're a brain nuclei, it'll be occurring around
the scale of 10 times per second, five times per second. But if you're a neuron,
it might be happening at 1000 times per second or 100 times per second, much,
much, much faster, right? And so what it is like to be that observer window is to
feel a flow of time at the rate at which your refreshes are occurring. And so
what's really fascinating is there's a few anomalous experiences in our
experience that relate to time perception. So when you're in a life
threatening situation, you're driving down the freeway, a truck changes lanes into
you and you are feeling like an impending doom, you will have the
experience of time slowing down. What's happening? Could it be that the observer
window that is you is increasing the integration rate, that frequency of
gestalt representation generation is increased, you're tapping into more
concrete, less abstract information, you have less time to integrate a bunch of
interesting information, you have less integration time, but you can get much
more refreshes, right? You can get more static frames of what is happening. And
so time is experienced as a dilation, where it feels like time is moving slow.
But really, you're having more experience per second because your observer
window has frequency shifted into the faster range. On the flip side, we can
have the opposite, where time folds inward and dissolves away and an hour
passes in an instant and we lose track of time and suddenly we look up from our
book or we pull out of our thoughts and 10 minutes have flown by and we're
shocked that all this time has disappeared. Where did it go? So we suggest
that in this example, your observer window is shifting the opposite direction,
right? It's shifting towards longer integration times. More information is
able to enter into this open window and gets bound into a gestalt representation,
which is a large abstract integration of a lot of interesting and creative
abstract ideas. So when you're daydreaming, when you're mind wandering, when
you're lost in thought, you might have a sort of stretching of your temporal
experience as the integration windows expand to get more and more information
into a single integration and your thoughts become more abstract and yet
time flies by because you have less moments of consciousness per second.
However, there's more information in this abstract quality in each of those
thoughts. So we're going to move on to the second principle of coherence and
coherence is really best understood by contrasting it with synchrony. So
synchrony, remember, is how we create an observer window. This is no easy feat.
You need a lot of biological infrastructure like a capaciting membrane or
all these fibers oriented to create high synchronization in the brain nuclei.
So synchrony is the creation of single entities with zero lag. Everything is
just one thing all of a sudden and we can form this equivalent of a conscious
being with the capacity to integrate information. Coherence is like a
conversation. So the analogy here is that coherence can be understood of as two
people having a conversation. One person talks, the other one listens, the other
person talks, the other person listens. And so there's a communication going on.
And the words need to be transmitted to the other person, right? There is a
non zero phase lag. There is a lag between the information going from one
person to the other. And when the information is received, it's integrated
in that observer window and then it, you know, some new information is sent
back, right? And so when two people are having a productive conversation, they
are coherent. If you were to track their audio waves, you would find that
they're sort of vibing together, but they're not happening at the same time,
right? It's not the same person speaking the same words simultaneously. Sometimes
that can arbitrarily happen, but it's more of a predictive thing, right? So
their communication has delay. And you wouldn't say, oh, that conversation is
going so well, they've just fused into the same person, right? There's still two
different people. The synchrony is the creation of the two separate people. And
the coherence is the communication between the different people, right? So in
practice, in biology, we see that when brain regions want to communicate with
each other, there's something called neuronal communication through neuronal
coherence. This is developed by Pascal Fries. And Pascal Fries proposed,
essentially what I just told you here, you have these rhythmically oscillating
different units. And when they want to transmit information to each other, they
will sort of align their oscillations so that one transmits some information, the
other one receives it, and the transmissions are sent back and forth,
right? And so if we look into the brain and we look at some complex cognitive
control tasks where multiple regions need to communicate with each other, you'll
see that they'll become coherent with each other. And that information will
preferentially follow these different pathways. And so what's really cool about
coherence is that it's very dynamic, it's very transient. And so this really
contributes to cognitive flexibility, right? So if I had information come into
my brain, and it always went down the same pathways every single time, this
would limit my flexibility to dynamically interact with my environment. And
actually, we want our attention to route information in this pathway versus
another pathway. And so when you want to pay attention to one quality, but not
another, you'll see that those regions processing the qualities that you're
paying attention to will become coherent with each other. And the ones that you
don't want information to go to will kind of not have that strengthened
coherence together. And so there's this really fascinating phenomena in the
brain where so much of our processing is linked to very interesting, distinct
rhythms, and probably the most pronounced in human cognition is what's
called the theta rhythm. This is about five times to eight times per second,
kind of five to eight range. And the theta rhythm is found in so much of our
behavior and in a lot of our information coming into our brains and in a very
special brain nuclei called the hippocampus. And so when I am speaking to
you right now, the words that I am saying to you are actually entering your
ears at a rhythm of the theta rhythm. And shockingly, this theta rhythm is
found across many different cultures and languages. Doesn't matter what
country you're born in, what language or ancestry you have, all languages that
we've been able to find have a very pronounced eight Hertz to five Hertz
theta rhythm in the speech envelope that gets transmitted. So cross culturally,
people are talking to each other at the exact same rate, and it seems to have
maybe an evolutionary and a biological basis, right? So if your brain and your
hippocampus, this memory storage episodic memory construction region in the
brain, it is vibrating in the theta rhythm. And so when you're giving people
words and language, you want it to resonate into their episodic memories and
you want it to be constructed into present new memories, but you also wanted
to access old memories. In addition, your eyes are moving at roughly a theta
rhythm. Even when you fixate on a single fixed point, your eye is actually
twitching around in what's called micro saccades, small eye movements. Those
micro saccades and those macro saccades as you look around a room and explore a
new environment are all locked to the theta rhythm, right? So you have
audition, theta, vision, theta, major memory storage in theta. And so all of
these different regions in the brain are processing different information, but
they're transmitting that information to each other in the theta rhythm. And
there was this really cool paper by the Hanselmeyer lab that that actually
presented people with snippets of audio and flashes of video. And when those
snippets and flashes were presented in theta rhythm, coherently, you were
actually able to assemble an episodic memory for those audio visual parents.
And when they looked in the brain, they found electrical activity rhythmically
vibrating in theta frequency in visual cortex and in audio cortex. And there
was increased coherence when you were forming a memory and when you were
successfully sort of pairing that information together. And so coherence
is a way that this audio nuclei, this visual nuclei are sharing information
dynamically, routing it over to the hippocampus, routing it up to higher
order regions that need to process some information. And so coherence seems to
be this really fundamental role for how information is routed throughout the
brain. So what might this feel like? And so I think there's this idea that, you
know, hey, we're just routing information around. And so it's kind of just like
switchboards or circuit breakers just pumping information here and there. But
I wonder and I speculate whether the experience of being an observer window
within a coherent transient functional network feels like a dialogue, feels
like a conversation, maybe even like a debate, and not necessarily just like
the direct one to one transmission of information, right? We go back to the
analogy of two individuals communicating. If you're an observer window and
you're at this macro scale, you have all this neural information processing,
protein information processing, all these scales beneath you working to
generate all this information. Does this macro scale electrical activity that we
can measure for this nuclei? Is it like the equivalent of like a fully fledged
personality? And here, you know, there's a couple movies like that movie inside out
by Pixar, which sort of depicts these different personalities communicating
with each other in the brain. Is coherence more like a dialogue than just,
you know, sending a signal through a wire or like a carrier pigeon from one
place to another. Instead, it's a dynamic interplay or conversation between a
bunch of personalities. And so there's this guy, Richard Schwartz, who he was
studying, he was doing family therapy where he would take a dysfunctional
family and they'd go through a psychotherapeutic process where they'd
communicate and they'd look at different family roles that different people were
playing. And he found that psychologically, this psychotherapy that he was
using actually works well in an individual. An individual has an internal family
system, as he calls it, a bunch of personalities coexisting within your
mind and within your psyche. And these different personalities can be
dysfunctional. The conversation could not be going well. There could be
dysfunction in the family or there could be a coherent family unit where the
personalities are flowing and communicating effectively with each
other. Is coherence some signature or some direct neural mechanism for how
these different personalities in your brain communicate with each other? It's
not a carrier pigeon. It's a dynamic, interesting conversation between sub
entities within you. So being a observer window and undergoing coherence might
feel like more of a conversation than just shooting signals through wires.
Third and final principle is cross frequency coupling. And oh my God, I
love this principle. It is so exciting. So much of my own personal research has
been moving towards looking at cross frequency coupling, because it's really
this fascinating way that you can study multiple spatial temporal scales
interacting with each other. And so the first discovery of cross frequency
coupling was in the hippocampus, the region I mentioned to you previously. And
what they found was that the brain nuclei of the hippocampus was undergoing
these big slow rhythmic theta oscillations. And meanwhile, high frequency
neurons were also activating and going through these action potentials. And
they were coding for different regions in space. So there's a rat running
around a maze. And there's different cells called place cells that fire for
different locations along the maze. And they found that within the theta rhythm,
a sequence of these place cells were firing off. And as the place cells were
activating, they were all locked to a particular phase within the theta
oscillation. So every time the theta oscillation like went up, you get a bunch
of place cells activating, and then it goes down and there's silence. And then
it goes back up and a bunch of activations and it goes down and there's
silence, right? And so this is called phase amplitude coupling, it's a form of
cross frequency coupling, where the phase of the slow frequency oscillation is
related to the amplitude of the higher frequency oscillation, right? And so
research shows that you can actually decode trajectories of movement from
these theta oscillations in the hippocampus. And when you go down to the
neural level, you just see a cell fires for this place, a cell fires for that
place. But from the electric fields of the hippocampus, you could figure out a
trajectory of motion, right? And so it's it's basically forming some form of
abstraction, right? It's sequencing, it's organizing, it's it's basically
ordering the lower level information into this just stalled more abstract
representation. So it's not just like binding a more complex representation
like we talked about with synchrony, but it's really this form of abstraction.
You're building a more abstract representation from more concrete
information, right? Trajectory is more abstract than just a point. So here you
have like a vector and maybe a speed. But below it, you just have a single point
in in space and maybe in time. And so we can find a lot of evidence that when
you're doing these higher order cognitive tasks, right? When you're
undergoing some mental function, which requires abstract knowledge, you'll
find this phase amplitude coupling pattern, this cross frequency coupling
pattern, where you see these big slow rhythmic brain nuclei coupled to these
faster rhythms. And the the real canonical one is called theta gamma
coupling. And this was the example in the hippocampus that I mentioned. And you
find theta gamma coupling whenever you need to generate more abstract
representations, or you need to build more abstract items from more concrete
items. And so this seems to be sort of a universally applied mechanism in the
brain. And it's gaining a lot of traction. And we're finding more and more
evidence that this is taking place. Newer rhythm, which I've been sort of
pioneering and getting really interested in, is called delta beta
coupling. And this is the idea of similar to the to the building of abstract
ideas or representations. Delta beta coupling has been much more strongly
linked to action initiation and decision making and action planning. So in a way,
it's sort of like the top down equivalent to the theta gamma rhythm, where
you see these big slow prefrontal decision making regions oscillating when
you're trying to choose between a couple of different options. And then this
really fast beta rhythm, which is linked to spinal cord activation and muscle
innervation muscle activation. There's this coupling between this big slow
decision making process, and then the spinal cord bodily movements that get
enacted. And so just like cross frequency coupling sort of has this bottom up flow
of information as you're building more abstract representations moving up the
nested observer window hierarchy. There might be other frequency bands that are
really dedicated to taking the information from the tire order more
abstract regions, big slow observer windows down into the details where we
got to translate all these big abstract action plans into move that muscle, move
this muscle, you know, do this complex piano play with your fingers. But it
comes from these big abstract cartoony decisions that are being made. So what
does this feel like? Well, I think this one has a very clear experiential
analogy, right? The idea is, and I mentioned this earlier in the episode,
ideas popping into your head. This is the theta gamma experience. An idea shows
up, and it's in your mind, and it's fully formed to subtract delta beta. I
want to move my arm over here. I'm not thinking about I'm gonna use my flexor
extensor, and I'm going to use my elbow to do this thing, right? It's all just
this fluid motion that occurs. And I have very abstract ideas of what is
actually happening. And somehow it gets translated. I mean, you can barely think
about what you're doing, and you'll go and do it, right? A good analogy is with
professional sports, professional musicians, right? They they learn these
complex motor movements, but then it gets encoded into lower levels. And then
they're just activating cartoons, right? There's just these cartoonified
decisions being performed. And then and then it occurs. And I think another
cool analogy related to this is that cross frequency coupling is limited,
right? It's a weak form of coupling. You can only influence one level beneath
you, one level above you, you can't get much deeper than that, right? So you hit
a wall, and you can't go deeper. What does that feel like? I think a good
example is optical illusions, right? These undulating visual patterns that
come from black and white checkered visual effects. And so we know it's not
real, we know that there's nothing actually undulating. However, we can't
stop ourselves from seeing it. You don't have control over it, it's just coming
up. So we don't have like ultimate perceptual control over what our eyes
are doing, you know, we're only influencing one level beneath ourselves.
There are weird examples like with the Necker cube. It's a cube that you can
view from two different perspectives. And in that example, people are able to
flip between these different ways of viewing it. Is it popping out of the
screen? Is it sinking into the screen? And you can actually flip that at will.
But it's challenging. It's hard to flip the Necker cube for some people. Other
people find it easier. So what makes the difference between people that have an
easy time flipping the Necker cube and others that don't, you know? So I think
there's like, emphasizing this, you're the volitional agent at this higher level
trying to have top down influence on these lower levels. And sometimes you
struggle to have the influence that you want to have. Other times it takes the
form of cartoonified abstraction, right? And yet it makes its way down. But
you're only operating at a very higher level. All right, quick note on
fractals, and then we'll hop into the quantum computer question at the end.
So when we measure electrical activity in the brain, if this was all real, then
we'd want to see this sort of scale free observer windows at all these different
levels, cross frequency coupling going down this hierarchy, all this interesting
resonance structure. And what we do find is that the background noise of the
brain has this one over F power distribution, and it's called pink noise.
White noise is like equal noise at all frequency bands. Pink noise is shifted
towards the lower frequency end. So lower frequencies have more noise and
higher frequencies have less noise. This sounds like the ocean. You can look up
pink noise and listen to it for yourself. But it sounds a lot more like the
ocean, whereas white noise sounds like static. And the pink noise is a little
more soothing than this pure static. So when we measure the brain, we see pink
noise, we hear the ocean in the electrical activity of our brains. And what
this implies is that these big low frequency rhythms have a bit more of an
influence over the overall signal in our in our brains and in our bodies. And
this is what we would want to see if there was a scale free fractal like
organization to the activity in our bodies. And so there's a lesser known
principle in fractal mathematics called the Hearst exponent. So if you take the
Mandelbrot set, you kind of have this like Buddha looking figure at at once
one view of the Mandelbrot set. And as you zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom,
zoom, you keep zooming, you see all these crazy patterns, crazy, crazy, crazy
patterns. Boom, you see the Buddha shape again, once you get deep enough into the
Mandelbrot. Keep zooming, keep zooming, keep zooming, boom, there it is again.
There is a certain rate at which you will zoom and then you see the original
pattern that you started off with, right? And so there's a rate of zoom until you
hit an interesting pattern. And so what we're using or what we're sort of
speculating is that observer windows are kind of like fractals in that they have
a certain depth that you have to zoom before you see more observer windows. We
have observer windows, they're neurons, let's say, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom,
zoom, zoom, zoom, nothing, no observers, no observer windows, bam, proteins, these
are observer windows. Keep zooming, more time passes, more observer windows,
right? Zoom out from the neuron, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, bam, brain
nuclei. So the idea is that observer windows are not arbitrary, they're not
anywhere, there are clear boundaries on what can be an observer window and where
you find the observer windows. They're not infinitely spread like at all, at all
levels, but there's some sort of ratio or some sort of mathematical description
for when observer windows show up in your body and in your, in your brain. And
so a fun question here is how deep can we go? You know, is it turtles all the way
down, right? The, the classic example of the earth is flat, there's a turtle
holding it up, but who's holding up the turtle? Oh, another turtle, but who's
holding that turtle up? Oh, another turtle, oh, it must be turtles all the way
down, right? How deep does this observer window fractal go, right? Who knows,
maybe you hit Planck scale and that's the last observer window, you got these
Planck scale observer windows and everything's kind of built up out of
that level. If we zoom out, are there observer windows at larger, more
macroscopic, slower scales? Maybe, maybe biology is complex and biology needed to
be evolved. And so we are the largest observer windows on the planet. And
maybe we are giant observer windows relative to the rest of nature and
resting to the world around us, right? Maybe there are larger observer windows.
What would that look like? Very speculative, almost into the woo woo
range, but interesting and fun to think about. Okay, observer windows are
limited. They are difficult to create and they're defined by a high degree of
synchrony. How high is the synchrony requirement to be an observer window?
Well, you know, Jonathan Schuller and I are going to move forward publishing this
paper thinking about this, just very classical, sort of simpler terms, just
talking about electrical activity and coherence and synchrony is kind of a
matter of degree, you know, where coherence is weak coupling, synchrony is
strong coupling, but it needs to be strong enough that it forms that functional
unit, right? However, if you take a quantum computer, quantum consciousness,
take on all of this, what if synchrony was really quantum coherence? And here
the terminology gets very confusing because the word quantum coherence sounds
like the other word for coherence. But the idea here would be that really,
really strong coupling would be you form a single wave function, a bunch of
quantum bits, they're all entangled, they form a single quantum computer. And so
the observer window is a quantum computer. The high degree of synchrony that
you require is the ultimate level of synchrony. No environmental influence
whatsoever. Quantum mechanics has a definition where the superposition and
the entanglement effects reign supreme, they become dominant when there's no
environmental influence and it's like the state of ultimate synchrony, right? So
one way to recast the now model within the quantum consciousness paradigm is to
say that observer windows are quantum computers, right? There are quantum
computers, and there's quantum computers nested within quantum computers, and that
gets a little speculative and wild. But then these quantum computers set the
domain of what can be an observer window, and then all other forms of
compute quantum computers talking to each other is classical. Classical
communication has a phase lag, it has physical constraints on the communication.
And so coherence is classical communication between quantum computers.
Cross-requency coupling gets bizarre, but maybe it's some other form, yeah, of
classical communication, or maybe that is yet some third form of communication
that we don't really understand yet, right? Synchrony is quantum computation
fundamentally. Coherence is this digital classical, maybe forming a
digital computer network, and then that cross-requency coupling seems to defy
either of these forms. And I'll come back to this in our next episode, because
after this we're going to dive deeper into these notions of fractal computation,
and there's some fun ideas out there that I'd be remiss to not introduce you to.
So look forward to our next episode on fractal computation, and I'll leave you
to ponder tonight as you fall asleep. Are you a single conscious being? Are there
nested conscious beings within you? Are you a rich dialogue? Is your mind a
corporation of workers working with you for some common goal, which is your
life's mission, and this is a collaborative enterprise of conscious
beings nested within each other? Is that your reality, or are you a holistic
single individual, or are you a collection of physical processes and
chaotic influences? Alrighty, I'll talk to you again very soon.
