Welcome back to the show that tells you you are a quantum
computer with free will supervising a vast hierarchy of
cognitive systems. My name is Justin Riddle. And this is
episode 40 of the quantum consciousness series. In today's
episode, I'll be giving you an update of the nested observer
Windows model and recapping a lecture I gave at the science
of consciousness conference in April of 2024. By the end of
today's episode, we'll ask the question, what is it like to be
at the apex of a hierarchical consciousness? This episode is
available on YouTube and an audio only version is available on
Spotify and Apple podcast. If you like what you hear today,
then please like this video, subscribe to this channel, leave
a comment below or for the audio listener write a review.
So today, I'm going to be basically recapping and giving
you the same lecture that I gave at the science of consciousness
conference in April of 2024. But I'll be giving it a little bit
of an expanded version. You can find the original recording on
on the internet, I'll provide a link that you can go look, you
know, at the original version if you so desire. But essentially,
this is a update to a previous episode on this channel that I
gave. However, the manuscript is now published in the neuroscience
of consciousness journal. I will also give a link to that
paper it is open access so free to download and read for
yourself. And this is work that I've done with Jonathan
Schuehler. He's a professor at the University of California,
Santa Barbara. So all of this work is collaborative with him. So
without further ado, let's hop right into it. So the title of
the paper is hierarchical consciousness, the nested observer
windows model, or the now model for short. So to introduce this
idea of hierarchical consciousness, because it is not,
you know, usually a typical way that people imagine that the
brain or the mind is organized. So I'll give you a quick
example here. So when driving, you start to mind wander, pondering
the nature of consciousness. Without warning, you suddenly
realize you were almost at your destination. You wonder where
the time went. Now your attention is focused on navigating
the which freeway exit to get off, and on what side street to
turn. You are acutely aware of the lack of awareness paid to
driving. But you do not notice that the wandering mind kept
wandering while you were focused on navigating the side
streets. When parking your car, you revisit the wandering mind.
There is a fresh batch of theories and models that seem to
have materialized. You diligently proceed to review those new
ideas, as you absentmindedly walk up the driveway. So this
example is meant to sort of showcase a couple different
ways in which we are not fully aware of all of the cognitive
processes that are ongoing within our own mind. And it appears
that there are many cognitive systems coexisting
simultaneously in your mind. And you usually can only pay
attention to one or a subset of these different cognitive
systems. So a very common example is driving. A lot of the
times we're flying down the freeway at 70 miles per hour. And
we're barely paying attention to what we're doing. But this is
kind of alarming, right? I mean, you could almost die at any
moment if you lost control of your vehicle. And yet we consume
our mind with fanciful ideas and and fun thought processes as
we are driving. And it's very second nature to just kind of
let your body take over the act of driving. And then at certain
moments, you need to interrupt your mind wandering and pay
attention to driving, you know, once again, and there's a way
that your mind can get your attention gets you reengaged
with the act of driving. And, you know, in the absence of
that call to pay attention, you can freely wander your mind
around. And in this example, we give kind of an additional way
that your mind could be operating autonomously. And that is
mind wandering itself. Could it be that there is a part of your
mind that is maybe always wandering, always engaged in
abstract thought. And when you pay attention to driving, let's
say you need to navigate some side streets as you're going to
your friend's house, you really need to pay attention to
everything that you're doing. And then you revisit the wandering
mind. And could it be that the wandering mind kept going when
you were paying attention to driving? This is something that
we much less often kind of attribute to what can be
performed autonomously in our brains in our minds. However,
why not? And I think if you were to introspect on your
conscious experience, you'd probably be able to recognize
many instances where there appears to be fully formed
ideas that are, you know, springing into your mind
springing into your attention. And you say, Hey, that was a
great idea. I just had. But where did that idea really come
from? Were you aware of the creation of that idea kind of
from the ground up? Okay, so hierarchical consciousness is a
very novel way of really thinking about you and your
mind. So you are at the top, you are the apex of a hierarchical
system. This means that there are systems nested within you.
And within those systems, there are further subsystems nested
within those. So what are some of the implications of
hierarchical consciousness? And what is it like to be at the apex
of a hierarchically consciousness system? So we often
kind of naively conceptualize the mind as a monologue. There's a
narrative stream, the story I'm telling myself as I go through
my day. And while there's a lot of validity to the idea of a
narrative monologue, there's also a lot of moments where our
mind is more like a dialogue, right? When you're in your
thoughts, and you're simulating these different ideas, you can
go for minutes and minutes and minutes at a time, debating
different positions, different ideas. And a lot of times we talk
to ourselves, you are talking through some idea, hearing your
own counterpoints to that idea. And it's as if there is a
dialogue of multiple competing interests within us. It says if
we have many different personalities, drives, views,
ways of conceptualizing the world around us, and they're not
necessarily compatible. And we're faced with a lot of
conflict, inner conflict as we navigate new situations. What
should we do here? What should we do there? Do we view this as
you know, viewpoint A or viewpoint B? And there's a
rich dialogue occurring internally. Another implication is
that we often kind of have this idea that we're creating our
thoughts. I thought this thought, this is my thought, we
claim ownership over our thinking. You are building and
constructing ideas. And once you have an idea, you proudly, you
know, tell the world, ah, look at my idea, I've created this
wonderful new product of my mind. And this is my product.
However, there are many examples, if we're kind of honest
with ourselves, where we just have an idea, and it seems to
spring out of nowhere. There's no experience of creating the
idea. It's like an epiphany moment, an idea is thrown into
your mind. Could this be some sort of nested substructure,
some cognitive system within you, that created and constructed
and did a lot of the hard work, and then just presented you
with an idea at the apex level. You still claim ownership over
that idea. However, you weren't really a part of the creation
process per se. Even more extreme, there are intrusive
thoughts. Sometimes we have a thought and we say, Oh, I did
not think that thought that was not me, my brain just generated
this thought and I am not responsible for that thought
whatsoever. This idea, this thought just occurred. But that,
you know, that's not me. I delete that I will willingly
suppress and remove that thought from my mind. And I also
reject ownership. I am not an owner of this thought. It was
something my brain generated. So this is also a very common
place example that, you know, if you introspect, you'll you'll
have many moments where you might not want to claim
responsibility over your own thinking. And we also have this
idea that we are in control of our bodies. You know, I choose
to move around and I'm making this hand gesture with my hands.
This is me controlling my body. However, I'm not really aware of
what my hands are actually doing. I am initiating a cartoon
version of what I want to happen. And then a very complex
intricate muscle activation pattern then arises. And so I am,
you know, in control of that to some degree. But I really don't
understand any of the details of what my body is actually doing.
And so on some level, you know, you're in control, but you're
not as in control as you might think that you are. And if you
really pay attention to what your body is doing, you will
sometimes find these sort of automated or seemingly unconscious
movements that your body is performing. And could it be that
there are nested systems within you that are potentially kind
of mediating your connection to the body. And when they act
semi autonomously from your will, when you're, you know, not
paying attention, there's some evidence of cognition or some
sort of will or form in your body's movements, even if you're
not fully consciously aware of what is occurring. So at the
core of hierarchical consciousness is the idea that
yes, you are a cognitive system. Yes, you are thinking. But
within you are thinking cognitive systems. And they are
providing you with this information with these
cognitive streams. And you are supervising a bit of a
corporation of subsystems within you. And this gives a very
rich landscape to our internal experience. There are so many
cognitive structures inside of you. And they all are acting in
these very complex nuanced ways. And this sort of increases the
richness, the variety of our inner life. And it gives a way of
kind of understanding biology from a from a new lens. So now I'm
going to dive into that kind of biological motivation. Alright,
so where did this hierarchical consciousness idea come from? On
some level, it came from introspection. But in another way,
there is a really strong motivation for hierarchical
consciousness that arises from our observations in biology and in
neuroscience. Okay, so if we ask the question, where in the
brain should we study consciousness, right? There are
many different people that are neuroscientists. And yet they
use very different tools, different systems that they're
studying. And so, you know, we might make this kind of pitch
of reductionism. Every system is reducible to a subsystem. Okay,
a brain region is made out of neurons. A neuron is made out of
synapses. Synapses are made out of proteins and proteins are made
out of atoms and atoms are made out of quarks and the forces of
particle physics. And so to understand a brain region, you
shouldn't study the brain region. It's actually just
neurons. You need to go study neurons. But you know, you
can't really study neurons because they're just too big. And
you know, they're not really real. Neurons are really just a
bunch of synapses and electrical potentials. But to
understand the electric potentials, you got to go study
the synapses. But you know, synapses are really not real
either. They're just made out of different proteins, different
receptors. And the synapse really just emerges from the mass
action of many, many protein receptors. So forget about the
synapse, we got to go study proteins. And then proteins are
really just emerging phenomenon of all these amino acids. And
those are really constrained by these, you know, more atomic
style chemical forces of organic chemistry. And then, you know,
it's an infinite reduction, maybe down until you hit
mathematics, or something like that. But then, oh, you know,
math is just a construct of humans and human society. So
really, there's this strong reductionist bias. And I would
make the argument that this is sort of a naive thought to say
that, you know, to study something, we have to go study
the parts. Because eventually, we're all just particle
physicists. And we're all going to our nearest, you know,
particle accelerator. And no one is doing neuroscience, right?
Then it's completely inappropriate to study the
brain at all, because we should all just be particle
physicists, right? So if you take reductionism to the ultimate
extreme, it gets a little ridiculous. So right now, the
status quo is that to study consciousness, you have to study
neurons. And in a weird way, this is like a an assumption that
people don't even admit that they have, right, there is a
strong bias to say the brain is neurons. And you have to study
neurons, right? But for the same reasons I just laid out with
reductionism. Why study neurons? Why not study synapses and
proteins? What is it that makes the neuron special? Well, you
could say, Well, the neuron has the capacity for action
potentials for these meaningful electrical potentials. It's that
electrical property, which is so meaningful. However, there are
very profound electrical properties at the level of
functional brain regions of entire brain nuclei. Why in the
world would you not be allowed to study brain nuclei? Why is it
inappropriate to study brain nuclei? And yet it is completely
appropriate to study neurons themselves, right? So moving in
either direction, you can construct some rationality for
that movement. However, all theories out there, you know, in
status quo, typical neuroscience of consciousness are these kind of
toy cartoon neurons. And so hierarchical consciousness is
really making the pitch, you know, what if all of these levels
were meaningfully contributing to conscious experience to the
information processing of the brain? You can study brain nuclei,
and you can study neurons, and you can study proteins. And more
so, what if there was some system that actually allowed for
information transfer between all these different levels? If you
could transfer information across these levels, then perhaps
there is genuine information processing happening at these
different scales. And it might be different information that is
being processed, right? As you move from these orders of
magnitude of difference, there could be unique channels of
information being processed at these different scales, and then
some sort of meaningful exchange across levels. And so I
think there's a pretty good motivation to say that this is
happening in the brain. And then the follow up question would
be, what does this mean for consciousness? What if there's a
hierarchical biological system at play? How do we shove
consciousness or how do we make sense of consciousness within
that system? Could it be that there was some sort of
cognition, esch processing occurring at all these different
levels? And maybe there is even consciousness at multiple
levels within the brain. Alright, so to kind of motivate a
little bit of this theory of the evidence for it, I'm going to
pivot a little bit to say, you know, what is the evidence that
these large scale brain nuclei are real? Because in a strange
way, or maybe it's not so strange, it might align with
like just human bias of where the status quo is at. We are much
more hesitant as a field to say that brain nuclei functional
brain regions are real. Those get the label of epiphenomenal much
more often than a neuron. There are very few people walking
around saying neurons aren't real, they're just epiphenomenal.
However, there's many people walking around saying functional
brain regions aren't real, they just, you know, are kind of a
circle we draw around the brain in one way or another. But
really, we should all be studying neurons. So I like to give
the example of a train. So if we were to imagine the brain as an
engine as a train, what is it that pushes the brain train
forward through time? What is the engine of the system? And status
quo would say that the engine is neurons, there's a bunch of
neurons, and they have electrical potentials, the
spiking activities that are occurring, they release chemicals
from one onto another, and then they react and activate based on
this chemical signaling. However, if you put a recording device
inside of the brain, you observe these large electrical
fluctuations at the scale of entire populations of neurons.
And what we used to think as a field is that these electrical
fluctuations were just kind of the steam off of the brain
train. These are epiphenomenal. They're not real signals. Well,
there's signals in the sense that you can measure them, but
they're not really doing anything, right? It's not
contributing to the function of the brain. However, we now
realize after some experimental work and after some theoretical
work, that there might be a bit of a circular causation here
where even if these electric fields at the scale of hundreds
of thousands to millions of neurons, even if that's
generated from the activity of smaller, you know, neurons
themselves, and the mass collective action of these
neurons, once the electric field has been generated, once it
exists, it then exists independently of the individual
neurons, and that electric field can then change and constrain
the activity of neurons. And there's a little bit of a
circular causation here. Neurons can cause electric fields.
These electric fields can then change neurons. And it's not
saying that one is primary, although maybe you could make
the argument that you wouldn't have the electric field without
the neurons. And that is, you know, likely true. However,
they're, you know, they both are contributing meaningful to the
processing of these systems. And there has been a lot of work
lately, really diving into what do neural oscillations do for the
brain and for cognition, and we're getting more and more
evidence that they appear to be meaningfully related to
cognition. So what I would make an argument to you, why should
we care about these electric fields about these neural
oscillations? Well, these neural oscillations are really the
closest correlate that we have to cognition. So I'll give you a
couple examples here. So one example is the theta oscillation
that you can witness in sound waves. So as I am talking to
you, if you were to record the words coming out of my mouth,
you take that sound wave recording, and you break down
the frequency domain, the frequency components of my
speech, you'll see that there's a lot of rhythmic structure to
the way that we talk to each other. And more so, if you zoom
into individual words that I'm saying, there are different
sound chunks in each of my words. And those sound chunks are
coming at a very rhythmic rate across all different cultures
that we've measured. People tend to speak at a very canonical
rate. And there's a prominent theta frequency oscillation
roughly between four and eight hertz across all these different
languages that we can record from. And that rhythm is a very
prominent rhythm in the sound waves. And we can find that
rhythm from the sound waves in the electrical activity of the
brain. And if we look at auditory cortex, for example, as I'm
talking to you, your auditory cortex is rhythmically
fluctuating in sync to the words that I am saying. So this is a
really profound electrical property within the brain. And
it really closely correlates to the type of information that is
being processed in the world around us. And is it a
coincidence that we all speak at a certain rhythm? And this
rhythm is found all throughout the brain with various protein
constituents that give rise to this rhythm. There's a really
tight correspondence in frequency domain between our
behaviors and the electrical properties of our brains
themselves, which might suggest that, you know, our brains are
helping us produce language. There's some electrical
determinants, some biological brain determinants for our
speech. And then, you know, we're tuned into these rhythms in
our environment. Another example comes from the visual
cortex. So in the back of your brain, there is a electrical
rhythm called the alpha oscillation. This is occurring
roughly around 10 times per second, 10 hertz. And if you
measure visual cortex, you'll find this big prominent
electrical wave traveling through your visual cortex. And
what people have found in one example experiment is that if
you flash a light really quickly, there's a certain rate at
which if I flash the light really quickly, you will
perceive it as a single flash, versus if it's a little bit
slower, you perceive it as two separate flashes. And there's a
certain time point at which it crosses over from being
two flashes into getting fused into a single flash. And this
is the flicker into fusion rate. And this is roughly around
100 milliseconds in the average individual. And what people
have found is that the rate at which your visual cortex is
fluctuating is correlated with your flicker fusion rate. So the
time at which you shift from a flicker into a fusion is related
to the ongoing electrical fluctuations in your visual
cortex. So what this means is there's basically a one to one
correspondence between visual awareness, refreshes, and the
electrical activity in your brain. If the flashes show up in
different refreshes, then you have the experience of two
separate flashes. But if both flashes end up in one electrical
fluctuation in your visual cortex, then you just have the
experience of a single flash fused together. So this is quite
wild, right? I mean, this is basically saying that your visual
awareness, the perception that you're having right now of
visual information is actually flickering and updating. And we're
maybe not aware of this update in our experience. And you know,
I would argue that maybe it's because you're a little bit
slower up at the apex, but more on that a little bit later. And
this is directly related to the cognitive processing within your
system, right? So to be reductive and say, Well, who cares
about these electric field fluctuations, we got to dive into
the neurons because the neurons are all that matters. Well, we
have a very strong tight correlation between the electric
fields in this large brain structure and your experience. So
what evidence can we make that there is a strong correspondence
more so than just correlation, right? Because just because we
can measure something and just because something is correlated
doesn't mean that it's really or causally related to the thing
itself. So electrical activity happens, cognition happens as
well, these two phenomenon or correlated to each other. And so
the way that we can test this in the laboratory, and my lab
does, you know, exactly this, we will deliver what's called
noninvasive brain stimulation, and we can do this in humans,
where we can deliver a brief magnetic pulse to the brain. And
that causes a brief electric current to arise within a part
of cortex. And if we apply these brief pulses at a certain
spacing, right, then what we find is that we can very
selectively drive these electric field fluctuations in the
brain, where the repeated application of multiple pulses
will start to build up and ramp up an electric field
fluctuation. So here I'm including a image of you know,
some data that was recently published from my group, where
we essentially show just this that if you're delivering brief
magnetic pulses to the brain, and you're recording the electrical
activity in the brain region that you're targeting, you can see
a ramp up in these electric fields. And what's really
interesting is then we can actually change and shift
cognition as a function of just the frequency that we're
targeting in the brain. And you know, in my day job, I'm a
cognitive neuroscientist and a lot of my work is delivering
frequency specific brain stimulation in human participants
in order to alter or change their cognition. And the idea is
that this is a way of building causal evidence for these
macroscopic electric fields in the brain. It's not just
reducible to neurons, but by changing these electric fields,
we change cognition. So this is building much stronger evidence
that these electric fields are directly related to the cognitive
processing within the brain. So my work and that of others is
really trying to validate this highest level or one of the top
levels within the biological hierarchy, the level of functional
brain regions of electric field fluctuations roughly between 10
Hertz and two Hertz, this low frequency range in the brain
really is real. It's doing something for cognition. It is
a part of the engine of the brain. It is not just the steam
emanating from the brain, but it is really doing something for
cognition for our experience. And I think what is really
exciting about this work is that, you know, we have a very slow
reality, we're thinking our thoughts, we're pondering things,
our thoughts occur at the scale of multiple seconds, we're
perceiving things at the scale of sub seconds, doing analyses
like these and doing experiments like these really
build evidence that that low frequency electrical activity in
the brain is meaningfully related to cognition is meaningfully
related to the processing of the brain. And it one to one
relates to our experience of being a human being inside of
our brains. So the next question here is, is there a way to
communicate from one scale to another scale? And this is where
the concept of cross frequency coupling comes in. So cross
frequency coupling is saying that there's coupling between two
different frequencies across those frequencies. And this was
first observed in rodents with invasive recordings of the
hippocampus, which is a part of the brain involved in spatial
navigation. And what was found was that there are these big
electric field fluctuations in the hippocampus, as rats are
navigating mazes, and simultaneous to those big theta
frequency electric field fluctuations, you also have
neurons that are coding for individual locations in space. So
these are called place cells. And so you'll have, for example,
neuron A fires when you're in location A, you have neuron B
that fires when you're in location B, neuron C in location
C, neuron D in location D. And what you find is that in the
hippocampus, there is a sequential activation neuron A,
the neuron B, the neuron C, the neuron D, as the rat is sitting
at location A and thinking about the future of their movement
through location A and to B and to C and to D. And there's a
sequential activation of these neurons firing. And the sequence
of firing is occurring within a theta rhythm. So it says if the
brain is going ABCD, ABCD, ABCD, ABCD, there's a rhythmic
activation of these place cells being activated through time.
And so this is the first observation of cross frequency
coupling between the scale of neurons and the scale of the
hippocampus. And the neurons are inside of the hippocampus. But
you can now decode a trajectory of motion, a movement of the
animal from the electric field activity on its own. And
granted, you know, all these neurons are coding for
information and building and, you know, projecting information
into these electric fields. And then the electric field is
sort of an abstract representation of all that
information at the lower level. So I think what's really
interesting here is that you've built a trajectory of motion
from locations, right? This is not a more complex location. This
is a abstraction away from location into movement. Movement
is like a higher concept than a location. And so we have the
construction of a higher order abstract concept from lower
order information. And maybe cross frequency coupling, the
co occurrence of fast neuron activity nested within low
frequency electric field activity, and the coupling the
systematic relationship between these levels. This is evidence
of some sort of mechanism, some sort of means of information
transfer between nested systems one within the other. This
example that I've shown you is called phase amplitude
coupling, where the phase of the theta frequency basically where
you are in a single cycle is related to the amplitude, the
activation of these neurons. And it says if the low frequency
signal is kind of sequencing the higher frequency signal. And
there's been a lot of work since this original rodent work on
the hippocampus finding cross frequency coupling in memory
processing, working memory, long term memory, attention,
decision making, there's many, many examples that we've now
observed of these big, low frequency, entire brain regions,
entire networks of brain regions, coupling to more
microscopic scales. So the next question is, you know, okay, we
can measure these correlations, but is it quote unquote, real?
Do we have causal evidence for cross frequency coupling? We can
use the same magnetic stimulation approach that I
told you about just previously. But we can also use what's
called transcranial electrical stimulation. And this is
something that my lab also uses actively. And there's been many
people, you know, using this tool. But essentially, you can
deliver electric current to the brain that's designed to mimic
these endogenous coupling patterns that you observe in the
brain. So one example that I'll show for you right now is we
can observe cross frequency coupling between one signal and
another signal, we can extract the peak frequency of that
coupling in a human participant using EEG. And then we
can derive a electrical stimulation waveform based on
our observation in EEG, and then deliver electrical
stimulation back into the brain to then change and enhance the
endogenous cross frequency coupling, and then change
people's cognition. So the example I'm showing you here, you
can go check out the papers if you're interested. But this was
a cognitive control tasks where people had to, you know,
memorize a bunch of different rules and use context. And
there was sort of a multi stage decision making process that
they had to engage with. And there were numerous cross
frequency coupling signals emerging from the brain. There
was a perception control signal and action control signal. And
we differentially targeted either the perceptual control
cross frequency coupling signal or that motor control
signal. And we could change behavior in a very systematic
way based on what frequency we were targeting, either that
motor control frequency or that perception control frequency.
Alright, so we have causal evidence for cross frequency
coupling for these interactions between many different stages
or scales in the brain. And so the question now is what does
this mean for consciousness? So in the nested observer
windows model, at the core of this model, is this idea of a
nested hierarchy? And this is directly motivated by cross
frequency coupling. And so the primary question in hierarchical
consciousness is what does it mean if we were to take cross
frequency coupling very, very seriously, right? Cross frequency
coupling is not only real, but it is a fundamental property of
what it means to be a conscious being. So what if cross
frequency coupling was very, very, very much real? And what
that would imply is that there is information processing
occurring at a slow, big scale, and information processing
happening at a faster, smaller scale, and these systems are
nested within each other. So the metaphor we use to describe
this is mosaic tiling. So in mosaic tiling, you have an image
that is made out of mosaic tiles. These are different smaller
tiles, and the collage of all these tiles together produces an
image, a mosaic image. And what we suggest is what if there is a
recursively nested mosaic tiling, where every image is made
out of images, where those images are then mosaic tiles of
even smaller images, and the pattern repeats recursively as
you zoom into an image. So what this means is that your
cognitive system, your experience is a collage of all of
these different cognitive systems within you. And all these
cognitive systems are bubbling up into your experience. And
collectively, they form you as this collage of cognition. But
if you were to dive into any one of these cognitive threads, you
would find that that is in and of itself, a collage of more
microscopic cognitive sub processes, and so on and so forth
as you zoom into smaller and smaller systems. So the nested
observer windows model is basically saying that you are an
observer window, you are a bounded space of cognition. And
within you are nested sub windows. And within those are more
sub windows. And there's a recursive process of nesting
motivated by the observations from modern cognitive neuroscience
for a role of cross frequency coupling in cognition. So the
now model in order to get to the point where we can talk about
these nested systems, we need a couple other metaphors, a couple
other mechanisms to kind of flesh out the model to be
complete. So the first metaphor is mosaic tiling. This is what
I already spelled out for you. The next metaphor is a theater.
We need a boundary around a cognitive system. And we use the
metaphor of a theater. And we call this an observer window. This
is a spatio temporally bounded system. And within it, there is
a holistic gestalt representation. There is sort of a
wholeness to what it is like to be an observer window. And
there's some boundary around the system that excludes the rest
of reality to say that either you're in the window or you're
not. And if you're in the window, you are bound together into a
single observer, a single frame of reference. Now, because there
is this nesting structure, what this really needs also to have
is a mechanism for dialogue or communication between observer
windows that are within the same scale. So it might be that you
at the apex, you're at the top, you're the the head honcho
observer window. As you zoom in, there's a bunch of cognitive
systems coexisting. But more so those cognitive systems, they
can communicate up to you to the observer window. But they also
need to communicate laterally to each other. And this requires a
different mechanism than just communicating up to the top
observer window or down to a sub observer window. You're
talking to your peers. And this we use the metaphor of
dialogue. And so there are three mechanisms that we propose in
the nested observer windows model. The first mechanism I
already talked to you about this is cross frequency
coupling. This is a means of transferring information up and
down the nested hierarchy. You can have a emergence of
information from the lower order into the higher order. You
can also have a submergence of information from you or from a
sub window down into the smaller faster windows. And this is a
means of sending control signals down into your sub
structures. Now the formation of an observer window, we use a
mechanism called synchrony. This is a zero phase lag
connection between all the components of a system. Very
simply put, it means that everything within an observer
window is perfectly synchronized. There is a zero lag
synchronization, where all the sub components form the whole
component. And this is something that we kind of
intuitively assume is the case. When you call a thing a thing,
you kind of assume that everything in that thing is
synchronized and acting as if it was one thing. Here, we're
kind of formalizing that and saying that synchrony is the
foundation for creating one of these observer windows. This is
very similar to wolf singers, binding by synchronization, the
idea that you can create a gestalt representation, a single
meaningful construct through synchrony, through
synchronization. So we're really just building off of and
using wolf singers mechanism here. And then finally, we have
coherence. Coherence is the mechanism for dialogue or
communication. This is very much akin to Pascal freezes,
neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. The idea is
that two systems that are fluctuating will will communicate
to each other. This isn't that they're so synchronized that
they fuse and become one thing. But there is a non zero phase
lag between the two systems, where one is kind of talking
while the other listens and vice versa, they're coordinating
their processing through time, their dynamics. But they are not
fully synchronizing and fusing into into one another. So we
updated communication through coherence to use the word
dialogue through coherence. It really is the same as Pascal
freezes method or his mechanism. However, we think dialogue
kind of preserves a little bit more of the autonomy of the
individuals, instead of viewing these as like switchboards in a
in a circuit diagram. Instead, they're kind of autonomous
beings or autonomous cognitive systems that are like talking to
each other, rather than fusing with some sort of direct wire
connection. All right, an important caveat slash question
here is, you know, we propose synchrony, coherence, cross
frequency coupling as the core mechanisms in the now model.
However, we want to kind of caution that we don't really
think that these mechanisms are sufficient to create
consciousness. We think that these are necessary mechanisms
for communication across scales for the formation of an
observer window for communication between observer
windows. However, just because you have stuff that is
synchronized, we don't think you're spontaneously just gonna
have consciousness anywhere that you have an electric field.
There's probably a little bit more to it than that. If you've
been watching my YouTube channel, then you'll know that I am
very much fascinated and interested in theories of
quantum consciousness, the idea that quantum computers might be
somehow core to the nature of reality and to the nature of
consciousness fundamentally. So I'm kind of holding out that
there are, you know, more mechanisms that we will discover
to be really at the core of what it means to be a conscious
being. However, in the meantime, we got to go out there and do
some cognitive neuroscience. And there's a lot of tools and
methods we can use from cognitive neuroscience like
non-invasive brain stimulation, like the observations made
with EEG or fMRI or invasive recordings, optogenetics, you
know, there's a lot of great tools out there. So we think
that, you know, there's a lot of work to be done just by viewing
these as necessary signals related to consciousness, even if
they're not sufficient to create consciousness outright in a
sort of generative way. But I think it's a really honest
portrayal of where the value of the theory is. There's a lot to
be done in this moment right now with the tools that we have.
And there's room in the future to incorporate new ideas that
inevitably will be emerging from advancements in technology and
in science. Alright, so let's dive a little bit more into the
phenomenology. What is it like to live at the apex of a
hierarchical consciousness system? So one way in which it is
like to be the top of this nested observer window hierarchy is
that ideas will just pop into your mind fully formed. This is a
pattern of emergence. So what does it mean to receive
information via cross frequency coupling? Maybe it would feel
like a light bulb going off in your head. Bam, there's an idea.
There's a fully formed, fully fleshed out concept right there
in front of you, right? The emergence process would kind of
abstract away the lower levels. You are really only aware of
maybe one layer deep into your brain, maybe two layers deep
into your brain. But once you get to three layers deep or even
two layers deep, probably it gets a lot more murky to kind of
see the origin of all this information. Another way that
it's like to be at the apex is we initiate a very cartoon image
of what we want to do. So let's imagine you're playing tennis
and you got to run to the other side of the court, swing your
racket. How aware are you of all the muscle activations of all
the groups in your in your hand, in your legs? We are
initiating cartoons in our minds. You know, and I think
cartoons are a very apt way of kind of thinking about apex
life. You know, your apex is a cartoon diagram. It exists at a
very abstract level. And yet it has access to all the details.
So we perceive HD reality, we perceive fast, high detail
information, and we generate very complex movements. However, we
experience these at a very abstract level. So one of the
beautiful things about the now model is that you can kind of
have your cake and eat it to in the sense that you are very
slow. And yet the data within your mind is very fast. So we get
all of the rich details of all the brain regions, all of the
neurons, all the proteins, all that information processing
that's bubbling up the hierarchy, you get access to it, you get
all of that information. And it's very fast, except you are
very slow. And there's no contradiction here, right? This
is a way of integrating information across very
different time scales. And you can think and act very slowly.
And yet you can propagate that down into the lower levels.
Another example of what it's like to be at the apex, we have
somewhat limited control over these lower levels. And there's
a few examples that I think really showcase or highlight that
limitation. So one of them is optical illusions. So you know,
if you have these undulating checker patterns in some image
that you're looking at, you could have full conscious
awareness that the sheet of paper or the the image is not
moving. However, there is an incorrigible sense that there is
some movement in the image, even though you know that it's not
there. You cannot help but perceive the optical illusion. And
this is a nice way of also showcasing the apex. You are not
fully in control of the subsystems. Okay, and I think this
is one of the real novel predictions of the now model is
that you cannot control your body fully. You are, you know,
sending commands out. But the body can't fully interpret your
commands. And you're so many levels of abstraction away,
that you can't even fully grasp all the sub processes going on
internally. And you are truly an abstraction within the body,
probably still have free will probably still have full control.
But your control is limited to what you are able to know. And
you're only able to know a very high level of detail. Alright,
so the apex is fundamentally slow. And I think that this is
kind of counterintuitive to what a lot of people imagine. And
this was one of the components of the now model, that it even
took us time to accept as we were kind of thinking through the
implications of our own theory. And the idea here is that you,
the apex are likely operating at the time scale of a second to
multiple seconds. Okay. And so what's happening here is you are
this fully integrated observer window. And you are observing the
information content within yourself. So it says if you are
looking down upon your hierarchy at all times, and you're
looking down at these cognitive subsystems and perceiving them,
and they're very fast. So you think to yourself, Ah, that's my
thought right there. Oh, that thought is mine too. That thought
is mine too. And you're like looking down on these nested
observer windows and identifying them as you and the nested
systems are faster than you. You are terrible at seeing
yourself. You only seal the sub windows. And so you mistake the
content of your mind for your mind. It is a part of you, it is a
part of your mind, but it is not your mind. So we now believe
that your mind is integrating over these faster cycles of
these nested systems. And here's a couple examples. You climbed
a mountain, you're looking out over the mountain, and your eyes
are darting around picking up information. So your phobia of
your retina, the center of your retina, the center of your
eyeball perceives high density color vision. The periphery of
your eye only perceives black and white. And it's very low
information content. So when you see the mountain, you just
hike to the top. Do you perceive little spotlights of your
retina as data is being collected? No, your eye darts
around at theta frequency, roughly six times per second,
your eye is moving around. And it's gathering all these
snapshots of the mountain scene. And then it assembles all of
that information into a gestalt representation of the mountain
scene. And our argument is that your mind is at the scale of
the gestalt representation of the full scene. There are
multiple processing time points where your eye gathers data
here gathers data there gathers data there gathers data
there and then it packages and integrates all that information.
And your experience is, wow, isn't that beautiful? Look at
that mountain scene. But if you zoomed into one of your nested
observer windows, they would only have Oh, there's a mountain.
Oh, there's some trees over there. Oh, there's the beautiful
sky over there with some clouds. Each of their snapshots,
their gestalt perceptions is the mountain is the trees is the
sky. But you are slow. At the scale of one second, you've had
six eye movements occur. And now all six of those eye movements,
all that data gets packaged into your experience. And you have
this wallah, this image of the whole mountain vista. Another
example, as I'm talking to you, I'm sending you all these
words. But think about what it's like to listen to words, to
listen to someone talking. You're not really paying attention
to my words. You don't actually really care or know all the
details of all the sound waves I'm sending. Your experience of
my words is, Oh, wow, a sentence. Oh, wow, another
sentence. Oh, wow, another sentence. We argue, and we are
like planning an experiment to like formally test this. We
argue that you are perceiving sentences fully gestalted
together. You're not really paying attention to all the
sound bites. Of course, a nested system is and if you want to
call that you go ahead and call that you. But you are most
closely this big slow observer window. And you receive the
fully packaged information content of a sentence. And if
you introspect on your experience, you can pay
attention to my words if you want to. But most of the time
you're not, you're just like, wow, what a cool idea. Oh, that's
an idea. Oh, that's an idea. You're perceiving the fully
fledged idea construct of the sentence more so than perceiving
words sequentially and building up a sentence. Of course,
there's violations of this. There's exceptions to this. It's
a nested interacting system. So there's ways of like diving in
and paying attention to the details. But if you choose not
to pay attention to the details, you still receive all the
information, right? And that is somewhat counterintuitive and
not the typical thinking on how cognition is occurring. Another
implication here is that it actually is quite hard to be
aware of separate sources of data in your mind. Okay, and we go
into this a little bit in the paper, but I'm going to expand
more on it right now. So when you introspect on your
experience, you are an integrated whole. And even if
there was let's say eight sub observer windows, and maybe you
could name them, you could say, Hey, this is, you know, Justin
one, Justin two, Justin three, Justin four, all these sub
processes within yourself. What if it's hard to distinguish who
is giving you this information, right? You are so highly
integrated at the top level, that you are terrible at
perceiving the individual sources of information that are
becoming integrated into the apex. And this is one of the
reasons why it's kind of eluded us that there are multiple
sub windows, right? Because it's kind of hard for us to learn
about these different sub processes. However, this isn't
to say that it is impossible to learn about these different
sub windows inside of you. And so we also make the argument
that maybe one reason that meditation is so bizarre and so
weird and why we would need to meditate is because if you close
your eyes and think about your experience in your mind, it is a
chaotic mess inside of your mind of all these different
thoughts and feelings and drives and perceptions. Could the
complexity of our inner life be because we are a nested
observer window system, and all these sub windows all have
different drives and different personalities and different
things they're trying to do. And you just naively say, I am
me, I'm one person. And yet there's all these different
conflicting selves internally. And when you try to introspect
on yourself on your experiences, that milieu of
cognitive systems are all being bounded together. And so the
observer window nature of yourself makes it even more
challenging to then introspect on the various sub components or
sub processes that might have a unique origin internally. Alright,
so what evidence do we have in the brain that we are modular?
And what's kind of wild is that the brain is almost bizarrely
over modular and the intuition that you're one person almost
doesn't line up with the data of the brain. If you look at the
brain, it's got two hemispheres. And these hemispheres, if you
hold the brain in your hand, you can kind of twisted and move
the brain. And it's really not touching itself that much. There
is a huge chasm running through the center of your brain,
separating it into two different halves. What if this is a huge
process of the observer window system, where your brain is
intentionally divided, right? The brain wants to create
cognitive dissonance. It wants competing narratives of self. And
by creating competing narratives, you encourage a greater
diversity of thought internally. And this leads to higher
intelligence through simulating more possibilities of what
could be out there of how to view and how to act. And this
would be maybe a evolutionarily beneficial thing to
create internally is a high, high, high modularity. You have
examples like split brain patients, right? If you cut the
brain in half, you cut the corpus callosum. These were
patients that had intractable epilepsy. So they were having a
lot of seizures. And so they cut the brain in half to try to
reduce the amount of seizures that these people were having.
And there's some really bizarre findings out of these patients.
Essentially, that immediately following the surgery, it appears
as if the individual now has two different personalities.
There's a lot of these like simple dissociations of
information coming in between different eyes or different
visual fields. The hands kind of being controlled by different
hemispheres. These are kind of like the simple things you learn
about in textbooks about split brain patients. But what you don't
learn as much about in standard textbooks is that following the
surgery, if you talk to people that work with these patients, it
appears as if there's two very distinct personalities co
habitating within the individual. All right. And
there's some pretty wild examples like one that VS
Ramachandran talks about, where people appear to display very
different belief systems. One hemisphere believes in God, the
other hemisphere does not. One hemisphere has like a funny sense
of humor. The other hemisphere is quite serious. You know,
there's a lot of internal conflict. And the stories you can
learn from people that work with these patients are quite
wild, right? And I feel like this is somewhat missed the
mainstream public discourse in a weird way. Partly, in my
opinion, because this is kind of fundamentally unsettling. In a
weird way, we don't want nested observer windows to be true.
Because it's so alien, and it feels so wrong to our naive
intuition of being a single individual. There's something
culturally preventing us from taking nested observer windows
seriously in a weird way. But is that just some cultural quirk, or
some bias that we've kind of grown into? And can you explain
two personalities coexisting within a single individual in
the split brain patients? Kind of bizarre. You also have the
inverse example. For example, Krista and Tatiana Hogan. These
are twins that are conjoined at the brain. So there is a
connection between the thalamus of these two girls, where
their skulls are fused and their brains are connected. And the
two girls are able to communicate telepathically with
each other. They can think thoughts and hear each other's
thoughts. They can allow each other to control each other's
bodies. They get annoyed at each other when they eat foods that
they don't like, right? They can tell each other jokes and have
you know, a fun time internally. And you know, I think this is
really interesting to ask the question, you know, are these two
girls one person, or are they two separate people? Probably
they're two separate people. However, it's quite strange that
they can communicate using just their minds. It's almost as if
there's two apex observer windows and a means of
communicating between the two apexes. And we might think to
ourselves, wow, this is so alien. This is so bizarre. I have no
idea what it would be like to be the Hogan twins. But if the
nested observer windows model is true, then you might actually
know what it's like to be the Hogan twins more than you might
realize. Maybe you're talking to yourself all the time when you
talk to your sub windows. Maybe you haven't had the experience
of having a lateral apex window, communicating between the
apexes. However, you have the experience of having sub windows
talking to each other and having internal conflict and
dialogue. So maybe it's not as foreign to your experience as
you might expect. I also think there's some really important
work occurring in the domain of psychotherapy to really
conceptualize the self as a family. So Richard Schwartz
developed what's called the internal family system
psychotherapy. He is a person working in the mental health
space. And he was working with family therapy. So he would take
a family that wanted to work through some of their issues
into his clinic. And he developed a method of having, you
know, different pairs of the family talk to each other work
through their differences. He crafted kind of a canonical
archetypal framework that most families appear to fall into.
There's different familial roles that people will take on in the
family. Bizarrely, what he discovered is this family based
psychotherapy was highly effective in the individual. So if
you took a single person, and you walked them through a family
based psychotherapy, you would realize or uncover that it is as
if there are different personalities internally, and
these forge the same canonical familial roles that you observe
in families. You have a family inside of your head, where
there's different personalities competing for space, competing
for time. And as you experience psychiatric illness, or cognitive
dissonance, it could be that there's some sort of battle debate
conflict between these different internal family members. And
this sounds completely bizarre. Maybe it's just a psychotherapy
that works. Hey, take it or leave it. Or it is metaphysically
ontologically reality, because there is a nested observer
window system inside of you. And if you dive into the observer
windows inside of your apex, these are your family members. You
have an internal family system of different sub windows with
different desires and goals, communicating with each other
throughout your entire life. You are a cooperative enterprise of
multiple competing, cooperating cognitive systems, feeding into
your experience. And this is the nesting within you that
explains who you are and what you're doing. What if you could
better characterize the different personalities that coexist
inside of you? Could you live a healthier, more productive life?
This is the, you know, the pitch of internal family systems.
Also, some really interesting cases, like dissociative
identity disorder or multiple personality disorder. So when I
was receiving clinical psychology training back in my postdoc,
I brought this up to some of my mentors, I was like, ooh, what
about multiple personality disorder? How does that, you
know, work in psychotherapy and in psychiatric illness? And
they told me, oh, that doesn't exist. That is made up from the
movies. There was a little bit more nuance to it. But essentially
the vibe or the impression was that multiple personality
disorder is not real. Okay. However, there's been a lot of
interesting reviews out recently. And I've talked to a couple
people who have, you know, loved ones with dissociative identity
disorder or who have worked with these patients or who are these
patients themselves. And I personally am fully convinced that
dissociative identity disorder is real. It really happens. But
let's wonder, you know, what is it that makes people so
resistive to DID being real? I think it's that metaphysically
ontologically, we don't have a way to make sense of this. It's
so bizarre to our intuition that we reject the premise that
this could ever be real. However, the nested observer
Windows model, of course, you know, has a way to account for
this. If the apex window experiences some really strong
trauma, then maybe it would dissolve. Maybe it would, you
know, loosen its grip slightly. And some of the sub windows
would take on a more viscerally real quality, right? The sub
windows are the multiple personality internal family
within all of us. And DID is not necessarily a complete
pathologicalization of, you know, reality. But there's some
truth in every psychiatric illness to our experience. And so
DID represents some component of us that maybe freaks us out.
Maybe we're not coming to terms with. But if there is this
rich internal cognitive nested hierarchical structure, then DID
is not impossible. It has a biological explanation. And
there's elements or components of their experience that
resonate and are true within your experience as well. It's not
so alien as to be impossible to empathize with or to
understand. So another phenomenon of relevance to the now
model, our topos and topomancers or the act of
topomancy. And so this is the intentional creation of an
imaginary friend. So these are people that actively and
willfully create a imaginary friend in their mind. And they
talk to this person, they listen to this person, they hang out
with this person. And this is not unlike the phenomenon of
children having very vivid and real imaginary friends in their
experience. And so topomancy is the as an adult intentional
creation of an imaginary friend. For what purpose? Well, for
fun, to deal with loneliness, maybe this is some sort of
coping strategy for your for your life. You know, whatever
your motivation for doing this, there's a growing community,
especially on Reddit, that is developing the skills related to
topomancy. And I think this is fascinating. In a way, this
lines up very well with the now model. Potentially, topos are
the recognition of a sub window internally, and encouraging a
sub window to take on its own voice, to take on its own
reality, and you encourage independence, separately from the
apex, or with a more direct line of communication with the apex.
So I think this is a really fascinating phenomenon and is
probably worth studying. So I'm talking with some people,
there's a few researchers out there, Tonya Lerman and Michael
Lifschitz, who are really diving into topos and topomancy. So I
think this is a really exciting area to kind of look at maybe
validating the now model. Alright, some other examples that
might be of relevance. There was some work recently, looking
into the octopus, for example, as a sort of exotic organism that
might show more of a hierarchical consciousness system than
humans display. So in the octopus, there is some pretty solid
evidence as of late, that the tentacles are semi autonomous,
they appear able to learn and act and behave somewhat
separately from the full organism. However, they can of
course be wrapped into the goal directed behavior of the full
octopus. And so this really like kind of in a beautiful way
exemplifies the now model, where you have semi autonomous
sub windows that are able to nest into the apex upon demand.
And maybe the octopus or other organisms might give us insight
into the human nested observer window framework, because there
might be different mechanism biological structures at play,
which tweak and change the expression of the biological
hierarchy. Maybe there's less cross frequency coupling, maybe
there's more autonomy at a lower level. And that would give
rise to a shift in what it is like to be this organism. But it
could be compared and contrasted with the human physiology. And
I think that is just a really fascinating new line of work to
dive into. Another philosopher neuroscientist, biologist on
this same kind of thought pattern is Michael Levin. Michael
Levin in his group have been doing some really great work
thinking about hierarchical information processing. And he
has these really bizarre xenobots, which are clumps of
cells that appear to form holistic organisms. And this is
super bizarre, right? There is no biological infrastructure to
make a xenobot. But it appears as if there is a macroscopic
structure that emerges from these clumps of cells. A different
approach as studying the octopus would be to look at the
emergence of maybe cross frequency coupling, some sort of
hierarchical consciousness system in these very simple models,
which might give us, you know, more novel insight. An important
question here, or a fun thing to think about is what is the
nature of consciousness in your brain? So the very safe, simple,
kind of naive one is what we call apex hierarchical
consciousness. This is the idea that you exist at the apex of
the hierarchy. And you are the only one that's conscious in your
brain. It's just you don't worry about those nested subsystems.
They are processing your cognition. But you're the only one
who's home. You're the only one that's conscious in your body.
Alternatively, there is a emergent hierarchical
consciousness, some threshold, where above this line, all of
these observer windows are conscious beings, your nested
observer windows are conscious, they have independent
experience from you, not fully independent, right? Because
there's some interaction, but they are conscious in and of
themselves. And then finally, there's some sort of panpsychic
hierarchical consciousness possibility, where every observer
window is a conscious being, period, full stop. However, you
know, the observer window requires synchrony. So there's
some threshold, some mechanism that needs to be at play to
create an observer window to create a conscious being. So
it's not that it like spontaneously consciousness can
just be everywhere. But you know, this still kind of holds some
sort of boundaries, some sort of condition for consciousness to
to be present. Alright, so I just want to end with a reference
to Daniel Dennett, who sadly recently passed away. He had
this idea called the Cartesian theater. And it's the idea that
you know, your naive sense of consciousness is that there is a
little little man in your head that's perceiving everything,
hearing everything, smelling everything, pulling the levers
moving the body around, he points out the confusion in this
that okay, if there is a little conscious being inside of your
body, wouldn't there need to be a smaller little conscious being
inside of that person's body? And then wouldn't there be an
even smaller conscious being inside of that person's body? And
there's an infinite regression of smaller and smaller people
inside of your mind. And so this is completely preposterous when
you need to do away with this simple notion of a theater of
experience. And he called this the homunculus problem, the
problem of having nested infinite consciousnesses. Well, the now
model right is very at odds with this. And so we you know,
think what if this is a homunculus solution? What if
there is a Cartesian multiplex? Instead of it having a
Cartesian single theater, there's only one show that's
playing. What if there are many shows, a multiplex or a
synaplex, a, a theatrical establishment with many movies
going on inside of your brain, the nested observer windows model
says there are many experiences internally. And you maybe are a
bit of a moviegoer popping between the many diverse
experiences happening inside of you. And there is maybe this
near infinite fractal of smaller beings nested inside of you. And
in that sense, it really would be turtles all the way down. Maybe
there's some floor, maybe it keeps going. And I think an
important question is, you know, could there be something bigger
than us, something larger than us going in the other direction?
Is there an observer window greater than the individual? And
at one point, I will have a couple episodes probably on the
concept of collective consciousness. Is there any
substance to the idea of a shared or collective experience? So
with that, wrapping up with the now model, check out the paper
for yourself. I think it's a really cool, exciting new
theory. Obviously, I do because I've, you know, poured a lot of
time and energy into this. I'm also want to, you know, point
out Jonathan Schueler is really a core contributor to these
ideas and to this model. And we're now looking at different
ways to test these theories in people with dissociative identity
disorder in people with tulpas in split brain patients, looking
at these low frequency integrations that are occurring
within your experience. So a lot of new research on the horizon.
And I will talk to you again very soon. Goodbye.
