On average, Americans spend 90% of their time indoors.
Buildings in cities have a huge impact on our comfort and well-being.
Building buildings with lots of natural daylight, non-toxic materials, and superior levels of
air quality and thermal comfort can have a big impact on well-being and productivity.
Besides the impact upon those of us who live and work in the built environment, buildings
also have a huge impact on sustainability through energy and material use.
Buildings consume 50% of the energy and 75% of the electricity that flows through the
U.S. economy.
Buildings use 40% of all raw materials globally.
15 trillion gallons of potable water are used in buildings annually, about 14% of the total.
About 40% of greenhouse gases are sourced from buildings.
The good news is that we can design buildings that produce more energy than they consume,
harvest rainwater from the sky, and are filled with natural daylight, and are built of non-toxic
materials.
Buildings can be designed to be recycled when their useful life is over, and we can do this
for about the cost of building conventional buildings of the same quality.
As I've mentioned before, the American Institute of Architects has adopted a plan called Architecture
2030, whose goal is to transform the built environment from the major contributor of greenhouse
gas emissions to a central part of the solution to the climate and energy crises.
Architecture 2030 calls for all new buildings to be net energy producers by 2030, and for
the renovation of older buildings to conform to these standards.
Net energy producer means that the building produces as much or more energy than it consumes
on an annual basis.
Let's talk about some of the features of green buildings I've helped design.
This building meets the Architecture 2030 standards today.
It's the Swartz-Gwitch Sustainable Living Center.
This is the home of the Sustainable Living Program at Maharishi University of Management
in Fairfield, Iowa.
I'm the co-director of the program, and my office is in this building.
It's designed to be a living laboratory for the principles of building design that we
teach.
The building was built of local, natural materials like earth blocks, whole tree timbers, and
natural plasters and paints.
We did some filming in a couple of classrooms in the Sustainable Living Center.
Let me show you what an earth block looks like, and then how we make a building out of
them and other natural ingredients.
This is an earth block.
It's made of material that we just dug from the ground.
We rented a special machine, put the earth in the machine, and the machine can squeeze
out enough of these blocks to build a house in a day.
If there's no other material in here, no concrete, no other filler, it's just earth
compressed.
All the walls that surround us in this building are made of this block.
Students built 35,000 of these blocks for the construction of this building, and you
can see them in the wall behind us right here.
I'd like to talk a little bit more about how earth is used in this building.
We saw in the big classroom how earth blocks create the walls of this building.
Then we also cover those walls with an earth plaster.
This wall here is built of earth blocks, but then we've covered it with a natural earth
plaster, which is earth we just dug up from the site here, mixed with a little bit of
clay, sand, and chop straw, and a little bit of manure from our local organic dairy.
That's a traditional ingredient in a lot of earth blasters.
You notice this wall is dark, the clays we dig up here are dark, and the rest of the
walls in this room are light.
That's because we want to use daylighting in this building to light the building.
There are ecological consequences for building solar panels and wind generators, and we want
to use that energy wisely.
The largest use of energy in this building is for lighting.
We can get all the light we need just by bringing light in from those high windows that you
see here on this side of the room and the high windows and the atrium that brings light
into the center of the building.
Light this classroom from both sides.
We have low windows for views so that students feel like they're connected to the outside.
In order to make the walls white, all we did was cover this natural earth plaster with
a lime wash.
There's very little real paint in this building.
It's mostly just earth, clay, sand, and a lime wash so that we use mostly just natural
materials.
The Sustainable Living Center has a solar electric array, wind generator, solar hot
water collectors, and a geothermal heat pump that produce 30% more energy than the building
consumes annually.
Let me show you around.
First, the beautiful passive solar greenhouse.
In ecological design, every major function in a system needs to be performed by many
different elements.
So in this building, we have three ways in which we heat the building and two ways in
which we cool the building.
The first way in which we heat the building is called passive solar design.
In passive solar design, we have windows here that face south.
We use all the materials that we would use in a regular building, windows, concrete,
steel, and we place them in such a way that we use our understanding of the flow of energy
across the site and the different places that the sun finds itself in different parts of
the year in order to heat the building almost for free because it's all materials that
we use in any building.
So for example, these windows that face south, there's an overhang above them.
And in the summertime, when the sun is very high in the sky, these windows are completely
shaded so that there's no extra heat gain into the building in the summertime when we
don't want it.
But in the wintertime, in this latitude, the sun is only about 20 degrees off the horizon.
It's just a little bit above the horizon, and the sun penetrates deeply into this room,
hits against these walls, and heats the building.
So that's the first way in which we heat the building.
Now we're going to go talk about the second way, which is active solar design using collectors
on the roof of this building.
Now that we've learned a little bit about passive solar, the first way in which we heat
the building, I want to tell you a little bit about the second way in which we collect
and store solar energy for this building.
It's called active solar.
It uses one of two kinds of solar panels we have on the roof.
Two kinds, one that make hot electricity and one that make hot water.
The ones that make hot water collect the sun's energy in hot water and store it in this 5,000
gallon tank.
Then we have pipes in the floor that when the building calls for heat, we can take this
hot water and we can store several days' worth of solar energy in this tank and distribute
it that throughout the building.
These devices back here are called controllers, and what they do is they monitor the temperature
of the solar collector, and they monitor the temperature of the tank.
When the temperature of the solar collector is hotter than the tank, it turns on a pump
that will circulate the fluid and collect the solar energy and store it in the tank.
When the building requires heat, if the passive solar again isn't keeping up with the demand
for heating for the building, then the thermostat in a room will turn on one of these pumps
which circulates hot water from the tank through the floor into the building.
This pump, for example, is the big classroom that we were in first.
This pump is the middle classroom.
This pump is the greenhouse, and that's how the heat is transferred from the tank into
the building.
If we have an extended period of cloudy cold weather in the wintertime and the passive
solar and the active solar weren't keeping up with it, we have a third way in which we
keep the building, and that's with a geothermal heat pump, which we'll take a look at next.
Now if the passive solar and the active solar aren't keeping up with the heat requirements
of the building, we turn to our third way of heating the building, which is with a geothermal
heat pump.
A geothermal heat pump takes one unit of electricity and uses it to pull two or three units of
heat from the ground.
There's a network of pipes, thousands of feet of pipes, that are about 15 feet in the
ground.
The temperature at 15 feet is always about 55 degrees.
It takes electricity to do that, but we use our solar and wind power to power the geothermal
heat pump.
In the summertime, we can also use it for cooling, because it's much easier to reject
heat from the building to the ground at 55 degrees than it is outside when it's 100 degrees
out.
And overall, the building generates about 35, 40 percent more energy than it uses, not
just for electricity for computers and lights and power point projectors and things like
that, but also for heating and cooling.
So all the energy requirements for the building are matched, plus about 30 percent is given
back to the grid.
The building collects water for free from the sky through rainwater harvesting.
It supplies water for all uses in the building, including drinking.
The building processes all of its sewage waste.
No utility bills, no water pipes in or out.
And finally, let me take you just a short walk outside the building to the power shed
and show you how all the sources of solar energy come together.
The first thing that happens is all the wires that go out to the solar panels and up to
the top of the wind generator come in on this pipe.
Believe it or not, all the solar panels and wind generators have individual wires that
come in here and come in down through this pipe.
And then what happens next is very simple conceptually, but there's a lot of complicated
technology that goes on in this box.
On this side is the solar and wind generated electricity, and on this side is the utility,
and this box makes the connection between the two.
It turns the solar and wind generated electricity into better than grid quality power.
And this converts the energy from the solar panels that are just outside this building
on the ground.
This converts the energy from the solar panels that make the overhang on the greenhouse.
This converts the solar energy for the panels that are on top of the building.
And this box converts the energy from the wind turbine into better than grid quality
power.
And right now, it's generating 6,000 watts out of 12,000.
It's quite windy today, but it's not very sunny.
And that's the beauty of the combination of wind and solar.
When it's not sunny, it's often very windy.
And you get a very steady supply of energy between the two.
Now we're up to 2,900, 3,000, 4,000, 5,000, 6,000, 6,700, while it goes up to 12,000,
so it went up to half of it.
And it varies because the energy in wind is related to the wind velocity cubed.
So every time it doubled the wind power, you get eight times the energy, not just twice
the energy.
So for example, that means if we get a 10-mile-an-hour wind and we get a gust to 20, we get eight
times the energy.
So right now, it's still around 1,000, but a minute ago, it was up to 12,000, and that's
the maximum.
Today, we're actually getting the maximum out of this winter event.
Now I'm going to show you how everything comes together.
The solar and wind-generated energy, the building energy, and the grid.
What happens in this pipe is the solar and wind-generated electricity comes in here.
The building energy gets taken off here, and the energy from the power company is here.
So let's use as an example, let's say that we're generating 10 kilowatts of solar and
wind energy, and the building's using two kilowatts.
So 10 kilowatts comes in here.
Of that 10, two go off here and service the building.
There's still eight that need to go someplace, so they'll go out here and actually spin the
meter backwards and put power out onto the grid.
Now let's say it's nighttime, and the solar's not generating any energy, and we're just
generating maybe one kilowatt from wind, but the building's requiring three kilowatts.
So one kilowatt comes in here from the wind energy.
The service is one of the three, we still need to get two from someplace.
So those come here from the power company, and they actually spin the meter forward,
and we actually buy some power from the power company.
So this system does this all day long.
There's no storage on the grid.
In other words, none of this energy's being stored anywhere.
What's happening when I push it out onto the power grid is that somewhere there's a fossil
fuel generator that's backing off and using less fossil fuels.
So we're saving fossil fuel by putting this energy out onto the grid from solar.
The system we looked at a minute ago was a grid tide system, meaning that it takes solar
energy, pumps it out to the grid, but the grid has to be functioning, the grid has to
be turned on, the grid has to be active in order for that to work.
If the grid is down, then you won't have any power.
Even though you've got solar panels and sunlight, you won't have any power.
I'm going to talk about a different kind of system called an off-grid system, which can
operate independent of the grid, whether there's a power grid or not, whether you're
a thousand miles from the power grid, as long as there's sunlight, this system will operate.
It has a couple of basic components.
It has solar panels that take the sun's energy and turn it with electricity, no moving parts,
nothing to wear out.
We store that energy in batteries so that we have energy for if we need more energy at
the moment than the sun's producing, or if we need energy at night, we have that energy
stored in batteries.
Solar device is a charge controller, and what that does is it takes the solar energy
from the solar panels, and it moderates the flow so that the batteries don't get overcharged.
It controls the flow of solar energy, so if we're not using energy, the batteries don't
get overcharged and get damaged from that.
Then we take the energy out of the solar, out of the batteries, the solar and wind-generated
energy out of the batteries, put it into a device called an inverter.
What that does is it converts the solar and wind energy into better-than-grid quality
power from the batteries, and it provides power to run all the appliances in your house,
whatever you might need to run at the time.
It's as simple as that.
Solar panels through a charge controller to the batteries, charge the batteries up, then
take energy from the batteries through the inverter to power your house.
You might have noticed in the video, the sound level changed in the shed, in the power
shed, because it was a very windy day.
You could actually hear, when it got windy, you could hear the sound of the energy being
converted from wind energy into grid power, and that was the changing value of the sound
in the shed that you heard in the previous clip came from that.
Here's another building.
It's my home in Fairfield, Iowa.
It's a climate-responsive building.
Every aspect of its design is tuned to the weather and climate of Fairfield, Iowa.
It's off-grid and powered by solar and wind.
I haven't paid an electric bill in more than 20 years.
It harvests rainwater and treats its own sewage, so I haven't paid a water or sewer bill either.
No pipes in, no pipes out.
It's got high windows that flood the building with daylight.
It's built of locally sourced materials like lumber and earth plasters.
It's insulated with straw bales stacked up like bricks.
I took everything I learned at my home and designed a housing project called Abundance
Ecovillage, which is powered by solar and wind, has a farm at edible landscaping and
uses rainwater for water supply.
In Abundance Ecovillage, the beers are cold and the showers are hot, but the homes by
design use one-third to one-tenth the energy of a conventional home.
We've found smarter ways to get better service from energy with energy star appliances, extra
thick insulation, sun-catching greenhouses on the south side, and earth tubes for cooling
and ventilation.
Once energy demand is reduced, it's cost-effective and practical to supply the smaller energy
demand with solar panels and wind generators.
There are 15 homes in Abundance Ecovillage now, but when it's fully built out, there
will be 30.
One way to lower the ecological footprint of a house is to make it smaller.
This house is an example of the not-so-big-house concept.
The owners moved from a 5,000-square-foot house to this 800-square-foot, well-designed
house in the Ecovillage, and they prefer it to their much larger old house.
Do green buildings cost more?
Well, it varies widely.
Typically, there is a 10% to 20% premium for building a high-performance building.
Green buildings use better quality, long-lived materials that sometimes cost more up front.
But that increased cost is paid back in terms of increased comfort, energy savings, water
savings, and maintenance cost, just as with solar panels for solar energy.
There are two basic approaches to green building, natural building and high-performance conventional
building.
Natural building uses locally available, lightly processed materials.
High-performance building uses conventionally available materials and building science to
create buildings that require very little energy to heat and cool.
The best buildings are 100% solar heated and cooled.
By design, they use 75% to 90% less energy than conventional buildings.
Note that some natural buildings are not high-performance buildings.
They take considerable amounts of energy to heat and cool, and some high-performance buildings
are not made with natural materials.
Let's look at natural building in a little detail.
Natural building uses lightly processed, locally sourced materials like straw bale,
cob, rammed earth, adobe, wood, and stone.
Earth plasters can be used for walls and floors.
Some combination of clay, fibers like straw and sand are common ingredients in natural
building.
Often, these structures are owner-built or involve a community building effort.
My friend Susan in Fairfield and her husband John are building their own home and using
lightly processed, locally sourced materials like straw bales, local timber from their
land, and earth plasters.
The great courses crew and I visited her home to see how she mixes and applies her
own homemade plaster to the outside of the home.
Hi, my name is Susan.
Welcome to the farmhouse at Hickory Highlands.
I'm going to do a demonstration for you of an exterior plaster on a straw bale wall.
The base coat has already been applied and is dry, so we're going to wet the wall and
then we're going to do our skim coat of our last coat of one clay, two sand, and a half
a part of a manure straw mix.
The manure helps to add a little bit of fiber and water resiliency.
So we start with water.
I'm going to do about a half of a part.
So I'm putting in one gallon of sifted clay.
This is my own just subsoil here in Iowa.
Our subsoil is pretty much pure clay.
I put it through a hammer mill to get it all broken up like this.
So that's one clay and we'll do two of sand.
Just going to do a little bit so I can get it mixed up a little bit.
This is going to make some noise.
Right now we have half water, one clay, and one sand.
Plaster recipes are quite variable, depends on your subsoil and how much sand is naturally
in your subsoil.
You might be adding more sand or less sand to get a good plaster mix.
Then we have some lovely cow manure from our sacred cows.
I'm just going to put in a little bit.
The water varies, depends on how wet your sand was, how wet your clay was.
I'm going to put in some chopped straw.
This was also chopped in the hammer mill, nice and little pieces, about a half a bucket
when I combine it with the manure.
Now I'm going to apply it.
I have a hawk, I have three different trowels.
I have a metal trowel, a wood trowel, and a plastic trowel, wet it, sticky.
So it's going to stick to the wall.
You want to dampen your wall first so that your coat that you're putting on will stick.
You want to start wetting your wall ahead of time so the water has time to soak in.
Many different ways you can do it, you can take it from the front and go up this way.
You can take it from the back and go this way.
If you're not comfortable going like this, if you're new at it, you tend to drop more
on the ground than you get on the wall.
So what some people like to do is they just put their hawk right up against the wall and
push. It doesn't matter, you just get it on the wall.
So if this was a final coat, you would use a steel trowel to make it quite tight, especially
when you're inside.
This is not a new or particularly unusual way to coat the walls of a house. About 50%
of the people on the planet live in earth houses and there are lots of examples from
around the world. The town of Roussillon in southern France has long been known for the
production of beautiful pigments from clay and earth deposits near the village. Both
insulation and thermal mass are useful in sustainable building design but they have very
different functions and you can't substitute one for the other. Insulation blocks the flow
of heat in or out of a building and it is typically made from light fluffy materials.
It's like wrapping a building in a nice down comforter. Thermal mass stores energy as it
rises in temperature and releases it as its temperature drops. It's used for keeping a
space from overheating during the day, storing excess solar heat for release into the space
at night. Thermal mass materials are dense and heavy like rock and concrete. In the sustainable
living center, the earth block interior walls have 10 inches of insulation on the outside.
The earth blocks help keep the interior temperature constant and the insulation slows the flow
of heat in and out of the building. Now on the other hand, high performance building
uses conventional materials that for the most part will be familiar to building contractors
and available at your local building supply store. Most building contractors can adapt
to the novel ways these materials are used in high performance building but it's best
to find a builder that is educated about it and committed to it. High performance building
combines intimate knowledge of the climate, the site, the materials and building science
to create buildings that require very little energy to heat and cool. Here's what you
should consider in creating a high performance building. Start with green features that you
can get for free. Passive solar design uses common building materials to collect and store
energy. Provide abundant natural light and ventilation. Remember it's passive solar because
there aren't any pumps or fans used to move the energy. Common building materials like
windows, wood and massive materials like concrete can be placed in such a way that the building
by design collects and stores solar energy in the winter and rejects solar energy in
the summer. It makes optimum use of the energy that flows over your site in all seasons.
It's mostly free because it's just a more intelligent approach to placing building materials
that for the most part you would have used anyway. You trade more intelligence and design
for less building energy use. It's important to consider passive solar in the early stages
of design because obviously it's difficult to change the orientation, shape, window placement
and insulation levels of a building after it's built. Here are a few tips for passive
solar. First, build a rectangular shape and orient the long side east-west. This maximizes
solar exposure for winter and minimizes for summer. Favor window placement on the south
to maximize solar gain. Windows need an overhang sized to block high summer sun and allow
a low winter sun to penetrate deeply into the building. Ten to fifteen percent of building
floor area in south facing windows is about right. You can overdo this and cause the building
to overheat during the day and use too much energy at night, so pay attention to your
measurements. Locate heavy materials like concrete and tile where the sun will shine
directly on them to help store solar energy for use at night. The sun spends a lot of
time shining on the west side of a building during the summer. Minimize windows on the
west to avoid heat gain in the summer. Day lighting is the art and science of lighting
buildings using sunlight. As you saw in the classroom video for day lighting, windows
need to be placed to allow indirect sunlight into the room. Direct sunlight is too intense.
Daylight windows are often placed higher with view windows at a lower level. You will have
to spend a little extra money for insulation. For the colder parts of the U.S., you want
about twelve inches of wall insulation and twenty inches of insulation in the ceiling
or attic. Remember that the extra money you spend on insulation can often be recouped
through savings in downsizing or eliminating the furnace. Seal the building tightly and
provide fresh air using an air-to-air heat exchanger. Air-to-air heat exchangers allow
the heat in exiting warm air to be passed by incoming cold air, allowing abundant fresh
air with a minimum energy penalty. These guidelines apply mostly to new construction.
I'd like to make a distinction between energy conservation and energy efficiency. Energy
conservation is doing less with less, having a colder house to save energy, freezing in
the dark. You might also want to consider modest lifestyle changes, these energy conservation
measures like wearing a sweater and adjusting the thermostat higher or lower. It couldn't
hurt. But energy efficiency is doing more with less, having a more comfortable house
that uses less energy, hot showers and cold beer just being smarter about how we heat
the water and cool the beer. In keeping with the theme of sustainable living as a radical
redesign for a better way of life, we're going to consider some of those energy efficiency
measures next. Start with a professional, high-level energy
audit. This is different than most free walk-through audits offered by utility companies. Expect
the audit to take most of the day and cost three to five hundred dollars. You'll get
a prioritized list of options for improving energy efficiency and comfort as well as an
estimate of energy savings for each option. What can you do with what you got? How can
you retrofit a home or apartment for sustainable living? I have to be honest with you. Retrofitting
an existing home to a high performance standard can be difficult and expensive. We talked
about some ideas in our lecture on energy and here are a few more.
Running down air leakage. Do weather stripping. Often utility companies have incentives to
help pay for this. Cock around windows. Put on seasonal storm windows and weather strip
around the doors. Seal the holes in your house. Seal around pipes, wires, electrical outlets
and other penetrations. The next thing to do is add insulation.
Attics are easy places to add more insulation. Aim for R60 in the attic and R40 in the walls.
Current value is the measure of the ability of a material to block the flow of heat. Higher
numbers are better. Cellulose made from old newspapers is a common attic retrofit insulation.
Attic insulation is a good do-it-yourself project and most places that sell cellulose insulation
will loan you the machine that blows it into the attic. Be sure to seal up any leaks from
the house into the attic before adding insulation. If your house is old and doesn't have any
insulation in the walls, you can blow cellulose or foam into the walls. Unlike attic insulation
though, wall insulation is best and done by an experienced installer. Replacing windows
can be pricey, so consider insulation first. The next thing to consider is improving the
efficiency of your heating and cooling system. Seal the heating and cooling ducts. Test to
see if your furnace is operating at peak efficiency with a combustion efficiency test. It's also
important to check that sealing air leaks doesn't trap combustion gases in your home.
Retrofitting an existing home is not easy. The most efficient way of doing so is an area
of continuing research. Now, speaking of furnaces, let's look at a couple of other heating systems.
Wood is stored solar energy and makes a good backup heating source from passive solar homes.
Modern wood burners are efficient and clean burning. I use a wood burning stove as the
only source of heat in my well insulated straw bale home. If you use solar electricity,
consider mini-split heat pumps. Mini-splits take one unit of electricity and produce up
to three units of heat and provide efficient cooling as well. I am designing a new home
for my family and it will be heated and cooled by a mini-split powered by solar electricity.
Ground source heat pumps are expensive at the small capacities needed for low energy homes
but can work well for larger buildings. Ground source heat pumps use the stable temperature
of the earth at depths of eight feet or more to provide heating and cooling.
Buildings in cities have a huge impact on human well-being and sustainability. The biggest
part of our ecological footprint comes from the built environment. Using the principles
outlined in this lecture, you can begin to see how we can build buildings that are regenerative,
that give back more than they take, that are sustainable.
