I'm sure that many of you are aware of a growing trend towards green products and I'm sure
that you won't be surprised to learn that sustainable living includes being mindful
of what you support with your purchasing choices.
Each dollar you spend is a vote of support for a product in the company that makes it.
Whether you're shopping for groceries, personal care products, cleaning products, even home
improvement products, many companies are offering greener alternatives to the items that have
been available in the past.
In this lecture, I will try to help you navigate a greener course through some of the choices
you make every week as a consumer.
First, make sure that you really need what you're about to buy.
The greenest product is the one you don't buy.
Can you share the item with someone, borrow the item, or would it really ruin your life
to do without it?
The developing sharing economy where the internet is connecting people that want to share things
like cars or rent a spare bedroom to a traveler will help with this process.
Let's define what a green product is.
Of course, some products are greener than others.
For example, some lip balms are made with petrochemical waxes and come in non-recyclable
plastic packaging.
Other lip balms are made with organic ingredients and come in biodegradable packaging.
Some products are green by their very nature.
Natural building materials like straw and clay are inherently green.
They take very little energy to process, they are easily recycled, and they don't contain
any toxic materials.
On the other hand, some products are very hard to produce in an environmentally responsible
way.
For instance, a computer or a cell phone requires rare minerals that can only be mined in a
few remote parts of the world.
They require a lot of energy to manufacture, they use electricity to operate, and are made
primarily of plastic, which is a petroleum-based product.
Not so green, right?
But there are some companies or cell phones that are greener than others.
Some are more energy efficient, use fewer toxic substances in the manufacturing process,
and can be recycled into new electronic devices when you discard them.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency defines a green product this way.
Generally, a product may be considered greener if scientific evidence demonstrates that human
health or environmental impacts have been significantly reduced in comparison with other
products that serve the same purpose.
This comes from their greener products website.
I like this definition because it reflects the fact that a product is considered green
only in comparison to its competition.
This implies that green is not an end in itself, it's a process where products can
continually get greener as technology and the marketplace allow.
In a rapidly changing world of consumer products, manufacturers compete for your shopping baller
by looking for trends in the marketplace.
Some of those trends are short-term and superficial.
We've all seen cereal boxes that feature a popular athlete or advertising that ties
a product to a summer blockbuster movie.
In general, these marketing trends don't reflect a change in the product but just try
to capitalize on current popular culture.
Some companies look at sustainability like this, a short-term trend in popular culture.
On the other hand, there are companies that recognize that sustainability is more than
a fad and look to provide products and run their companies in ways that truly embody the
principles of sustainability.
These companies have long-term strategies for capturing market share that involve radically
rethinking how and where the product is manufactured, packaged, and sold.
When you look at the huge assortment of products on store shelves, it may not feel like your
individual purchase could possibly make a difference in global marketing trends, but
you are, in fact, voting with your dollar.
If you choose a product with the made-in-the-USA label when shopping for, let's say, socks,
the store where you shop is more likely to continue to stock socks made in the USA.
We're actively supporting the American workers who make, package, and market those socks.
The same is true for environmentally friendly or green products.
By choosing to purchase a product that is made in an environmentally friendly and sustainable
facility packaged with a minimum of materials and made without harmful chemicals, you are
contributing to the growth of a marketplace that not only respects the environment but
also respects the consumer.
So what makes so-called green products different?
How do we know how green these products really are, and what are the advantages of switching
to greener products?
In order to answer these questions, we need to understand a few things about how the manufacturing
process works within our current economic system.
A few years ago, a delightful educational video called The Story of Stuff went viral
on the Internet.
In the video, environmentalist Annie Leonard defines our system as a materials economy
made up of the extraction, production, distribution, consumption, and disposal of goods.
By this, she means that we extract resources, for example, oil or cotton or wood.
We use those resources to produce a product, a computer or socks or a loaf of bread.
We distribute the product to consumers, and when it has outlived its usefulness, we dispose
of it.
To this system, Leonard adds people, the government, and corporations.
The Story of Stuff points out that this is a linear system, depending on finding places
to source our materials and to sink our waste.
Going back once again to the EPA's figures, in 2012, Americans generated about 251 million
tons of trash and recycled and composted almost 87 million tons of this material, equivalent
to about a 34.5% recycling rate.
The Story of Stuff claims that 95% of the material that flows through our economy ends
up in the landfill within three months.
Despite our best efforts, the vast majority of what we buy and use every day ends up in
the landfill.
Leonard then contrasts this with nature, which uses a circular materials flow.
The waste of one system is the input for another system.
What we need to understand is that the road from the mine or the farm to the factory,
the store, and the consumer, and then to the landfill, does not need to be a one-way street.
We do not necessarily need to be continually extracting our diminishing resources and throwing
them in the dump.
We can turn the process into a circular path.
We can design our goods so that the disposal step is not a trip to the landfill, but rather
the creation of a new resource.
In their groundbreaking 2002 book, Cradle to Cradle, Remaking the Way We Make Things,
architect William McDonough and chemist Michael Brodngart describe a new approach to manufacturing
that works to eliminate the concept of waste and put the inputs and outputs of the industrial
economy into closed cycles.
Their slogan is, waste equals food.
What's waste for one process is the food for another.
They propose that we move away from a cradle-to-grave approach to moving resources through the
economy and into the landfill.
By taking the view of waste as a potential resource, our consumer choices might actually
give us the opportunity to leave a regenerative footprint, one that gives back more than it
takes.
McDonough calls this concept cradle-to-cradle, continually cycling old materials into new
products.
I'll get back to that idea in just a minute.
There are health implications of using greener products, too.
We are spending an increasing amount of time indoors.
The average American spends 87% of their time indoors.
Our personal environment, where we sleep, where we work, where we eat, and where we
get together with family and friends, are all made up of manufactured goods.
From the carpet, to the paint on the walls, to your home electronics, furniture, and clothing,
everything around us is a product of that old cradle-to-grave model.
In many cases, these products provide us with a comfortable lifestyle, but they may
be endangering our health as well.
The materials and chemicals in the products that surround us, like the plastics and petroleum
products, have been implicated in a wide variety of ailments.
Air pollution from burning fossil fuels also has health implications.
An extensive body of studies has found strong associations between respiratory health and
concerns like asthma with direct exposure to motor vehicle pollution resulting from residing
or attending school near major roads with high traffic levels.
Increasing our use of greener products reduces our exposure to many of the harmful effects
of petroleum products and tailpipe emissions.
As an example, replacing diesel fuel with biodiesel in school buses could cut their emissions
of diesel particulates up to 47%.
According to the American Lung Association, diesel particulates are a major cause of childhood
asthma and they are encouraging schools to make the switch to biodiesel, which is a diesel
fuel made from plant sources, rather than petroleum.
Using greener products can reduce wasted resources, reduce pollution and help protect
our personal health.
So how do we choose which product we will support with our purchase?
Well, let's start with the materials in your home.
Whether you live in a new home, older house, or an apartment, chances are the materials
are pretty similar.
The walls are built with drywall over wood or metal studs and the exterior is covered
with siding of some sort, or a type of masonry like brick or stucco.
Sometimes you will have wood flooring, tile or carpeting, kitchen cabinets, bathroom fixtures
and more.
The style may be different, but in general this is what you will find in the standard
American home.
There has been a revolution in the availability of green alternatives to conventional building
materials.
Paints that don't off-gas toxins and sustainably harvested wood are some of the products you
can find at big box building supply stores if you look.
Some go beyond being less bad to being regenerative.
One area that has gotten a lot of attention, as I mentioned earlier, is the carpet industry.
Studies show that carpet is replaced every seven years despite the fact that most carpet,
if well cared for, will last up to 25 years.
That means that millions and millions of square feet of carpeting are going to the landfill
each year.
Nylon fibers from carpeting last virtually forever.
Chemists estimate that nylon will last up to 250,000 years in a landfill.
And what about all the energy that it took to drill for oil, process the oil and produce
the nylon in the first place?
All of that energy is embodied in that carpeting and it is lost to us once it goes to the landfill.
The carpet industry is making huge moves toward a more regenerative model.
Some companies are producing carpeting out of old plastic soda bottles.
This is an illustration of upcycling, a term that refers to techniques that recycle materials
into higher value products.
Not only is this carpeting taking advantage of the energy already embodied in the plastic
bottles, the carpet itself can be recycled again and again as carpet.
Perhaps you have decided that rather than buy new carpeting, you will save money and
reduce waste by simply cleaning your existing carpet.
Can you keep the old carpet clean without exposing yourself, your family and your pets
to harmful chemicals?
Well, there is a nice selection of natural carpet cleaning products available now that
use plant-based cleaning agents rather than petroleum-based products.
There are carpet cleaning services out there that now offer non-toxic carpet cleaning.
But here's a thought.
When it comes to household cleaning products, perhaps the best way to assure that your cleaners
are truly green is to make your own alternatives to commercial cleaning products.
Some of you out there might remember when white vinegar was commonly used as an all-purpose
cleaner.
In the old days, this was considered a frugal alternative to more expensive store-bought
cleaners.
This old favorite has the advantage of being completely natural and non-toxic.
For instance, a simple recipe consisting of one quart of warm water, a quarter cup of
white vinegar and a half teaspoon of liquid soap or detergent will do as well as a glass
cleaner as many name-brand products.
Some people use old newspapers to wipe the glass rather than paper towels which leave
lint behind.
The vinegar-soaked newspapers can then safely go in the compost.
We all know that baking soda is great for absorbing refrigerator smells, but is also
a great mild abrasive cleaner for cleaning tile surfaces, tubs, and porcelain sinks.
With a little research and experimenting, you can save money and go green by partially
or completely eliminating commercial cleaning products.
If you aren't making the products yourself, it can be difficult to determine which of
these household materials and cleaning products are the greenest alternatives.
Luckily, there are some certification agencies that now investigate the claims of manufacturers
and make this information available to consumers.
Any product can call itself natural, but if they carry the certification of a reputable,
independent, third-party certifying agency, chances are much better that you are getting
what you paid for.
Many of you are familiar with the certified organic label on food products that indicates
that no chemicals were used in raising the ingredients and that the facility it was produced
in is also certified organic.
There are similar certifications for buildings and building materials, appliances, computers,
health care products, and household cleaning supplies.
Let's look at a few of these.
The U.S. government offers several certifications for greener products.
They include USDA certified organic label that I just mentioned, which covers food,
health products, personal products, and some cleaning products.
The USDA bio-preferred label refers to industrial and household products other than food that
are composed primarily of plant-based materials rather than petrochemicals.
Energy Star is the label that you see on household appliances, home electronics, light bulbs,
and other energy-consuming devices.
It indicates that these devices meet a minimum standard for energy efficiency.
Other non-governmental certifiers include EP, uses comprehensive criteria for design,
production, energy use, and recycling.
EP currently covers computers, computer displays, televisions, and imaging equipment.
It is managed by the Green Electronics Council.
The Forestry Stewardship Council, or FSC, certifies forest products including wood and
wood products like furniture as well as paper, packaging products, and other timber byproducts.
Lead or leadership in energy and environmental design is a green building certification program
offered by the U.S. Green Building Council that recognizes excellence in new building
and renovations.
To receive lead certification, building projects earn points to achieve different levels of
certification including bronze, silver, gold, and platinum.
There are also international certification agencies like the Institute for Building
Biology and Sustainability in Germany.
The IBM, as it is known in German, offers an extremely strict regime for testing which
includes indoor air quality, drinking water quality, and noise pollution.
It even addresses more controversial issues like electromagnetic pollution.
Most everything we do uses electricity, and the electric and magnetic fields generated
by electrical devices completely surround us.
There is some evidence that the electric and magnetic fields created by things like cell
phones and power transmission lines and Wi-Fi can have negative health effects on some people.
Building Biology has procedures for testing levels of electromagnetic fields and mitigating
them if they are too high.
What other ways can we reduce our ecological footprint and begin to establish a regenerative
footprint?
There are sustainable ways that require a little less research and can be fun and rewarding.
Some of these ideas include the following, buying locally.
Buying locally does not assure that you are buying a greener product, but at the very
least you are going to help maintain a sense of community.
A community business is usually more likely to be concerned about local air quality and
local water quality than a business that is owned by a far away corporation.
Farmers selling at a local market rely on their reputation for raising good, fresh,
and wholesome food and for caring about his or her community's quality of life.
For that matter, you might consider becoming more involved in making the stuff you need
or developing relationships with the people that make the stuff you need.
Thousands of people across the country are showing their entrepreneurial spirit by participating
in a local value-added economy.
They do this in a number of ways, such as raising food or making a product using locally
grown produce.
This could include baking bread or making pasta, preparing specialty meats or cheeses,
brewing beer, processing wool, or any of a number of other products.
Not all regenerative activities need to be agriculturally based, though.
There is a growing movement of self-described makers that are using high technology to produce
their own customized products rather than relying on mass marketing and disposable consumer
items.
This might include anything from sewing their own clothes to using recycled materials to
creating inexpensive electronic microcontrollers to monitor soil moisture and water the garden.
Maker spaces are popping up all over the country.
They are a great place to find a community of like-minded people.
Repair is once again on the rise.
Once everybody took a TV in to be repaired, but now we usually just throw it away and
get a new one.
But that trend is changing.
Websites like ifixit.com provide free instructions for repairing a huge range of things from cars
to cell phones.
In cities across the U.S., repair salons or repair cafes are popping up.
We can get together that are designed to allow people to share their skills with others,
learn new skills, and get their stuff fixed for cheap.
Finally, buying used items is easier than ever.
Nice consignment shops are now a fixture in every trendy neighborhood, and websites
like eBay and Etsy make it easy to find good quality, gently used stuff.
After all, the greenest products are those that we use again and again rather than buying
new.
Another revolutionary idea that is popping up across communities and neighborhoods all
over the United States is sharing.
Yes, I know it sounds crazy, but after decades of living an American dream that includes
owning your own lawnmower, people are discovering that most of the time that lawnmower is sitting
unused.
So are the chainsaw, the weedwacker, and the rototiller.
It just makes sense for neighbors to share these items.
Not only does it make environmental sense, but it also saves money and builds a stronger
sense of community.
Even car sharing services are gaining in popularity.
Right now, we are at a great place in the discussion to go back to the ideas of recycling
and upcycling.
Obviously, repairing items rather than throwing them away and buying used items are both related
to recycling.
What are the bigger implications of converting what would otherwise become waste into reusable
resources?
Let's talk about some new trends in recycling.
Returning to ideas put forth by William McDonough and Michael Brungart and Cradle to Cradle
and in other writings, what we generally think of as recycling might more accurately be described
as downcycling.
By this, we mean that used products like scrap paper can be shredded, pulped, and made into
toilet paper.
Glass bottles can be crushed and added to asphalt to make paving materials.
What we are doing here is getting one more used out of the raw materials before they
flow on down the waste stream and eventually end up in the dump.
On the other hand, materials like aluminum or steel can be recycled back into new aluminum
or steel using far less energy than it takes to mine ore and smelt new metal.
We have already talked about Cradle to Cradle and upcycling a little, but let's look at
how McDonough and Brungart define it.
They propose two systems for cycling materials, a biological metabolism and a technical metabolism.
The first is based on nature's biological nutrient cycling systems.
It's for materials like biodegradable packaging that can safely be returned to the environment
to nourish living systems.
The second is a closed loop system where high tech synthetic and mineral resources like
steel and aluminum circulate in a perpetual cycle of production, recovery, and manufacture.
These cycles mimic the earth's Cradle to Cradle systems like the ones that cycle calcium
and carbon.
Both these cycles are closed loops, constantly breaking down and recombining our materials
rather than allowing them to be lost in the waste stream.
In nature, the sun powers these cycles and it can in the human economy too.
The concept of entropy is at work again.
Sustainable upcycling uses solar energy to continually create products of the same or
better quality.
For example, electronic components that are continually cycled into electronic components.
As I mentioned earlier, conventional recycling is often downcycling, getting a few more
uses from something before it eventually goes to the landfill.
Nylon carpet becoming a speed bump that eventually ends up in the landfill is an example of downcycling.
Now don't get me wrong, it's still better to recycle and get a few more uses out of
the materials and energy embodied in a product than to simply throw it away.
But the more sustainable goal is to develop a Cradle to Cradle economy.
You can actually buy Cradle to Cradle certified products now.
The Cradle to Cradle Products Innovation Institute has a website with a registry of Cradle to
Cradle certified products.
Before moving on, I want to add one more term to our list of recycling techniques.
Repurposing refers to reusing waste materials for new and different purposes without melting
them down, grinding them up or otherwise turning them back into raw materials.
In the old days, rural folks used to turn worn out tires into tire swings, planters
for flowers or other folk art decorations.
In a very simple way, this is repurposing.
Waterglass wine bottles can be stacked with mortar to create beautiful garden walls.
Old doors can be made into colorful painted fences or old license plates can be made into
purses.
Creative people are finding a plethora of materials to create new products that are
both functional and unique.
Another way that innovative people are learning to establish a regenerative model in their
communities is through the use of local currencies.
Local currencies establish a way to trade value within a community without the use of
the national currency.
Local currencies create a more flexible system than one that is based simply on bartering.
The value of goods or services can be exchanged within the community, but the value stays
within the community.
Sometimes different mechanisms are used to keep the currency circulating.
For example, negative interest rates may be used to encourage holders to spend their currency
before it devalues.
If the currency isn't used, it loses a percentage of its value every month to encourage you
to use it.
In some communities, the system is based on an exchange of hours in which individuals
can, for example, trade their time as a house painter for the services of a lawyer.
These systems are called time banks.
The lawyer may not need painting services, but he can choose to take his payment and
time from, say, a physical therapist that also has chosen to participate in the time
bank.
All of these systems can work well, build community, and keep value local, but I have
to raise a caution here.
Local currencies must not be in any way mistaken for US dollars.
That's what's called counterfeiting.
It's not illegal to print money.
You just can't make it look like US dollars.
Local currencies must be clearly marked as what they are and cannot be used as money
outside of the designated community.
When it comes down to it, though, how much are we going to spend to transition to a more
regenerative lifestyle?
Fancy organic food costs a lot of money, right?
And buying a new hybrid car is not cheap.
I know.
Well, let's look at some of the personal economic implications of adopting a more regenerative
lifestyle.
When it comes to things like food, cleaning products, soaps, body care, organic costs
about 20% more than the non-organic equivalents, according to the Organic Consumers Association.
The report published by TechSci Research predicts that the United States organic food market
revenues are expected to grow at an average rate of around 14% between 2013 and 2018,
despite these higher prices at the checkout counter.
Why are organic groceries more expensive and why are people willing to pay higher prices
for organics?
To answer the first question, greener products are often more expensive for several reasons.
First, the market for organic and green products is smaller, but as demand and supply rise,
prices drop.
So if the SciTech report is correct, we should see prices of greener products falling.
Organic and green products are usually more labor-intensive to produce.
Chemical shortcuts like harmful herbicides and pesticides cannot be used in the growing
or processing of organic products.
Another reason that organic foods cost more is that they receive relatively few subsidies
compared to conventional commodity agricultural crops.
So processed foods may be artificially cheap, while healthier fresh fruits and vegetables
cost more.
So why are more and more consumers choosing to pay more despite the higher price tag?
In some cases, the products are of better quality, provide better service, and are therefore
worth more.
In other cases, people are willing to pay more for the health benefits and satisfaction
that come from being part of creating a more sustainable world.
For example, organic foods often have superior taste and nutrition, have no agricultural
chemical residues, and are grown in ways that increase the fertility of the land over time
rather than diminish it.
Another reason that people are willing to pay a higher price for their food is concern
about animal husbandry, the practices of large-scale confinement agriculture.
Again, these practices are cheaper for the producer, however, more and more shoppers
are looking for eggs from humanely-raised chickens and meat and dairy from animals raised in
pastures without antibiotics and other drugs.
Many organic food buyers are also concerned with the welfare of workers and want to support
local workers and local economies.
Because these products are produced on a smaller scale with less mechanization, they often
create more jobs than conventional products.
According to the UN Food and Agricultural Organization, organic agriculture creates
new jobs in rural development not only in the U.S. but in other countries as well.
So now let's review a few keys to moving toward a sustainable personal economic model and
establishing a regenerative footprint.
First, always remember to make informed choices.
Don't trust that a package that says all-natural is really sustainably made.
Do your own research.
Take for third-party certification, then evaluate your priorities, consider where
and how you want to vote with your dollars.
Sometimes that means spending a little less for something, sometimes it means spending
a little more.
Look for opportunities to shop locally, buy used, share and repair when appropriate,
upcycle and repurpose, grow and make your own.
By becoming an informed consumer, reducing waste and actively participating in your
personal environment, you can move toward a healthier, cheaper and more regenerative
lifestyle.
