In 1930, economist John Maynard Keynes wrote an essay called Economic Possibilities for
Our Grandchildren.
In it, he predicted that the productive power of the industrial economy would solve the
economic problem of humanity within a hundred years.
Then he said, humanity would go on to the permanent problem of how to live wisely, agreeably
and well.
In many ways, the sustainability movement is the quest to learn how to live wisely, agreeably
and well.
Living well is the material dimension of sustainability.
We are material beings and need food, shelter and other necessities of a good life.
But contrary to what many economists would have you believe, it's not all a matter of
economics.
Economics is important and it's how we obtain the material requisites of a good life.
But we are also social beings.
We need to love and be loved.
Living agreeably is this social dimension of sustainability.
Living wisely relates to the ethical and spiritual dimension of sustainability.
We are spiritual beings.
We need a sense of purpose and meaning.
Keynes was pessimistic.
In wealthy western countries like the US, we reached the point where we had the capacity
to solve the temporary problem, the material requisites of a good life, in the 1950s.
Research from the growing field of happiness studies indicates that below $10,000 to $15,000
per capita income, increases in wealth lead to corresponding increases in human well-being
like you would expect.
But beyond $10,000 to $15,000 per capita income, increases in well-being and satisfaction have
more to do with better social relationships and a sense of meaning in life.
People need to believe what they are doing is significant and that their actions are
in some sense right and good.
Once essential human needs are met, human happiness or quality of life depends far more
on cultivating the social and spiritual dimensions of life than on acquiring more income or wealth.
In this lecture, I'll introduce the emerging field of sustainable economics.
We'll explore why sustainable economics involves more than simply putting a price on social
and environmental damage caused by economic activity and letting the market work it all
out.
Economics is about how we get our individual material needs met.
Throughout most of history, material comforts were the limiting factors to a good life.
It made sense to focus on material, economic values as the way to improve human well-being.
Today, however, for many people, material comforts are no longer the limiting factor
in a good life.
We lack time for rewarding relationships with other people, to pursue our interests and
to give back to others.
We lack a sense of purpose and meaning.
Sustainable economics recognizes the importance of relationships in a sense of doing what
is right and good as forces that should drive economic policy, not the other way around.
Economies are not capable of creating anything of value.
They simply facilitate the process of extracting things of value from natural and human resources.
Economies are necessary when we go beyond individual self-sufficiency.
If we could get all of our needs met directly from nature, we wouldn't need an economy.
What does a sustainable economy look like?
What I present now reflects the work of ecological economists like Herman Daley and borrows heavily
from the pioneering work of my colleague and sustainable economist John Eichert.
Here's a definition of sustainability we've been working with, put in terms of economics.
Economic sustainability is meeting the economic needs of the present without diminishing the
economic opportunities of the future.
Sustainable economics works to ground economics in the real world, including the physical
sciences, physics, chemistry, and biology.
Sustainable economics says that people must obey nature's laws.
Unlike abstract concepts like money, real objects like people and cars and trees cannot
grow exponentially forever.
In nature, things grow, they have a period of stable functioning, and then they die.
Sustainable economics recognizes limits imposed by nature on how much of the resources of
the earth can be dedicated to serving human needs.
In the lecture on energy and sustainability, we looked at energy in the deep and somewhat
mysterious role it plays in the development of order and structure in the universe.
Let's review it again in the context of economics.
Energy isn't destroyed by use.
However, each time energy is used, it becomes less concentrated, less organized, and thus
less useful than before.
Eventually, all energy becomes unable to produce anything of economic value.
This lost usefulness is a result of the physical law of entropy.
An economy that depends on non-renewable sources of energy like fossil fuels is not sustainable.
As fossil fuels become increasingly scarce, their ability to produce things of economic
value will diminish and eventually be lost.
Even as such an economy continues to grow, the energy needed to meet the needs of future
generations is unavoidably diminished and will be depleted.
Society requires energy too.
People are born as helpless babies and need to be educated and socialized to become productive
members of an economy.
All this takes energy.
When our thinking and inventing takes energy, 20% of the energy used by the body is used
by the brain.
There is also a kind of entropy of social energy.
Relationships and social structures need to be renewed and refreshed regularly.
From this perspective, an economy is a system for optimizing the conversion of low entropy
energy and materials to high entropy energy and materials, extracting usefulness in the
process.
The production and consumption of goods and services inevitably leads to the conversion
of low entropy energy to high entropy energy.
Thus, economies inherently lead to the degradation of materials and energy, in other words, to
the production of waste material and wasted energy.
Anything of use to people is ultimately derived from nature and society.
If in the process of getting our economic needs met, we use up the usefulness of nature
and society, then there is no place else to get anything of economic value.
To offset this, physics tells us we need a high quality source of energy and systems
that will use this energy to recycle and renew the usefulness of materials.
In nature, biology uses sunlight to offset the effects of entropy.
We can use nature as a model as we work to develop an economy that regenerates and renews.
In this sense, a sustainable economy is all about sustainable energy.
The source of sustainable energy on earth is solar energy in all its forms, solar electric,
wind, hydroelectric, biomass, and more as we've been discussing.
Now here's a diagram that's often used to describe the relationship of the environment,
society, and the economy to sustainability.
The place where the economy, society, and the environment intersect is considered the
sweet spot of sustainability.
From this perspective, the only parts of nature and society that are useful to the economy
are those that can be assigned economic value and move to the sweet spot of this intersection.
Here the goal is to assign economic value to the environmental and social damages so
that market forces can recognize and can deal with them.
There are a couple problems with this diagram.
First is that it would lead you to believe that some part of society isn't part of nature
and some part of the economy is not part of nature or society.
But that isn't true.
Societies are embedded in and a part of the larger environment of the earth and economies
are a creation of societies and are embedded in them.
The second problem is that it leads you to believe that we can ameliorate the social and
environmental damages caused by economic activity by assigning them dollar values and letting
the market work it out.
Social values can have an economic element.
Doing business with people you know and trust reduces transaction costs.
But purely social relationships are inherently different than economic relationships.
You can find a new friend, but you can't trade friends with someone.
Once a purely personal relationship ends, its value disappears.
There is no product left that can be traded, rented or sold to anyone else.
There is no way to monetize social relationships and turn them into marketable goods.
We can also assign an economic value to some kinds of ecological damage and make the polluter
pay.
But the ethical relationship we have to care for the environment is inherently different
than an economic relationship.
Like social relationships, purely ethical relationships produce nothing of economic
value that can be exchanged or traded to anyone else.
There are social and environmental things that we need to do for sustainability that
don't lend themselves to market solutions.
Another problem with putting a dollar value on social and ecological damage is that those
with money can simply pay to continue to do damage.
Now, don't get me wrong.
We can use market economies to help some environmental and social problems, but we can't rely solely
on market economies to deal with problems of social and environmental sustainability.
We don't have time to go into detail on all the differences between economic, social and
ethical relationships and values.
I hope I've given you enough here so that you can begin to see some of the problems
with trying to use economies and markets to deal with these essential elements of sustainability.
If you are interested in exploring these further, I recommend the work of economist John Eicherd.
He's developing the core theory for a sustainable economy that works for everyone.
Now, I'd like to show you another diagram that I think paints a more realistic view
and ecological, sustainable worldview.
Here you can see that the economy is entirely bounded by society and is structured by the
laws and policies of society.
And society is in turn entirely bounded by nature and is structured by the laws of nature.
This type of relationship is called a nested hierarchy, what economist John Eicherd calls
the hierarchy of sustainability.
Within a nested hierarchy, purpose is derived from the next highest level of organization
and lower levels define the possibilities for the higher levels.
For example, if we think of the human body as a nested hierarchy, the purpose for the
heart is defined in relation to the body as a whole.
And the heart affects the potential of the body.
By beating faster, it provides the potential to exert extra energy and quitting the heart
stops function of the body.
Like this, the purpose of the economy is derived from society, and the economy affects the
potentials for society.
The purpose of the economy being derived from society suggests that the economy should
be put in service to society and the environment.
Currently, it's the other way around.
We do things that are good for society or the environment only if they don't negatively
affect the economy.
To respect the hierarchy of sustainability, the order should be, is it good for the environment,
is it good for society, and finally, can we afford it?
The idea that the economy affects the potentials of society suggests that we need to make enough
surplus from the economy to cover the economic costs of the non-economic things we need to
do for society and the environment, such as funding the essential functions of government.
There are economic costs for ensuring social equity and justice, protecting the environment,
and conserving natural resources.
This diagram also suggests that one of the roles of society is to put constraints on the
economy so that society and the environment aren't exploited by the economy.
Sustainable economics is about putting economic value in proper relation to social and environmental
value, respecting the hierarchy of sustainability.
Let's talk about sustainability and economic growth.
The mantra of the industrial era is, growth is good.
We've created an economy where improvement in the human condition is predicated on continuing
growth year after year and throughput of materials and energy.
This kind of growth is called compound growth.
Let's look at some examples of how compound growth affects sustainability.
One of the basic principles of economics is that humans have a preference for the present.
The future is inherently uncertain, and if we give up the use of something today, there's
a chance that we will not be able to enjoy it in the future.
A blunt way to put this is there is no way to get anything of economic value after you
are dead.
That's why we have interest rates.
At an interest rate of 7%, $1.10 years in the future is only worth 50 cents today, because
that 50 cents could grow at a compound rate of 7% and yield $1.10 years later.
And $1.00 100 years in the future is worth only a tenth of a cent today.
That's why something that has a big payoff or the potential to cause a big expense for
a future generation has very little economic value today.
Investments for the benefit of future generations cannot compete with investments that promised
returns next year, next week, or even next decade.
The corporate world expects rates of return of 15%, which means $1.05 years from now is
worth only 50 cents today.
That's why many corporate planning horizons extend only 5 to 7 years into the future,
because any value or expense occurring after that is rapidly discounted to zero today.
Because economic value is inherently short-term, economic incentives alone are inadequate to
ensure the long-term investments in nature and society that are absolutely necessary
for sustainability.
Remember our definition of sustainability, meeting the needs of the present without diminishing
the ability of future generations to meet their needs.
We've just seen that there is no economic value to doing things that provide a benefit
solely for some future generation.
There is no social value in doing so either.
You won't know anyone, and you may not even have any descendants.
Doing something for the sole benefit of future generations is an ethical value.
We do so because it is the right and good thing to do.
So economic values are important for sustainability, but ethical and social values are also necessary.
According to many, the growth rates of the industrial era were an aberration, and such
growth rates did not seem to be sustainable in the future.
Growing in nature grows at compound growth rates for very long.
To get a million times bigger requires only 22 doublings, very few things double in size
more than 10 times.
If an economy grows at a compound rate of 2.5%, modest by industrial era standards,
it will double every 30 years.
If this keeps up over time, then eventually the economy overwhelms all the systems of
the earth.
Here's a little thought experiment that illustrates this.
Let's say that the output of the global economy 2,000 years ago was $1.
If it grew at a rate of 2.5% per year until now, it would generate an economic output
of $3.6 trillion today, that's 3.6 followed by 20 zeros.
This is the equivalent to 7 billion people spending nearly $1 million every minute of
every day of the year, and it would more than double over the next 30 years.
Obviously, the economic growth rates of the industrial era will not be sustainable into
the future.
Stocks of fossil energy have allowed a period of compound economic growth, but those stocks
are finite.
The global economy of the next century must be sustained by the daily inflow of new solar
energy.
Solar energy available for economic use is large and relatively constant, but it is
finite too.
The sustainable level of economic wealth on earth is ultimately limited by the quantity
of economic value that can be extracted from the daily inflow of solar energy without degrading
the capability of the natural systems of the earth to provide their essential services,
like assimilating waste, maintaining the fertility of the land, and purifying water.
What to do then?
Well, it's the concept of a steady state economy that provides a logical, conceptual
foundation for the development of a sustainable economy.
In nature, an organism that grows forever is a pathology.
People are born, go through a period of rapid growth, go through a period of stable functioning,
and then they die.
A steady state economy is like a mature forest ecosystem.
At any given time, there are areas of the forest that are going through cycles of growth
and expansion, areas that are in a period of stable functioning, and areas that are dying.
Overall, the flow of energy and materials through the forest is constant.
Like that, a steady state economy will have organizations being formed, organizations going
out of business, and organizations in a period of stable functioning, but the overall flow
of energy and materials will be constant.
Let's look at the idea of steady state economies in a little more detail.
In 1848, the classical economist John Stuart Mill proposed the stationary state economy
in reactions to assertions by other classical economists like Adam Smith and Malthus that
the end of growth must result in catastrophe.
Neoclassical economics, which replaced the classical economics of Mills and Smith, was
in a large part an effort to refute limits to economic growth.
In the developing era of sustainable economics, people like Herman Daly, Peter Victor, and
John Eichert have revisited the idea of a steady state economy and updated it for sustainability.
A steady state economy is defined as an economy that maintains a constant population, a constant
supply of labor, and constant stocks of natural and financial capital.
Sustainable energy sources are sequestered from the daily inflow of solar energy, leaving
enough solar energy for the other living creatures on the planet.
Those are put into cycles that mimic nature's biological and mineral cycling systems, the
cradle to cradle systems proposed by McDonough and Brongard.
The concept of waste is eliminated, and the output of one system becomes the input of
another.
Does a steady state economy mean the end of innovation, evolution, and improvement in
the human condition?
A steady state economy does not imply stagnation of creativity and human development.
In John Stuart Mill's words, it is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition
of capital and population implies no stationary state of human improvement.
There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental culture and moral and social
progress.
Let's go back to our mature forest ecosystem analogy.
Even though the flow of energy and cycling of water and nutrients is constant or steady
state, there are always parts of the forest going through rapid growth and development.
Other parts that are maintaining their current state of development and other parts that
are dying.
There is innovation and evolution going on, and these could be at a higher level than
in a pioneer stage of forest development when most resources are tied up in physical growth.
As in an ecosystem, the pioneer growth phases of an economy suck up a lot of resources.
A steady state economy could actually have more resources devoted to innovation and creativity
than a growth economy.
Next, let's look at employment and sustainability.
Many of our current employment policies are a throwback to an early industrial era when
the earth's resources seemed unlimited, workers were few, and the basic material needs of
people were many.
The objective was to increase total production by increasing productivity per worker so that
each worker would be able to earn more and spend more and promote even greater economic
growth.
At the same time, technology was used to replace workers whenever possible.
Today, the earth's remaining natural resources obviously are limited.
There are more workers than employment opportunities, and material well-being is no longer the limiting
factor to the happiness or quality of life for many people in the world.
Today, in 2014, the need is to create more employment opportunities from less material
and energy use.
What about using technology to put more people in satisfying work rather than using technology
to employ fewer people?
Full employment of a growing population would not require returning to labor-intensive production
or human drudgery.
It would only require turning the attention of the economy to producing things that depend
more on uniquely human thinking, creativity, imagination, insight, and intuition.
Material mass production seemed a logical vision for the past when people were few and
resources were many.
But it is less a logical vision for the future with lots of people and relatively fewer resources.
One innovative way to handle the problem of cyclical unemployment is to share the available
work.
If there is 10% unemployment, send everybody home at noon on Friday.
This would provide jobs for more people by reducing working time by 10%.
This could also leave more time for family and other non-economic pursuits, leaving people
enjoying life more by working less.
It wasn't always this way.
In his landmark book, Stone Age Economics, anthropologist Marshall Sallins studied the
economies of Stone Age hunter-gatherers.
The myth is that pre-industrial life was short, brutish, and hard.
What Sallins found is something quite different.
Age societies were the first leisure societies.
Material needs for food, clothing, and shelter were met by working as few as 15 hours per
week with many of the tribe not gainfully employed at all.
The rest of the time was spent in social engagement and developing art and craft.
There was a growing trend in some industrialized countries to put the benefits of productivity
gains toward working fewer hours.
France and Germany have 30 to 35-hour work weeks and mandated six-week paid vacations.
In 1930, the Kellogg Company successfully experimented with a 30-hour work week.
Productivity gains from a shorter work week allowed Kellogg to pay essentially the same
wage for a 30-hour week as for a 40-hour week and to employ hundreds of new people.
Working less means you could dedicate more time to producing the goods you previously
bought, like garden produce.
We'll return to this idea when we discuss the maker movement in a few minutes.
There is even a political party dedicated to promoting the benefits of less industrial
work.
It's in Canada and it's called the Work Less Party.
One of the keys to a steady state economy is low or no population growth.
Progress is beginning to be made in curbing population growth.
Some wealthy European countries like France are experiencing negative population growth.
The UN estimates that global population will stabilize at about 9.2 billion people by 2075.
If the global population were stabilized, the earth would quite likely have more than
enough resources, including the daily inflow of solar energy, to meet the basic needs of
people in both developed and developing countries.
The world of the future will have enough energy to sustain a desirable quality of life for
humanity, just not enough energy to sustain the same sort of economic growth seen in the
industrial area.
Many so-called developing nations of the world still need to focus on their economic problem,
on producing enough to meet the basic human needs of all within their societies.
However, these nations need not consume all of the earth's remaining resources in the
process of developing their economies.
In addition, they can develop their economies without sacrificing their cultures, communities
and families.
Such nations can balance their necessary economic growth with equally necessary social responsibility
and ecological integrity.
The degrowth movement advocates for a planned transition to a sustainable economy rather
than one forced by ecological, financial or social collapse.
Degrowth advocates argue that as a complement to building a steady state sustainable economy,
we need to degrow the negative effects of the growth economy, things like poverty, homelessness,
exploitation, pollution, carbon intensity, species loss and work hours.
Degrowth aims to maximize happiness and well-being through non-consumptive means, sharing work,
consuming less, while devoting more time to art, music, family, culture and community.
Reimagining and reinventing the good life lies at the heart of any transition to a sustainable
low-carbon economy.
High consumption lifestyles simply cannot be adopted by 9 billion people while keeping
within the material, energy and ecological limits of the planet.
Degrowth advocates argue that an adequate response to these limits requires more than
minor changes to current lifestyles.
It will require a cultural paradigm shift away from high consumption lifestyles towards
a way of life informed by principles and practices of material sufficiency, knowing when to say
enough.
Research indicates that high-consumptive societies are mis-consuming.
Many people could reduce their consumption while increasing their well-being.
The world is both starved and stuffed.
People are suffering from obesity and people are starving.
Countries suffer from excesses of over-consumption while other countries struggle with meeting
basic material needs.
There is the possibility for wealthier countries to cut consumption and improve lifestyles,
making room for the many in the world that can still benefit from economic growth.
Given that we don't have many policies in place for sustainable economies, what can
we do now with our purchasing and investment decisions?
We vote in the polling booth at election time, but we vote every day with our purchases
and investment decisions.
How we spend our private and public money is one way of voting for what kind of world
we want to live in.
How can we begin to make the transition to a sustainable economy using the collective
power of our purchasing and investment decisions?
First, respect the hierarchy of sustainability, not always choosing the lowest priced item
without regard to social and ethical factors.
Cost is important, but it should be considered in the hierarchy of sustainability.
Something like this, do I get a sense of rightness and goodness?
Is it good for the environment?
What are the consequences for my social relationships?
And finally, can I afford it?
There are certifications that can help sort through these kinds of decisions and new
forms of business organization that work to expand social and ethical values in business,
like B Corpse or certification.
There is a movement in the investment industry called socially responsible investing, or
SRI.
SRI has been around since the 1700s.
One segment is mutual funds that are screened for a wide variety of sustainability criteria.
For example, there are socially responsible investment funds that allow you to invest
only in companies that are involved in renewable energy.
You can also gather with your friends in an investment club that helps finance sustainability
initiatives in your community.
You can begin to go from passive consumption to co-production.
One example is home food production.
Learn skills that were once common, like fixing things and making stuff.
In this lecture, we've explored the core concepts for a sustainable economy.
We've seen that the economy is about meeting the individual material needs for a good life.
Sustainability means respecting the hierarchy of sustainability in economy and service to
humanity and nature and humanity functioning in harmony with the laws of nature.
We've seen the limits to compound growth and explored the benefits of a steady state
economy, economy that functions in balance with the flow of solar energy and cycling
of materials like a mature forest, dedicating a significant portion of its resources to
offset the effects of entropy to regeneration and renewal for future generations.
I'll close with a 1968 quote from Robert Kennedy that reflects this idea of putting
the economy in its proper relation.
The gross national product does not allow for the health of our children, the quality
of their education, or the joy of their play.
It does not include the beauty of our poetry or the strength of our marriages, the intelligence
of our public debate, or the integrity of our public officials.
It measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither
our compassion nor our devotion to our country.
It measures everything in short except that which makes life worthwhile.
