And we are live, okay.
So welcome everyone to the November 2018 Ensouce seminar.
As is usual, at this stage of the proceedings,
we'll have a relatively slow start
to allow people to prep up the speed.
And we have a couple of other members of the community
who hopefully will be joining us live.
Our speaker this month will be Harry Heft
from Denison University.
Harry, a psychologist, a professor emeritus psychologist
in Denison who has worked in the area
of ecological psychology and environmental psychology
for many years, taught and teaches in the area
of environmental psychology and cultural psychology.
Harry's most probably best known work
and the place where I first came across his work
was his impressive term ecological psychology in context,
tracing the lineage of James Gibson's talk
back to William James and also connecting it
with the other domains of ecological psychology,
such as Roger Barker's work,
which will form the basis of much of what
is Harry's gonna talk about today.
So just before we get started with the actual talk,
we have a little bit of news which we can share
if I can bring up the in the coming weeks.
Ezekiel de Paolo, Anna de Yeager and Elena Kouffari
will have a new book released called Linguistic Bodies.
So it's a substantial contribution
to the whole field of understanding language
from an inactive perspective.
It's a, I've been able to see some of the work
and I'm very much looking forward to reading
the full work itself, looking at the whole issue
of embodiment from the ground up,
very much from in a depth that is well worth exploring.
And we are lucky enough as well to be able to,
if you buy now or buy soon, there's a code here
that you'll be able to use to get 30% off
from the MIT Press website as well.
So you can swipe that code and use it to save yourself
a bit of cash on an otherwise very good expenditure of money.
Okay, so that is,
now, so that's it in terms of sort of initial news.
So that'll be the case.
I think we have, we're still possibly gonna have
one or two people will join us a little bit later
for the Q&A session, have a nice conversation.
But in the meantime, I guess, Harry,
we should probably move toward the talk.
Hopefully, we've had a few people be able to catch up online.
That's fine.
Okay, so without further ado, Harry Heft,
please invite you to give this one sensor seminar.
Well, hello everyone.
Thanks for joining.
And I will switch to the slides.
Okay, I'm assuming I think America is still there.
Yep, it's still there.
Okay, that all looks good.
You might not think there's a hide button
beside the stop sharing button there,
which, there we go.
There we are.
So we're all good then.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, the top, the title, as you can see,
is talking about emergent structures in everyday life,
but there are emergent structures
at a higher level of analysis than we normally consider.
So let me just sort of lay out a few basic issues first.
These are mostly issues
that I assume everyone's familiar with,
so I won't spend much time on them.
I'm talking primarily from the perspective
of ecological psychology.
Initially, James Gibson's approach,
and that will shift a little bit.
The major assumption here is that our focus
is on perception action.
When we look at psychology
from the point of view of perception action,
of view the individual as an agent,
an agent whose actions are intentional or goal directed,
and also that are embedded in a context or situated.
Now, in much of the literature,
and I think here is where ecological psychology
might contribute to some inaction thinking,
is that the situated or the embedded notion
of perception action doesn't get a great deal of play.
So in fact, this is what I wanna focus on today,
is the ways in which action is embedded
or situated in a larger set of circumstances.
So when we say that action is intentional,
it's intentional with reference to what?
And the most general statement we can make
is that it's with reference
to psychologically meaningful features of the habitat.
The prototypical example of this are affordances,
which again, I'm assuming the listeners,
viewers are familiar with.
Affordances are relational properties
of the environment taken with respect
to an organism's actions.
So here is a feature of the habitat.
If you're a young child approaching this feature,
it affords particular actions like, for example, climbing.
So the affordance property is a relational property,
as I hope we're all familiar with.
If not, we can talk about it later.
The other common reference that's treated in the literature
is when we're engaging with others.
And so in this case, others are affordances for action.
And so the individual in each of these cases,
the child is a co-participant in a larger unit,
which we could call a with, barring from urban golfmen.
That is, it's part of a dialogical unit.
Again, the individual is intentional.
Action is embedded within this unit.
And then it's a dynamic process.
Lots of people have written about this.
I think the previous ENSO speaker spoke about this as well.
I wanna just highlight a couple of things here
that with the responsive partner,
the individual and that partner
co-constitutes an interaction frame.
This is an intersubjective interaction frame.
There's a common understanding of what's going on here.
And we can understand this with regard
to the diagram on the right,
which comes from a paper by Chamero and Turvey,
where the constituents, A, lowercase B and C,
jointly give rise to a set, A.
They constitute it, give rise to it
and operate within those,
the constraints of that larger set.
And we'll see how this plays out as we proceed.
Notice again, that this unit, the set,
is an emergent dynamic structure
that emerges from the interaction
and the coordinated relationship
of the constituent participants.
Now, let me sort of shift gears
and add a couple of other pieces
before I go on to what I want to say.
E.B. Holt, who many of you may know
was one of James Gibson's mentors in graduate school,
developed this concept of the recession of the stimulus,
which had a big influence on Gibson.
What he means here is that intentional action
has an environmental correlate.
It's directed towards something.
But what's important in this notion of the recession
is that the reference for action can be specified
with regard to features at different levels of complexity.
So for example, action can be directed
toward a single object, toward multiple objects,
which he wrote about with regard to events
of various durations.
And so what we want to do is talk about action
as directed towards structures that can exist
at multiple levels of scale.
And that is to say, the scope of directed action
may shift over time.
There's a wonderful paper by Ludger Van Geek
and Rob Vittigan on The Horizontal View,
which I recommend to you.
So we're looking at how intentional action
needn't be just directed toward an object
or toward another person, but toward multiple objects
and even toward a larger unit and event.
One other preliminary piece of information
before I proceed is that scientific inquiry
has tended to follow along two tracks.
And America's a wonderful paper that he's working on
on this topic.
And that is scientific, there's experimental inquiry,
obviously, but also scientific inquiry
has taken the form of natural, it's called natural history.
And we're all familiar with this in the sense
of what's often called fieldwork,
like fieldwork in plant ecology, animal ecology,
geology, and so on.
And the goal in much of natural history
is to identify the frequency and circumstances
of the occurrence of whatever your basic subject matter is.
So in other words, if we're interested
in particular types of plants, how often do they occur
and where do they occur and under what circumstance.
This work goes back to antiquity,
but we're probably can trace it most fully back
to the work of Unhomehold in the early 1800s,
who in fact was a major influence on Darwin
and prompted Darwin's voyage on the Beagle.
And also in contemporary science,
we're all familiar with the work of Jane Goodall.
And again, the point of natural history
is to identify what is the basic subject matter,
where does it occur, how often, and so on.
And then of course the question is,
where's psychology in all this?
And for the most part, psychology has not pursued
this line of work at all.
As many of you know, psychology is unique
among the sciences and having started out
as an experimental science.
So there's been very little work of this nature.
In psychology, the exception is the other
ecological psychologist who I'll mention today
besides Gibson, and that is Roger Barker.
Barker realized in the late 1940s
that psychology was missing this vital piece.
And so he began to conduct an observational study
of the everyday actions of individual children
as they went about their day in their town.
It was literally sort of descriptive work,
but also Barker wanted to know,
is there some discernible order or pattern
in the child's actions over the course of the day?
In other words, what might account
for what the child was doing at any given time?
And here's the overall conclusion of his study,
although I'll talk about it in more specifics momentarily.
First of all, and this comes as no great surprise,
the actions of any individual child typically changes
dramatically when he or she moves
from one location in the environment to another.
How a child acts, let's say in a classroom
or in a playground or in a pharmacy, changes.
But the other thing which is really noteworthy
that he points out is that if we follow the activities
of an individual child, their actions show greater variability
across different locations,
and that's what the prior statement essentially stating.
Greater variability across different locations
then do the actions of different children
within the same location.
Now, this is really unusual observation
from the point of view of psychology,
which just assumes that the determinant of action
is sort of within the person.
And what Barker found is where the child is,
turns out to be a very reliable predictor
of what the child is doing.
Now, the question is, why is that the case?
And so that's what I wanna pursue for the remainder,
for the most part, for the remainder of my time.
Why is it the case that children's actions
change notably when they move from one location,
and I'll use the word location here generally, to another.
And why is it the case that different children,
their behaviors are more similar within a given location
than they are across different locations for,
just for our present purposes,
imagine this is the same group of children
in each of these situations.
Notice how radically their actions change
across the situations, but how somewhat similar they are,
how more limited, they have much more in common
within any situation.
Now, why is that?
Well, the reason why is that there's an emergent
self-organizing pattern of joint action.
This is not Barker's terminology.
Barker called the book, refer to a behavior setting.
What happens is the emergence of behavior settings.
So what I'm doing, Barker was writing
in the 50s and 60s, and he didn't have
the same conceptual tools that we have today.
He was working largely with the theoretical tools
of cybernetics.
So what we're doing here is trying to cast Barker's thinking
into dynamical systems language.
And so due to the coordinate of coupling
among the constituents, let's say in this classroom,
what emerges is a higher order unit,
in this case, the classroom,
within which those constituent behaviors are embedded,
and from which those coordinated constituent behaviors,
the setting largely arises.
Here's another case where a group of children
sort of all essentially agreeing
to coordinate their actions.
Similarly, give rise to a certain possibility,
in this case, a game, which wouldn't be there
if it weren't for the joint co-ordinative coupling
of the constituents.
There is a sense of there's a collective intentionality.
The children, there's an intersubjective awareness
that we're a part of something bigger.
I'll come back to that.
And to try to talk about this
with a little more specificity,
the coordination among the constituents,
the components give rise to this emergent structure.
And to sustain that emergent structure,
the co-ordinative actions are constrained.
So this is a view here where the degrees of freedom
of constituents are limited by virtue
of their participation in the higher order dynamic structures
that they themselves generate.
That's what I think is really quite interesting
about this phenomenon of behavior setting
and how it fits really nicely
into dynamical systems thinking.
Joanna Rosazek-Leonardo has nicely stated this
as the emergent stabilization
of selective constraints on actions.
Interestingly, her research deals
with mother-infant interactions.
We're seeing the same phenomenon happening
at a different level of complexity.
So why is knowing where a child is a reliable predictor
of what she is doing?
Well, because we're considering her or his actions
in relation to the emergent structure
within which they are situated or embedded.
So going back to where I was at the outset,
we're looking at how perception action is embedded
in a particular set of circumstances,
which in part is generated by joint action.
Now, what led Barker to the discovery?
And I really think discovery is the right word here
of behavior settings.
And again, this was, I would say this occurred
in the early 60s.
I'll give you an example that he cites in his writings.
I'm gonna talk to you about 10 minutes of observations
of a girl named Maude, who's six years old
in a neighborhood soda fountain.
And for historical purposes, I must say that is indeed
the soda fountain that he observed.
So I was pleased to take a field trip there.
So let me help walk you through this complicated figure.
What Barker has done on the left-hand side,
these numbers, is the various things in this case
that others say to the child, what he calls social inputs.
And they're marked by these arrows, if you see.
So these are the various remarks that are offered
by Maude's mother or in a few cases, the clerk.
And this is time.
So these are the things that mom or the clerk say to Maude,
or not what they say, but when they say it.
And if we assume sort of an SR relationship,
you would think that behavior would follow
from these inputs.
But in fact, these are the inputs.
These are, I mean, sorry, these are the behaviors.
They occur over a duration.
So this is the onset of one action.
This is the onset offset of that one action and so on.
So these are units of action.
And if you look at where the arrows lay
relative to the onset of the behavior episodes,
you can see that they don't correspond
to them very reliably at all.
In other words, if we were to predict what Maude is doing
with regard to these actions, which have a duration,
some of which are nested within others,
you can see that they aren't really initiated very often
by what anyone is directing toward her.
That is, there's no reliable causal relationship
in the sense of efficient causality.
Looking, say it said another way,
looking at the actions of others,
they were terrible predictors of Maude's behavior.
Barker was initially discouraged by this input
until these results, until he realized something.
If you step back for a minute,
he realized that in fact, all of Maude's actions
were in fact congruent with the setting in which she was in.
That is to say, she was behaving perfectly appropriately
with the neighborhood, in the neighborhood soda fountain.
Actions were appropriate to the type of place
where they occurred.
So why is that?
And we see this also if Maude or children
or in a literature class or an ice cream shop
or a football field, their patterns of action
overall differ.
And even though we maybe couldn't predict them
on a micro scale, actions are appropriate
to the type of place where they occur.
And so we might view this more in terms of formal causality
that actions take the form of the dynamic structure,
the higher order dynamic structure to which they belong.
And I've already explained how this works
in some of the prior slides.
So essentially the soda fountain was a behavior setting.
It has a dynamic quasi-stable,
that is to say self-regulating function.
It's a set of joint actions by Maude, the mother,
the soda clerk and Maude's brother who was also there
supported by the physical material structure
available, the affordances.
So here are the properties of a behavior setting.
They occur naturally, they're in the world.
They're not created by an experimenter.
They're not necessarily,
they're not in the head of any one person.
They are properties of the world.
They're composed of dynamic patterns of action
of individuals with the supportive affordances.
They're in a certain place and behavior settings
operate within a specific time period.
So we can pinpoint where that soda fountain is
and when it opens, when it closes.
And notice that it's not a physical location
that's part of it, but it's the setting itself
is generated by the actions of the people there.
So after hours when no one's present in the soda fountain,
it's not a behavior setting.
It's essentially an empty shell.
The behavior setting is an eco-behavioral unit.
Behavior settings are psychologically
and publicly meaningful ecological structures.
That is to say they're perceivably meaningful
and available for others to see
as long as they've come to understand
what these are within the context of their community.
And these structures stem from, as I'll say more fully,
the normative practices of participants.
These dynamic eco-psychological structures exist
independently of any single individual.
If Mod's brother leaves the soda fountain,
the behavior setting still goes on.
And they're self-regulating because if in fact
a participant begins to act
with outside the bounds of normative action,
the other participants can attempt
to kind of bring them back into line.
So what Barker did remarkably over two full years
and another year in another city in the UK,
he examined all the behavior settings that existed
over the course of an entire year.
And this is just one page of a very long table,
but let me give you an example.
So if you look here, the behavior setting type,
furniture store, there was one of them.
It was open 305 days during the year.
It was in operation over 2,700 hours.
So we can begin, and similarly,
if we look at kindergarten classes,
there was one kindergarten class during the year.
It was active 97 days out of the year for 242 hours
and duration, if you wanted to,
if you were looking for a knitting class,
there were two, they occurred 45 times jointly and so on.
If however, if you were looking to,
this I didn't mention this,
but this was the observation of a town
in the United States and the Midwest,
if you wanted to play a game of cricket,
you'd find no behavior settings there.
In other words, the behavior settings
provide the eco-behavioral resources
or the eco-psychological resources
of the town during the year.
This indicates what one could do in the town.
And notice that these, again,
these behavior settings emerge out
of Coordinative Joint Actions of the participants.
So here is, if you will, a behavior setting,
which many of you would be familiar with,
we could talk about the participants
as having a sense of collective intentionality.
They know what the action and what the activity is
and they all know that they're part of this.
Charles Taylor nicely phrases this,
social practices are not carried out
in acts of single agents.
A great deal of human action happens only in so far
as the agent understands and constitute him or herself
as an integral part of a weed.
So in this case, just as the case to the right,
the constituents, the coordination of the participants
give rise to a higher order unit.
What I think all of us who read the literature
and action and ecological psychology
are familiar with the case on the right,
the case on the left though is equally commonplace.
And in fact, our communities are filled
with these higher order units of collective action.
So where might we go here?
Well, I can envision a developmental research agenda,
which I'd like to bring up and encourage anyone
to sort of join in on.
First of all, we wanna understand how children learn
to become participants in ongoing family
and community practices.
And part of this process is surely as put in out
by Eric, Rachel, and Julian Kiverstein,
it's a process of educating attention,
educating the attention of the novice
to selected parts of the world that has significance
for a given practice.
That is to say, the individual is,
the attention of the individual was brought
to these significant events
which have some kind of coherence and structure.
In doing so, the child learns about the range of actions
that are permissible in that location,
in that behavior setting.
What I've written about in other, in various places
is that this is not a matter of rule learning.
Rule learning really can't account for this
for a whole variety of reasons,
but rather what's mostly happening
is that the child learns about what is impermissible
in those places.
That is to say, they acquire a sense
of the constraints on action.
And so then in any given behavior setting,
there is a limited number,
the limited degrees of freedom of action
due to overlapping sets of constraints.
So let me just give you one example here.
So here's a child's party at a restaurant.
And I'm speculating, this is open for research,
that what accounts for the action of any given child
is the overlapping of several sets of constraints.
One being, what is it to have a meal in a public place?
What is it to interact and be in a restaurant?
And three, what is it like to interact with one's friends?
If you sort of bring those three sets of constraints together,
we can see sort of the range of actions
which are likely to occur for any given child
in this situation.
We're not able to predict what exactly the child's doing
at any given instant,
but we can really delineate in a fairly limited way
what the child is likely to be doing.
And so, and also this is not a height,
we're not talking about the determination of action,
but rather within those constraints,
there's a great deal of improvisation and spontaneity,
which makes them enjoyable and fun
and a shared sense of what's going on.
The second program of research which one can conduct,
and this is something I wanted to,
that I've done a little bit on,
is that of course for a child to act appropriately
in a given setting,
they need to be able to recognize what the setting is.
The behavior setting is a dynamic inter-individual unit.
It's not a mere collection of people.
In a Gestalt sense,
it should be some unit that is perceptible.
The child, the individual,
should be able to identify what kind of setting
this inter-individual unit is.
It's an X, not a Y.
So, is there any evidence for this?
And I should say also that in looking for evidence,
we're also providing some support for the notion
that behavior settings are independent of any individual.
They are eco-psychological structures
in the environment considered relationally.
That is to say they have a similar ontological status
as an affordance.
So, let me explain this experiment
that was conducted with some colleagues here.
And what happened is we went into
a number of low community settings
and essentially choreographed over a 10-minute,
sorry, 10-minute period,
what the individuals were doing.
These are sort of paths of travel
through a particular setting.
And then this was translated into an animation.
These blue poles with a red dot on the end,
that's to indicate the nose,
are individuals, but we've eliminated all features
except for sort of the whole entity of the individual.
And what we're gonna do is we're gonna move
these individuals around in the same fashion
as they were observed in the setting initially.
And sort of like if you're familiar
with the point light display research,
it's similar to that in that we're going to see
if participants in an experiment can identify
through the movement of these.
What kind of setting it is?
Can they detect structure from motion?
So let me give you a brief snippet
of one of these animations.
And then after this, what I'll do is show you
a number of choices with which the participants
had to choose among or to rank order.
Now, the participants saw a bit more of this
than what you've just seen,
but then they were given these choices
and asked to rank order them.
How likely is it that any one of these
reflects the pattern of action that we just saw?
I can't go into the explanation
of how we came up with these items,
but it was based on a series of previous examples
but it was based on a series of pre-tests.
And what we found was that folks tended to view these,
that scene is either a coffee shop or a restaurant.
And rarely the other three.
Here's another example.
This one's gonna have a little glitch at the end,
but you'll see most of it.
Okay.
And then they were given these choices to rank order.
Maybe you've made a choice.
I'll show you one more.
And they were asked to pick among these.
We also did this experiment rather than having
the labels of the places, just a list of activities,
what was likely going on in the animations.
And overall, what we found was that individuals
were fairly accurate at sort of identifying
what they were observing.
That is to say the behavior settings were perceptible.
Now it's true that some were more easily identifiable
than others.
And it turns out that the ones like this one,
which was about basketball game,
where the actions were more highly constrained
or those are more readily identifiable.
There were a few which we included in the experiment
that folks had very difficult, a great deal of difficulty
but looking at them, there were many possibilities,
the constraints were few.
Okay, so what I'd like to think about then
is that these behavior settings
are perceived pattern of joint action,
much like the patterns that you observe
in the flow of the stream.
Behavior settings are like eddies
that you can get drawn into.
And so to borrow a phrase from Eric and Julian,
we can talk about attractors in a landscape of affordances.
In our case, unlike their paper,
we're talking about the attractors as being behavior settings.
We carry out our daily lives
and we have available to us affordance of behavior settings
which we can be drawn into and can participate in.
And our participation has to be normative
in such a way that it sustains the integrity of the setting.
So we're positing extra individual attractors
in a landscape of affordances.
They're dynamic and self-organizing.
There's interdependence among constituents.
These are emergent structures.
They're self-regulating.
And one other point, and this is the point
I'll come near my conclusion on,
is that they have a historical character.
In order to understand them,
we have to understand the history of the participants,
particularly in the case of behavior settings,
the sociocultural history of the individual
because these knowing how to participate in a setting
is based on normative social practices.
We don't know much about this.
And I think there's really great opportunity
to study these processes in children.
So the title of my talk again,
was Places as Emergent Dynamic Structures in Everyday Life.
We're identifying higher order ecological structures
as properties of human eco-niches
in addition to affordances.
And so to understand embedded action
in everyday community life,
we need to pay attention to the higher order structures
within which actions occur
and to which actions contribute and sustain.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
So I'll just wait for you to finish screen sharing there.
Excellent.
Are we back?
We are indeed back.
Thanks very much for that, Harry,
that all looks well set up there.
So, yeah, so it's changing up all of the kinds of things
that I'd like to talk about
and trying to represent points of view
of a few others as well.
I guess can I just start with one of the things
you mentioned a couple of times,
the relationship between...
That behavior settings had many properties
that were similar to those of affordances
in that they were psychologically meaningful,
they were independent of individual agents and so on.
But there...
Are there any significant differences, I suppose,
between behavior settings and affordances
as they're normally considered,
aside from not being considered
as being associated with an individual object, say?
Yeah, I mean, one could call behavior settings affordances,
I guess the distinction is that they emerged out
of joint action among groups of people,
numbers of people.
So in that sense, I would like to think of them
as not operating at the individual level,
but operating with respect to some social group.
If for those of you who wanna go back
and read Barker's initial work,
he in fact referred to some individual objects,
like for example, a telephone booth,
which is an antique now, obviously,
as being a behavior setting.
I would take exception to that,
I would certainly refer to that more as an affordance,
whereas behavior settings are entities
that emerge out of joint action.
It's what communities provide for individuals.
It's a large part of the basis of social life.
And I think we can then take an analysis
of structures at this level
and better understand structures at a much higher level,
like institutions and so on.
And I've written about this
in some of my recent publications.
Okay, thank you.
So in essence, there's a sense in which a community,
I mean, as a community then,
something more than the collection of behavior settings
that make it up in the same way that a behavior setting
is more than the individual actions.
But is that the same kind of relationship
we're looking at there?
Well, I think we would need to go to even higher order units,
as I said, like institutional structures and so on.
But they're going to grow out
of a number of different settings.
So if you take us, let's say a primary school,
there are the behavior settings of the separate classes
and perhaps of the administrative offices.
And then collectively we could think about the institution.
But an individual is not necessarily aware
of the operations of the institution they need to be.
They just need to be in their place
within that immediate behavior setting.
So I think it provides sort of,
but you had to have said this to me
when we spoke the other day,
it provides sort of this middle of a bridge
between often with the units of analysis
that sociologists are often concerned about
and what psychologists are concerned about.
And we can quite see how in fact,
the more sociological units might emerge from,
well, I should say it differently,
are grounded in psychological processes.
I think that's really the right way to think about it.
That we're ultimately grounded in sort of
these complex social lives that are social structures
we live in, in psychological processes.
I'm not reducing them to them,
but I'm rooting them in them.
Okay.
So I mean, I'm sort of fascinated then by actually,
obviously there's a massive wealth of history
in Barker's work and the development of it.
But I was sort of introduced to a critique recently
of not really a critique, I guess,
but just sort of an observation of the constraints
of Barker's original work.
Given that it was, it depended so much
on the observation of this single small town
in rural Kansas, you know, Oskalooska, Midwest,
being this kind of Norman Rockwell-esque,
almost ideal of what rural America might be.
And then questioning, well, just how representative
is that as a sort of community environment
of the kinds of environments in which,
and communities in which the great majority of people,
even in the United States, actually,
and developing grow up in.
Right, right, right.
Oh, I can make mention of a study that's,
I'm not even sure if it was published,
a study that was conducted by Barker's collaborator,
Herb Wright, and one of his students,
where they looked at small towns,
middle-sized towns, and urban areas,
in terms of how well the notion of a behavior setting fits in.
And just to mention one finding,
we found that behavior setting applied more readily
to big cities than to middle-sized cities,
in the sense that big cities
form these neighborhood enclaves,
which they themselves operate almost as small towns.
So a common remark that many people
will make who live in big cities,
to those who down is,
well, you think about this as a strongly mass of people,
but in fact, we're just a group of neighborhoods.
And so it's quite conceivable
that this notion of behavior settings
constituting, let's say, a neighborhood,
or again, I call it an enclave, could work quite well.
But it's an empirical question.
And having said that,
let me point out just one other thing to you.
Again, Barker made this discovery, like in the 60s,
he received quite a bit of a claim at that point.
And then his work was promptly forgotten
for the next 40 years,
because psychologists tend to not know
what to make of this structure.
And they keep wanting to read it in ways
which just don't really fit its character.
Now with dynamical systems theory
and also with Gibson's ecological thinking,
I think it can be brought back as something
that is important and greatly understudied.
But in the end, I think to respond to your criticism,
I think it's an empirical question.
Let's go look.
Yeah, yeah.
That's, you know, these are grad students
and natural historians of psychology,
well, I have to mobilize said army in the first place,
I suppose.
I mean, the first, a comment that sort of frequently made
when I bring this up in conversation courses
that behavior settings or modern behavior settings
interpenetrate in a way that would not have occurred
in the time of Barker's original work,
because of communications technologies
that, you know, it used to be a time that you were,
if you were in a behavior setting,
it was more than likely just a single behavior setting,
whereas now we might be engaged in four or five
with different activities, usually at least two, right?
So there's the mobile phone sitting
in the corner of our site while we're also engaged
in other kinds of conversation,
or certainly my students are never in a single behavior
setting when I'm giving a class,
they're always in at least two.
And so if that's the case, I mean,
what are the costs of that?
I mean, it's somehow, you know,
sort of the resources that a behavior setting provides
for its individuals, are they less rich?
Because people are sort of have a foot
in multiple camps at the same time.
Are we engaged in the behavior setting now?
I'm inclined to think no,
because there isn't much that kind of,
I mean, there's a bit that constrains our action
kind of as a dialogue,
but we can be doing all kinds of things,
you know, while we're interacting with this.
So I suspect there could be a sort of a real loss
of community resources.
Another way I like to illustrate behavior settings,
by the way, and this is a common experience
for American adolescents, and I suspect it's true
in Europe and in Ireland and in England as well,
is the problem that adolescents have in the town,
there's often little opportunities
for things for adolescents to do,
because the community doesn't really provide
behavior settings, or I say opportunities
for kids to get together.
Now, I think what's happened is,
in the absence of sort of having nothing to do,
that was the refrain of teenagers in the 80s
and early 90s, we've got nothing to do
because there are no behavior settings for adolescents.
What's filled that void, obviously, is social media.
And we can then go on to talk about
what are the gains and costs of that.
The gains are that they provide adolescents
with ways to interact with one another,
but the costs are enormous,
and I'll leave that to another time
for any of us to think about.
Yes, so it's sort of very easy to let things
expanded to lamentations about the state of our youth,
I suppose, in these kinds of circumstances.
Can I ask then about you, essentially,
you set forward a couple of lines of empirical inquiry.
That, essentially, would be recommended
by behavior settings by a proper recognition
of behavior settings and a use of them
to understand psychological processes.
So, can I actually expand a little bit more
on the first of those?
When you talked about developmental psychology,
in essence, psychological development
is the learning of the range of actions
that are permissible in the various settings
available to a child.
Is there a, so you've already cited
some developmental research,
and Nicole Ross-Manitz worked from
the ENSA seminar just a month ago,
and Joanna Rajachek, Leonardo's work,
who is going to be giving an ENSA seminar
in the spring, hopefully, just to plug seminars
either side of yours here,
are examples of work that fit into that framework.
Are there any others that you might highlight,
or do you think there's any particular gaps
in current developmental psychological research
that really need addressing
if behavior settings are taken seriously?
There's such a paucity of research of this nature,
again, of knowing how children spend their time.
There's been a number of studies looking
at time use in adolescents.
Over the past couple of decades,
they often involve collecting diary information,
but first-hand observation of action,
of adults and children, is really vital.
I mean, let me give you just one of my favorite examples.
It's not related to behavior settings,
but it sort of, I think, makes the point really well.
Karen Adolf, who does research on the development
of motor development in young infants,
has been sort of pushing against this position,
which I think now is mostly dead.
But for a long time, the function is
that children's emergence of crawling and walking
was purely a maturational process,
because it seemed to just sort of come on out of the blue.
And what Karen and her students did
was go into the homes of infants
and just sort of watch their locomotive behavior.
And what they found, much like linguistic researchers find,
is that children are walking tremendously,
crawling, walking tremendously
over the course of their day.
I mean, they're practicing and practicing
for hours and hours and hours.
So what might appear to be sort of
the sudden emergence of walking
is based on just an inordinate amount of practice.
You wouldn't know that if you didn't look at children walking.
And the same thing I think has come to our understanding
with regard to the emergence of linguistic structures.
They don't suddenly appear.
Children hear hours and hours and hours of language.
Now, you wouldn't know those things
unless you actually did the descriptive work.
Let me, if I may, bring up a somewhat different point.
And I was thinking about this with regard
to my comment on social media.
And it has to do with the university where I work.
Like many places, there's been movement more and more
towards students communicating with the social media.
And it seemed to me that one of the effects of that
was to kind of drive students into these separate silos
of social interaction and not promote interaction
with people one doesn't already know.
Well, what can we do about that?
Well, part of the problem is the architecture
for a long problem.
Looking around the college, it seemed that there were few,
if any, big public spaces that would attract individuals,
which might then create behaviors that any patterns
that would draw people into them.
And so we just finished a two-year redesign
of the main plaza on the campus,
which hopefully will generate much more public interaction
and therefore the creation of these social structures.
It was just completed.
So by next spring, we'll be able to start observing all of that.
But in other words, behavior settings
are not just about action, but they're
about affordances and new you.
And so we facilitate and structure behavior settings
by what's the available affluence structure
that's also available.
OK, so I'm I guess that kind of interdependence
between the sort of the physical environment
and the social environment, because the joint action
isn't or the relationship there isn't contingent.
As I think you sort of said before in some of your kind
of pointed out in some of your writing,
that behavior, the physical settings
of the behavior setting or the physical aspects
of the behavior setting are usually designed for purpose.
They're and they don't just happen to.
So I'm sure it happens in some cases
where you have this emergent in an otherwise unstructured
or wilderness space.
But in the majority of your settings
in which we actually exist or act,
then they are specifically designed
for the purpose of enabling the joint action in question.
That's right.
The design of places can promote, not cause,
but promote certain patterns of action out of which
joint action structures can occur.
Eric, Eric Greenfield has certainly written a bit about this, too.
Can I ask them to sort of switch tack a little bit,
just maybe go a little bit more expansive
just before we finish?
I might be throwing you a curve ball here,
which is not my deliberate intent.
But just to look at some of the theoretical context here
and the relationship between behavior settings
as a largely overlooked phenomenon and theoretical consideration
and other areas of cognitive science or psychology
that have had even to a large extent, possibly niche work.
But nevertheless, where there is a course of work done.
So just when you were talking initially about.
Behavior settings and the manner in which
perception action has been everyone within ecological psychology,
for example, recognises it as always being embedded in a larger context,
but that that embedding isn't dealt with explicitly
to the same extent as other aspects of the relationship.
But I'm wondering about Russian activity theory then
from Luria and Bygotsky and others.
Is there sort of a strong sort of consonance
or resonance between behavior settings,
bark area and eco behavioral stuff and activity theory, which I think.
That's a that's a that's a really great question.
And I've not thought about it before, but it seems to me.
To use Vygotsky in language, if the tools that we engage with
essentially become internalized to structure thinking.
Well, could we think about behavior settings?
As essentially playing that same role.
So we can be sort of we know how to act in certain places
because we engaged with the structures in a Vygotsky in way.
I think that's a great idea.
I haven't seen anyone write about it.
I'd encourage you to write about it.
I'd like to think when I'd like to think I'd like to think more about it myself.
Yeah, let me let me maybe say one final brief form,
although I hope it's apparent.
I mean, the the goal here, both with Gibson and Barker,
as I've been talking about it, is how do we develop
a psychologically meaningful description of the of the habitat?
The the the tools that we've used from the from other sciences
like physics just aren't adequate to account for psychological experience.
So the larger long range goal is how can we think about
the environment in psychologically meaningful ways?
I think affordances is a huge step in that direction.
I think behavior settings,
it's part of the fact that they've been neglected, you know, also not for that benefit.
Thanks. Yeah, it it it does feel like that the
the ecological thinking and, you know, ecosystems thinking is
which obviously was sort of fundamental to to Barker's work and is
I guess the sort of definite room for that to flourish a bit more within psychology.
And even within ecological psychology,
it hasn't it doesn't seem to have come to the fore in the way you might have expected.
It's in the way Gibson wrote.
No, no, in fact, you kindly mentioned my book at the outset.
And and the and the first part of the book is largely on Gibson
and on in its historic and Gibson's historical roots.
The second part is on Barker and I am trying to link Barker to Gibson.
When I get comments from individuals about my book,
it's usually only about the first half.
I mean, it and especially my friends in ecological psychology,
as far as I can tell, tend not to pay much attention to the second part.
On the other hand, my colleagues who are interested in the social cultural dimensions of ecologicalism,
the dimensions of ecological psychology do take note of that.
So part of it might is is I surely do to the fact that the way ecological psychology has evolved over the past 40 years has been in ways that hasn't fully hasn't fully embraced social cultural factors.
And there's a good and and and there's a good reasons that folks might do that.
But but I'm certainly trying to do engage in that latter activity.
Excellent.
I think I think that's probably a very good place to have a nice finishing note.
So I'll just say thank you very much for your time and for presenting today.
And, you know, I guess I look forward to seeing more.
Yeah.
Well, thank you for inviting me. It was a pleasure.
Thanks.
OK, so.
