Hello everyone, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host Sean Carroll.
We've done a lot of sort of science on the podcast over the years, as it were. The podcast is old
enough, I can now say over the years. Wow, that's pretty impressive. And doing science, when you
try to talk about science to an audience, which is not necessarily full of specialists in that
particular kind of science, what do you do? How do you talk about science to non-scientists? Well,
the very first thing you do is you strip out all the math, right? You assume that the people
listening are not necessarily familiar with the equations, the symbols, the manipulations that
the professional scientists have to go through to understand their field. But you can nevertheless,
even without the math, you can talk about the concepts that the scientists are dealing with.
This raises a puzzle when the thing you want to talk about is math. We haven't talked about math
as a pure subject that much here on Mindscape. We did talk to Steven Strogatz, who's a professional
mathematician, but he's very close to being a physicist in many ways. We haven't quite ascended
to the truly abstract realms of very pure mathematics. So that's what we're doing here today.
Pure mathematics, no equations, but we're going to try to talk about the concepts that you come
across at the most elevated realms of mathematical thought. Our guest today is Emily Reel, who is
a topologist at Johns Hopkins, and she's a very big believer in being able to conceptualize these
deep mathematical ideas in the simplest and best way possible. So she's a great person to guide us
on this tour. And the foundational idea we're going to be talking about is topology.
Topology is the study of the properties of mathematical spaces that are invariant when
you smush them, when you smoothly deform them a little bit, right? Like if you have some clay
that is molded into a shape, you can talk about the number of holes in the shape of clay that you
have. And then if you move around the clay a little bit, if you don't rip it, the number of holes will
remain constant. So that's a topological invariant. It turns out, and this is where the fun part comes,
that as a mathematician you want to say, okay, what do we mean by characterizing the qualities
of a mathematical space that are invariant under smooth deformations? Well, you can count the
holes. You can also say, well, how many times can I make a path that wraps around the holes in
this particular system? Those kinds of structures turn out to be numbers or transformations or
other things that we can add together and multiply together. And we build these mathematical algebraic
structures by asking the question, how do we topologically characterize these kinds of spaces?
So we're led from topology into algebra. And Emily's going to take us there. We're going to discuss
things like homotopy, groups, rings, group oids, all these words that you're not supposed to have
necessarily been familiar with already. We're going to discuss them. And by the end, we're getting
into what is called category theory. Category theory is something where even the other mathematicians
go, oh, no, that's too abstract for me. Category theory is sort of a general theory of spaces and
structures and maps between them. It provides a different way of thinking about mathematics as a
whole. So I'm a big believer that, you know, math, just like physics, is part of the general
intellectual conversation we should be having. There should be history and economics and math
and physics. And it would be a mistake to exclude math from this overall intellectual discourse.
And I think this conversation is a good example of how we can do it. You know, thinking like a
mathematician gives you new handles on the world just like thinking like a physicist does. And
so I think it's going to be fun. Let's go. Emily Reel, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast.
Thank you. You know, I know that as a physicist, as a theoretical physicist,
who thinks about the universe and the many worlds of quantum mechanics and so forth,
I'm often asked, like, what is the point of this? You know, are you making a better cell
phone or are you carrying cancer? Like, why are you doing this? And I have my own answers. But
as a mathematician who works on topology category, things like that, you must also
get this. So what is your, do you have a favorite answer to that kind of question?
Sure. I mean, my dad loves to ask me what the practical applications are about the math I
love to think about. And I think he knows that he's kind of needling me because, you know,
that's just, it's just not the point for all mathematicians. I mean, for some, of course,
it is, you know, there are very important uses of mathematics to make the world a better place.
But I guess a way that mathematics can make the world a better place is by making it a
more interesting place to be a conscious being. And that's how I, or that's what inspires me
to be a mathematician. Yeah. Good. No, I think I, I'm not going to say that's the right answer,
because like you say, different people have different answers, but that's analogous to my
answer. And people ask me about looking for the Higgs boson. And so many of my physics friends
will say like, well, it might someday inspire a new technological something. I'm like, no,
number one, no, it won't. And number two, that's not why we're doing it. We're doing it because
we want to find out what's going on. And if there's an application someday, that'll be a benefit.
The other preliminary question I wanted to ask, I just had a podcast episode a couple of weeks ago
about the philosophy of mathematics. And, you know, there's realism versus non realism,
Platonism versus, I don't know, anti-platonism. I'm told that most working mathematicians are
Platonists. They think of what they study as, in some sense, real. Do you, do you know or care
or have a take on that debate? I certainly don't know as much about it as some of your other
guests, but I agree with that instinct. I mean, the things that I think about and I dream about
and I talk about with my friends feel very real to me. And, you know, I don't expect that I'll
kind of trip over one on my walk to campus, but, you know, they feel as real to me as,
I mean, as anything else. I mean, I guess as I understand it, that, you know, a table that
seems like a solid real thing is not really real either. So, yes, I subscribe to Platonism.
Well, yeah, I mean, there's certainly some structure to math, right? Like we all agree,
given the axioms, where we go and so forth. So there's something there. I actually don't have
a strong opinion one way or the other. That's why I'm quizzing people these days. But
actually, I mean, there's a philosophy of mathematics that's maybe a little closer to
the point of view of category theory, which we'll get into later on, which goes by the name of
structuralism, which says that, you know, what a mathematical object really is, is determined by
the role that it plays within mathematics. So, for example, you know, you could ask,
what are the natural numbers, you know, zero, one, two, three, four, five, and a role that
the natural numbers play within mathematics, I could give it a fancy name, I could say they're
the kind of universal discrete dynamical system. But essentially what that means is,
you know, natural numbers are something you can recursively define functions on. If you have,
if you're trying to define a, you know, sort of a sequence of points or a sequence of real numbers,
what you, a strategy, you know, Fibonacci sequence, for instance, is a famous sequence,
one, one, two, three, five, eight, 13, 21, 34. The relative terms converge to the golden ratio,
there's a lot of fun properties in Fibonacci, but a strategy for defining a sequence
is you define the first term in the sequence, or maybe the first few terms, and then you give
formula or a strategy for producing the next term in the sequence from the terms you have
previously. And the fact that recursion is possible is telling us something very deep
about the role that natural numbers play in mathematics. And so I guess I'm of the point
of view of like, that's what the natural numbers are. They are sort of the thing that you can
recursively define functions on. How, quite how that fits with Platonism isn't entirely clear to me,
but yeah, I don't know, me neither. I did have a guest a while ago, James Ladiman, who's a philosopher,
who says the same thing about physics. He is a structural realist. He thinks that what really
matters are the different structures, not the objects that we attribute these structures to,
relating between. I don't, great. It sounds like he's a category theorist. So it could be.
Aren't we all a category theorist? We're moving in that direction. So we will get to there. But
I think that you had, as we were talking about what to discuss here, I think you had a strategy
that makes perfect sense of starting with topology, because topology is something everyone has heard
of, right? I mean, why don't I, rather than trying to guess, why don't you tell us what you think
the definition of topology is that we could all get our hands on? Great. So topology is the study
of spaces, both, you know, kind of physical geometrical spaces that we move in in the world,
but also spaces that you might imagine that, you know, have some resemblance to, you know,
Euclidean space, three dimensions, two dimensions, one dimension, but are somehow more exotic.
So a topological space could be, you know, for instance, the points on a plane is an example
of a topological space, or you can imagine the points that are on the surface of a sphere,
so the surface of a soccer ball, surface of the earth, or you can imagine the points that are
on the surface of a donut. You can imagine that you're an ant that sort of walks around a donut
and all the different configurations that ant could be in those describe points in a topological
space, and then you can start to compare what those worlds are like. Topology is a realm to do
that. Can I just ask very quickly, when mathematicians use the word space, obviously it doesn't
simply mean the three-dimensional space in which we live. What's the difference between space and set?
Right. So if I wanted to define a topological space formally in mathematics, I would start with a set
of points. So if I wanted to describe three-dimensional Euclidean space, I would start with the set
of points which are determined by three real coordinates, sort of a distance along the x-axis,
a distance along the y-axis, a distance along the z-axis. So that's a set of points. We can
think of them as the points in three-dimensional space. But then what turns a set into a topological
space is also a way to understand distances between points, or more generally understand when
points are nearby and when points are far apart. So that could be a function that tells you how
to compute the distance between two points. That's a metric space, which is an important type of
topological space, or there's a more abstract way to get at the same thing in the absence of a formula
for distances. Okay. And so a line is a space, a circle is a space, a sphere. So for mathematicians,
the sphere is just the surface of the sphere, right? It's not the interior. Like you said, the
two-dimensional sphere is the surface of the ball. And then you could have like a 100-dimensional
sphere or whatever. So there's a lot of spaces we have to play with. You can have Mobius bands. So
that's a space that's kind of like a cylinder. So it's like a toilet paper tube. But imagine you
cut the toilet paper tube sort of long ways from end to end. So now you have just a flat
strip, and then you twist it and then glue it back together. So that is also a space. It's
quite similar to the cylinder, but it's a non-orientable space. It's confusing in a Mobius
strip, whether you're on the inside or the outside. There's no way to decide that. Whereas on, you
know, the toilet paper tube, there's the outside where the toilet paper goes around, and then
there's the inside, which you sort of put on the roll, on the holder. Do you have one of those
Klein bottle sculptures? I have a Klein bottle sculpture. I don't, but right. So a Klein bottle
is a one-dimension higher version of this. And what's interesting about the Klein bottle is,
well, so it's a surface. It's kind of like the surface of a sphere. Let me describe how you
would build a Klein bottle. So you can start with a flat sheet of paper. You would glue two sides
of the paper together. So you're forming now a toilet paper tube. And then, so from there, kind of
a simpler construction that isn't the Klein bottle, as you could just sort of stretch the toilet paper
tube and glue the end circles together. And if you did that, you would get a surface of a doughnut
shape. So that's familiar. The torus. We can use the word torus. It's okay. Okay, we can use the
word torus. So if I want to get a Klein bottle, it's the same idea. I'm going to glue the two ends
of the toilet paper tube together, glue those two circular ends together. But I want to twist
the one. So if I'm gluing, if I'm walking around, when I glue them together, I'm sort of zipping up
the, going counterclockwise around one of the circles and clockwise around the other circle.
But I want to reverse the orientation on one of the circles before doing this. Now, you can't do
this in three-dimensional space. So if we were in a fourth dimension, you could actually embed a Klein
bottle into four-dimensional space and do this construction. But there are, there are these
toys that you should, you should just, everyone should just Google and there are these toy glass
versions. And what's fun about it is there's some ambiguity between what space is inside of a Klein
bottle and what is outside. So if you, you have a torus, like a glass doughnut, you could sort of
fill it with jelly. And the jelly is inside the torus. It's not outside, you know, until you bite
it, you're not going to get jelly everywhere. But if you have one of these Klein bottles,
you could try and put, you know, jelly or let's say Kool-Aid inside the Klein bottle. And if you're
not careful, if you sort of flip it upside down and flip it right side up again, it's going to get
all over your, your chest because there's no inside and outside. Yeah. And this is the stock and trade
of topologists, right? So you don't care so much about the individual bumps and wiggles like geometry
cares about. Topology is more loosey-goosey in what it cares about. Exactly. Yeah. Very loosey-goosey.
And so, but the, the other thing to get on the table, I guess, is that there are topological
spaces that we care about. Well, maybe they're inspired by real physical situations, but you
might think that, well, physical space is three dimensional and we can have subsets of that.
Therefore, you know, there's some topological spaces to think about, but not that many. But as
you point out, like there are complicated situations where the space of all possible
configurations of something is an interesting topological space. Yeah, totally. So, I mean,
one of my favorite sources of examples of topological spaces are something called configuration
spaces. And these come up in robotics. They come up in physics where they might be called
state spaces. And exactly as you point out, these can get very high dimension very quick. But let me
mention an example that's small enough that we can dream about it. So, you know, imagine you have
a factory and there's a sort of one-dimensional track on the floor in the factory. So there's a,
there's a strip, essentially. And, you know, maybe it's a kind of a wheel or like a train
track. You can move forward and backwards along that track. And we're going to have two robots
positioned on the track. There's a red robot and a blue robot. So, well, let's actually start with
one robot. So if you wanted to, if you had one robot on a track, then you can describe its positions,
you know, using just kind of a one dimension. It's like an interval. You can have the robot
all the way, one end or all the way at the other end or any place in between. It can move continuously.
So this one-dimensional interval is describing the space of configurations of that robot.
So now let's put two robots on the track, a red one and a blue one. And now there's a space that
describes the configurations of those two robots. I mean, you might think it's a one-dimensional space
because you're still, robots are still on this one-dimensional track. But actually, you know,
you should use kind of one coordinate to keep track of where the red robot is and another
coordinate to keep track of where the blue robot is. And so that is describing the space that's
formed by taking a product of an interval with itself. In other words, it's a square, including
the interior, except the two robots can't be in the same spot. You know, one, you know, that if
these are physical robots, they can't collide into each other. So you have to remove a diagonal
segment from that square. And what you're left is with these two triangular components. The bottom
triangle corresponds to the red robot being on the right of the blue robot. And the top triangle
corresponds to the red robot being on the left of the blue robot. And so what's interesting about
the space, what we can see already by visualizing the configuration space, which is this square
with a diagonal removed from it, is that it's disconnected. Once you've put your robots on the
track, you're not going to be able to swap their orientation with respect to each other.
That's right.
But, you know, if you're designing the factory, you might say, well, that's a little bit undesirable.
I don't have as much flexibility and improvement, perhaps in the design, depending, of course,
what you're trying to do with these robots on this track is you could make a circular track
instead of a, you know, straight track. And if you a circle is also a one dimensional object,
you just sort of move around it going clockwise. There's kind of one direction of motion.
But if you had two robots on a circular track, then what the way you describe their configuration
space is you would take, you know, each robot is some arbitrary point in the circle. We have two
circles, though. So we take the product of those two circles. And this is fun to think about that
actually, the product of two circles corresponds to the points on the surface of a torus again.
So S1 cross S1, the product of two circles are the points on the torus. Again, the robots can't
be on the same point. So what you have to do is you have to imagine you have the surface of a
torus, you built it by gluing together your toilet paper tube. Now you're going to make a diagonal
cut that, it's a cut that goes around sort of both loops in the torus once. So you actually did
this at home last night to test it in the way my toilet paper tube was made. Had a seam exactly
there. So it was easy to see that cut. It's sort of a diagonal cut that moves once around in both
directions. And if you do that, you're left with a connected surface. And that corresponds to the
idea that if you have two robots on a circular track, they can really visit all configurations.
There's no sort of left and right anymore. You can have them in any position. So anyway, this is
just sort of baby, baby examples of a really rich and beautiful subject. Some of the most difficult
and important decisions we make involve choosing people, whether it's choosing a PhD thesis advisor
or choosing a prospective spouse, or choosing who to hire for your company. I can't help you with
the first two. But if you're looking to hire people, I can recommend Indeed. Indeed is the job
site that makes hiring easy. You can post your ad, you can screen candidates and interview them
all on Indeed. Indeed gives you tools like Indeed Instant Match, giving you quality candidates whose
resumes fits your job description immediately. And Indeed skills tests that on average reduces
hiring time by 27%. You can choose from more than 130 skills tests, then add your must have
requirements so that you only pay for the applications that meet them. Get started right
now with a free $75 sponsored job credit to upgrade your job post at Indeed.com slash
Minescape. That's a $75 credit at Indeed.com slash Minescape offer valid through June 30 terms
and conditions apply. Right, because it's good because what topologists care about are the features
that don't change by like small deformations of the space. So the fact that a space is in two
disconnected components like the original example versus just being one connected component like
the second example, that's the kind of thing that gets topologists very excited. Right, so when I
say circular track, it could be an oval track, it could be a square track, it could be a hexagonal
track from a topologist, those are all the same. The famous thing I bet many people have heard
that to a topologist, a coffee cup is the same as a donut, right? Because they're both tourists.
Right, right. I mean, that's not that's not my favorite example, because
so topologists have different notions of when things are the same that we're alluding to.
And one of the notions of sameness is if two spaces are what's called homeomorphic.
And what homeomorphic means is that there is a sort of one-to-one correspondence between the
points and the space. There's a way, you know, there are two invertible functions, invertible
continuous functions that map all the points on one space to the other and the other to the one.
And so if you have a solid tourist now built out of clay, and you have a solid coffee cup,
you can define one of these homeomorphisms, this sort of one-to-one correspondence between
the points and the tourists and the points in the mug that are continuous so that you're not
tearing the surface as a part or adding new holes where there weren't holes before, that sort of thing.
So, I mean, it's true that topologists consider tourists and a coffee mug to be the same, but
for like really kind of obvious reason, they're just so evidently the same. But there's another
notion of sameness, a weaker notion of sameness that also comes up in topology, which is called
homotopy equivalence. And here are the ideas, two spaces are homotopy equivalent if you can
continuously deform one to another. And so let me give you some examples. So, all of Euclidean
space, you know, three-dimensional Euclidean space is homotopy equivalent to a single point.
So, you could imagine, I think of this homotopy equivalence as like the reverse Big Bang. So,
you imagine three-dimensional Euclidean space, you know, so you have, let's imagine we have the
origin point, so the center of the universe and then all the other points in the universe. I
realize the universe is probably not three-dimensional, but let's just bear with me here.
Also, it doesn't have a center, but that's okay, we're gonna, your method.
And Orinor does have a center, but let's pretend there's a center of the universe and the universe
is three-dimensional. So, in the reverse Big Bang, what I'm going to do is I'm going to continuously
move all the points in the universe back in a straight line to the center of the universe,
to the origin. And they'll move kind of faster, slower depending on how far away they are. So,
at time zero, every point is where it is. And then at time one, they've all
crashed home into the center of the universe. So, that is describing a continuous deformation
that reveals that three-dimensional Euclidean space and the point are the same. So, here's an
example, sort of everyday example of a homotopy equivalence that feels more fun to me than the...
Let me just butt in there because, so just to get it clear, the reason why this is an
interesting example is because the point and three-dimensional space are homotopy equivalent.
They can be... One can be continuously deformed to the other, but they're not homeomorphic because
there's not sort of an equal number of points in them. Yeah, right. There's uncountably infinitely
many points in three-dimensional space, but there's one point in one point space. And yeah,
so this is a cooler, way more destructive notion. I mean, dimensions totally don't matter anymore.
You know, all n-dimensional Euclidean space is also homotopy equivalent to a point.
Yeah. So, an example, an everyday example that is kind of like that is to a topologist,
a pair of pants and a thong are the same. You can imagine a homotopy equivalence that sort of,
you know, shrinks sort of vertically, I guess, you know, and just leaves the thong from the
pair of pants. And this is the... So, the point is that there are different ways of expressing
the idea of sameness, depending on your sort of level of focus on what you care about.
Yeah, totally, totally. And this is very pervasive in mathematics. You know, mathematicians
love trying to understand the sense in which things are the same and it's often a pretty loose
sense. So, I had a very, very brief career, in fact, as a hack topologist when I was in graduate
school and I needed to calculate the homotopy of various things that appear in particle physics
because we have these things called topological defects, right, which are very important from
the early universe. None of the things I calculated turn it out to be relevant to the real world,
but, you know, that's the risk that we take when we do these things. But it gets us into, you know,
so far it's been fun, homotopy, you know, smoothly deforming things into each other,
but now we want to be a little bit more rigorous about it. We want to characterize,
we want to use this notion of smoothly deforming one thing into another to characterize the topology
of different spaces, right? I mean, is in some sense our job to sort of characterize all topological
spaces? Yeah, exactly. And a way to, a classical problem, which is a good way to visualize this,
is you can ask how many different surfaces are there, you know, sort of in this sort of very
flexible sense. So, not necessarily just, so for instance, is we've described a few different
surfaces. There's the sort of surface of a sphere. There's a surface of a torus. You can have many
hold, the torus was the donut shape. You can imagine having many hold donuts, they're like,
you know, you're baking a tray of donuts, but you've put them too close to each other. And so
they've all kind of congealed and there's, you know, one donut with three holes in it, you know,
that's another surface. And there's a classification question, you know, how can we tell that these
spaces are really different? I mean, they seem different, perhaps maybe I'm giving away my
intuition, but they seem different, you know, how, but how do we prove that they're different?
Because we've seen that these wildly different spaces are, in some sense, the same.
Yeah. So, so how do we do that?
So, yeah, so, so the idea is, I mean, this, this is a hard question to answer geometrically, because
just because you can't imagine a continuous deformation of one space to the other doesn't
mean it doesn't exist. So, strategy is to bring algebra into the story somehow and give a way to
assign a number or some other kind of algebraic structure to a topological space. And if,
in a way, that would give the same answer if the spaces were homotopy equivalent. So,
so the homology groups or homotopy groups that there are various different constructions you
can do. And it's, it's easy to prove that if the spaces have continuously deformable into each other,
they'll produce the same invariance. And so, if you happen to get different invariance,
then you know that they were different. Right. So, actually, go ahead.
Well, I can give an example of this. Yeah, exactly, do that.
So, what I'm going to try and argue for you is that the surface of a sphere,
so the surface of a soccer ball, is a different space than the surface of a donut. So, a torus
and a sphere are different topological spaces. And just to make sure we're imagining these spaces,
again, you know, imagine you're an ant walking around the surface of a sphere, that's one space,
the different positions the ant could be, or you can imagine an ant walking around the surface of
a donut. Not the interior in either case, just the surface. Not the interior in either case,
right. The ant, the ant can't eat the donut or eat the sphere, the ant is sort of stuck on the
surface. And it can't like jump off either, it's, you know, okay. So, right. So, the invariant that
I'm going to use to prove that these are different is something called the fundamental group,
that is, it's a, and what it's counting essentially. So, in each, it's for convenience,
I'm going to pick a point on each of these spaces. These spaces are connected. So,
picking a point is not a big deal. So, pick whichever one you want. We'll take the north pole on the
sphere and any point at all on the torus. And what the fundamental group is going to
calculate is the number of essentially different ways that the ant can walk from this home base
point, walk around on the surface and come back to the home base point. So, the subtlety there,
as I said, the number of essentially different ways. So, I mean, they're uncountably infinitely
many ways an ant can walk around the surfaces, but what I'm asking are they essentially different?
And so, let's set aside the sphere example for now. Let's start by thinking about the surface
of the donut. Okay. So, an example of two ways that are essentially different is we can imagine
starting at our home base point and walking, you know, say in a counterclockwise direction
around the loop that goes through the sort of donut hole. If you put a donut hole inside the
donut, that's, you can imagine walking, it's sort of been a vertical. The short way around, basically.
The short way around, great. So, that's one way the ant could walk.
Or the ant could walk, let's say, tracing the same trajectory, but going in reverse orientation,
going backwards rather than forwards. So, those are fundamentally different. And what I mean
by fundamentally different is there's no way to continuously deform the first trajectory
into the second trajectory while staying on the surface of the donut. If I could sort of slice
through, you know, where the dough bit of the donut is, I could do that. I could sort of cut
through the bit that's not on the surface, but that's not allowed. So, walking in the surface,
once the ant decides it's going clockwise rather than counterclockwise,
those are different choices that the ant can make. In fact, they're homotopically
inequivalent, right? So, because you cannot continuously deform one into another.
What's cool is you can actually enumerate all of the different choices. So,
another different trajectory the ant could take is it could walk the long way around. So, let's say,
staying on the top and going clockwise or going counterclockwise. Or it can do some sort of
combination where it loops, you know, some number of times through the center circle while also
traversing the long way around. And there's a way to enumerate all of these essentially
different trajectories. What you need are two different integers, essentially. One integer
that's describing the number of times you go in a clockwise or counterclockwise direction around
the short loop. And then another integer is describing the number of ways to go counterclockwise
or clockwise depending on whether it's positive or negative around the long loop. And you can prove
that this pair of integers enumerates all possible trajectories. So, on the sphere,
it's actually quite a lot simpler. So, if you have, you can imagine any path the ant might
take on the surface of a sphere from the north pole to the north pole, kind of wandering around
any which way. And you could kind of shrink that trajectory in a continuous way.
Sort of so that it gets smaller and smaller and smaller. So, if it in fact goes all the way to
the south pole, maybe it shrinks a little bit so it only goes to the equator and then maybe it
shrinks a little more so it stays north of the Tropic of Cancer and so on and so forth. And
eventually all of the trajectories are deformable to just the ants sitting at the north pole and
never moving at all. So, there there's only one trajectory that the ant can make. And that's
the proof somehow that these two spaces are not the same. Which is wonderful because it took
us on a little journey. I actually want to dig into this because on the one hand we're not surprised
that the sphere and the tourists are topologically different, but it was a bit of an effort there
to actually show it, right? Even in that case where we had things under control. And in doing that,
you know, you stumble across, so you ask the question, how many different ways are there to
sort of do this path that returns to itself? A loop, right? A closed circle in this space.
And in the case of the tourists, you just uncovered this pair of integers, the number of
times you go around the short way, the number of times you go around the long way. And integers,
not to not to get too fancy about it, now that's algebra. That's not geometry or topology or
anything. Like, roughly speaking, mathematicians are either geometers and they like space or their
algebraists and they like equations, right? But an algebraic structure appeared here somehow.
Right. I think, you know, this is just the tale of complexity in the modern world. Like,
everybody has to be everything these days. So even if your heart isn't with geometry,
you have to use some algebra. Well, I want to just take advantage of your being here to dig
into this a little bit more. I mean, we asked this question about how many ways you can draw a
circle, roughly speaking, in the tourists. And there's a lot of ways, but then there's this
hidden structure in that if you have a circle going around once in one direction and another
circle just doing the same thing, you can add them together in some sense, right? And that's
the beginning of algebra. Am I too dramatic there? Yeah, that's exactly right. So a more,
I mean, I've described this in describing the fundamental group, I said, you know,
let's imagine we have a home base point where they, and we're going to consider the ant walking
in these little loops from the home base to the home base, but it's actually maybe more natural
to not have a home base point because, you know, I don't know where it would be on the surface of
a tourist, for instance. So another way to think about this sort of algebraic structure is you
can imagine an ant walking from any point P on the surface to any other point Q on the surface,
it, you know, takes some path. And then later, you know, maybe the ant is tired and it takes
a nap, but then later it wakes up and then it walks from the point Q to some other point R.
And what you're referring to is you could then compose those two paths, compose those two
trajectories and then get a path directly from P to R. So if you can walk from P to Q and walk
from Q to R, you can compose those two walks and get from P to R. And that's the beginning. So this
is a composition operation on the paths and the surface of a tourist or on any space, paths in
any space. And really the sort of invariant that more exactly describes the algebra that's hidden
in the geometry is something called the fundamental groupoid or the fundamental infinity groupoid,
which is not a group, which is a type of mathematical object we teach undergraduates,
but an sort of infinite dimensional analog of a group and infinity groupoid, which is a,
you know, sort of frontier of research level mathematics. Right. I think that it, look, if
people are going to listen to this entire podcast episode, I want them to come away knowing what
an infinity groupoid is. I think that's going to be something that they'll be able to impress their
friends with at cocktail parties and so forth. So you but to go very slowly to get there, you know,
you mentioned the fundamental group, which is the collection of the circles we started with. So
what's a group? Right. So a group is, I mean, a way to, I mean, this, like it, there's this,
there's this metaphor of the blind men and the elephant and, you know, somebody's holding,
somebody's touching the trunk, somebody's touching one of the legs, somebody's touching the tail and
have a completely different perspective of it. And that's, that's how I'm thinking about groups.
So it's like really hard to know how to start. But, you know, a group in this context is a set.
Here it's the collection of all different loops that aunt could take walking through some space,
together with a composition operation. So it's performing one loop and then following it by
another loop that can be understood as a loop. Even though you come back through the center,
it's still a loop and then satisfying some, you know, sort of very natural axioms. So if you're
walking along a loop, you could always reverse your trajectory and walk back in the other direction.
And that's an undoing somehow of the process. So every element in a group has an inverse
that if you compose with it, it gets back to sort of where you started. And a few sort of simple
axioms like that. So it's kind of a, it's a stripped down version of, you know, the integers
or something like that, right? Where the integers, you can add them together. So the integers are
an example of a group, right? Right. Integers with addition is an example of a group. Absolutely.
That's right. Not with multiplication. Matrices with multiplication is an example of a group.
Matrices with addition is an example of a group. So I have to say something about the dimensions
to make those examples work. But okay. And the physicists love group theory because symmetries
are a group, right? Like rotations and translations and things like that. Yeah, absolutely. So another
perspective on groups, if we sort of move around the elephant is a group is an axiomatization of
the symmetries of an object. So, so, or the different configurations that an object might be.
So let me, let me explain what a symmetry is. So, so imagine you have a twin mattress and you know
that you're supposed to kind of flip your, your mattress occasionally, because I guess it's good
for the life of the mattress. And so you might wonder, like, how many different ways are there
to flip the mattress? How many different configurations could the mattress be in? And
well, it's the mattress, one option is whatever the mattress is when you start it. Then you could
sort of rotate it head to toe. So you're sort of switching the head and the toe, but the top
stays the same. That's one move. You could also flip it sort of side to side. So I'm keeping the
head at the head and the toe at the toe, but I'm switching the top and the bottom. Yep. Or you
could combine those two operations. And the effect of this is the head is now where the toe was and
the toes were the head and the top and bottom surface has also flipped. So a group is recording
on the one hand, the four different positions that the mattress could be in, but also how these
different flipping operations that I described compose to each other. So each of those flips
is an order two element of the group, meaning if you perform the same move twice, you get the
mattress back to where you started. If you do any two different of the flips, you'll get the
third one, which is not a typical property of a group, but it's special to this one, which is,
goes by the name, the client for group. This group does not have a generator, meaning that
there's not one operation you can do over and over again that will take you all the way
through the group. And this is why it's hard to remember how to flip your mattress because
you have to remember sort of how you flipped it last month. So you don't just do the same operation
and again and get back to where you were the month before. So the integers do have a generator.
You just add one and then you can get all the integers either by doing that or undoing it.
Yeah. Add one or negative one, you get all the way through everything. So yes,
the integers are cyclic group, which have a single generator, absolutely, but client for group is not.
Right. So the integers may be two people who are not group theory,
Fischinados are a nice little paradigm, but it's important that groups can be very different. So
this is a finite group, this mattress flipping group, right? It's only how many elements are
there in the mattress? Yeah, four elements. Okay. Yeah. All right. And there's, so I mean,
these groups are super cool and really tell you something profound about geometry. So
you might have heard of the platonic solids, which are the three dimensional figures that you can get
by gluing together regular two dimensional figures. So a regular two dimensional figure is like a
triangle or a square or pentagon or a hexagon where all the sides have the same length,
all the angles are the same and so on and so forth. And there are infinitely many of these
because there's a heptagon and an octagon and a nonagon for any natural number N,
you can get a plain figure with N sides. So you might wonder how many of these regular
platonic solids are, how many different shapes you can get by gluing together, say triangles or
gluing together squares or gluing together pentagons or gluing together hexagons maybe.
And you can prove in fact that there are only finitely many. In fact, there are five of them
using group theory by studying the symmetries, the sort of orthogonal groups, the special
orthogonal groups that describe the different configurations of these hypothetical shapes.
Before even knowing they exist, you can limit the possible configurations.
But clearly that's not what Plato did.
I don't know, maybe somewhere like buried in Plato's intuition. But another fun fact is,
so the five, there's something called the tetrahedron, which is built from triangles. And
then there's the cube, which is that's the most familiar one built from squares. Then there's
the octahedron also built from triangles. And then the dodecahedron and the icosahedron. And
even though I named five things, in a sense there's kind of only three of them because
there's this duality relationship between the platonic solids, which you might have seen. If
you take a cube, so it's got four, so it's sorry, its faces are squares, there are six of them,
and they are glued together along 12 different edges, and there are eight corners. And what I'm
going to do is I'm going to build a new platonic solid by replacing each of the corners by a face,
and each face by a corner. And what you get in that, just by kind of connecting everything up,
is an octahedron, so one of the other platonic solids. And so there's a duality relationship
between the cube and the octahedron, and also between the dodecahedron and the icosahedron,
and between the tetrahedron and itself. And those are reflected by their symmetry groups.
So because of this duality relationship, the symmetry group that describes the configurations
of the cube is the same isomorphic to, same shape as the symmetry group of the octahedron, and so
on. Anyone who played Dungeons and Dragons knows about the platonic solids because they have a
dice, but they don't know about the duality relations. So now that's good, that's something
else that they have in their bag now. I'm only going to do this at great risk, but I figure,
like, all right, while we've talked about groups, why don't we also explain rings and fields to
the audience, since these are the other sort of algebraic structures that mathematicians love to
throw around. Yeah, absolutely. So I mean, what's funny is, you know, after a while, you kind of
forget that these terms refer to other things. Sorry, when I say field, I mean, I definitely
think about the mathematical field before. I remember that's like also the thing that's
out the window, but right. So a group is describing a setting where you have, you know,
a collection of objects, and you have one composition operation to combine them together.
So if we have the integers, we can think about addition. If you add two integers, you get another
integer. But, you know, there are other binary operations on the integers that come up, you
know, multiplication, for instance. And a ring is a setting where you have two operations,
an addition operation or an addition like operation and a multiplication like operation.
And they interact in ways that are sort of familiar for the integers. So if I, you can
understand, there's a distributivity property that says if I add two integers together, and then I
multiply by something, it's the same as multiplying first and then adding. And there are a few axioms
like that. So what's cool about, I mean, you might ask, like, why do we bother we like everybody
knows what the integers are? Why do I need this abstract concept of a ring? And that's a totally
fair question. But a really fun, or it's kind of interesting fact is there's a very deep analogy
between the integers and polynomials. So, so a polynomial is like this, this is sort of the
thing that you would meet in a high school algebra class. So you have a variable X, an indeterminate
variable X, and then you can form a polynomial by sort of adding up X's and multiplying X's and
then throwing in real numbers as the coefficients. So the polynomial might be like 5x minus 5x plus,
I don't know, 17x squared plus pi x cubed, because we can have real numbers as coefficients,
minus 3. So that's a polynomial in a single variable X. And polynomials also form a ring. If
you have two polynomials, you can add them together, you can multiply them. There's sort of rules for
doing this that you might have learned in a high school algebra class. And those ring, the ring of
polynomials with coefficients in a field, which we'll get to what a field is later on, coefficients
in the real numbers. And the ring of integers are very, are very quite similar as rings. They're
both, they have a division algorithm. You can do sort of long division with polynomials like with rings.
All the ideal elements are principles. And so, I mean, that's the sort of thing that's of interest
to mathematicians are these kind of deep analogies between structures that are superficially quite
different. Well, and what's the difference between a ring and a field? Because they're kind of similar.
Right. So a field is like a ring, it has two binary operations. But if we go back to the
ring of integers, there's a pretty big difference between the addition rule and the multiplication
rule. So if I, in that, every addition, every element has an additive inverse. So if I pick
my favorite integer, you know, 17, there's another integer, negative 17, that when I add them together,
I get zero, which is the identity for the addition operation. But that doesn't work for
multiplication. If I pick my favorite integer again, 17, there's no integer I can multiply
17 by to get back to one, which is the multiplicative identity. Right. So that's what distinguishes a
ring where you don't necessarily have multiplicative inverses from a field. In a field, you do have
an inverse to both the multiplication and the addition operation. You sort of assuming you're
not trying to divide by zero, that number quite works. So things like the rational numbers,
which throw in these multiplicative inverses or the real numbers are fields in addition to being
rings. And does the existence of the number zero get you in trouble? Because it doesn't have an
inverse? Yeah. So in a field, you have to treat zero as a kind of special case. So in a field,
you have to, your zero and your one can't be the same. Otherwise, the whole thing kind of collapses.
Zero will not have a multiplicative inverse, but every other element has to. Got it. Okay.
And so when we started, we started this little journey, this whole sidetrack, because we were
thinking about the torus and its topology. And we found that the space of all the little loops,
the ant could walk on, formed a group. Are there examples where we associate rings or fields with
topological invariance? That's a good question. I don't know that that's commonly done. And I
think the reason is that groups are just so rich, you know, but, you know, a single group will not
capture the full data of a topological space. I mean, really, what you have to do is have introduced
lots of different groups that are measuring lots of different things. So the fundamental group
tells you about sort of loops in the space and whether you can, if you sort of walk along a
circular path in the space, can you fill that in with a disk? You know, could you,
I guess I don't know how to say it any better than that. That's a good way to say it.
Can you contract it? You know, if you have sort of a wire ring, is there, could you put sort of a
soap bubble on it somehow so that the surface of the soap bubble lives within the space that you
were talking about? So that's not possible if you're walking the short way around on a torus,
because the soap bubble would have to kind of cut through the dough, and that's not on the surface.
But it is on the surface of a sphere, you could just kind of, you know, paint over the disk.
So that's measuring this kind of one-dimensional holds, I guess, is the
area that's bounded by a one-dimensional sphere. But as we mentioned, there are kind of spheres
in higher dimensions. So you could ask, if you have a balloon inside your surface,
can that be filled in with sand sort of staying within the surface? And that's a
two-dimensional analog of the same question. And there's a question like that in all
positive integer dimensions. And that family of groups describes the full homotopy type
of a space. A single group does not, but if you have this sort of infinitely many groups that
it does. One of the things that I say just very casually to people who are non-mathematicians is
that you might think that mathematicians spend all their time thinking about mathematical objects,
like spheres or toruses or whatever. But really, they're thinking about maps
between the different objects. So I guess it's fair to say that first thing, the fundamental group
is maps from circles into the space you care about. Then there's the set of maps from spheres,
and then the set of maps from three spheres, and it clearly generalizes to infinite numbers.
Yeah, absolutely. But there's something special about the groups. You don't get fields or rings,
which have two different binary operations on them. I guess the last thing that I have in that
angle is, is there something special about fields and rings that have two binary operations that
it's worth stopping there? Can we define three binary operations on a set and make hyper-rings
or something like that? Sure. Algebra is a very flexible subject. To define what an algebra is
in full generality, you need the collection of elements that you're considering, and then you
can specify arbitrarily many operations with arbitrary arities, and you can specify arbitrarily
many rules between them. The subject of universal algebra invites you to consider examples like that.
Let's invite listeners in the audience who are inclined in that direction to follow study universal
algebras. We're going to go back to the topology and the groups. You made a statement there.
I just want to make sure that I get it clear. If I figure out the set of all ways that I can map
circles and spheres and three-dimensional spheres, etc., into a space, I have not specified its
topology completely, but I have specified its homotopy type topology completely, which is a
slightly weaker thing. Is that right? That's right. Yeah. Okay. Do we know the answer to the
general question of how to completely specify the topology of a space? Right. The classical
approach to that, and it's kind of a topology, but let's imagine it's a theorem as opposed to a
topology. If you restrict to well-behaved spaces, it's a theorem, and if you take general spaces,
it's kind of a topology. The classical approach to this is exactly what you're saying. You describe
what's called the nth homotopy group as the collection of maps from the n sphere into your
space. Then because it's a group, you need a composition operation, which for two spheres,
I can describe the composition. If I have a map from a two-dimensional sphere into a space and a
map from another two-dimensional sphere into the space, and these maps are based so there's
the north pole and they send them to the same point in the space, you could imagine taking
another two-dimensional sphere and then collapsing the equator to a single point. If you had a balloon
and you collapse the points on the equator, you sort of squeeze at them carefully so it doesn't
pop. Now you have a single point. Now what you look like is something that's called a bouquet
of spheres. It's sort of two different spheres that are glued together along the point where
the equator used to be. You could sort of map from that into the space because you have two
different maps into the space that have a common point. The combination of that operation is how
you define the composition here. There's an analog of that in all dimensions. This is the
classical approach to saying what is a space algebraically? What are some algebra stuff that
tell you everything that you would want to know about the homotopy type of the space?
But a modern approach goes back to the idea of the fundamental group but replaces it by
something called the fundamental infinity groupoid. Since I promised I would tell
listeners what an infinity groupoid is, let me do it now. I like this because this feels like
a much more natural way to describe the space. Again, the fundamental groupoid,
depending on your point of view either is a theorem or it's a tautology,
really does capture the full homotopy type of the space. It's some algebraic structure where I'm
going to start with the set of all points in the space. The topology, I've forgotten about
distances and stuff. I'm just remembering the set of points because in algebra I have sets
and stuff I don't have geometry. I just remember the set of the points in the space.
Then what I'm going to throw in is the data of every possible path between any points in the space.
This is going to be a very big thing, by the way. We recover now every possible path that
an ant could take between points in the space plus the composition.
I mean, I gotta say that mathematicians use the word data in a different sense than physicists
Oh, yeah. I mean, all of our sets are infinite. It's fine. No problems here.
When you say the data of a path, you mean whatever information is required to
specify that path among the space of all the paths.
Right. We have all the points in the space. We have all the paths in the space.
When we were thinking about paths before, when we were talking about the torus, we were talking
about, well, we only want to consider paths up to being essentially the same,
sort of continuously deformable. We're not doing that here. We're literally remembering
every single path, every path as a distinct path. Good.
But we are also going to remember data of these continuous deformations.
There's a notion of path between paths. If a path is a map from an interval into the space,
this is a continuous map from a square into the space. An interval times an interval is a square.
So a map from a square into space can be understood as a path between paths,
sort of where one edge goes as one path, where the other edge goes as the other path,
and then the sort of other direction, the other dimension is giving the kind of path between
paths. So we're going to remember all of those as well, all of these paths between paths.
So these are called homotopies. And then there's no reason to stop at two dimensions.
So we could take three intervals, product it together. That's a cube. Remember all of those
maps into the space. These are paths between paths between paths. And then we could take
paths between paths between paths between paths, paths between paths, between paths,
between paths, between paths, and all the way up. And that goes to infinity. That's the infinity
groupoid. So that data, I mean, this feels like it's maybe not an improvement, but somehow...
Oh, yeah, it's something.
Somehow that algebraic structure, you know, both describes the full homotopy type of a space,
which is a useful way to think about it, but also invites you to imagine a generalization
to a different world that's further removed from the geometry, where you can imagine some
of these paths are no longer invertible anymore. These are sort of one-way paths, you know, you
might not be able to go backwards for whatever reason. And this is now the world of infinite
dimensional category theory. And that's really where I work, though.
Well, so, which brings up a couple, there's a couple of things I just got to clean up there.
You were on a roll, so I just wanted to let you keep going. But one thing is just to remind
folks, when you talked about the path between two paths, right? The cube, sorry, the square
that was a map into it, that path between two paths might not exist if the two paths are not
homotopically equivalent, that there won't be any path between them. So there's some structure in
the space of what paths between paths exist. Right, by what's present and what's absent,
that's a beautiful way to say it. Good. And the other one was, this is a little bit off topic,
but when you did the explanation of the sphere and you squeezed it down at the equator to get
the bouquet, not only is the language very beautiful, but the visualization is very compelling.
And one thing that always gets asked, how do you visualize the infinity groupoid? Is that
something that is necessary for you to do? Do you approximate infinity by two, or is there
some other trick? It's hard. I don't know. I mean, you sort of imagine a little piece of it at a
time and then I don't know. Yeah, it's hard. Okay, that's fair, completely fair. I basically
give the same answer. I say you don't. You do the two-dimensional or three-dimensional examples
you can get, but at some point you have to trust the equations you're pushing around.
And I don't think we've quite elaborated the difference between a group and a groupoid.
Right, so the difference between a group is, so the example of a fundamental group,
the elements of the group are actually the loops themselves. We've kind of fixed,
as prior we given data, the home base point for the ant, and then the only further data we record
are the loops in the space. So in a groupoid, you don't fix a base point. You allow different
base points, so the different points on the surface of, or in the space. And now, so now
you have kind of two levels of data. You have the collection of different points, and then
you also have the paths between the different points. Okay, is this, I mean, outside of the
world of topology and homotopy, are there group oids? I mean, groups, physicists use groups all
the time, right? SU3 cross SU2 cross U1 is the symmetry group of the standard model of particle
physics. We never use the word groupoid unless we're secretly mathematicians. So just in the
abstract sense, is there a difference? Yeah, sure. So your groups are all automorphism groups of some
object, and it's a fixed object. So, you know, you're thinking about automorphisms of R3 or
automorphisms of R4 or sort of R3 with a chosen orientation or something like that. So your groups
were all automorphism groups of a fixed object. In a groupoid, you have different objects. So
there's not just one object anymore, there are different objects, and it's exactly the mini
object analog of a group. Okay, I see. That's not so bad. And automorphism is just a map from a
space to itself. Is that right? Yeah. Okay, good. Yeah, sorry. We all know what automorphisms are.
So then, okay, good. Sorry, there's a lot of clarifying questions, but then let's get back
to the punchline here. The infinity groupoid, the sort of topological sense of all the different
paths that we can map into the space and the paths between the paths and the paths between
the paths of paths. So if we knew the infinity groupoid of a space, we would know what?
Everything. Well, everything if you only care about the space up to homotopy. I mean,
if you're willing to say that n-dimensional Euclidean space is the same as a point, there's no
difference whatsoever. Then yes, you know everything about the space. Now, I mean, if you care about
geometry or dimension or things like that, then this is not the right point of view.
But for the Taurus, when you said, you know, let's calculate the fundamental group,
and we noticed that it looked like, so for the sphere, the fundamental group is as trivial,
so it's one element. For the Taurus, it's two copies of the integers. So it's basically two
integers you just give me. How do I even express what the infinity groupoid of a space is?
Right. So let me move back to the sphere because the two sphere, because it's a little easier to
describe here. So if we're thinking about the loops in the two sphere or the paths in the two
sphere, there's kind of nothing interesting to say. If you have any two points on the, sorry,
the two spheres in the ordinary sphere, if you have any two points on the sphere, you can connect
them by a path, and there's a sense in which all paths are the same. You could continuously
deform any path from x to y into any other path from x to y. But now if we think about these
two-dimensional paths between paths, there are fundamentally different ones, and this is really
surprising. So in one dimension, all paths are somehow the same. But in two dimensions,
paths can be quite different. So I want to think about paths between paths, and so I should fix
the two paths first. So let's start at the north pole and the south pole. So these will be paths
from the north pole to the south pole. And one of the paths I want to take is the
international dateline, so somewhere through the Pacific Ocean. And the other path I want to take
is the prime meridian, which is, I don't know, it's through England or something like that.
Two-grenage, yeah.
Okay, somewhere else. So there's the Greenwich one and the Pacific Ocean. So those are both
paths from the north pole to the south pole. Now a path between paths is a continuous map
from a square onto the surface of the earth that sends one edge to the prime meridian and the other
edge to the international dateline. And one of them is the one that would cover Asia that would
go east from the prime meridian to the international dateline. And the other one is the one that would
cover the New World, so go west. And those are fundamentally different in the sense that there
is no three-dimensional path, no path between paths between paths that continuously deforms the one
to the other. If you could pass through the core of the earth, you could do that, but we have to
stay on the surface. It's not allowed. So in this sense, the fundamental group or the fundamental
group or sort of one-dimensional thing does not describe everything that's going on on the surface
of the sphere. But once we allow these higher-dimensional things, we do get everything.
And is the kind of day job that you're involved in more actually calculating the
infinity groupoid of this or that, or is it more proving theorems about properties of infinity
groupoids? Right. So that's a great question, because those are both very active areas. There
are a lot of researchers working on both problems. I don't do the calculations myself. They're very
hard. I do kind of the theory side, but some of my colleagues work on the calculations.
I'm sure it makes everyone feel good that you don't really do the hard part. You're just doing
the simple part of proving theorems about infinity groupoids. And also, this discussion is wonderful
because it does, beneath the surface in the language that you use and the way you talk about it,
the role of the maps between the different spaces really shines through. Just think of all the
spaces you can invent and all the different ways you can map them in some sense. And that
sneaks us up into the topic of category theory, which is not really our focus here, but I don't
want to leave the audience completely bereft of category theory while we're here.
So how do we get from topology to category theory? Sure. I mean, again, there's lots of
different roots in, but maybe the one that's most relevant to this conversation. And this is
kind of back to the conversation and philosophy that we started off with is,
um, so the fundamental theorem in category theory or somehow that that's expressing the core
philosophy of category theory, this thing called the yinata lemma says that if you have any sort
of mathematical object, it could be a topological space or it could be a vector space or it could
be a ring or it could be a field or whatever, any sort of mathematical object. You can understand
everything that you want to know about it by considering the other objects of that same type.
So other spaces or other rings or other fields and the maps between them. So,
right. So what this is saying in the case of spaces is that if you have a unknown space x and
you're trying to understand that space, so we don't know sort of what its dimensions are,
what its points are, we don't know anything about it. Um, a theorem in category theory,
the yinata lemma says that you can completely characterize your unknown space by considering
the other spaces. So all these spheres and torii and other surfaces and whatever and all
dimensions and then the continuous maps from that into your space x. Well, okay, what's cool
about that result. So we were, we were using this idea in topology already to understand spaces,
but what's cool is it's completely independent of the mathematical context. So the same theorem
is true for rings. You can understand a ring by thinking about other rings and the ring
homomorphisms between them. You can understand a group by thinking about other groups and the
group homomorphisms between them. Um, this works in any mathematical context whatsoever.
It's again, a little bit, uh, related to some ideas in physics that we should always be talking
about relations between different things rather than intrinsic essences of things themselves.
So yeah, absolutely. Yeah. And, and why is this called category theory? Like let's, let's just
bite the bullet and tell people what a category is maybe. Sure. So I mean, a category is kind of
like a very general template for a mathematical theory. So Barry Mazer has this metaphor. It's
like something with, uh, nouns and verbs. So a category is given by a collection of objects.
These are the nouns and what you should think of here are like all the rings, all the possible
rings. So the integers and the rationals and the polynomials and matrices and blah, blah, blah.
So all the rings. Um, and then you also have the sort of functions between them. So
in the case of rings, these would be functions that respect the addition and multiplication
laws. In the case of spaces, these would be continuous functions and sort of that totality
of information, the objects like the spaces and the functions, the continuous functions or maps
between them and their composition and so on. That's a category. And what's great about this is
every word you say makes perfect sense. And at the end, I'm left not quite knowing what the
implications of these ideas are. That's where that's the devil being the details, right? You've
ascended to this platonic realm of wonderful abstraction where there's just things and maps
between them. So how do you, what's the usefulness? What's the cashing out of this? What is the
free market value of a good category theory? Right. So, um, I mean, one nice thing about
category theory is you can just say when two categories are the same in a essential sense.
So there's a notion of equivalence between categories and I'll give you my favorite example. So
there's a category whose objects are vector spaces, which are something that are kind of
fundamental in, in sort of modern quantum physics. So a vector space is like a, you know, collection
of vectors with vector addition and scalar multiplication. And then the, the sort of
transformations between vector spaces are called linear transformations. So there's,
so this is kind of a bread and butter category objects or vector spaces, the maps or transformations,
which are some sort of functions between these vector spaces. Now there's another category
that's kind of a lot simpler to define. So the objects in this category are just natural numbers.
So there, I know exactly how many objects there are. Each natural number is an object,
there are no other objects. That's it. And now I need to say sort of what an
transformation is. The natural numbers are zero, one, two, three, the positive, not negative
integers. Yeah. Absolutely. Okay. So, so now I need to say what a sort of transformation or what an
arrow is from one number, let's say five to another number eight. And what it is, is it's going to be
an eight by five matrix. Okay. So to make something a category, I need to tell you about the objects
and the arrows between them. And that's what I've done. The natural numbers are the objects,
the matrices are the arrows, but you also need a composition law. So I need a way to take a
five by eight matrix and an eight by seven matrix and produce a five by seven matrix.
But there's a thing for that. It's called matrix multiplication. It's an operation that satisfies
the axioms of category. So those are two very different sounding categories. On the one hand,
I have this like very abstract comp, you know, very large thing of all vector spaces and all
linear transformations between them. And then on the other hand, I have this kind of toy category
with natural numbers and matrices. And those categories are equivalent. So in other words,
you can think of the natural number as a stand in for a vector space, the number five corresponds
to five dimensional Euclidean space. I was going to guess that, I promise. Yes. Yeah. And you can
think of matrix as a stand in for a linear transformation. So if you have vector spaces
and you choose a basis, then you can use those bases to get a matrix of numbers that encodes the
full data of the linear transformation. And so in a mathematics department, we often teach linear
algebra and kind of two different tracks. There's a sort of computational linear algebra. If you're
going to be, you know, the next founder of Google, you need to learn how to use these matrix operations
and you'll take that sort of course. Or there's a theoretical linear algebra that's, you know,
taken maybe by more math majors. And this on the ground, the subjects feel very different because
one, you're learning a lot about matrices and reduction and operations. And then the other,
you're learning this theory about linear independence and bases and so on and so forth. But
it's the same subject because they're, these are equivalent categories. Okay, that is actually
a very good example of like a little useful bit of insight that you get from thinking this way.
So just, I know that this is sort of already been said by you, but let me try to say it again to
drive home this notion of a category to people who don't use it as a bread and butter. Because
when you say a vector space, let's just imagine, let's optimistically imagine everyone knows what
a vector space is, right? They have in their mind x y axes and little vectors. So a vector space is
itself a collection of things, right? The vectors, there's an infinite number of vectors in the vector
space. But the category is of vector spaces. So the individual elements of the category
are the whole vector space, a two dimensional vector space, a three dimensional vector space,
et cetera. And you're thinking about the maps between vector spaces and then extra maps between
the set of all vector spaces and the set of all integers and things like that. So it gets pretty
unvisualizable pretty quickly, but that's why you get paid the big bucks.
Well, the visual is you're sort of zooming out. You're really taking a bird's eye view of
mathematics. The objects that a group theorist would study are really just little atoms inside
the category of all groups. And what's fun is if you're a category theorist or a higher
dimensional category theorist, really the categories themselves become very small. So
in my work, I zoom out one other level and I think about categories whose objects are categories.
Inside those categories are things like the category of vector spaces and then the vector
space is an actual vector space, which has uncountably infinitely many vectors in it,
as you point out. And so at what point do we get to the infinity categories? There's an
infinity group, or there must be an infinity category, right?
Yeah, sure. I mean, yeah. As every decade, mathematicians invent more complicated objects
to study and the universes where those objects live are categories with more dimensions of
morphisms between them. And those are these infinity categories.
I mean, just knowing that, can you foresee what was going to be invented in the next decade?
Like what is the obvious thing to draw more arrows between?
Yeah. I mean, what I'm hoping happens in the future is that we change our foundation system
of mathematics. So it's kind of more suitable to these complicated up-to-homeotopy structures that
we're thinking about today. Well, maybe this is a good place to end up. Because
in some sense, like this all, it's kind of fun. Like you and I are both in the small group of
people who just think it's fun thinking about this stuff. But it's also maybe a shift of
perspective on what math is in changing what we mean by equality and equivalence and things
like that. And so can you imagine that math is going to look very different down the road when
this really seeps in? Is it kind of like a shift from classical mechanics to quantum mechanics in
some sense? Yeah, I think so. I think we maybe see glimpses of it today. But I think every living
mathematician would be very surprised by 22nd century mathematics. And I hope to be around to
see some of it. Well, I was very interested to read. There's a wonderful interview with you in
Quantum Magazine. And one of the interesting things you're doing is writing books. I mean,
maybe you count them as textbooks, but anyway, technical mathematical books where,
correct me if I'm saying this wrong, but you were just as interested in reproving known theorems
in better ways as in improving new theorems, which is supposed to be the typical thing
mathematicians are paid to do. Right. And there's this Bill Thurston, who is this wonderful
topologist, Geometer, drew attention to kind of the role that mathematicians need to play in
making mathematics understandable to humans. So because something has been proven, that means
it's true, which a nice thing about mathematics is the theorems that were proven 2000 years ago
are equally true today. But that doesn't necessarily mean that it's understandable by somebody who
wants to build on those ideas and use them to do something else. So I think it is worthwhile to do
a bit of kind of tidying up and repackaging, streamlining. A wonderful success in the history
of mathematics is that these cutting edge discoveries that were kind of very controversial
or inconceivable to somebody 100 years ago are now stuff we teach undergraduates in their first
and second year. True, right. I mean, there was a lot of controversy over calculus, right? That
was considered hard, yeah. Right. These pinnacles of human achievement are now something that
thousands and hundreds of thousands of students are learning every single year. And
I hope we continue to progress in that way. We should check back 30 years from now. We'll have
you back on the podcast and we'll check to see whether or not category theory is taught to at
least undergraduates, at least first year students in the math classes. So that's something to look
forward to. Emily Reel, thanks very much for being on the Mindscape podcast. Great. Thanks for having me.
