Hello, everyone. Welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll.
Probably everyone listening has heard the phrase, a theory of everything, right?
The origins of this phrase are actually a little bit murky.
You know, it's not such a weird collection of words that it hadn't appeared in the literature a long time ago.
You know, people have talked about the idea of a theory of everything.
But the context in which we currently usually talk about it is either super string theory in physics or some other competitor to super string theory.
As far as I can tell, that coinage came from John Ellis, who is a theorist at CERN.
He wrote a little article in the early days of the super string revolution, 1980s, called the super string, a theory of everything or of nothing.
So it wasn't completely triumphant, right? He was actually talking about whether or not this possibly could be a theory of everything.
It was immediately pointed out by non-physicists and even some physicists that the idea of a theory of everything in this sense
is actually very, very restricted to a certain reductionistic way of looking at the fundamental constituents of nature,
the idea being that nevertheless those fundamental constituents make up everything else.
But there's no sense in which that idea of a theory of everything would be the final theory that we ever need in science, right?
Because we do have higher level emergent things. We have biological organisms, we have economies and societies,
and we have people in psychology, all this stuff, right, that is certainly not covered, not to mention easy questions about astrophysics or chemistry or so forth.
So the root from that kind of theory of everything to many other scientific questions is a complicated one.
Therefore, we still have room for other theories of large grandiose scope.
And today's guest is Michael Muthukrishna, who has a book coming out called A Theory of Every One.
That's intentional play on words from the theory of everything idea.
The subtitle is The New Science of Who We Are, How We Got Here and Where We're Going.
Obviously, kind of an ambitious book trying to synthesize many kinds of ideas.
Michael is at the London School of Economics.
He's sort of, I think his official title is a Professor of Economic Psychology.
So there's both economics in there and psychology.
He's actually collaborated with some of our previous Minescape guests, Joe Henrich and Edward Slingerland.
So he thinks about the grand scope of human history and how we are influenced by biology and evolution, cultural evolution,
how we pass down ideas from generation to generation.
And a big thing, as he'll say in the episode, a big thing for him is the fact that human beings, unlike other animals,
do have this sort of distributed cultural knowledge that we can pass down.
Human beings have schools, right? Have an educational system in a way that other animals don't.
Other animals do teach their young. Some of them do.
I don't know. Lions, I'm told, teach their cubs to hunt by pretending to be in pain when their cubs bite them a little bit.
So they're teaching them, like, oh, yes, that's the right thing you should do.
But they don't have a curriculum. They don't have a syllabus.
They don't have it quite as organized and systematized as human beings do.
So that plays a large role in the exceptionalism of human beings.
And of course, it's tied to other capacities, our brains, our languages, things like that.
So we'll talk about all of that.
But then Michael wants to go much further.
He talks about not only economics, but the technological side of economics,
the importance of different ways we have of harnessing energy from, you know, just burning wood to burning fossil fuels to solar energy
and how these allow for expansions of the economy and therefore of human opportunity in a very clear way.
And then he brings it back or brings it down, I should say, to the current era, our political polarization,
our stagnation of innovation, if that's true, and what we can do about it, how we can do better.
There are parts of this long, elaborate story that I am 100% on board with.
Other parts that I will wait to see, let's put it that way, not 100%, but I'm open to it.
I think it's fascinating stuff.
And Michael is very clear and very well educated on a whole bunch of things.
So I think it's a very good listen.
With that in mind, let's go.
Michael Muthukrishna, welcome to the Mindscape podcast.
Thanks for having me, Sean.
So you've written what sounds to the average reader of titles like an ambitious book.
It's called A Theory of Everyone.
And I like that you're kind of making fun of the physicists there.
It is, you know, it's a modest title.
It could have been a theory of everything, right?
Yeah, exactly. Just people.
Yeah, no, it's a play on a theory of everything, of course.
But I mean, the title hints at the central claim of the book, which is that, you know, we are...
So I'm sure your listeners know already, but, you know, the theory of everything in physics
is this grand, unifying theory, you know, general relativity meets quantum mechanics, whatever.
The idea or the central premise of the book is that we have reached this point in the human and social sciences
where we have this overarching theoretical framework that unifies things
that make sense of an otherwise chaotic and confusing world and turns it into a real science.
And so, you know, I tell the story of how this happened in the more mature sciences
to illustrate how this has happened for the human and social sciences.
So, you know, like in physics, right?
We used to think that Thor was banging his hammer
and the physical world was the result of capricious gods.
And then, you know, folks like Newton and Maxwell and Einstein come along and they write down equations.
I mean, Maxwell is crazy, right? At the time of like whale oil and horse-drawn carriages,
he's writing down equations for like a magnet.
It is. It's amazing, yeah.
But suddenly, like the world is less chaotic and confusing.
We know, like the weather is still difficult to predict, actually,
but we know that it's not caused by capricious gods.
It's caused by these rules. We have the rules.
And once we have those, we can also turn them into technologies, right?
Like we can eventually land, you know, a spacecraft on an asteroid.
And the same thing happened to chemistry.
Now, Newton's not a dumb guy, as we just said, but he's trying to turn lead into gold.
And again, it's not because he's a dumb guy.
It's because he doesn't understand like collusion theory.
He doesn't know the world is made up of elements that fit into a periodic table.
But once you have a periodic table, you know, then alchemy becomes chemistry.
So you can do stuff before you have a periodic table.
Like we got to gunpowder, for example.
But, you know, why is it that when you pour this acid on a metal,
you're creating this gas and it's bubbling away?
Like what's happening there, right?
And can we turn lead into gold?
Maybe it seems like another chemical reaction.
But once you have a periodic table, you can be like,
yes, we can make gunpowder and it's like,
okay, yes, we know what's going on here.
But no, we can't learn to turn lead into gold.
Those are different elements.
The world is less chaotic and confusing.
And eventually you make your way not only to chemistry,
like, you know, turning oil into plastics or whatever,
but even, you know, eventually to things like protein folding.
And of course, this happened in biology too, right?
So it was a chaotic and confusing world.
Why do some animals have live words and others lay eggs
and why does the peacock have this giant elaborate tail
and the peahen doesn't?
And then along comes Darwin and later on the modern synthesis
with, you know, Fisher and Wright and Hamilton and so on.
And suddenly the world is less chaotic and confusing.
It's still difficult to predict the trajectory of species
or the behavior of ecologies.
But if you're trying to do that without the rules
that underlie the system, you're running blind.
Right.
So yeah, in other words, what I hear is that
this underlying theoretical perspective on what's going on
can be helpful at a higher practical level.
And let me guess, you want to extend this to human beings.
Exactly.
I mean, the claim I make is not that, like,
I have extended to human beings.
But actually we are in the midst of a revolution
on the scale of Newton and Maxwell and Einstein
and the scale of the periodic table
and the scale of Darwin and the modern synthesis.
That is, we know the rules.
We know why humans are different to other animals.
We know the rules by which humans acquire
and synthesize information.
We know the rules by which societies are changing over time.
And that should allow us to build the equivalent of technologies,
a better job of public policy, for example,
by applying that.
So part one of the book is kind of laying out
that theory of everyone, that theory of human behavior.
And then part two is like, okay, well,
take me at face value and assume that I'm correct
about what I'm saying.
Here's what this means about inequality and innovation
and how we design the internet and, you know,
what the future of education should look like
and how we get past energy transitions and so on.
And how many pages is this book, like 5,000?
I was like 480 pages or something.
You know, I mean, I lean heavily.
It is a book for the public.
So what I try to stay away from, like,
you'll read some behavior books and it's like,
in this study we showed XYZ.
I mean, the studies are there.
But what I'm really trying to say is like,
there is a tapestry.
There's a world that everything is connected up.
It's like once I explain the periodic table to you,
everything makes a lot more sense.
And so I rely heavily on like, let me explain it to you
so you can check it against your own life.
It's that allow you to see the world as you never saw before.
And once you see it, you can't unsee it.
So maybe a good starting point then is the classic question
of what makes human beings so special?
What makes us different than the rest of our animal cousins
even though we're actually very similar at the DNA level, right?
Yeah.
So what humans are a different kind of animal
that have a third line of information
or a second line of inheritance.
And this is really fundamentally what allowed us
to build the world that we have today.
So we not only have a genetic inheritance like hardware
that we get from our parents, right?
And we not only have kind of a lifetime of experience
where we learn things, but we have cultural software
that has accumulated over time
and is literally running on our brains
allowing us to think new thoughts,
see the world in richer new ways
and understand the world as no other species ever has.
And that cultural line isn't just learned.
It is evolving.
It's not an analogy to genetic evolution.
It is an extension of population genetics
into the world of culture.
We call this cultural evolution.
And it's evolving beyond conscious awareness.
So we have a set of behaviors and values
and sometimes technologies that are not only...
The world is not only more complicated
than the smartest among us could ever recreate,
but often we don't really understand why it is
that we do the things we do,
certainly at an individual level
and sometimes at a population level.
Like you probably brush your teeth twice a day
and if I ask you why,
you'll tell me something about plaque and tartar
or something like that,
but you don't really have a good causal model of that.
Or you probably finish your course of antibiotics, right?
To avoid superbugs.
And you probably have a causal explanation for that.
But you have an illusion of explanatory depth
that stops you from checking further.
I'm going to say to you, it's like obviously Sean,
like not every one of those bacteria are going to die.
And so surely if not all of them die,
surely finishing your course of antibiotics
would have the most resistant bacteria left.
That's what would create superbugs.
And now you're like, oh, wait a minute.
You know, but you don't have to worry
about kind of antibiotic kill curves
or, you know, the optimal dosage or anything like that.
You have just acquired the interfaces
to interact with the world.
You check your emails on a device that may as well be magic.
So the book is about how we evolved to have that.
How it is that we became a different kind of animal.
How that connects everything up.
And what that means about how we should study ourselves
and think about our future, right?
Like if you want to understand the secrets of pivot tables
in Excel, if you want to understand how chatGPT works,
you don't look inside the CPU and GPU.
It's not in the brain.
It's not in the neuroscience actually.
It's in the software that's running on that hardware.
So the difference in other words,
obviously other kinds of animals and so forth
do have behaviors that are passed down from generations,
but they're not through learning, right?
I mean, are there, it's always a worry
when you talk about vast generalizations to other species
that there's going to be counter examples.
Are there any counter examples of, you know,
things that are not genetically encoded,
but our knowledge that other animal species
passed down from generation to generation?
Yeah.
So this area is called dual inheritance theory
or gene culture co-evolution
or the extended evolutionary synthesis.
And particularly the extended evolutionary synthesis
does, it is about like these other transmission,
like so environments are transmitted, right?
An earthworm can inherit the environment created,
that more moist environment created by its ancestors.
There's also information being transmitted,
just not to the degree that humans do, right?
So like chimps, for example, learn from their mothers
and they have traditions of, you know,
wadding up leaves into sponges and sponging up water
or using sticks for digging termites or whatever.
And those do seem to be trying,
or cracking nuts is another example of this.
They're entering the stone age, if you like.
They do have that, but humans,
for reasons I explained in the book,
and maybe I can say a little bit about that now,
rely on that social information
and agree to use that information if you like.
We use that information at the expense
of our own everyday experience.
And chimps do not do that.
Like, let me give you an example.
You're the worst person to give this example to,
but I'm going to give it to you anyway.
You'll see in a moment why that is.
Like, if I ask the average person, right?
Or the average person will swear up and down
that we are on a spheroid rotating around a star,
one of many stars in the Milky Way,
you know, one of many galaxies in the universe.
They will swear that up and down.
And every day they look outside at a flat earth
with a sun tracing the sky from east to west, right?
Now you might be, you know,
you're among a handful of people who checked, right?
But for most people, they don't.
They just believe it because the smartest people
in their society, most people in their society,
they believe that, right?
For the longest time,
UFOs were like in the realm of the flat earth, right?
And maybe they still should be, but at the moment,
because like the reliable sources are talking about
what are they called now, UAPs or whatever, and aliens.
Now people are like, wait, is that actually a thing?
Like, should I be reconsidering my model of the world?
We should go back to the previous consensus understanding,
I think there.
But this is interesting because you're saying two things,
one of which I was expecting and one of which is a little bit,
I've heard it before, but it's unexpected in this context.
The expected thing is, you know, we not only have knowledge,
we have some kind of symbolic knowledge, right?
So, you know, we can package the knowledge
and spread it more efficiently between ourselves.
And that's obviously some kind of phased transition
in human behavior that we can talk about.
But you're putting more emphasis than I would have guessed
on our limitations, you know, which I think are very important.
But it's interesting to hear in this context, you know,
we're finite, we don't have infinite ability to do our own research
in the current parlance.
So we kind of have to rely on our social networks a bit.
That's right.
And so it's actually because of those limitations
that we ended up with this cultural evolutionary system.
It's because of those limitations that we deferred the calculation,
the computation, the innovation to the population level.
So because we couldn't, you know, we couldn't fit all of that in our heads,
we ended up like selectively learning and copying without really understanding
that we were able to surpass it.
So I'll give you, there's an experiment I talk about in the book
that really illustrates this,
what humans do compared to other great apes.
So this was an experiment done with young children and young chimps, right?
And so the experimenter has a box, and the box has a hole on the top
and the hole on the side, right?
And the experimenter takes the stick
and pokes it through the hole in the top and pokes it through the hole on the side.
And when they do this they poke it through the hole in the side,
they, they get a piece of fruit, which the chimps love.
And they get a sticker, which the kids love.
So the experimenter pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side,
you know, hands it to the chimp.
What does the chimp do?
Pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side.
All right, experimenter pokes a hole through the top,
pokes a hole through the side, hands it to the child.
What does the child do?
Pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through the side.
Okay. Now in the key variation in the treatment, you have the same box, but it's no longer
a black box. It's transparent. You can see into it.
Okay.
And you realize that that first action doesn't do anything. There's actually like a ceiling
or a floor, you know, where it's just hitting that. It's to retrieve the fruit and the stick,
or you just need the second action.
Okay.
But again, the experiment to take the stick pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through
the side, hands it to the chimp. Now, if you've ever watched like a chimp, you know,
doing a working memory task or spinning through Instagram, chips are smart, man.
Very good.
Yeah.
And so what do they do? Ignore that first action. Go straight to the second action
and they retrieve their fruit and they're a happy chimp.
What does the child do? Experiment to pokes a hole through the top, pokes a hole through
the side, hands to the child. What does the child do? Pokes a hole through the top,
pokes a hole through the side.
So children, you have a head full of recipes that you don't fully understand.
Interesting.
That you've accumulated and you acquire from the smartest people since you were a child around
you. Some of those you've checked, many of those you haven't and if your life is going well,
you've never had a need to check some of the beliefs that you hold and the behaviors you
engage in. But because we're smart because we're dumb, we're smart because we ate better than
apes do. And because we're willing to defer to that body of information culture,
we don't sit naked in the rain like they do. They want to figure everything out from first
principles. They want to understand it before they do it. And so they're stuck. They're stuck
at a particular limit by their brains.
That's a wonderful example. I love that experiment because the cynic might have said,
see the children, human children, not as smart as the chimps because they can't figure it out.
But your spin on it is whether or not they're smarter, they're relying on a whole thing that
the chimps don't have access to, this sort of collective knowledge that gets us through the
complicated social environment we're in.
That's right. But you see that collective knowledge isn't just about behaviors and
beliefs. It's also about mental tools, like literal upgrades to our cultural software for
thinking. And we know some of this through history, thanks to history, which is the cultural
fossil record if you like. So if you take something like numeracy, some small-scale
societies still count one, two, three, and then many. And our ancestors probably counted like that
too. We were able to get further using a metaphor. So many societies would use stones, think calcium,
calculus, maybe stones pressed into clay. So you've got notches as well or cut into wood.
Many societies use body parts. So we have a decimal system, which is super annoying,
to be honest. It doesn't translate well to binary. It's the worst of all systems.
And other societies use phalanges. So they count 12 with their thumb, the finger bones,
and various other body parts. I wish we'd landed on 16, but here we are.
And so as a result of this, we now had a metaphor for thinking that we no longer had to use. We
could just store it in our heads, represent it in our heads. And now we could count the natural
numbers above one. But stones and fingers and whatever, they don't make zero obvious,
because zero stones is nothing. And nothing is, well, it's nothing. And so it took centuries
before zero was recognized as a number. And centuries, it was actually the 17th, 18th century,
the negative numbers became more obvious. And again, it became, it was an upgrade thanks to a,
the number line. So we moved away from objects to position, right? And, you know, there's this
quote I have in the book from a British mathematician Francis Mezry, and he's something like, you
know, negative numbers darken the very fabric of reality. It's like way melodramatic, right? And
he's right. But once you have a number line, it's simple enough that you can teach it to young
children, which is what we do. Yeah. But it's given us a new ability, because obviously, once you
can count, you can count to do anything. And then the number line itself gets extended, right? So
it's like, what if you have another number line that is, you know, orthogonal to the other one,
it's like, Oh, a complex plane emerges, right? And so you don't, you don't, you can't see this,
because we live in a bubble, a very big bubble. So I don't mean like you and I, you know,
in our ivory towers, you know, I don't mean like coastal elites and rural small town. I mean,
we're all every person we ever meet went through education through school. And school has become
since the Industrial Revolution, the primary means by which we download a cultural package to the
next generation. Because we are a species that relies on socially transmitted information,
you have every child has to catch up on the last several thousand years of human history. And we
try to do it more efficiently, because if we lose that link, we literally become dumber. We
literally lose, lose a bunch of technology, right? We have to transmit that every generation.
But as a result of that, many of the things that we think of as being human
are in fact endowed by us by accumulated cultural knowledge, and you can't get it by measuring it.
So the Stroop test, I don't know if you've ever seen the Stroop test, basically,
you've got words, the color words, and they're written in the color, like red written in red,
blue written in blue. Oh yeah, I do know what you're talking about, but go ahead. Or,
mismatched, right? And you ask people, don't say, don't read the word, just say the color. So,
you know, even though it says red, it's written in blue, so say blue. And people struggle. Reading
has become an instinct that overrides color perception. Now imagine, you know, a psychologist
from Venus, you know, like the anthropologist from Mars. A psychologist from Venus comes down
and studies these crazy apes on, you know, on the planet, and they give them the Stroop test,
and they're like, oh, it appears that humans have an innate ability to read, but no innate
ability or it overrides any kind of color perception, which would be wrong, of course, right?
But because these culturally endowed skills have become part of our thinking, and they're
ubiquitous at this point, you can't measure it. You know, all of experimental psychology, all of,
even IQ tests were developed after the advent of truancy laws and compulsory formal education.
So, even something like the ability to reason. So, I talk about some of my own work, right?
So, Alexander Luria, we were replicating some of his work. So, Luria goes out to Uzbekistan. He
wants to understand how education is changing people's psychology. And he uses if p, then Q
reasoning, okay? So, this is actually one of his questions. He says, where it snows, the bears are
white. In Novia's Emilia, it snows, what color are the bears? Now, you didn't say it, but you're
thinking white. You know, like Uzbeks with education, white. My six-year-old, white, you know?
But what happens to the Uzbeks who didn't have education? How do they answer? They're like,
I think probably brown. I've seen a brown bear. You're like, what? Listen to what I'm saying.
And you're like, well, I don't know what color the bears are. I haven't been to Novia's Emilia.
So, it's not that humans can't reason. Of course we can, right? But it's a grounded,
cultural reality-based reasoning. And it becomes an ability and a hypothetical ability to reason
through our education system. And then the whole world becomes more complex, right? Like, a new
baseline is achieved. So, if you think about TV shows, right? Like, think of like Wambam Batman
for the 1960s, where it is like the dark night from the early Nazis, right? Like, even the most
low-brow television has more convoluted storylines, more characters than, you know, what our parents
and grandparents watched, right? So, that is the central premise. And so, the book is all about,
well, how does that software get written? And how do we write better software for the future?
Because although IQ test results have been going up, they have now stagnated and so have our schools.
Let me ask the sort of chicken and egg problem here, because when we talk about human exceptionalism,
there's a whole bunch of things that happen and maybe they're all related. There was some kind
of phase transition, right? Like, some people will emphasize language and symbolic manipulation
of information. Some people, I had Adam Bulley on the podcast, who is part of a group that likes
mental time travel, the ability to hypothesize the future and speak counterfactually as something
that is uniquely human. And you're, you know, like other people, emphasizing this communal aspect,
the sort of offloading certain cognitive tasks to the collective. Which came first? Is there
some causality there or is it a package deal? Absolutely. So, actually, the book is about,
it tackles this very problem. So, you know, people who, people who posit things like,
so I know Adam, you know, and I know the language people, I'm not sure who you spoke to, but
people who posit language as an explanation are wrong because language is part of the
package of humans. It doesn't explain anything because, you know, in evolutionary biology,
you have a startup problem, right? So, let's say I'm the first person with like some genes for
language. Well, that's useless because nobody else speaks, you know? So, like, you've got a,
you've got a startup problem. And language only works if you've got something worth transmitting.
So, so language isn't an explanation. And a lot of the other features of our,
of our cognition are also this part of this package. So, you know, the story, the,
here's what, here's what a mix of kind of the models and evidence and what you can kind of piece
together tells us, okay? So, the first thing that happened was that there was a transition
across the animal kingdom, but certainly for humans because of our generation length,
toward relying on social information. And it is, it is, if you look at the models and
population genetics, these are the models where you can branch off into a world of social learning.
So, if you, when, when the environment is highly stable, then genes do the best job of adapting
to that environment. So, even among humans, right? Skin color is a genetic adaptation that
is well predicted by latitude because of UV radiation. You don't want so much UV radiation
that you get cancer, but you don't want so little that you have vitamin D deficiency,
which also leads to cancers and other diseases, right?
But the time scale is very long for those adaptations to happen. So, a stable environment
is where it works. They're fairly long, but they happen, right? For, for, for our, for the human
generation length, which is not, you know, the last several thousand years, a hundred thousand years,
right? It's not, sometimes if there's, if selection is strong enough, it can be quite fast.
Okay. And if there's variation in the population.
And so, by the way, you know, remember like humans, like part of this puzzle is that humans,
when most animals encounter a new environment, they're forced to genetically adapt.
And we did a little bit like human skin color, but, you know, like more, more fat for the arctic,
more, you know, proteins to process the local plants. We, as hunter-gatherers, before, you know,
physics, chemistry, biology, psychology, all of this stuff. And even before agriculture,
we marched across the planet and we figured it out in each stage. You know, we figured out how
to process the proteins using, you know, like new, new techniques and so that we could eat them.
You know, we, we, we didn't get much more fat and fur. We hunted the local animals and avoided
prey and war. Sometimes the predators, you know, skins as our own, right? So this is what we need
to explain. This is what we need to explain. So genes do a great job if, if the environment is
highly stable, if the environment is highly unstable, then genes are not a good solution.
Because, you know, today the red berries are edible tomorrow. It's the, the blueberries and
the water is here. The water is there or whatever, right? Instead, evolution has to rely on trial
and error learning across the lifespan to figure it out. You got to have a big brain to do that.
And you got to do a lot of trial and error and it's really inefficient. And so these key models
developed by, you know, mostly by Roy, Rob Boyd and Pete Richardson and also by, you know,
Kveli Shorts and Mark Feldman over at Stanford. There's an intermediate zone of environmental
variability where it is matched to generation length such that your parents and grandparents
have some knowledge worth paying attention to. And it is, it is at this point that we begin
to rely on the information they have. So imagine something like a cyclical drought.
Yeah. Maybe, you know, you've, you've never experienced one and the lag is too long, right?
Maybe your parents haven't either, but grandma remembers that when she was a child, there was
a drought and they went left to the forest past the mountain and, you know, she leads her tribe
to safely. And, you know, I was, I was recently talking to an anthropologist, she was like,
that actually happens. You know, this is a real thing. Kim Hill, you know, was telling me,
you know, from his group. Yeah, check. So, so now in this zone, so this was a nice model developed
in the 1980s, right? In 1981 and 1985, these models were developed. And everyone was like,
oh, that's cool. Yeah, maybe that's what happened. And what happened was in the late 90s and early
2000s, we actually got ice core data. So we could see climatic variation. What did we find?
Massive amounts of variation followed by a moderate zone as, you know, exactly the moment
when humans evolve. Now you should have to, you should pause for a second and be like, well,
wait a minute, all those animals, surely they all experienced, right? There is a, there is a link to
there is a link to generation length for the first step, but you also need something else
to kick this thing off. You've got this bootstrap problem. Okay. So I suspect, you know, in the
book, this is going a little, we don't have a model of this, you know, by the way, you know,
theories only become theories if you can write them down. So, you know, this, what I just said,
we've got good models for good empirical evidence, what I'm about to say, we don't have as good models
except when it comes to brain evolution, which is some of my own work. So I suspect bipedalism
actually did a lot for us. Okay. And the reason for that, so we were, we probably bipedal for
completely separate reasons, right? This is kind of an early adaptation. And by being bipedal,
it did two things. One, it freed our hands for you, for making tools and carrying them around,
right? So you can invest in that stone axe, because you can carry it to the next location
and use it again. Whereas if you're a quadrupedal ape, like a chimp or a orangutan or a gorilla,
whatever, like, you don't want to carry this big ass rock around. So you don't, you have to reuse it.
So cheapen the cost of tools. The second thing that it did is what I'm doing with you right now
that unfortunately, audio listeners can't see, which is talking with my hands, right?
Those Italians, we all do it. I saw you do it, you know, we talk with our hands. And so that
opened up a new modality for communicating with. So now, now we can begin to solve that language
problem, which as I said, it's not an explanation as part of that package. So imagine, I should say
more, so the information begins to accumulate, because cultural evolution becomes a second
line of inheritance. And that happens because of what I described there. So for any evolutionary
system needs three ingredients, variation, like diversity, easy to solve for culture,
people do all kinds of things for all kinds of reasons, different information, different
personalities, whatever, transmission. So you need reliable, you don't want too much information
to be lost during the transmission process. So for, for, for genes, of course, it's because
genes are, are not mutating at a very high rate. And you need variation reduction. And if you
want it to be adaptive, you need selection where more of the good stuff sticks around and less of
the bad stuff. And if you meet those criteria, you have an evolutionary system. It's how genetic
algorithms work, right? So genes, we know how that works. For culture, I just gave you the
transmission. We copy without understanding. And so we don't lose too much information. And we do
it selectively. We copy people who are more successful. We copy people who other people
are copying. We copy people who are experts. You know, we have a, we have a psychology that
it leads us to, for example, if a celebrity says, I'm drinking this drink, you're like,
I want that drink. We do it instinctively. Why? It's got nothing to do with their success, right?
But other people, you know, but we don't know. It's a black box. I don't know why, you know,
Beyonce is such a great singer. So I'm just going to, I'm going to wear her perfume and I'm going
to dress like her. I'm going to do everything because, you know, if I'm trying to copy the best
hunter, maybe it's because of the shoes he wears or, you know, his weapons or where he goes hunting,
but equally it's because of his kick-ass beard or fact that he shaves his head or the gods he
worships. So a little hunter copies everything about them. Now, if you have that system, you've
already deferred to the population level and information begins to accumulate. Okay. Now,
we have evidence for early accumulation of information because one of the best pieces of
evidence from, in my view, that this is absolutely why humans evolve is the fact that we rely on
cooked food. Our jaws are too, too weak for chewing on like a gorilla on leaves all day.
And our guts are too short to process that food anyway, even if we could, right? So that means
we were cooking food. We had fire. Now, I don't know if you've ever tried to light a fire,
but it's hard, man. It's hard, right? Even once you're taught, it's hard, right? And so like that
meant that we needed fire to survive and we don't have genes for it. It's got to have been culturally
transmitted. You couldn't have figured it out. So that's a very early, very early bit of information
and maybe the stone tools too, and probably before the stone tools, the bone tools and the
wooden tools that didn't survive the passage of time. When you say very early, what years are we
guessing? So we're talking like millions of years. Millions of years ago. One and a half. Yeah. Yeah.
So this is like very early on. So before like modern humans. Yeah. And we have evidence for
this, right? Like we have little bits of evidence for, for a very, and so that meant while we were
bipedal, we had information worth transmitting, right? And so that means you can get what's called
a Baldwinian process in evolution. So a Baldwinian process is one where you can get to a place through
learning. But if you can get there through genes more efficiently, those genes can be selected.
So in this case, I can, there is a bunch of gestures I can give you so you can build the tool
or light the fire or know that, you know, I can, I can have guttural utterances and I can wave my
hands in a particular way. And you can learn that that means just through, you know, reinforcement
learning, figure out what I'm talking about. But now if you have cognitive changes that allow you
to acquire that bit of language, that you can do it more efficiently. And that means the next
generation, you can do a little bit more and a little bit more and a little bit more. Now you
have the ratchet to get up in the presence of an accumulating body of knowledge. You see where I'm
going? Yeah, I do. And go ahead, keep going there. Yeah. So you have, you have, you can begin to
accumulate this knowledge, right? And so some of the genetic changes, by the way, like made us
more susceptible to choking. So as I say in the book, we were literally dying to speak to one
another. And so, you know, and so we had, so this did a few things. So one, now we had all
this knowledge, we had language begin to evolve, language continues to evolve, by the way. So for
example, it becomes more efficient. Some of my research. And our brains grew. So they tripled
in size compared to our last common ancestor, you know, five to seven million years ago with a chimp.
Our brains were to the point where if you look at the medical literature today,
once you hit about the 85th percentile, so doctors used to think it was like big babies were
difficult to birth. Turns out it's not big babies, it's big heads. Once you hit about the 85th percentile,
it hockey sticks up in terms of emergency cesareans and emergency, you know, forceps. So basically,
you need these. So that means for our species, like it was kind of the curse of Eve, right? Like
we had all this knowledge, big brain, it's painful and dangerous childbirth for mother and baby.
Yeah. So we did other things. We began to, for example, extend our childhoods, right? So one
change that seems to have happened for us is we had a self-domestication and we became neotonous,
which is an easy change for evolution to make. I mean, we turned the magnificent wolf into a poodle.
You know, so we neotonized dogs into permanent puppies. And the same thing happened for us.
We are permanent youthful apes, able to learn for a very long time. So we had a longer child,
a longer juvenile period, and we created an adolescence, which is the period from when you
could reproduce to when you actually do, which has been growing and growing as the body of knowledge
has begun to grow. It used to be that like a high school degree was enough to get a good job.
Then it was a high school degree, plus any college degree, then a STEM degree,
then also a master's degree and an unpaid internship and so on. And so now we're actually
hitting a new limit. So before, the primary selection was on like being able to give birth
to these bigger heads. Now it's like about giving birth at an older age, right? Yeah.
All of this completely changed our societies in a variety of ways that puts the whole human
package together. It's what created grandmothers. It's what created, you know, the difference between
men and women, like you created dads, very unusual among great apes. It, yeah, I mean,
the division of labor, you know, the division of information, all of this emerges. So it's not
what, you know, the theory of everyone isn't like, so I make fun of what I call, I love this genre
of book, by the way, the one thing that explains everything, you know, the Toti kind of books,
you know, it's like, let me show you why my little bit of research that I just love happens to
explain the whole damn world, right? This is a Toti adjacent book, like Toti's like an acronym
for that, you know, it's adjacent, right? For sure. But I'm not like doing this one thing. Like I've
got, you know, I kind of talk about the role that energy, like the big theme of the book is the role
that energy and particularly excess energy has played in all of life and certainly in our civilization.
And I talk about the fact that there are kind of four laws and you're going to hate this as a
physicist, but I don't mean Newtonian laws. I mean, kind of lenses of how in which we can view the
world, you know, the law of energy, which is fundamentally life is competing over excess
energy, the law of innovations and efficiency. So life is evolving new ways to use that energy
more efficiently, the law of cooperation, that the scale of cooperation to the level at which
the individual unit, be they cells or individuals, or you know, in a society, or in a, or employees
in a business is the level at which the per person per unit return on energy is not going to be higher
in a larger or a smaller group. And the law of evolution, which is that both through genetic
and cultural evolution and the interaction between these, we find the space of how to cooperate,
how to innovate at a population level, and how to, and how to unlock new bits of energy,
which, you know, thanks to the fossil fuel revolution with the industrial revolution,
we now live in that world. Well, let's talk about energy a little bit, because the story
that you just painted reminds us of this idea that history is basically a search for calories,
right? Yeah. Food calories back in the day. And then when we invent industrial technology,
we're just, we need even more calories in the sense of an energy source. And part of the theme
of your book is how much of a central organizing principle that is for human history. Correct.
Yeah, that's exactly right. So, you know, for, for us, the first, this is an ancient thing,
you know, what you just said about calories. And, you know, I put it in terms of jewels or
watts, like this is fundamentally what matters, you know, the first organisms,
whenever we turn from RNA into the first self replicators or whatever.
Sorry, the other way around, you know, the first several applicators into RNA and eventually
organisms. The only energy we had is like the fact that we got a large moon, which was closer to
the earth, sloshing the water back and forth over the, you know, the land and the seas. So,
you got some gravitational energy there. But some of it's the sun falling. So, we have the earliest
proto photosynthesis, which was, which didn't use any oxygen, right? Right. And then we had a
mutation, which led to a more efficient photosynthesis, which, you know, polluted the world, a great
oxygenation event, mass, mass extinction. But there was also a new opportunity. So, once we had
photosynthesis turning solar energy into chemical energy in the form of like ATP and
little sugar, little sugar cubes, basically, it meant that other organisms could begin to find
a new niche of not directly converting the sun into, into organism and moving at plant pace,
but eating other organisms and moving a little faster, right? There were like a little bundle,
just as a story of colonialization, actually, you know, an energy rich little corner of Eurasia
creates the largest empire the world has ever seen out competing other less energy, less,
less cooperative societies in devastating ways. And so, you know, and so the same pattern happens
throughout life. You got prokaryotes getting eaten by eukaryotes, eukaryotes being eaten by
multicellular life, complex multicellular life, and eventually all the way to you,
who is more like an ecosystem and Amazon rainforest of a microbiome and, you know,
and interacting differentiated cells more than you are a single organism. And if you run out of
energy, you're going to get defeated by the lower scales by the bacteria, or you're going to get
your stuff stolen from you by the bigger scale, same pattern across the across everything. So,
for humans, the in terms of our calories, the first unlocking of energy was the one I described
before, which is fire, right? We it was a chemical energy technology that allowed us to predigest
foods and make them those calories more bio available, which allowed us to grow those brains
and shrink those guts, right? Occupy a new niche. The next major revolution was agriculture,
which was a solar technology, right? Where now, rather than expending all that energy,
walking around, searching, you know, hunting and gathering, like trying to find plants and small
animals or large animals in a group, you domesticate and look after animals and you grow food more
efficiently. It was a law of innovation, if you like, and the law of energy and you grow your
population to the point where you out compete the hunter gather groups to the margins that are
not suitable to agriculture, which is still where they live today, right? And those larger groups
are able to innovate more and you lay the foundations for the beginnings of cities as
kind of massive nodes of collective intelligence, right? This continues and we live in a Malthusian
world, right? Because the pattern in this story across every scale is that when you get this
unlocking, you get an era of abundance, and that would have been that first era of abundance. And
then, because carrying capacity has gone up, the number of individuals meets that carrying
capacity and you once again enter an era of scarcity where the per person calories or energy
is lower. The next major unlocking that is most relevant to us was the industrial revolution,
which if you look at any metric of progress, the size of our polities, the, you know, child
survival rates, anything you care about, it just shoots up into the sky, right? And as in Morris
puts it, it made a mockery of all the world's earlier history, scientific revolution, black death,
renaissance, blips in anything we care about. And that's because we exploited stored solar energy
in the form of like Pete turned to black rock coal and, you know, algae, you know, whatever turned
to oil and natural gas, right? And we unlocked that in a matter of centuries, we began to burn
that down. And we, using that excess energy, we multiplied ourselves and our efforts, we had
another agricultural revolution, the green revolution, you know, Norman Borlag, where we
synthesized through the Haber-Bosch process, we synthesized fertilizer with nitrogen in the air
and, you know, natural gas. And this allowed us like four billion people, half the population
along our life today, thanks to that process, we're literally eating our fossil fuels,
we use them to develop new technologies. Now, here's, here's, here's where we transition to,
you know, part two of the book in which is that the energy return on investment, which is a key
metric I care a lot about, is decreasing. So the excess energy is shrinking and economics and a lot
of what we do, we've focused on efficiency, because they all developed long after the industrial
revolution, right? Or after the industrial revolution. And so if you look at one metric,
like oil discovery, and all the metrics look like this, in 1919, one barrel of oil found
you another 1,000 barrels. Okay. So massive return on energy. By 1950, one barrel of oil,
a barrel of oil found you another 100. And by 2010, one barrel found you another five.
So, so the level of cooperation is governed by this, if you like the space of the possible,
created by an energy ceiling, and an efficiency floor, and that is shrinking. Our ability to
innovate new efficiencies is decreasing, the rate of that is decreasing, and the ceiling is
rapidly falling on us. And so our societies, all of the fractures are cracking, we're falling back
to lower scales of cooperation, as a result of this. Let's actually get out of this. Let's pause
and dwell on this, because I think this is an important thing. First, let me just sort of
summarize this point, which I'm going to be very much in favor of as a physicist, that
the progress, progress in the sense of just change, not necessarily improvement,
of human society, is a story of transitions, right? It's more punctuated equilibrium than
gradual improvement. We, you know, innovate, gradual and occasional punctuated. Yeah, sure.
Yeah. But the, but the idea that we do innovate, we find some new mode for doing something,
whether it's producing energy or technology or whatever. And then that gives us space, right?
We can then grow into that. But you're saying that as we do grow into that, as we sort of reach
what might be a new equilibrium, we also, because there's less spare excess wealth in various forms
to go around, things get squeezed a little bit. Our social fabric gets a little bit harder to
maintain. That's right. So I mean, our, not only does population grown, and so that alone is,
but that's a good thing for the most part, because it means more innovation, right? Like more people
insofar as everyone is able to access all of that cultural knowledge and, you know,
opportunity matches talent and all of that stuff, which as we both know, isn't often.
Not always true. Yeah. But, but, you know, the other side of it is simply that the space itself
is shrinking, because not only is abundance turning to scarcity for the usual reasons,
but we're reentering a Malthusian world simply because our excess energy is decreasing.
Like it doesn't matter how fancy your gadgets and technology are, if you can't charge them.
Like our ability to access energy isn't just like price, it's a proxy for it that's affected by a
bunch of other things. It's literally how much energy do I need to get some amount of energy back?
Ideal world, you want a small energy sector. It's like 5% of the economy at the moment, right?
That's great. But as, because it means that the returns on that energy allow you to do
everything else that makes life worth it. Like traveling on flights across the planet and, you
know, hanging out with your friends and eating great food that requires ingredients drawn from
all around the world. All of that stuff relies on abundant energy.
And I guess, yeah, I think you're going to have to convince me of this one a little bit more,
because I can imagine, you know, the same kind of general story, but then saying, well, once we
reach some equilibrium, once we have some steady flow of energy in and things out,
then we can figure out a way to organize our society that fits in to that equilibrium. You
know, the moments of change in a different telling than what you just gave, the moments of change
are the scary ones where we're not sure what's going on. But once everything is a steady flow,
there we might reach a happy equilibrium. But you seem to be saying that's not empirically
what happens. That's a very physicist answer, Sean. I mean, in biology, regardless of our,
you know, our evolutionary game theory, there are no equilibrium. And the reason for that is
because, you know, in a world, so, you know, I tell the story in the beginning of the book,
like why I got into this, I'm trained as an engineer, you know, originally, and I kind of
switched fields. And the reason that I did that is I got really concerned around climate change.
And I got concerned about a lot of, I lived in a lot of different places like Africa and
New Guinea and things like that. And I was concerned that people don't understand culture,
first off. And second, climate change, we're all focused on mitigation. But as the world changes,
we're also going to have to figure out how to live in a climate changed world. And some of that we
get like carbon capture and those kinds of technologies. But how do you deal with a million
Bangladeshis underwater coming into India? How do you like not have civilization come apart? What
does that mean for, you know, the Middle East and then for Europe? Like the Syrian migration crisis
is the first example of that, you know, you had climate change, probably induced droughts, you
have a bunch of people coming into cities, there's not enough jobs to go around, not enough infrastructure
to support them. Eventually, they start to, you know, to, and then the geopolitics kicks in,
eventually you have a difficult problem at Europe store stuff, right? That's what I wanted to work
on. So the thing is that in a world, like, you know, I remember watching Al Gore's documentary
in 2007, and I was like, and I started reading the IPCC reports, I was reading the Pentagon
reports, and I was like, Gore is absolutely right about the problem. But he's crazy. Like,
are we going to slow the economy to save the planet? If we do, amazing, I'm happy. But I just,
I just don't believe that because in a world where every, every country is trying to outcompete
every other country, every company is trying to outcompete every other company, and every individual
wants more than their neighbors, you're not going to get this equilibrium sustainable, you know,
whatever, you're, all you're going to do is encourage a zero sum Malthusian world where your
success means my loss because there's a limited pie from which we are taking stuff, unless you
somehow equalize everything and people don't like that. So I mean, any theory of change or any theory
of society that requires a complete shift in human nature and not just constraining in some way
is broken. It's, it's broken from the beginning. It's broken before you got there. So this is
an example. There isn't, you know, so like ideas like degrowth or, you know, like just pure sustainability
of stagnation are dangerous because they will shove us back into a zero sum environment.
Is that what it was like back in the hunter-gatherers?
Yeah. So hunter-gatherers are really interesting. So we have some new work where we're trying to,
so hunter-gatherers are, oh well, some hunter-gatherer groups are known for their egalitarianism,
right? They do equalize, right? If you move to like pastoralists and chiefdoms, you start to see
a bit more inequality and things like this. And so people sometimes interpret that as the ancestral
state was, you know, was, was an egalitarian, humans are by nature egalitarian. No, that is
probably an adaptation to those zero sum conditions where there's weak property rights. Why? Because
in a world that is zero sum, and that means your, your gain is my loss and vice versa.
If you like, you start a pizza business, right? And I'm like, you start a pizza business, you took
a piece of that limited market. I'm going to like burn your business down or take from you. That's
what it incentivizes. It incentivizes destructive competition. In a world that's positive sum,
you start a pizza business. I'm like, yo, I got to start my own chain of pizza, you know, like,
obviously the pizza business is booming, very different psychology, productive competition.
So hunter-gatherers in a world of destructive competition, and there's two equilibria that
emerge in the model. One, they just kill each other to extinction because of these destructive
cycles, or two, they manage to flatten. But the consequence of that flattening is a decrease
in productivity, because what is the point if you can't rise higher, right? It's a little decrease
in production. And it is a kind of stagnation, if you like, right, that eventually gets you
outcompeted by the pastoralists, by the agriculturalists, by, you know, the larger
societies that are not engaged in that. And so that's the central problem with what I think the
solution you're alluding to. Well, it's not even a solution. I'm just wondering what the
space of possibilities is. But you're pointing out that, to put it in the harshest possible
terms, inequality can be a driver of innovation. Correct. And evolution, like life, is competing.
Now, you could get cycles, if you like, you know, like predator prey model type stuff, you know,
where it's like you get a nice bird, and the rabbits go up, and you know, the hair go up,
and then, you know, the foxes will catch up, and then you get a lion. You can get these kind of
equilibrium urge, but it's not a, it's a Malthusian world that most animals inhabit.
We escape the Malthusian trap simply because we got a little boost. So the question is, so my view
is that in order to tackle these very real problems around sustainability, climate change,
and not destroying ourselves and our planet, we need the next era of abundance, not, you know,
an era of scarcity. Because, you know, the countries that are, first off, it's easy to
be nice to people when there's plenty to go around, right? And second, the countries that can invest
in looking after their environment and preserving blocks of land and wanting to live in a clean
environment are those that are wealthy enough, energy rich enough, that they're not worried
about simple things like food and, you know, having enough resources for hospitals and education and
other infrastructure. Those are the countries, like, you know, as in Australia recently,
I'm Australian citizen, actually, you know, like, so I, you know, I was, I was at the Great
Barry Reef. I was there as a, as a teenager and I remember like, oh my God, like I was in these
areas, I was like so bleached, right? This was in, I don't know, early 2000s or something. And I was
back again last year and I was astonished. I was talking to people like, how did you manage to
restore the reef? They have money, they have resources and they care about it enough because
they have the highest household wealth in the world and the only country in the world that has,
you know, positive migration from America, right? So they were able to invest in it,
if they want to. You do that in a world of abundance, not scarcity.
Well, I'm, yeah, and I don't want to disagree because I don't know enough to be able to disagree,
but I'm curious about the possibilities. Like I said, is that, that story you just told is,
is compatible in my mind with an equilibrium zero sum game where everybody has that level
of wealth, right? I mean, I haven't quite seen the connection to inequality and competition.
It's just exactly what you said. So there is no baseline, right? There's no like,
now I'm satisfied, right? You know, like I have enough, like progress and, you know, and, and
competition, like we want more, we want more than our neighbors and there's always problems to be
solved. And even if you as a society, even if you as an individual decide, you know what, I have
enough, we as a society, you're going to get outcompeted by the mutation, cultural or genetic,
right? Where that says, actually, I want a little more. Yeah, it's not inequality. In other words,
it's invadible by that other mutation. Okay, I'll make, I'll make one more stab at
utopian egalitarianism and then we can move on. Even if we bought the idea that inequality is,
is going to happen unless it's sort of, we enforce some kind of rigid, you know,
equitability that everyone is unhappy. Can we imagine that we're in a world of such abundance now
that we can have some equality, some competition, some motivation for innovation, and yet the worse
off people are still much better off than they are today in the actual world.
Yeah, I mean, I think the issue is, so I kind of surveyed the energy technologies available
to us. And I really, apart from solar, if we solve the battery problem and hydro, which is
fantastic, if you've got fast flowing rivers, please use them, get on your Canada, you know,
it's really, it's really nuclear as having the right numbers apart from fossil fuels. And the
fact that those are decreasing, we're in real trouble. And you know, there are, there are,
you can have a society that's more redistributive and it comes at a cost or
or look at the top 100 European companies, right? They're old, you know, very few were,
you know, invented, you know, created like this, this century, if you like, look at the top 100
American companies, how many of them, right? Europe redistributes a lot. And so it squashes,
you know, it's a good, it's like, I live in Europe, right? I live in the UK, somewhere between,
it squashes things. And so productivity is lower, production is low. And so you end up,
you know, with America doing a lot of the innovation, and there's a little bit of
free writing, you know, where you get to benefit from all of those drugs and all of those technologies,
you get to use the iPhone, you get to use, you know, the internet, you get to use all
of these different technologies. But it's being driven by this American, you know,
this creation of inequality in America driven, like, you know, so I talk about Silicon Valley,
right? Silicon Valley is a, people think of it as like a bastion of success. Now, man,
it's a grave, you're at a failure, right? And that's what America, you know, America says,
you do you, everybody go try, you can do this too, right? It's terrible at an individual level.
The Asian model, like, you know, Asian tiger mom, you know, Japan, whatever is,
you know, you don't do you, you do me, like you do this, you follow the script,
and everyone is better off, but it leads to incremental innovation, like you have to believe
in a crowded market where everybody also thinks this, and most people still fail,
that you are going to make it. And a society that encourages that in a large enough marketplace with
enough energy results in finding the few apples, what we call unicorns for a reason, right? The
apples, the Amazons, the alphabets, the whatever's, right? And the graveyard of failure is forgotten
because America is richer as a result of this. And you draw, good, I'm going to give up on
the utopia there, you know, the egalitarian, I'm actually not highly committed to it.
I would enjoy this. I'm not highly committed to it, but I want to learn. But you then take this
picture, I know we've given it very short shrift because it's a deep book with a lot of things
going on, but you take this picture of human nature and the development of history through
these transitions and getting the energy, and you apply it to current issues that we have.
I mean, climate change is one of them, of course, but also political polarization. I mean, what about,
you know, the growth of populism and authoritarianism and so forth? How do we understand that through
this lens? So, I mean, the first thing is, you know, like, ideally you want to predict,
you want to explain, but then you want to be able to do something about it.
I mean, so I see the rise of, there are always fractures that exist in a society, right? There
are always fractures. They are the class divisions, ethnic divisions, you know,
regional divisions, there's all these fractures that exist. But in a world where there's plenty
to go around, people just mumble and grumble. So, you know, this analogy, imagine the buses
coming along, right? That's the rate of economic growth. And people are waiting for the buses,
and you know, you've got some people who have special passes, the 1%, get to the front of the
line first. And you've got groups that favor their in-group, and they're like, come on, you can come
in front, and you're waiting there. But if the buses are coming every five minutes, you mumble,
you grumble, but you put up with it because you're going to get a seat. Just wait five minutes more.
But if the rate of buses slows down, what an hour, what a day,
it's like driving around at car park where there's plenty of spaces versus only one. And now some
asshole, so can I say that in your podcast? Someone tries to take your place, right?
It's a very different psychology. So, and it doesn't even have to be like a reality,
like the perception that that is happening, the created perception can create the reality,
right? Or if you're looking at, if you're, if you're, if we have a psychology that's sensitive
to rate of change, right? And you feel like things are slowing down a little bit, right?
That alone is enough to trigger this, those fractures becoming something more. So then you
can have the rise of the right wing, you can, you end up with more ethnic fractures, you get
political polarization, you get all those fractures becoming something more. And the solution to that
is one, if you've got the resources, invest, right? You can have a million people turn up
at your door if you don't have enough food and water and prepare for those guests, right?
So you need to invest in infrastructure so that already stretched schools, you know,
the good schools, the hospital lines, you know, people are not waiting and waiting and now they're
annoyed because you're giving things to newcomers. Like that's a recipe for ethnic conflict. But if
you're investing and you're like, you know, alongside this, this new group of people, we're
going to put in all this money so that there's enough space for everyone. That's a good thing.
And if you don't have that, you need to be investing in energy technologies that allow
us to raise that ceiling. So talking about the umbrella model of multiculturalism is really
fusing all of these solutions into something that would work in a way that current melting pots or
mosaics or, you know, no hyphen French models really just don't.
So just to try to rephrase it, because I do think this resonates with something that I
had believed for a while, they're one of the things, the major factor that what is the acronym
you use that, you know, the one thing that explains everything when it comes to,
you know, populism, et cetera, is the idea that people who are not well off,
which you might think are going to go for like leftists who are who want to spread the wealth,
but they really are feeling powerless and both in the sense that their political voices aren't
heard and that their lives are getting worse, right? And then they that, that combination
pushes them toward appealing to a strong figure who can shake things up.
Yeah. Yeah. Look, you know, as I pointed in the book, I don't think there's good evidence that
people don't like inequality. What people don't like is a double negative. So you're saying that
they're people like it like equality. No, I'm not saying that people like equality or inequality
or whatever. What the people want is fairness. Yeah. Okay. Right. Like people want the outcomes
to be matched to the input, you know, like they want a return like they don't want necessarily
the hand down. Maybe some people do, right? But like people want the opportunity so that what
they do that they're hard working, if they choose to wake up early and get to the front of the line
at that bus stop, they will get at their seat. And when that stops happening, no matter how
early they wake up or because of where they're born or who they're born to, they just never get
that seat. That is the problem. That's when society starts to come apart. And that's what we need
to resolve. So, you know, in the section on inequality, I differentiate between, you know,
wealth creation versus wealth appropriation. Wealth appropriation is rent seeking. It's
monopolistic behavior. It's like land, you know, like holding on to land for centuries,
as in the country I live in, you know, where you're just, you're just, you're just taking,
you know, a rent on the land, providing no additional value, right? This is why we need like
land value taxes are kind of a way out of this. It's like a huge thing that I talk about in the
book. Whereas wealth creation is like you created Apple or you created, you know, Windows or you
created Amazon. Yeah, you put like a bunch of high streets and malls out of work, but you made
things more efficient that consumers like. And you actually, you created wealth in some sense,
either through the efficiency, the law of efficiency, sorry, the law of innovations and
efficiency, or because you've found some new energy technology or something, right? You've
literally created a new, you've increased the space as possible, and you are allowed to keep a part
of that space. And you are allowed to make other bets that we hope will continue to expand the space.
But the issue is that under an intergenerational transmission of wealth that entrenched that
inequality slowly over time, having the remaining people fight over smaller and smaller scraps.
That is when society comes apart. And that's what we need to solve.
So you'd be in favor of larger estate taxes. Would be great. As I pointed out in the book,
that would be great. But it runs up against a few issues. One is a smart estate planning wealth
flight where people take their money out of the country. And it also goes against, you know,
it goes against kind of instincts about like provisioning for your children and working
harder later in life. It would be great. Here's the outcome you want. You want to create a world
that is, every generation has a fairly fair playing field to start with, so that the best
and brightest of every generation can push forward our species to where we need to go.
And over time, things accrue that prevent that happening. So what I actually, so there's a,
you know, there's a, there's an open secret within economics where across the political
spectrum, you know, people agree that most taxes are distortionary. You know, they affect your
behavior in negative ways. Like your income tax, right? Like if you are afraid, you're going to
earn a little bit more and move into the next income bracket, you're like, that marginal gain
is not worth it for me. So now it's distortionary on your productivity or production. You know,
sales tax, like I'm not going to buy that because of the sales tax. It's distortionary on commerce.
There's one tax that is non distortionary. And there's a moral case for it. And it is fair.
And it would do away with the need for the other taxes. You could get rid of income tax. You can
get rid of sales tax and get rid of capital gains tax. And you could still pay for the
US military and Medicare and, you know, this country, many more. So that is land value taxes.
So the one asset that people own that they did not create, the one asset that stands above all
others is the land. And I don't mean like what you do on the land. You shouldn't be taxed for
your buildings or anything you do on the land. But the land itself is common. And there's a moral
case almost like slavery, where we really need to get rid of this ability to own land. Or at the
very least, those who take that land should be taxed for, you know, for that use of that land,
for its most, and this does all kinds of things. So it's non distortionary. It leads to the most
productive use of that land. It solves a lot of housing issues. And the only barrier to it that
people agree is is going to require revolution. Unless I guess the middle class realized that
because we all, you know, I own land, you own land, you know, like we own land. But what you
don't realize is how little you own relative to, you know, many others. 25,000 Britons who own
Brits who own half of the country or, you know, the 10% of Americans who own I think 60% of the
country. But just to just to point out, this is very radical as a proposal. And there's probably,
you know, unanticipated consequences here. The difference in utopia and, you know,
in a better world are constraints. And what you want, you know, there are real constraints on
this. And so what I suggest, you know, I suggest pathways out of this. So the path dependence
leads us into a world, like it's hard to rewrite the Constitution, it's hard to like change the
tax code overnight. But what you can do is do what, for example, so, you know, last week I was in
Estonia, because I want to understand how they are the top of the pizza tables in the Western
world, beaten only by a handful of other handful of East Asian countries. And they do it while
spending less per student than the rest of the OECD average and certainly less than the US,
Canada, UK, Australia, you know, then, and they have better outcomes. How did they do that?
Sorry, explain what these tables are that you're talking about?
Oh, sorry. Yeah, sorry. The OECD's pizza tables test students around the world on mathematics,
on reading, and on science. Good. Okay. And Estonia tops that table. Their students top the
table. Right. A part, as I said, from a couple of a few Asian countries, how did they do that?
So I went there to understand, you know, I spoke to the former education minister, I spoke to the
person who founded what was called the Tiger Leap Foundation. So after the fall of the, well,
after the Soviet occupation ended in 1991, only half the country had a telephone. So, you know,
when Estonia became its own country, they were like, okay, if we want to leap ahead,
we're going to have to do something different. We're not like super wealthy. We don't have like
a bunch of resources. We just have our people, right? That's it. We got to invest in our people.
And so, you know, you can tell, you can see how, why the people who did this thought of it because
of their own experiences, but they decided to really invest in technology. So they created what
was called the Tiger Leap Foundation, where they overnight gave it the access to computers,
you know, for every student, they internet connected everybody, they train the teachers
and so on, right? Then they were able to do this, because they have radical decentralization.
Every school has autonomy over what they do. Every municipality has autonomy. And
central government can't just say, let's do this. They have to incentivize. So teachers were
incentivized to share knowledge through this teacher social network called School Life.
They gave them opportunities and incentivized by sharing that knowledge. They increased their
pay. They gave them opportunities to travel to other places to borrow the best from things from
around the world, creating a brand new curriculum. And they tested them onto things at a local level.
And when it worked, it got spread to the rest of the country. Many, you know, so, you know,
in this case, for example, robotics is taught, like they were the first country to teach
reading, writing, arithmetic, and now algorithms to like elementary school students.
They, they trialed and, you know, Conrad Wolframs, I don't know if you come across Conrad
Wolframs criticism of math education, where he says, you know, math education recapitulates
history for some reason, like, we, you know, we're like, we're going to learn numbers. Now,
the Greeks and Pythagoras for some reason, and, you know, eventually get to algebra and
eventually calculus, right? Many students never get to calculus, and we don't learn any 20th century
math in high school, let alone 21st century. Like we're missing huge swaths. Why is that really
the most efficient way to do it? So Conrad, you know, obviously wanting to sell some Wolfram
products, but, you know, he, he argues, well, in the real world, you and I do math on computers,
right? Like we're not back in the envelope calculations. That's not where the hard stuff
gets done. Right. And so what you want is for kids to understand what it means to take a derivative,
what it means to what an integral actually is and how it can be used and maybe some stats.
And, you know, like, you want them to have mental models and work alongside computers,
and you can teach that before you, what's hard about calculus is not the derivatives and integrals,
it's the chain rule and it's the mechanics, the quadratic, you know, like it's those that are
difficult. I agree with you there. That's not what's important. That was built for a world before,
you know, one middle school teacher was like, make sure you learn how to do mental math,
you're not going to carry a calculator in your pocket. He didn't force you to do that, right?
So we, so they were able to trial that. And now they're trialing this really radical new
education system, where they, the learning happens at home, right? Where homework and
schoolwork are swapped, basically, right? How can a teacher teach to 20 to 30 kids of different
abilities? They can't. So the lower end get left behind, the upper end are ignored, right? And so
in order to do that, what happens is you when you're at home, you get educational material,
you get teachers and whatever, you get this from the best minds. And then you come to school to
practice that you do the homework where the teacher is not the deliverer of knowledge,
that the facilitator helping you use the internet and AI to practice your skills
in a very kind of practical real world focus. And you do that through radical decentralization.
So the US works the same way, by the way, you know, Justice Brandeis referred to each state as a
laboratory for democracy, right? Arizona, you want to try something? Go try it. If you fail,
you fail it at an Arizona level. And if it works, we bubble it up to the top.
Such a Nadella converted Microsoft from a monolith to a series of startups using the same
principle, you know, it's like, you're going to try different things and we're going to bubble
it up to Microsoft and it works. And that they invested in chat GPT and open AI, right? Great
moves. And the shares have been, have been soaring. The Catholic Church works this way, by the way.
You know, it's like lasted for so long because they're like, well, we got a central authority,
but you know, Jesuits, you go do your weird thing and we're going to laugh at you for most of it.
Oh, now we have a Jesuit Pope because that worked out, right? You have to have space to
kind of explore these possibilities to get out of that trap. So what do I why am I saying,
talking about all this because land value taxes are something you can do in what I call startup
cities, right? Like cities are the place where we all live and countries are increasingly untenable
in some ways. Like how do you get that? But if you empower cities, give them more autonomy,
allow them to learn from one another, have a more startup ecosystem around that. This is a way out,
right? This is the engine of development that Hong Kong represented for China. This is why
Singapore is at the top of the piece of tables, you know, it's, it's how Guangzhou works. And now
there's a bunch of startup cities or charter cities sometimes, you know, in, in Africa.
But this is a way past current democracy and eventually maybe programmable politics. But
I don't have time to explain that it's in the book. It's in the book. I think there's a lot in
the book and you know, we've covered a lot of it. But I do want to encourage people to check out the
book because it paints a much folder picture. But maybe we can sort of wind things up by
returning to something that we talked about right at the beginning, the, the children learning from
the adults rather than using their reasoning, right? That we rely on our cultural transmission
of knowledge. I want to feed that back into what we were just talking about in terms of
inequality and fairness and innovation and things like that. How much of a problem is it
that in the modern era, we're able to get that cultural knowledge in a, in a quite fine-tuned
or at least quite differentiated way, even within one culture, right? Like if I, in your
bus analogy, if I am constantly told that the buses come very rarely and discriminate against me,
even if it's not true, that becomes a problem for how society works.
Yeah. You know, like, you know, people talk about this as like the Walter Cronkite problem,
you know, like once upon a time we all got our news, well, not me, I'm too young.
Walter Cronkite, you know, was on the evening news and now like we all read different, you know,
we read Breitbart and, you know, and Huffington Post and New York Times, we're all getting it from
like different places. So I think the internet is interesting in that, so I argue that the internet
is actually creating, we are not in the midst of a fourth industrial revolution or fifth industrial
revolution. We are in the midst of a second enlightenment. Okay. One driven not by coffee
shops and pamphlets and books, but by tweets and, you know, and shared articles on social media
that piss you off. And they piss you off because they expose you to ideas that are not in your
in group. Now, alongside that is a countervailing force, which is that we are also able to assort
in smaller and smaller groups, and those groups can compete with one another. In other words,
the internet creates new tribes, right? So, you know, there's a show here, Little Britain,
and there's a character, you know, he's like, I'm the only gay in the village, you know, it's
not true. He actually, there's lots of other gays in the village. But once upon a time, you might
have been like, if you had, if you were a small minority in a small village, you were, you did
not have a critical mass to do anything. Right. But the internet enables you to find. So, you know,
I point to a couple of examples. So are you, are you into carrying sand in your pocket,
Sean? I am not. I've never have done it. Well, you know, like 30,000 people on like our, you know,
Reddit subreddit on pocket sand, talk about all the benefits of carrying sand in their pockets.
But that's actually kind of a niche interest on like stapling bread to trees. Like listeners,
go and Google bread staple to a tree. It is a hobby held by around 300,000 people. Right. So,
yeah, you get these different groups, but it's very hard. It's very hard to generalize whether
that is silo. Like it's an empirical question, whether we are now in silos or actually exposed
to more information and both are true. I think what is actually the case is it's not about the
information. It was never about the information. It was never about misinformation. It was about
whom we trust. And what has happened is that our trust in our institutions and to some degree,
as a result of that, in each other has decreased. And that is resulting in selective access to
that information and greater assortment. And the ultimate issue here, the ultimate level problem
needs to be solved. And that is it's an energy problem, actually.
Sorry, you made a leap there that I need to figure out. I mean, I agree that the trust in
institutions has waned. It seems to me like in some ways that's an outcome of the same game
theoretic analysis of different groups jockeying for space and things like that. And of course,
with the caveat that some institutions are super untrustworthy. So it's correct to not
trust them. But so how do you bring it back down to energy?
So sorry. So, you know, why I say that it's, you know, it's about the information is like,
there are always people always calling for the end of the world or saying that, you know, we live in
a racist society or that, you know, we live in a society where you are getting screwed over. There's
always people. There's always a bunch of people saying everything. But whom people listen to
depends on on circumstances. Right. And so what I'm arguing is there is a both a perception
and a reality. And yes, they can like feedback on each other. And the reality is that out truly
our space of the possible has indeed trunk. The amount of access energy available to each of us
has actually shrunk. And, you know, around about the 19, you know, the oil crisis, 1980s, 1970s,
you know, like, it was around, you know, what the fuck happened in 1971 1973. This was when it all
happened. The American dream died around then, because you suddenly had a 5050 probability of
being better off than your parents. That has truly happened. Right. And so that is fundamentally
an issue of excess energy, which ultimately drives GDP growth. So like 50% roughly of GDP
growth is energy or 50% is about it, you know, innovations and efficiency. Okay, I do get it
now. So it comes back to this shrinking distance between the ceiling and the floor basically
in our society. The amount that we have to all live in together, the scale of cooperation
that is that is incentivized. And I will let you close the these sets of thoughts with your
optimistic spin on how we're eventually going to work our way out of this.
Well, you know, so as I said, you know, part one of the book lays it all out lays out the
science lays out the problem. But then part two is is exactly about, you know, how do we
do the chapter titles like how do we reunite humanity? How do we create a new forms of
governance for the 21st century? How do we shatter that glass ceiling of inequality?
How do we trigger a creative explosion that maybe gets us diffusion and becoming the first
generation of a galactic civilization? How do we improve the internet? How do we as individuals
become brighter? And because like imagine you are the first generation to have the periodic table,
right? We can stop doing alchemy, we start doing some chemistry. And there are actual
solutions, given the constraints that we face, real life solutions that are possible
for tackling each of these problems. And that means that a brighter future is possible if we so
choose. I cannot close on any better sentence than that. So Michael Muthukrishna, thanks
very much for being on the Mindscape podcast. Thank you so much for having me, Sean. I loved it.
