Hello, everyone. Welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. I'm your host, Sean Carroll.
Today's podcast is one of those long-awaited episodes. People have been
asking for this one for a long time. You know, it's funny. Sometimes there are
some possible guests who are just so obviously Mindscape guests, and I haven't
had them on yet, and people are like, well, what's wrong? Why doesn't he have them on
yet? They must be feuding. There must be beef or something like that. That's not
usually the correct answer. It's usually just that I'd like to space them out.
As I've said many times, I like to have a variety, and that includes both people
who I know very well and I'm familiar with their work and the people I've never
heard of before. I got to looking for podcast guests. So Tim Maldon is someone
I've known for a long time. He's a leader in the philosophy of physics or what we
sometimes call the foundations of physics. So studying not physics as a
philosopher, but studying nature as a philosopher, but doing so in such a way
that you're looking at the foundational questions of nature. You're asking the
why questions, the deep questions. You're trying to be very careful. And Tim has
done very important work in thinking about space time and the geometry of
space time, the nature of time and the arrow of time. I will point to, I'll try
to link in the show notes to a wonderful mock debate that was done at the
Foundational Questions Institute between Tim and Julian Barber. Julian Barber
famously has advocated that time does not exist. Tim has famously advocated that
not only does time exist, but the arrow of time is fundamental, not just an
emergent approximation because of statistical mechanics. And what FUXI
does is it has the debaters flip sides. So Julian was arguing in favor of the
existence of time. Tim was arguing against it. And they were both really,
really good. I got to say, they were both quite persuasive. For the points of
view, they didn't actually agree with as well as being quite amusing along the
way. But today, we're actually going to be talking about quantum mechanics. In
some sense, this can be thought of as a sequel to the podcast they did a while
back with David Albert talking about quantum mechanics. David and Tim are
very good friends and have worked together for a long time. They don't agree
on everything because no two philosophers agree on everything. But they are
united in their skepticism about the Everett interpretation of quantum
mechanics. And so with David on the podcast, even though I'm pro Everett, I
want to give the voice to sensible voices on the other side, sensible points
of view. And so David explained why he doesn't like the Everett interpretation.
What we didn't get to right at a time was what he does like. So today with Tim,
we're going to be talking mostly about Bohmian or de Broglie-Bohm versions of
quantum mechanics, sometimes called hidden variable versions of quantum
mechanics. I keep calling them hidden variable theories as most people do,
even though as advocates like to point out, the variables are not hidden. The
extra variables that you add to quantum mechanics to make a hidden variable
theory are the ones that you observe when you actually make a measurement. And
physicists have not really caught on to hidden variable theories. They're not
very popular. But certain sets of people, some physicists, some mathematicians,
some philosophers have kept the flame alive. And interestingly, as we talk
about in the podcast, the Nobel Prize last year was given to tests of John
Bell's famous theorems, his famous inequalities, which were very much
prompted. Bell's exploration of these theorems and his proof of them was
prompted by David Bohm's hidden variable theory, which Bell thought was the
best formulated known version of quantum mechanics. Bell thought we should be
teaching it in textbooks. So it's a little weird that the people who really
take these theories seriously get good results that later lead to Nobel
Prizes, yet the theories themselves are not very popular within physics. Again,
I could give my reasons for not being a fan of hidden variable theories, but
they are, as Tim says about Everett, they are absolutely a serious attempt.
You know, it's something that you should think about if you care about these
things. And so we'll give the sales pitch for why you should take these
seriously. We'll talk a little bit about foundations of physics more generally
and even a little bit about the arrow of time. And the other thing that I want
to mention, because Tim reminded me of it at the very end of the podcast is
Tim is a the director and I think his title is director. But anyway, he's
the founder of something called the John Bell Institute for the foundations of
physics. Tim has been very active, not only in doing foundations of physics, but
in advocating for the status of this subdiscipline within philosophy and
physics. And the Bell Institute, which is located in Croatia and serves as a
place to meet and talk about foundations of physics is trying to raise funds to
get a permanent home. So they literally have a GoFundMe and you can visit the
John Bell Institute home page at johnbellinstitute.org that will link you
to a donate button. You can donate to the permanent home for the John Bell
Institute, where we're not there yet. We need a bunch more donations, but I
think they just started. So it's early days. Maybe mind scape listeners will
kick in a little bit. And with that, let's go.
Tim Maldon, welcome to the Mindscape Podcast. Thank you. Good to be here.
So you've been a champion for a little while of something called the
foundations of physics. So I want to ask you two questions. One is, what is that
for the listeners out there? But also, what's your sales pitch like? Hypothetically,
if you're talking to your colleagues in a physics department or philosophy
department, how do you explain to them why foundations of physics is so important?
Okay. Oddly enough, I don't have to sell it to the to the philosophers. It's a
weird situation. You have to sell it to the physicists. But it's very simple.
Really, foundations of physics, as the name suggests, is a branch of physics,
namely the one that asks, what are the most fundamental items? How do we
understand the most fundamental physical structures and things that there are?
And that's only part of physics, because you could do condensed matter
physics, where you say, I'm just worried about other states or the physics of
stars, and you take for granted a lot of the micro stuff, or at least how to
handle it. And then you're building up from there. But if you just dig and dig
and dig and say, at the very bottom, what's the stuff that doesn't get
explained in terms of other stuff? That's the foundations. And so if you do that
in physics, that's the foundations of physics. In philosophy, it's easy. I
actually just gave a talk about this to the undergraduates at Rutgers, because
that is part of what philosophers call metaphysics or ontology, which is again
just the question of what exists asked at the most generic level. And if you're
a physicalist, you think everything that exists is somehow physical. If you're
not, you might think there are other things that aren't physical, but
everybody pretty much agrees. There's some physical stuff.
Not everybody's happy, but not everybody. Of course, every time you say
something, you can think of a counter example, unfortunately. Now, the curious
thing, if I describe it that way, is you say, but why should you have to sell
this to the physicists? Why isn't this just part of the physics curriculum? And
that has a very strange and disturbing sociological answer that really goes
back to quantum mechanics, because they didn't really understand when the
quantum mechanical formalism was first developed in a way that was very
predictively successful. They really didn't understand what they were talking
about. They, the physicists? They, the physicists, the physicists who came up
with the math. And you can come up with math and understand how to manipulate it
to get predictions, but still not look at that math and be quite sure what the
physics underlying it is. And those were very good questions, and they were asked
very rigorously and vociferously early on by people like Einstein, people like
Schrodinger, people who were very deeply involved, even in the development of the
theory. But at a certain point, another crew, led by Bohr, and to some extent
Heisenberg, kind of said, well, don't ask those questions, either because for
some deep philosophical reason, they're not good questions, although they sound
pretty good, or eventually, this morphed into what people call shut up and
calculate, where you don't even explain. You just say, don't ask those questions.
I mean, my impression would have been that Bohr and Heisenberg were more like,
we filled you the answer to those questions. And then when the Americans got
hold of it, it was like, just don't even ask those questions.
That's my take on it, was that it was, I mean, Bohr, Bohr's background was in
Neoconti and philosophy. He actually said very, very, very mysterious things.
And I would say early on, the idea of the Copenhagen School was, say, some
incomprehensible stuff and then calculate. And then when it came to America,
they cut out the first step.
Good. And so, but he said sociological reasons. I mean, I can imagine why,
well, don't let me imagine. What is in your opinion, the sociological reason
why physicists would stop asking what is going on at the fundamental nature of reality?
So, and I'm speculating here, when they first started, everybody's
familiar with this picture of the atom as a kind of planetary system with a
nucleus and then these electrons whizzing about it. We still kind of picture it that way.
And that was sort of what was called the old quantum theory said that.
And it said, by the way, these electron orbits are restricted. They can't just
orbit anywhere where a planet can. They're restricted to these particular little
orbits. And then all they can do is jump between them. And when they jump between
them, they'll either give off or or absorb some light. And there was a bunch of
explanation that you could get out of that basic picture. But if you pursue that
picture, the natural question is what, but how do they jump? I mean, what, you
know, how does it get from here to there? And how does it orbit when it's in one of
these orbits and questions like that? And they kind of work beavered away at that
and couldn't make much progress on it. And I think they eventually got to the point
where they, they didn't want to say, yes, those are good questions, which we can't
answer. And they were satisfied that they were calculating correctly. And in order
not to say, there's really deep questions, we don't know the answer to, they
said, no, no, no, we've got it. We just have the mathematical formalism. The only
reason you're puzzled is that you're trying to push some classical picture on
the microscopic realm and it doesn't belong there. And your confusion is
arising from you having unjustified desires for comprehension.
I have, I don't know if I've ever mentioned this to you, I have talked to
fellow physicists and I've opined that despite everything I personally care
about more than just correctly predicting the outcomes of experiments. I
actually care about talking about reality. And many of them are very open and
explicit that all they want to do is predict the outcomes of experiments.
Yeah. And I think it would if somebody had a lot of funding and a lot of time, it
would be interesting to figure out at what point these people started saying
that because my experience is that young people going into physics care a lot
about trying to understand and they get very upset. And I know this because I
teach foundations of physics in the philosophy department and I get physics
students who say, this is why I went into the field. You're talking about the
stuff I was interested in. And I think in most cases, I can't imagine an 18
year old saying, I just want to calculate. So I think that basic curiosity
about the world gets beaten out of them. Yeah. And I really think it's part of a
physics education, unfortunately, to beat it out of you. So we talked about
Einstein and Boris that are but it's still more or less true, he said. I that
that's my impression. I certainly can testify that lots of physics students
will come to me and say, I get very frustrated. I raise questions to my
physics professors of the form. What's really going on here? And I'm not told
these are good questions, right? I really am told, don't ask them. Don't don't
spend your time thinking about this. And slight generalization, but the
philosophers to their credit have kept the flame alive. They've been thinking
about these things. Yeah, yeah. It's sort of, you know, it's the same way that
Aristotle kind of had to be squirreled away in the Islamic world for a while and
then eventually found his way back. Yes, I do think that that really philosophy
has been a refuge. And in some cases, as you know, like David Albert got his
degree in theoretical physics at Rockefeller, his background was not in
philosophy, but he's in a philosophy department because these questions were
welcomed in philosophy departments and not welcomed in physics departments. Now,
my feeling, I've got a people around us and I have some concrete reason to
believe things are getting better. I actually got an email kind of out of the
blue from a chair of the physics department who said, we're thinking of
trying to introduce foundations of physics into our program. Can you give me
advice about, you know, what we might teach and how it might be done? This was
great. And this was somebody I'd never met. Just, you know,
I was literally just yesterday talking to an undergraduate thinking about
grad school, and she wasn't sure she likes the foundations of physics, but
she's a physics undergrad, so she thought it'd be better to go to a physics
department for grad school. I was asking for advice on where to go, and it was
hard for me to even come up with departments who would let you do that,
right? Right. But maybe it's changed. Yeah. And, you know, and at a certain time,
I guess, that you could say, well, you could go here because, yes, it's a normal
physics department, but at least one or two people on the weekends and a little
bit hiding from their colleagues are interested in these subjects, and we'll
talk to you about them if you catch them, you know, off their clock.
All right. So there's our sociology, but you already opened up the doors to what
we want to talk about, which is these mysteries of quantum mechanics. And
David Albert was on the show. David Wallace was on the show. We were mostly
talking about entropy in the era of time. Adam Becker gave us his wonderful
historical introduction. But when we were talking to David Albert, mostly we
criticized the Everett interpretation of quantum mechanics. I say read, we being
the boy, I was defending it, but I always let the guest talk. So David gave his
spiel. So what we didn't get time to get into is, OK, then what instead? So if
put it, let's not talk about Everett today, unless it unless it comes up, I
want to be like substantive and proactive and constructive. What do we do if
we're thinking about what are the what are the mysteries we're trying to solve
about quantum mechanics that got us into this trouble? And what are the avenues
open to solving? Good. So that's a really good question. And there are there
are several different dimensions to it. But let me start with a dimension. And I
am going to briefly bring in Everett, but then let it go. Everybody knows there's
this experiment. They say a thought experiment, although you could do it, it
would be cool to do it. That Schrodinger talked about with this cat that
penned up in a cage with a with a bit of radioactive material in a Geiger counter
and this diabolical device. Actually, that turns out that Schrodinger was
really just reconfiguring the same thought experiment that Einstein had
written to him just before, which had to do with a keg of gunpowder that either
would or would not explode in the next half hour. And you could calculate a
quantum mechanical probability for it to explode and not explode. And what
Schrodinger was pointing out and what what Einstein was pointing out is that
you hold two views, which are very natural views you would like to hold. You
got into what seemed to them to be hopeless difficulties. And the two views
were first of all, when we do quantum mechanics, we describe a system with a
thing called a wave function mathematically. One of the questions is,
okay, that wave function, does it provide us a complete description of the
system? Meaning every physical fact about that system one way or another could
be extracted if you gave me the wave function. And this was when Einstein
Podolsky and Rosen wrote in 1935. And this is the same year as the cat paper. And
the cat paper was really a response or a reaction is better to say to the EPR
paper. The title of that paper is quantum mechanical description of reality
complete. This is what they were looking at. And they were arguing in that
paper. No, there's more, there's more to the world than wave functions. If that
were true, of course, then as a physicist, again, not as a philosopher, but as a
physicist, the question is, okay, what else is there? Tell me about the other
stuff. So there's one question is the wave function complete. And then there's
a question about how the wave function evolves through time, what its dynamics
is. And there's a Schrodinger wrote down this wonderful equation that has his
name, that has some nice mathematical properties, particularly linearity. And
people certainly wanted to say at least part of the dynamics is this Schrodinger
evolution. And you might say, well, why not just go whole hog and say all of it
is Schrodinger evolution? That's all it ever does. Okay. I like that idea. That
sounds promising. Yeah. So if you put those two together and you say, A, the
wave function is complete and B, it always evolves by Schrodinger evolution. Then
you get into this problem that Schrodinger was pointing out and that Einstein
was pointing out, which is that for the cat or for the gunpowder after an hour,
the wave function doesn't tell you either yes, it has exploded or no, it is not
exploded. Yes, the cat is dead or no, the cat isn't dead. The wave function goes
into this, we call superposition of different states, which normally you
dissociate one state with the exploded gunpowder and another with the unexploded,
but what the wave function gives you is not one or the other, but a kind of
combination of both. And if you say, well, that's a complete description, there
isn't no further fact that's left out. Then you say, but then the cat's neither
alive nor dead or the gunpowder is somehow, you know, weird, suspended state
between exploded and not exploded. And, you know, Schrodinger's view of that was
that that was ridiculous. And John Bell, when he writes about this, I mean, the
way he sums this up is he says, either the wave function as given by the
Schrodinger equation is not everything or it's not correct. And Everett, now I'm
just going to say the one thing about Everett is an attempt to say no, it is
both everything and correct. Hiking up with a way to make it both everything
correct. Right. So I would say that's the route that leads you to the many
worlds theory and you understand the motivation. It's to keep both of those
nice things, but it has this price to pay in terms of saying, you know, the idea
that that one cat you put into the cage and either ended up alive or dead. No,
that's not right. They're now, you know, and not just two cats, actually
infinitely many cats. People don't point this out that the there might be only
one live cat, but they're going to be a whole lot of dead cats because the thing
could have decayed at all these different times. Now, if you don't want to go
that way and so we won't spend our time talking about the price you have to pay
and what you have to do. I suppose let's just get our cards in the table for the
audience purposes. You're not a fan. I'm not, but it's a serious attempt. I mean,
you have to be very clear here. There are things I'm not a fan of, but I
appreciate the honesty of people who are fans. If they see the what they have to
confront and they, you know, straightforwardly say, yes, I by making
these commitments, I inherit these problems and I'm going to work on those,
right? And nobody should just turn their back in my view on a serious proposal. I
take it to be a serious proposal. I think there are other proposals out there,
which I will not name right now, which I do not think are serious. I don't think
that they have any chance. I would not put many worlds in that basket.
Gotcha. Okay. But if we take off the table, having the wave function be both
complete and always schrodinger, then your options are, all right, if it's not
complete, then there's something else in the world beside the wave function. And
then immediately you ask, okay, what is it? And what does it do? And why am I
talking about wave functions anyway? And things like that. Those are the natural
questions you ought to have answers at your fingertips. Or if you say, well, I
think something went wrong with the schrodinger evolution, then you can say,
well, I think the wave function doesn't always evolve in this way. It does this
other thing that people call collapsing, right, or reducing that looks very, very,
very unschrodinger like. This was the way that when John von Neumann wrote down
his understanding of the mathematical foundations of the theory had two processes
for the wave function, the schrodinger process and a collapse process. And that's
also kind of okay at a very high level. But as soon as you say that, you also now
inherit an obligation to tell me, all right, well, when and how does it deviate
from schrodinger evolution? And there are lots of details that can be put in in
different ways and different suggestions. Some people think early on that the
collapses had to be triggered by something. So things would go nice schrodinger wise
until X. What's the X? Oh, until a measurement is made or till an observation is made.
And then that, of course, astonished. This is something Einstein was very upset about.
Other people are upset about because they say, look, it's what do you mean an
observation? I mean, who can do the observing? Can a mouse observe? Can an amoeba observe?
Can they trigger a collapse of the wave function? If you go that direction in a certain way,
you end up with Wigner who says, oh, we have to talk about consciousness and now you're in the
mind body problem and you're in a mess. Other people have said, well, no, there's a kind of
trigger or something that affects collapse, but it's not measurement or observation.
It's like, say, gravity. I mean, this is something that Roger Penrose has been advocating
for a long time, not with as much precision as a theory as some other things, but that somehow
gravity, which is the one thing that is not well understood quantum mechanically, may come in here
as triggering this non schrodinger evolution. And then there's another idea, which is that,
no, it collapses and nothing triggers it. It just happens. It happens randomly from time to time
at a certain rate in a certain way. This is called the spontaneous collapse theories.
And there's a famous theory by a Gerardi-Rominian Weber, the GRW theory,
and they just put numbers to it. I mean, this was the great thing they did. They didn't just
wave their hands. They said, okay, yeah, it collapses every now and then. How often? Well,
once every 10 to the 15 seconds per particle, and how does it collapse? Well, you multiply
by a Gaussian of this width and put some math to it. This is what John Bell was so impressed by.
I know when I talked to him about that theory, was that, okay, for many years,
people have had this kind of general thought, but they took the step of turning it into clean
mathematics. Yeah. And also clean mathematics, but a real theory, physically, right? Yeah. Not
just an idea, not just a general suggestion. That's right. And it can be, in fact, experimentally
tested. Yes, it does. It makes, because the wave function evolution is different, and because
the predictions really depend on what the wave function does, it will make, it's easy to see,
in principle, it makes different predictions. It's harder to come up with the experimental
situations where you can see those differences, although people have been working at it for
some decades and making progress. The progress is mostly ruling out the theory. I mean, so far,
we have not seen a signature that the theory is correct, okay? We haven't ruled it out,
but you could have ruled it in. If you'd seen certain things, you could have really ruled
it in. It has not been ruled in. And ruling it in, these spontaneous collapse theories would count
as falsifying these other theories. That's right. If that were to happen, then the other
things on the table that we might talk about, including Everett, would, you know,
a lot of the motivation for Everett would go away, because one of the motivations is,
but gee, this Schrodinger evolution is so nice, right? So that is a motivation. I guess to a
physicist, there's a sort of, I don't want to say intuitive, but emotional objection to these
spontaneous collapse theories, like it just looks so ad hoc that the wave function just does this.
And I guess you could say, yeah, but we're fitting the data. Yeah. And ad hoc, it's not that I don't
have some sympathy, but when you realize how difficult these questions are and the weird extremes
that people have gone to say, oh, but I don't like this one because it's ad hoc, that is such weak
key, right? I mean, get over it. The physical world might look a little more ad hoc than you
prefer. You really shouldn't rule things out in a strong way for that reason.
I guess maybe following what you said about Einstein and EPR, the one thing that you can
say about quantum mechanics is that someone's going to have to give up on something that they
really want to be true. Yes, I think that's correct. I'm not sure. I would say, and now I'm
going to tip the hand, which you'd understand already, if you already know I'm not that sympathetic
to the many worlds because of the problems I see there. And I also have this feeling that I can only
say by saying the collapses don't smell right to me, right? I don't want to put too much weight on
that. But that's just the way I feel. I mean, when you're in this, you kind of make a judgment
about what looks more plausible to you. Then we have the last possibility where, okay, yeah,
there are no collapses. I agree. I like the Schrodinger evolution. It looks, it's clean. It's
pretty. It's linear. I want to keep that, but I want my cats to just, one cat goes in and one cat
comes out. That means I have to have something in addition to the wave function. And now the
question is what? And the amazing thing, and I think anybody, whatever you think about the theory
is at least just for the non-relativistic theory, there's some complications further on. For the
non-relativistic theory, this thought occurred immediately in 1926 already by Louis de Broglie.
And you say, what is this magical thing you're going to add to your physics? Answer
particles, point particles. Just the sort of thing you were already familiar with, the sort of thing
even democratists, well, his were a little thick, right? They had their shapes. These can be point
particles. So they're even slimmed down and more minimalistic than democratian particles.
But the idea, okay, there are some particles and they move around and they constitute cats and tables
and chairs. And if you want to know whether your cats alive or dead, tell me where it's,
what its particles are doing, and I'll give you a good idea, right? You might say that's such a
simple idea. It couldn't possibly be the case that you just add some particles and write down a
pretty simple looking equation for how they move and everything comes out right. But amazingly,
in the non-relativistic theory, it does. I don't really see that as giving up on anything. I mean,
because what you have to give up on is the completeness of the wave function, but it's not
clear what the motivation for believing that ever was, except Bohr and so on saying, look,
we know what to do with the wave function. If it's complete, then we're done. And we want to be done.
So don't tell us there's something else, right? So in other words, the basic idea is when we
invented quantum mechanics, we started saying, oh, electrons are like waves, right? They have
interference patterns under the right circumstances. They spread out in the atom. They are also like
particles in certain ways. We measure little dots on screens. And the brilliant breakthrough
from De Broglie is that's because they're both at the same time. Yeah. Or to put it as Bell,
again, I'm always quoting John Bell, he says, people were breaking their heads all the time,
wave or particle, wave or particle, you'd hear wave a coal, right? It's a new concept you don't
have. And he said, why didn't it occur to them the simple answer, wave and particle? There is a
wave that is a thing that obeys a wave equation, which is why you get interference. That's the
wave function or the quantum state, the thing described by the wave function. And in addition,
there is a particle which always has a location. So if you ask, but why do these little individual
spots form on my screen? It's because that's where the particle hit. No reason why you can't
explain the wave like behavior because there is a wave and the particle like behavior because
there is a particle and that and their dynamics is coupled in a way that the particles are guided
by a wave like thing. And so the interference in the wave will affect where the particles go.
So this table in front of us is in some legitimate sense made of particles. Yep. And the positions
of those particles are among other things being guided by the wave functions. Yes. Are they
separately interacting with each other, the particles? Well, of course, the word interaction
here is one of those words that different physical theories will give you different
accounts of what even counts as an interaction. Certainly, the particles can be in a situation
where what happens to one will make a difference to what happens to others, right? So the theory
will just tell you, gee, you turn on a magnetic field over here and now this particle gets deflected
down. And by the way, that particle, you know, will get deflected up. I mean, the example I
just gave you is a little bit misleading. But now, is that an interaction between the particles?
Well, it's certainly mediated by the wave function, right? The particles can't do anything to each
other. But in a way, already you have that in Newton, you say, well, how does one particle
affect another gravitationally? Well, not sort of directly, but you need a gravitational field
or something like that. There's a mediator, there's a physical mediator
that accounts for these relations between what they do. Is that interaction? It is,
but it's not quite like classical Newtonian interaction. One way to talk about this, people
get a little bit, maybe this will help or maybe not. But let me say it briefly. If you've studied
any physics, if you did any Newtonian physics, you'll remember that the fundamental equation
is f equals ma, where a is the acceleration. And the acceleration is the change in the velocity and
the velocity is already the change in the position. So it's a second time derivative. And what that
means for Newton is that to give you the initial conditions of a system, I both have to tell you
where everything is and what its momentum is, right? So I need both position and momentum.
And then the fundamental kind of physical interaction through f equals ma is changing the
momentum. But in this theory, it's not like that. It's a first order theory. Everything
is just done with one time derivative. So the initial condition only has to be the positions.
And then what the wave function does is guide the particles. It doesn't push them around
by producing Newtonian forces on them. It guides them as it were determines where they go.
More in the way, this is a kind of analogy that David Bohm used to use, as if you were piloting
by radio control a little boat out on the lake. And you say, yeah, as you turn the dial,
as it were sending information or telling the boat where to go, but you're not pushing the boat
around, right? And in fact, if the boat goes twice as far away, so your radio signal is half
as strong, still, as long as it's getting the signal, it's going to guide it the same way,
right? Whereas a Newtonian force, you'd sort of think, well, the further away you get,
the weaker the force has to become. So it's a different fundamental picture of physical interaction.
And I think many physicists object to it or have this intuitive emotional response to it because
the wave function is guiding the particles, but the particles don't influence the wave function
at all, right? Maybe part of that negative feeling is that they're still thinking of
the wave function as a Newtonian force field. They might be thinking that this is an objection
people have raised quite explicitly that this theory violates they call the generalized Newton's
third law of action and reaction, right? So they say, oh, well, in general, I think if A
has an influence on B, B should have a back influence or a reciprocal influence back on A.
And that, I have to say, strikes me as just silly. I mean, in a certain way, if you say to Newton,
look, doesn't the law of gravity somehow affect what particles do? He'd say, yeah, yeah, yeah,
and say, but what are the particles? Do they affect the law of gravity? He'd say, no, of course not,
right? The law of gravity doesn't change because of what the particles do, what the way the particles
behave is accounted for, as it were, by the law. So we don't usually think that if A affects B,
B has to have a reciprocal back effect on A. Lots of cases where even in physics,
we wouldn't say that at all. So this seems to me to be a bit special pleading of trying to
find something to complain about. I mean, certainly, it sounds like a very made up
metaphysical principle that they just made up. Okay, you mentioned David Bohm. Tell us his role
in this story. So it's an interesting, I mean, the history of this is very interesting because,
again, people were very concerned. There was the early quantum theory by Bohr, which had this very
classical looking idea of this planetary atom, and then these jumping kind of jumps, which were
unusual, and they didn't quite understand. And then the new quantum theory was developed in the
20s, mid 20s, and the mathematics of it came out first matrix mechanics by Heisenberg,
and then wave mechanics by Schrodinger. I'm just throwing some names out, but people have heard
these names. But they had the math in a way, they kind of knew how to manipulate the math to make
some predictions. But it wasn't at all clear what the physical picture was, right? What's the physical
theory here? And de Broglie early on looks at this and says, well, I can just, I can just put these
particles in these point particles and have them guided around by this quite simple equation,
you need a second equation because we needed an equation to tell us what the wave function does,
and we're just going to keep Schrodinger's equation for that. So we got that. No real dispute about
that. Then we need a second one, which tells me what the particles do, and that's going to be a
thing called the guidance equation. And just from mathematical simplicity and other very basic
physical considerations, I think I've seen claim 10 different ways that would lead you in the
non-relativistic theory to a very simple obvious equation, guidance equation for this. So lots
of ways to motivate it, you know, intuitively. And so de Broglie discovers this and he presents it,
he was very young at the time, and some rather bad objections were made to the theory, but de Broglie
on his feet couldn't answer them. And the story seems to be that he was just a bit traumatized
by the whole thing, because these were the big shots of physics. I mean, he's a young guy,
he's at the Solvay conference with the biggest names, Einstein is there, Boris there, and so on.
And, you know, they're Pauli, whoever they're beating up on him, and he just kind of
seems to have abandoned the theory a bit. As far as I can tell, and I've heard people tell me this
more recently who looked into it, it kind of lays fallow. Now, Einstein, who we know didn't like
the Copenhagen understanding of quantum theory, we know played around with this theory or very
similar theories in the intervening years. He didn't like it, but he didn't like it because it had
what he called in a very manifest, easy to see way, spooky action at a distance, this non-locality.
So we know why he didn't like the theory. And he could never come up with a satisfactory version
to him. But it's very possible that he came up with the version that other people think is
satisfactory. Exactly. He could have very well had it. And it sort of stayed that way. And then
the really interesting situation, if we get into this, is David Bohm is now a young physicist,
very well regarded at Princeton. He writes a book explaining quantum theory from the kind of
Copenhagen-Borian point of view. And he's in Princeton, Einstein's over at the Institute
for Advanced Study. And he's kind of saying, gosh, I would like to get my nerve to go ask
Einstein what he thinks of my book. And he's actually trying to get other people to approach
Einstein. And as this is going on, he gets a message from Einstein. And Einstein says,
I read your book. Would you like to come talk about it? And the story is he goes to talk to
Einstein. So it's like 1950, 51. Yeah, 51, I think. Einstein has read the book. And Einstein says,
I think this is the best, the clearest exposition of the Copenhagen approach that I've ever seen.
I mean, he was really trying hard. But Einstein raised some objections. And the story is, and I
think it was a young man who tells this story, it was Bohm's roommate at the time that Bohm goes,
meets Einstein, comes back, and he reports when he comes back, I'm back to square one.
He was convinced by Einstein's objections. He just, he couldn't answer Einstein's objections.
He realized that he really didn't understand what he himself had written. And within a year,
he discovers this other thing, which was the same thing that Boyd had done. And apparently
independently, as far as I can tell, I mean, I was told recently, I haven't done the research
myself. But again, it's not hard to find that theory if you're looking in a certain direction.
And then he publishes these papers, this two part paper in 1952,
a theory that introduces so-called hidden variables into quantum mechanics and gives
you all the right predictions. And this was something that people had believed had been proven
mathematically impossible by John von Neumann when von Neumann wrote his book. So this is,
of course, a shock. It's like, you're not supposed to be able to do that. And then
you look at the paper and you say, wait, it does look like you can do that. And we now understand
that von Neumann had made not a mathematical mistake, but a kind of conceptual mistake,
which was caught at the time by Greta Hermann. Greta Hermann, yeah.
And people pointed it out, but who's listening to Greta Hermann?
When Bohr and Heisenberg are saying the opposite.
So in 1952, the theory sort of gets reborn under Bohm's name and Bohm worked on expanding it to
cover spin and some other, I mean, it's a kind of very basic theory at the beginning. And then
you start adding bells and whistles to cover more and more phenomena.
And it might still have disappeared, but John Bell became a fan of it, right?
Well, Bell, it's not that Bell started out as a fan of it. Bell was a fan of this.
He was a fan of saying, I understand what this theory is claiming, right? There's no mystery
about it. There are these particles. There's this wave function. Here's what the wave function
does. Here's what the particles do, okay? This is a picture of the world, like it or lump it.
When I first learned about this theory, and I was very skeptical about it from Shelly Goldstein,
Shelly helped me a lot at one point in our discussions because I was being very obstreperous.
And he said, look, surely you'll admit this is a theory of something.
Okay. It says there are these particles. There's this other thing. Here's what they do.
Now, just in your mind, imagine a world as this theory describes. Wouldn't it be interesting if
that world looked very much like the world we live in? Which turns out to be true.
This is always good advice when people have trouble thinking about new theories because
they always want to fit it into their own boxes, right? And if you just ask what it would be like
if it were true, you'd make progress. And it addressed the problem that Einstein had raised
about locality by saying, yeah. Yes. So this is what I was going to say. And Bell tells a wonderful
story, right? Bell says when he first learned quantum mechanics, he was very puzzled by it.
He didn't understand what was going on. And he thought you need to add something to it. You
need these additional variables, the way functions, not the whole story. And he said he was told by
his physics professors, no, no, no. Von Neumann has proven it can't be done. Mathematically proven,
you can't add any additional variables and keep the same predictions. And Bell says at the time,
he didn't know any German and the book had not been translated. And so that's where it sat.
He just didn't know why he didn't understand. He couldn't read Von Neumann's proof, but he was
told there was a proof. And then Bell says he just gets up in 1952 and reads this paper that's been
published and says, wait, Bohm has just done what everybody's telling me Von Neumann proved
couldn't be done. Something's gone wrong here. He quickly convinces himself that the mistake
in that case was on Von Neumann's side. But he sees that the theory has this manifest nonlocality.
And he asks himself surely what Einstein must have been asking himself, can you get rid of it?
Can I have a kind of theory like this? But without the nonlocality in it, that still makes the right
predictions, the quantum mechanical predictions, that's the very precise thought that Bell had.
And when he finally got some time off on sabbatical to sit down.
Because he couldn't do it during his regular work.
But the amazing thing is, of course, when you see Bell's proof, it's a few lines of algebra.
It's not like proving Fermat's last theorem. It's not hard mathematically.
When I first read about this stuff, which was in the Scientific American in an article by Bernard
d'Espagnia back in 79, I guess, it's not looking back on it. It's not the greatest article in the
world. But it was enough was there that just with a little math, you could see, wait, wait,
I see the problem. I really, this just stands out at you. So what happens with Bell is Bell,
what Bell realizes is, wait a minute. No, you can't get rid of the nonlocality out of this
theory. You can't get rid of the nonlocality out of any theory. I mean, throw away quantum
mechanics and start from scratch from entirely different principles. Bell's proof is not about
quantum mechanics. It's just about certain experiments and the correlations that you see
in the outcomes. You can't have a theory that is local in a well-defined sense that won't predict
that. Quantum mechanics does predict it. And more importantly than quantum mechanics predicting it,
the world does it. That's why the Nobel Prize went to Clouser and Aspe and Zeilander recently
for doing the experiments that showed that the violation of Bell's inequality actually occurs.
And as you and I both complained about in separate occasions, the Nobel committee blew it in their
press release. Yes, they did. They said that what they had done was what proved that von Neumann
was right and you can't have hidden variables, which is just the irony there is so delicious.
Because Bell then became probably the strongest advocate of this
Bohm's theory or De Broglie's theory, which is a theory with additional variables.
Why? Because he could say, well, what's the objection? You can't object as Einstein did. I don't
like it because it's not local because now I understand, okay, the nonlocality is just in the
world. Suck it up. And it's a clear theory and so on. I mean, at one point, Bell says he's going
through all these different ways of approaching quantum mechanics and he says, well, the pilot
wave approach shows the best craftsmanship. But then he says, but is that he says then wonderfully,
I mean, he always made these cutting little remarks, is that is that a virtue in our time?
Right? Do people appreciate good craftsmanship anymore? Do they like just things that sound
amazing and blow your mind? Because at some level, it's a much more pedestrian kind of theory.
You say, yeah, there's some particles, they move around. Yeah, there's this wave function. That's
kind of funny thing. But I'll explain how it plays into the architecture here.
It was a rough time for the philosophy of quantum mechanics in certain ways.
But okay, so I think that there are any physicists out there who are not
into the foundations of quantum mechanics and they're listening. They're very confused because
one uses the word locality in different senses sometimes. I mean, if you asked a quantum field
theorist, is their field theory local? They would say, yes, it's very, very local. So what exactly
do you mean by this word? Good. So and there's even a technical mathematical condition that's
imposed in quantum field theory that they will call locality has to do with commuting operators.
Okay, so what's going on? Well, one thing to say is that there is there's bell prove there has to
be some kind of influence or effect. If Alice and Bob if I set up a pair of particles in a special
state called an entangled state and anybody who's heard about this at least have heard the word
entangled, but send the particles off way in different directions. So they're, you know,
hundreds of light years apart, one into Alice's lab and one into Bob's lab.
The intuition of causal locality basically says nothing that Alice does
can have any actual influence or effect on what Bob sees. Right? That doesn't mean there can't be
correlations between what they see. I mean, everybody knows people give this example, you
tear a dollar bill in half and send it to sides off in different directions. Of course,
Alice seeing one half immediately informs you that Bob will see the other half,
but that's not Alice doing anything that affects Bob at all. That's just true. Everybody understood
that. Everybody understands there could be correlations like that, but those correlations
are already explained by what happened at the source. And so nothing non local is going on in
that case. Bell showed no, you can't get the kinds of correlations you see in quantum mechanics by
that kind of local story. There has to be a sense in which what Alice does actually makes a difference
to what Bob sees or the other way around. That's causal non locality. Now the next question that
arises is, oh, could you implement that in some way to allow Alice to send a message to Bob,
signal Bob, right? Tell Bob whether they're going to meet for lunch today or not. And the really
interesting, I mean, a very interesting thing is that at least under certain pretty clear
idealizations, you can kind of look at the way quantum mechanics work and say, well, no,
actually, even though you can't get rid of this connection, you also can't use it to signal.
And the person who proved that first was also Bell. People like to call it the no bell telephone
theorem. So he was perfectly aware of it, right? You can't use the non locality to signal.
Sorry, that's a feature in Copenhagen, Everett, Bohm, whatever you want. You can never use it.
Well, okay, now I'm going to tread off into treacherous territory.
Okay. If you say, and I think it's just a bad thing to say, that the fundamental postulate
of, say, relativity has to do with signaling, that you can't signal faster than light. And you
say, oh, well, then this is still a local theory. But that just, I think, first of all, signaling
isn't even the right kind of concept that should be in the foundations of any theory, just as
measurement shouldn't and just as observation shouldn't. And, you know, Bell proved there is
this kind of non local causation. And maybe I can't use it to signal, but so what? But then
the next thought is, gosh, if there really is this real physical, non local connection somehow,
why can't I use it to signal? And you'd sort of offhand think there must be some clever way to
do it. Now I'm going to report something. To ask that question, of course, you really need a well
defined theory on the table in front of you, right? Because you have to ask, well, what can I do with
this physics? Quantum mechanics tends to use these things called Hermitian operators or,
or as they call them observables, and they sort of you, the mathematics of that is what they look
into to ask certain questions. But if you have an actual theory in front of you, you're not restricted
in that way, you know, you can just say, well, can I do something? Can I twiddle this and, you
know, see something? It looks like in the Bohmian theory with spin, there are reasons to believe
you could signal faster than light. Oh, this could be the most popular podcast ever.
You weren't expecting that, were you? I was not. It is, it is, I am, personally, I suspected there
should be a way. Sid Hunt Das, who's a young researcher, has been looking at something which
amazingly people had not looked carefully at, which is in this pilot wave theory, when you add spin,
okay, that's an additional physical degree of freedom, people usually just don't fiddle with it.
They kind of deal with spinless particles, you know, at this level to understand things. When
you add spin, and when you look at, there's a very specific thing you can look at that standard
quantum mechanics doesn't have an obvious way to even treat, right? This is the key to understanding
this. That is arrival times. So if I, if I... This is a well-known issue. Yes, it is a well-known
issue, although people just kind of put it out of their mind. So if I have an electron as it were
confined in a little box, which we kind of know how to do, and at some moment I open the box,
and then I've got a screen, and at some time a flash appears on the screen, one thing you can
ask is, well, what was the, what was the transit time? How long, what was the time gap between when
I opened the box and when the flash occurred? And it turns out, if you ask quantum mechanically,
and in quantum mechanics, you of course have to do experiments many, many times, and you get kind of
statistical results, you get a distribution of results. It's, nobody agrees how even to make
that prediction using standard quantum mechanics, because there is no Hermitian operator that
corresponds to arrival times. Okay? In the, in this pilot wave picture, because you have these
particles and they just move, it's kind of easy at least to ask the question, according to the
theory, how long did it, would it take a particle here to get there? So you can actually do these
calculations. And when you do them with spin, you start to see that there's a spin dependence
of the arrival times, which you really weren't expecting, but it shows up. And if that's right,
it's already a question of whether you'll see that. This is something you could check in the
lab. We're trying to find people who'll do it, but you need specialized equipment and you need the
motivation to do it. If, if there is that spin dependence of the arrival times, then there's a
very quick argument. Oh, you could signal. Now the signaling would be very subtle. I mean,
it's not like you could flip a switch and a light would go on there. But it would essentially say,
if Alice orients a magnet in her lab in a certain way, Bob will suddenly start seeing
a slightly different distribution of arrival times than if it's oriented another way.
And that would be any kind of information, right? It doesn't have to be a clean,
100% strong signal, any signal, right? Any Shannon information. Sure. And this suggests
that, yeah, you actually should be able to do that. Now there are lots of still,
there's lots of arguments within the community about whether this is right. How far do you have
to carry the analysis into the observing equipment? I mean, lots of stuff. Maybe in a couple years,
people will say, no, this argument breaks down for some reasons we don't quite understand yet.
So I don't want to say this is nailed down, but it's there and it's a really hot, interesting,
interesting topic and one that could be tested in a lab. Some of it you could do today.
I'm not completely surprised because both you and I have written papers about energy
conservation and its failure in quantum mechanics, which anyone could have done in the 1950s.
Yeah. I just didn't ask the question. But is this a fact that you're talking about now,
would it be a difference between well-meaning mechanics and other formulations of quantum?
Or is it just that you can't ask the question? Yeah, it's a little hard to say because, and again,
I'm now just reporting what Siddhant tells me and he's done all the research. He says,
if you go into the standard physics literature about arrival times, you'll find 20 different
suggestions about how to do it. They tend to agree with each other in the far field. That is,
if there's a long time between when you release it and when you detect it, all of these different
approaches converge on the same answers. But in the midfield, there are places where they
will not converge. What can you say? It's not clear what predictions the quote standard approach
even makes. Got it. You could say if the pilot wave approach makes a clean prediction, it's
clearly a different theory because, look, it's doing something precise where the arrival doesn't
even have anything precise to say. The other obvious question is you've been simultaneously
talking about whether you can send a signal faster than the speed of light, but also working
in the context of non-relativistic quantum mechanics where there is no speed of light.
So do we have to talk about relativistic quantum field theory to have this conversation?
Well, we certainly don't have to talk about it to have the conversation we've had up until now
because even before relativity, if you said, look, Alice is in a lab 100 billion billion miles away
from Bob, can Alice do anything in her lab that would make a difference to what shows up in Bob's
lab? The natural thought would be no. Even if there were some effect, even if there were a
fast effect, it would drop off with the square of the distance. It would tail off. So you can have
the discussion about non-locality even in a non-relativistic. Now, it becomes sharper in a
relativistic context because then you mean faster than light where there is a light cone
structure. There's kind of an objective thing you mean there that's very sharp. So you can sharpen
it up in the relativistic context, but I think you can still reasonably have it. It's not like
all of your discussion of the non-relativistic case just falls to the floor when you notice
there's relativity. My halfway informed feeling is that Bohmian mechanics looks quite natural
in the non-relativistic regime, and it's a little bit more of a challenge to see how we should just
do quantum field theory in that picture. Yeah, there is no doubt there are both conceptual
and technical challenges when you go from standard quantum mechanics and one of the
signals here for people who don't know is that in quantum mechanics, you talk about a system
having n particles, and that's it. Unless you add some or take some away, it's going to be n
particles forever. But that's not the world. That's not the world. We now know that there is some
phenomenon that we call particle creation annihilation, that particle numbers can change,
and so you need to account for that. I mean, there are lots of subtleties here. One subtlety is
the thing we call particle creation annihilation. Is it really? And what I mean by that is when
Dirac, and he's just a standard guy, was talking about this, he didn't have particles really come
into existence. He said, well, there are always infinitely many particles filling up negative
energy states. And what we call the creation of a new electron and a new anti-electron, a new
positron, is really just lifting an electron that was there all along in a negative energy state
up into a positive energy state and leaving a hole behind. So it looks like
there's a new electron and the hole is the thing we call the positron. Now that's a story that would
account for the phenomenon without really creating any new particles. It's just moving them around
in energy space as it were. So there's certainly you have to account for the phenomenon, right? You
have to account for the phenomenon. Yeah, I can take a really high energy photon and, gee, there
just appears now an electron and a positron or some things that satisfy certain conservation was.
We need to account for that phenomenon, whether it really deeply requires new particles or do you
want to give up the particle. The other thing to say is the pilot wave picture is not tied to
particles. It just says there's something that the wave function is guiding. It could be particles,
it could be a more field-like thing, right? There's a kind of way of doing Bohmian field theory
where you replace the particles with fields but the same kind of architecture.
And the other point to make, which at least needs to be made, is that people can say, gosh,
but there's no good Bohmian quantum field theory. Standard quantum field theory has been plagued
by mathematical problems and runaway singularities, numbers you try to calculate and they all come
out infinity. It's not as if it's all conceptual lightness and clarity in the so-called standard
picture. So you don't want to hold this picture to a higher standard of mathematical precision and
so on, then you're allowing for the theory that you happen to use. Okay, that's perfectly fair,
but I'm just trying to get straight for the listeners out there. If I'm a particle physicist
and I just calculated the rate of Higgs bosons decaying in the two photons and something like that,
is that stuff I can do just as well in the current Bohmian framework or is that work in progress?
Okay, so one of the things that people have looked at is suppose I remain, again, there are
different moves you could make. You could say, I'm going to give up the particles all together and
put something else more field like in or you can say, no, I'm going to stick with the particles,
but I am going to allow literally the number to change. I'm going to allow particle creation
and annihilation. You can do that. How you would work that out in a kind of pilot wave picture
was done, has been done for 30 years ago, I guess. And what you do is you say in the original
picture, you have a fixed number of particles and all they do is move around and change their
configuration. But now I say, no, no, the real space of possible states is there's a zero particle
state and a one particle state and then two particle states and then three. So this whole
thing called Fox space, which is familiar to any of the physicists you're talking about.
And you say, no, that's that's what I'm now going to say. The thing is always in a particular
location with a particular number of particles. Sometimes it just moves around in one of these
sectors and the number doesn't change. And sometimes it can jump up or jump down,
which corresponds to particle creation and annihilation. I now need a dynamics for that.
It turns out that dynamics tends instead of being deterministic to be indeterministic,
the easiest way to do it is say that at any given time, there's a certain chance
you'll jump up and create a new particle or jump down and lose particles. Okay, you can do that.
And what falls out of doing that is the mathematics of standard quantum field theory.
Okay. But so just just so I didn't lose it. Among people who are fans of Bohmian mechanics right
now, it's there's a camp that thinks maybe the hidden variables are field like and there's another
camp that thinks maybe there's just collection of particles that can change their number. So we're
not sure that's not a leading and there's a lot of things that are debated within it. So here's
another question. People when you start out, you're always treating electrons and gluons as
particles, but then they're all fermions, right? They're all half half. Oh, sorry. I'm sorry.
I meant quarks. Then people ask, well, what about the photon? Is that a particle? Are there photon
trajectories? And it turns out you can try and develop a theory in which there are and a theory
in which there aren't. Okay. And people work on both sides and there's no agreement in the community.
And you ask, well, what would be the advantages of doing it this way? What would be the advantage
of doing it this way? So it's a general architecture of how to develop a theory that can be implemented,
of course, in many different ways. And so even within the big house, right, there's rooms in
the big mansion of people who are working in different directions. With regard to the idea of
sort of stepping back from the fields and going particles as your ontology,
two things come to mind, one of which is against that idea, one of which is for it. So which one
you want me to tell you first, then you can respond. The worry I have is something like
the Higgs mechanism, where it seems that the Higgs boson lurking as a field with an expectation
value throughout all of space is playing a crucially important role in explaining phenomenologically
observable properties. Is that something you could use? I mean, I think I just answered that,
which is it sounds like you're the kind of person who would say, I'd rather, yeah, I'll treat my
fermions as particles and I'll treat my bosons as fields, essentially, which is, yeah, I won't
introduce particles associated with the integer spin objects. That I think would make you happy,
right? I don't have to say there's a Higgs particle to work it into the theory. And there is a
reason to think that you're going to work bosons and fermions can enter into the theory in different
roles. Okay, this is going to undo the good news that I had. So I don't know if you know this,
because I only recently learned it, but Richard Feynman, when he was inventing Feynman diagrams,
part of his motivation was to get rid of quantum field theory and replace it with another theory
particles again. And we now think of Feynman diagrams as a tool for understanding quantum
field theory. So he changed his mind. But his motivation, I'm told, was the cosmological
constant problem. Really? Yeah. No, I did not know that. Yeah, I mean, I was told that I need to
find the reference for it. But the idea is if you have fields, they all have these zero point
energies, and they add up to infinity, or you cut it off, and it gives you a big vacuum energy.
But if you have particles, you don't have that problem. So if I were a Bohmian particle ontology
guy, I'd be claiming a solution to the cosmological constant. That'd be more nice.
Look, that's a connection I was unaware of. My understanding, and again, this is not based in
anything other than what I somehow picked up on the street, was that one way, anyway,
let me put it this way, how Feynman thought about it, I'm not sure, one way to think about
Feynman diagrams, which is runs contrary to way people often talk about them, is that they were
just a mnemonic device, right? I have a mathematical equation that has an infinite number of terms
that I need to sum up. And of course, the issue gets bad when that sum goes to infinity. But
anyway, I have this, all these terms I need to add up. And that the diagrams were just easy ways
to kind of remember what the different terms looked like, right? To figure out what integral
you had to do. Exactly. And now, the way I say people don't do that is they often point at those
things as if they are literal pictures of stuff going on. Oh, this is doing this and this is
doing this and all the stuff is going on. It's a blooming, buzzing confusion of virtual particles
that are running around. That talk, I don't think makes any sense on any view. I'm on your side.
So, if it's just a mnemonic technique, then you're really, it's as if I like to say,
suppose you wanted to calculate the volume of a sphere. And you just love cubes. And you say,
okay, look, I'm going to first of all, figure out the biggest cube I can sit inside a sphere and
calculate its volume. And now I've got these other little, you know, six round pieces sticking out.
Now I'm going to find the biggest cube I can get out of each of those and then add those and then
more cubes and more cubes and more cubes. And you can see, okay, there's going to be an infinite
sequence of these volumes that you now need to add up to get the total volume of the sphere.
But you'd say, but you shouldn't think that the sphere is this really complicated thing, right?
It's actually quite simple. And in fact, here's another way to do this calculation that is,
you know, is straightforward and you don't do an infinite sum and G. It's just, you know,
fourth or third pi r cube. No, I think that's actually an important point because
lots of modern physics is motivated beyond the standard model particle physics searches for our
next best theory is motivated by questions of naturalness, right? And fine tuning and so forth.
And I think I don't know what the right way to think about those problems is, but I think that
not only do people talk as if there really are virtual particles popping out of existence,
which there aren't. But they also think that somehow nature starts with a classical theory
and then adds quantum corrections on top of it. And nature doesn't do that. And that might change
our perspective here. Right. And I think there's a, I think you're exactly right. And I think there's
a methodological point here, which is that because we start out learning classical physics and it
feels familiar to us and we familiar with the math of it, there's this great temptation of someone
says, oh, the way to come up with a good quantum theory is to start with a classical theory and
then do this thing we call quantizing it, right? We put the hats on, we turn certain variables
into operators. And well, most of the time it's clear how to do that. Sometimes it's not quite
clear how to do that. But you think, but this doesn't make any sense, right? The world, yes,
the world behaves pretty well the way classical theory predicts at a certain scale. But that's
because something emerging out of a very non-classical physics. And there's no reason to think that the
right way into that physics is to start with the approximation and then twiddle with it, right?
It's got to go the other way around, right? You need the fundamental physics and then hopefully
you can understand why the classical approximations work as well as they do. But I think people are
tempted because you have this kind of algorithmic thing of, oh, just take a variable and put a hat
on it and turn it into an operator. But conceptually, that's just not the right way to think about it.
Yeah, that's right. So good. I'm glad we can find all of our points of agreement against the
consensus, despite the fact that we have some disagreements. But this question of the speed
of light, I'm going to go back to the experiment, the possible signaling, because I do not know about
that work. I don't know whether it's right. So that's okay. We're putting it on. Yeah, right there.
But the idea of looking hard for possible experiments to do, I think, is a crucially
important one. I mean, my impression is that your typical Bohmian on the street thinks there's no
experiment to do to test Bohm versus conventional quantum mechanics, whatever that is. Do you have
a feeling about that? I do. And this is a discussion I am in right now arising out of this work.
That is, a lot of people in the Bohmian camp will kind of say, oh, but we know that it won't make
different predictions than, quote, standard quantum mechanics. Now, I think that's just wrong. I think
there are kind of toy cases that make it obviously wrong, but leave those aside. I just tried to
understand what the argument was. And I can't get it, right? And so I think some of this is
defensive, right? Because there's this, and you stop back a second and you see this is so unfair.
You have standard quantum mechanics, whatever it is. Anyway, you can make lots of good predictions
with it. Then somebody comes up with a new theory, and then they say, oh, does your theory make any
new predictions? If not, why should I pay any attention to it? Now, the first thing you notice
is, but wait, if these two theories had been discovered in the opposite order, right, you
would be going the other way around. So this can't be, from a logical point of view, a good
objection. Why should I take your theory seriously? Because it makes all the same predictions as my
theory, because that doesn't make any sense. But I think that is an objection that physicists often
made. And so there were certain kinds of defensive procedures that were put up to say, oh, no, we're
not saying they're new predictions, right? And then you'd have to go on. My view is a sharp theory,
again, standard quantum mechanics has certain vaguenesses in it. If you have to talk about
measurement, if you have to talk about observation, because those are vague terms, these are the
objections that we had. And so you'd expect a sharp theory will certainly ought to differ
in some ways. And you should be looking hard at where those differences might be.
Is so the unfair question, what fraction of the Bohmians out there agree with you about that?
It's not an unfair question, but it's a sociological question, which I just can't answer. I
don't know. I don't know. And even as it were, the Bohmian camp is divided into sub-camps and
probably the statistics and the different ones are different. And probably my guess is
weirdly enough, it probably correlates with age. I think younger people are more open to certain
things than people who've been through a lot of battles. But I really don't know.
Where are these Bohmians of which you speak? Are they in philosophy departments or physics
departments or Europe? Well, a lot of them, yeah. So there were a lot of students
in Europe. And I'm sorry, this is going to be just a little hard for me.
Det Lefder, who was at the LMU in Munich, had always a dozen graduate students. Unbelievable
what he did that nobody else I know has ever done to promote young people and bring them into this.
And he was in a physics department. He was in the math department.
And he was just the most wonderful, caring Dr. Vater and looked after these students.
He could not get many of them jobs in academia. A lot of them have gone into other industry,
whatever. They did their work. But there are a lot of young people who came through that program
who know the theory and work on it. Siddhant Das, who I mentioned, was one of Det Lef's last students.
And some of his students, a couple of them are in Tubigan. So there are more of them
in Europe who have come through LMU and through his influence. Then the other thing that's happened
is a lot of physicists who realize they're interested in foundations notice that if you have
credentials as a philosopher, you can more literally more easily have an academic career
in a philosophy department as a philosopher of physics than you can in the physics department.
Still true, yes. So some of them have switched over. Also Det Lef's student, Dustin Lazarevich,
who's now in the Technion in Israel. There are people who are around. And it's more than there
used to be. I mean, the total number is up. What the effect of losing Det Lef because Det Lef died
during COVID? I don't know. I mean, nobody right now is doing what he was able to do. And we have
to hope that some dedicated person with the right psychology and so on can
kind of take his place and help people along. Do you think we started by talking about
why you don't need to make a sales pitch to philosophers? They get it. Yeah.
How deeply do they get it? How much has quantum mechanics changed what philosophers think about
metaphysics? So this is an interesting question. In philosophy, I would say there are three camps
of people who do what goes under the name metaphysics. I just gave this talk at Rutgers,
the undergraduates, about metaphysics and science. Are metaphysics and science enemies or friends or
what? Or the same thing? Yeah, exactly. That was my conclusion at the end. So you jumped right
to the end. Sorry. But no, there's an interesting history because really there's a certain point
where they're clearly considered to be enemies. I mean, Carnap. I would say that in metaphysicians,
people would self-identify as metaphysicians in philosophy now fall into kind of three camps.
There's a camp that's sometimes called analytic metaphysics, which tends to be doing things
which don't seem to care much about science. They're asking questions that don't... It's not
obvious that any scientific theory would bear one way or the other on the question.
Oh, are there... I mean, these are not just going to be words. Are there universals or tropes?
Okay, so this is the kind of thing that a philosopher of a certain kind will understand
and they'll be fighting with each other forever about universals and tropes. And it's very hard if
you say, well, did Newton believe in universal tropes? You'd say, well, the Newton didn't care.
It's just not an issue that is built into the guts of that theory in any obvious way.
Okay. Then there's another camp that goes by the name scientific metaphysics for the reason of
saying that what I think is obviously correct, metaphysics is about describing what exists
at the most general scales. And if you're interested in what exists in the physical world,
you better pay attention to science. Not to say that the scientists can just answer those questions,
but they do have relevant things to say to offer. But then that group kind of subdivides into two.
The ones who then specialize say to do philosophy of physics. Now that really requires learning
some math and some physics and at a reasonably good scale, some people have full PhDs in physics.
But you certainly have to devote some time to just studying math and physics to do this in a
specialized way. And then there's another group of people who clearly acknowledge the relevance
of the physics, but they're not experts. And so they like to listen to the experts and try
and figure what they can draw out of it without themselves delving so deeply into it. I would
say that's how the landscape goes. But do they talk to each other, these people? Or do they go
to the same conferences? Yeah, I mean, they're certainly, they do talk while they're in each
other's presence. I mean, there are a lot of specialized conferences, but there are conferences.
I mean, I was just invited to be on a panel at the Metaphysics Society of America. And I'll tell
you, the people in that society are not people you'll ever run into. And they were doing a very
different kind of metaphysics, but they were happy. I talked about what I do and the way I
think about it and they didn't throw bricks at me. It wasn't the way they thought about it. They
were interested. They were interested. Yeah, they were interested and they appreciated having the
conversation. And I mean, philosophers tend to be pretty open to talking about weird stuff,
because that's more of us comes with the territory. Whatever strikes them as weird,
you still don't just reject it, right? I guess what I'm getting at, and I'm not trying to presume
the right answer, because I honestly don't know. But to what extent can we imagine smoothing over
the conceptual differences between thinking about physics and thinking about metaphysics?
Like, it really should be thinking about reality is what we're doing, right?
Yeah. I mean, we do, you know, I do need to mention here that, again, you can be interested in
metaphysics and not be a physicalist. So you'd say, part of what I do really is not going to
be informed by physics. If I'm a mathematical Platonist and I'm worried about mathematical
reality and I say that's just not part of physical reality, so I don't care how your physics comes
out. That's a fair, you know, that's a fair thing. So not all of metaphysics has to be
hostage or all that. Interested depends on where you're focusing your attention.
Okay. We actually, Barry Lower was another person we had on recently and Barry, he said
something not on the podcast, sadly, but in informal conversation that was even stronger
than something I would say. I think he was being humorous about it, but he said he remembers very
vividly being struck the day he realized that most problems of philosophy could be cured or solved
by statistical mechanics. And I think that he has a different view about you than that. So we're
running out of time a little bit, but I wanted you to have a chance to give a little bit of
your view of the arrow of time and things like that, which is the other giant thing that people
who care about foundations of physics spend their time worrying about. Right. So let me actually
start with the last thing first and just get it out in the open so people at least be aware of it.
I would say it is kind of everybody has this idea of their space and it's kind of three-dimensional,
at least at large scales. And if I talked about, say, the north-south direction at a certain point,
if I went on to say, by the way, space goes north to south, it doesn't go south to north,
you'd look at me funny and say, what in the world are you talking about? Right?
The spatial thing, there are two directions and they're oppositely directed, but space itself
doesn't go more one way than the other. I don't even know what you mean. On the other hand, the
person in the street, you say time goes from past to future, doesn't go from future to past,
they will again nod at you and say, yeah, tell me something new. Now, I happen to agree with that,
that as I think time is fundamentally different from space, temporal structure is fundamentally
different from spatial structure in that temporal structure does have a fundamental
directionality to it and spatial structure doesn't. This turns out to be a very contentious view
among philosophers and physicists for funny reasons, I would say, I don't know that we have
the time to go into, but it surely is the minority view. And it's a little bit viewed,
just to clarify, it's a little bit different than there are physicists out there and philosophers
who will question whether or not time exists or whether it's fundamental, but here we're talking
about the direction of time, not time. Yes, that's right, that's right. It would be even harder to
deny the existence of time altogether, but certainly the directionality is hotly contested.
I think time itself has a direction. Now, it is clearly the case that there are temporal, manifest
temporal asymmetries on any view. If you give me two pictures of somebody 10 years apart,
usually I can look at them and figure, oh, this was the younger and this is the older,
because people tend to wrinkle up. Now, that's not, maybe they had cosmetic surgery. I could get
that wrong, but there are certainly lots of very reliable temporal asymmetries,
and those need an explanation, simply saying time has a direction would not explain all by itself
any of those observable temporal asymmetries or what people sometimes call arrows of time.
I think all of that is a perfectly good object of study, even if you believe as I do, that one of
the things that you can invoke is that time is itself directed. That doesn't give me these
observable asymmetries like that, but it might be part of the explanation. How does it help?
Since people like David Albert and Barry and myself think that you don't need an intrinsic
arrow if you just have an initial condition that is doing all the work?
Because a lot of the explanation, I mean, we can do this in different levels, but let me do the
first level. What do I mean by explaining something? Well, often I think it's a kind of causal
explanation. I talk about cause and effect, and now you say, okay, but what distinguishes cause
and effect? Offhand, in many cases, causes precede the effects. I mean, if people often
talk about running a movie backward or imagining that, which of course, you can literally run a
movie backward, but then the end sequence comes before the title sequence. You still have a direction
of time. If you took that seriously as a movie of something in the normal direction, also all the
causal structure would be reversed. What were causes would become effects, and therefore the
structure of causal explanation would be different. You have to get a bit deep, and statistical
mechanics does come into this here in a way that we couldn't get on the table clearly in a short
period of time, where you not only have causal explanations where you say this particular
precise physical state gives rise to this later one, but other kinds of statistical explanations
where you say this kind of physical state. I haven't precisely, but I'm going to constrain it in
certain ways. There's a class of various that gives rise to this kind of state. I mean, this is the
sort of thing that you take a box of gas, and you say, if you wait a while, it'll eventually relax to
an equilibrium. That of course shows a directionality to it, because from this initial state, you can
say in five minutes, it'll be equilibrium. If you look at the equilibrium state at a generic level,
kind of fuzzed out level, you couldn't say, oh, five minutes ago, it was in this non-equilibrium
state. There's a kind of asymmetry there, and that's connected to certain asymmetries in statistical
explanation, probabilistic explanation. It's a very interesting and deep, hard topic. A bit
different than worrying about, say, relativity, which you might say is about space-time structure,
quantum mechanics is about material structure. Statistical explanation is about a kind of
explanatory project, and what goes into it, and what succeeds as giving statistical explanations
of things. But I do think that reversing the direction of time, you might have a very good,
what you consider to be a very good statistical explanation of something as seen as it were
in one direction of time. If you look at the other direction, you say, wait, there's no explanation
at all. The explanatory part went away. All I can say is a massive coincidence, or else,
to be teleological and say the future is somehow affecting the present. But I take it to be one
of the great discoveries of the scientific revolution to get rid of that kind of teleology.
Does your view that time has an intrinsic direction affect what we would call microphysics,
the standard model of particle physics, for example, or could it?
Sure, it could. I mean, I think that it plays into your fundamental picture of space-time
structure. And of course, one needs an account of space-time structure to even begin to write down
what you think of as laws of physics. And I think there are very specific ways in which
having a direction, well, certainly having a direction, let me just give you a very
concrete thing one could say. Suppose I have a kind of grid, like a street grid, and I have
two points on it, and you ask me, okay, how many continuous paths are there that will
take me from A to B? And typically, the answer, if the grid goes on forever, it's infinitely many,
because it can kind of go short way or around or far around, go way out and come back. Now,
suppose I put some arrows on that grid, right? So they're one-way streets. Now it's not at all
clear that this number will always be infinite. Now it might be quite tightly constrained. The
directionality gives me a resource there that a lack of directionality doesn't have. And I think
that's actually quite important and plays out in trying to understand the laws of physics, but
it's much more complicated. It's much more complicated, but that's what you're thinking
about these days. That's one of the things I'm thinking about very hard. I mean, I've been working
on thinking about what space at time could be like if they were actually not continuous,
but discrete at fundamental scale. I worked a long time and did six chapters just on space,
and now I have to bring in time. And the time part really has to have a direction. Just for
it to work, it has to have a direction. You have to understand how the directionality comes
into it. Sorry, what do you say for it to work? For this scheme I have, to be a kind of thing
where you could do a plausible looking sort of physics with. Do you have a catchy name for your
scheme? Yeah, full discrete geometry. Full discrete geometry. Okay, good. And the time
directedness has to be part of the story. Yeah, it's fundamental in it. Yeah. Okay,
all right, good. Well, we're looking forward to that. We'll get some point. Yeah, I know.
I got really stuck. Yeah, I mean, well, I'm up on chapter eight now. I mean, the spatial part went
real well. And then it was like, okay, part two, let's bring in time. And then you realize it's a
tricky business. Is it quantum we're talking or classical? This is all this is all classical
geometry. But quantum field theory, there is a connection to quantum field theory, which I'll
just state briefly, we talked about problems just in doing quantum field theory, just mathematical
problems. One way that this kind of Bohmian or pilot wave approach for quantum field theory was
done was done by Bell, it's called Bell type quantum field theory. And one thing he does is he puts
it on a lattice, that is, he doesn't do it in continuous space, he does it on a kind of discrete
lattice. And you have these jumps from lattice points to lattice points. That turns out to be
very important to have a structure where you can do the math in a clean way. Okay, looking forward
to the book coming out, we will pre advertise it here. So here's the last, I'm not going to call
it a question thing to respond to. When we talk about quantum mechanics, and as we say, you have
to give up something maybe that was hopeful or intuitive or whatever. And even in relativity,
it seems like maybe the world is a little bit different. Is there hope for
fundamentally understanding why the world is this way? Like in retrospect, can you say, oh,
yes, it had to be quantum mechanics, or are we just stuck with it?
Yeah, I think people like to say that why the quantum, you know, you'll get this thing. I think,
oh, come on, just, you know, grow up. No, I mean, there's going to be foundations. It's going to be
one of the really hard questions in this whole topic is the question, where do I stop digging?
Right? Where is my spade turned? Where do I say, okay, I've hit a foundation here.
It looks like this is a plausible place to stop. And all you can say is, yeah, this is the way it
is. Could it have been some other way? Yeah, it could have been some other way. It isn't.
This looks like a plausible place to stop. If you think if you're never going to be satisfied,
okay, then you're never going to be satisfied. And the problem is, there are dangers in both
directions, right? If you're too easily satisfied, you'll stop digging when in fact you could
discover a lot of interesting structure lying underneath where you've stopped. But if you're
too pigheaded, you're going to get to the bottom and still be banging your head against it forever,
because there is nothing underneath it, right? So there's a kind of connoisseur's feel for where's
a reasonable place to stop. But I don't think you're going to be stopped by some master principle
that says it could only have been this way. How could you expect that? The world is kind of contingent.
Well, that seems like a reasonable place to stop. So Tim Wilden, thanks very much for being on the
Can I actually, before you do that, because I'm here and I have many voices, many years
that I ever kind of normally will have, and I'm going to just take advantage of you and say,
one of the things I'm doing is trying to promote foundations of physics in the way I'm doing it
is I've founded this thing called the John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics.
And we are at the very moment, a kind of critical moment where we're trying to buy a physical place
for us to live. And if anybody out there likes people who talk about this stuff and thinks
they should have a place to go where they can meet and talk to each other, we have a GoFundMe
or you could go to www.JohnBellInstitute.org. If anybody would like to help us out in any way,
it's our moment of need and we would appreciate it greatly.
Good to be reminded of that. I will also mention that in the intro and put links on
the web page. I can mention it because it's an audio podcast. Tim is wearing a very fetching
John Bell Institute polo shirt right now. So that could be swag. I don't know. Is that a GoFundMe?
This, to get the shirt, you got to come to the place. The only exception to that are my parents
who are 95. And I said, you can have shirts without actually going. But this is, you can only wear
the shirt if you've been there and you've seen this beautiful island in Croatia and enjoyed it
and then you get a shirt. But it is actually an important thing. I'm glad you mentioned it
because it's a reminder that ideas are great and conversations about them are great, but
institutions also matter for getting these ideas out. And this is the problem. This field is an
academic orphan. Foundations of physics doesn't fit. It kind of doesn't fit in physics departments
and it doesn't really fit in philosophy departments. And so if it's going to live,
a place has to be made for it. All right. Let's look it up on the internet. So in that case,
Tim Walson, thanks very much for being on the Mindscape Podcast. Thank you.
