Hello. In the last two lectures, we've been looking at how the adult brain is organized,
and we looked from the external surface of the brain and saw that it's organized into
five different distinct areas. We also saw that if you cut up any of these areas and
looked at it, stained it for the cell groups or for the axons, that each one of these areas
of the brain is very, very complicated. Now, to complicate this picture even more, we looked
at just single sections of the brain. These are about 10 microns thick, and each of these
subdivisions is inches thick, and so every single part of the brain is complexly organized,
and so the internal structure is part of where that complexity arises from. What we also
defined at nucleus as a specific area within these different subdivisions, so the superior
colliculus was a specific nucleus within the midbrain, the lateral geniculate nucleus was a
specific nucleus located in the diencephalon, specifically in the thalamus of the diencephalon,
so there are huge numbers of individual structures in the brain. That's really the point that I
want to make, and this is part of why it's been so complex and difficult to understand.
Each nucleus in the brain, each structure, like the superior colliculus, like the lateral geniculate,
has its own unique organization, and we call that the cytoarchitecture, and what that means is each
nucleus is made up of specific kinds of neurons that are organized in that nucleus in a particular
way, and every nucleus, the neurons, are connected to other neurons very specifically,
and each nucleus will have different connections, and last of all, each of the hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of areas of the brain each have a unique function. So this is what we want to talk
about now, and that is in general terms how we organize the brain in terms of function.
So research has revealed that all these hundreds of nuclei in the brain
can be grouped into functional systems, and this is good because I don't know how we'd
ever forget anything if it didn't turn out that way. So we have two different kinds of
functional systems in the brain. The first kind of functional system is a system with a single
unifying function, and this is probably the one that's easiest to appreciate or to understand,
and I'm going to give two examples. There are many examples I could give, I'm just giving two.
The first is the motor system. So the motor system basically consists of any nucleus or area of the
brain or the spinal cord, any area of the nervous system that is involved with motor function.
So for example, we have a number of different things that go into our being able to make a
normal motor movement. For example, the brain has to plan the movement. It doesn't just make it,
it has to plan it first. So the brain plans a movement. Well, it turns out that if I turn
my brain like this, I know that areas located approximately here in the cortex are specifically
involved in planning a motor movement. The neurons in these areas actually fire before a movement
is initiated. Now where those neurons get their input, this is one of the mysteries of modern
neuroscience. The point is that this area of the brain is involved in the planning of a motor
movement. If I go just slightly coddle to that, this is the front of the brain, this is the back,
if I go just slightly coddle to that, the area of the brain that I now have my fingers on
is involved specifically in the initiation of a motor movement. So these neurons will be
connected to these neurons. They will plan the movement. This part of the brain will initiate it.
Now that's interesting. Now in order for motor movements to take place, we have to stimulate
a number of areas. We also have to inhibit a lot of things. So every time I make a movement,
I both contract muscle and inhibit other muscles. There are also motor programs. For example,
if I were to walk normally, my arms swing at my side in a very particular way. This is a motor
program. Well, that specific function is controlled by nuclei, which are deep in this hemisphere
that we can't see that we'll learn about later. But the point is that that's what the function,
these nuclei are involved specifically in that function. Now we talked about this before.
In order to make a movement, we have to, if it's going to be coordinated, we have to draw
our cerebellum into this. So the cerebellum is involved in being able to coordinate fine-skilled
motor movement. So my point here is that just up here, we have a number of different areas,
a number of different nuclei that play a role specifically in motor behavior. Now
that, we haven't even gotten to the spinal cord yet, but obviously it's spinal cord neurons that
actually go out to the muscle. So those neurons that are located in the spinal cord that actually
send their processes out to the muscle are also part of the motor system. So it's the coordination
of all of these different nuclei in the brain that are all complexly interconnected with each
other that allows me to do that. A very fine-skilled motor movement that was planned, initiated,
done, and coordinated very quickly. And we have no feel that this is going on in our brains all
the time. So it's the reason why we can chew gum and walk at the same time, because our brain
can handle more than one thing at a time. We can speak and move our bodies. I can move my hands
and speak at the same time. Speech being highly complex, but also a motor function. So all of these
areas of the brain that coordinate our motor movement and initiate it and planning of it
would all be part of a motor system. Another example of a system with a single unifying function
would be the visual system. So let's take that one, for example. Here's the front of our brain.
So there's our eye part of the eye is action outgrowth of the diencephalon. So the eyeball is
one of the only areas, in fact, the only area of the body where when the doctor looks in your eye,
he can see the back of the eye. And that back of the eye is action outgrowth of the brain. So it's
the only place in the body where you can see a part of the central nervous system in the living
person. So the eye is going to be connected to the lateral geniculate and the superior
colliculus and many other nuclei. And then the lateral geniculate is going to project right
back here to this cortical area. And that will be the first cortical area that processes information
about vision and begins the process of the cortex and the brain forming a percept that we call
seeing. You don't see with your eye, you see with your brain. If I turn the brain like this and we
look at the lateral surface, we're going to learn that a huge number of areas on this lateral surface,
our cortex, are devoted, in fact, to vision. And every single one of these areas from the neural
part of our eye to our brain to our cortex would be examples of nuclei and areas that are involved
in the visual system. Now, we also have systems that aren't don't really revolve around a single
function, but there are systems that have a variety of related functions. So this is another way that
the brain is organized. So for example, the hypothalamus. Our hypothalamus is again in the
diencephalon, the ventral portion of the diencephalon. And the hypothalamus is made up of a number of
different nuclei that have very, very different functions. But they're related, in a sense,
because most of them are all about establishing homeostasis. So for example, when we're thirsty
and drink something, it's because our hypothalamus has motivated us towards restoring a balance in
our body because we need the fluid. When we're hungry, we eat. And it's our hypothalamus that
tells us we're hungry. And it's also the hypothalamus that will tell us when we're full. So it is
attempting to restore that homeostasis. And the example I used earlier, when our temperature
goes up or down, away from normal, it's the hypothalamus that will attempt to regulate it
and bring it back to where it ought to be. So while all of these functions are so different,
they have something in common that makes them part of the system. Another example of a system in
the brain is one that's going to be the topic of many lectures in this course. And this is called
the limbic system. And limbic means on the edge, on the border. And it got its name because a number
of the structures that are located on this edge of the brain, this medial surface of the brain,
were found to be part of a sort of system that has something to do with learning memory and emotion.
And so we're going to be talking about all the different nuclei. Now, let's think about that
for a second. The reason it's not a single system with a single unifying function is because learning
memory, emotion, and also executive function are really very different functions. But it's really
all one system, because in fact, learning means that you have memory of something. That's what it
means to learn it. And we now know that emotions play a role in learning. We also know that emotions
play a role in executive function. So now we call this whole group of nuclei, which there's hundreds,
the limbic system. So within a system that's large like that, there might be subsystems
that are involved, for example, in learning and memory. There might be other subsystems
that are involved in a larger system like the limbic system. Now, another system that we have,
and this will be our last example, but it certainly won't be the last example in the class of a system,
is going to be the reticular formation. And the reticular formation is another term that has these
historical reasons behind the term. It's a small area that's located in the core of the brain.
So if we looked inside this structure, sort of in the middle of it, and it extends from the upper
medulla all the way into the telencephalon, or this is this core area, which is called the reticular
formation. And it got its name because early neuroanatomists believed that all of the cells
were interconnected like a reticulum or a net. And they weren't really, they were individual nerve
cells, but these early neuroanatomists couldn't tell that. So they called this area the reticular
formation. Modern neuroscience has discovered that there's over 110 individual nuclei in the
reticular formation that control everything from your heart rate, your breathing, to consciousness.
If there is damage to the reticular formation, particular nuclei in the reticular formation,
you are not conscious. And so this area of the brain has many different functions,
but it's still in one system referred to as the reticular formation. The reticular formation,
by the way, is one of the very, very oldest areas of the brain. So I want to, again, this is very
important because this is conceptually how the brain is organized and it's extremely important
that we understand this. When a scientist wants to know what a particular area of the brain does,
they want to be able to, first of all, identify the nucleus. They want to identify where it's
connected or what it's connected to, what area is the brain. And they want to know what system
that's involved in. So this basic idea that the brain consists of a number of different systems
is very fundamental. So our examples were motor system, any nuclear area is involved in the
motor system would be part of that system, motor behavior. We have the visual system,
any nuclear areas that have to do with vision would be included in this. And last of all, we have
systems that have a broad variety of functions, but they're all included in particular systems
like the hypothalamus, the limbic system, and the reticular formation. And within these large
types of systems, we might have a number of subsystems that are separated out.
This has some heuristic value because it's one of the most important things that we want to
understand is how the brain is connected, how different nuclei are connected. And I want you
to just think about the daunting task that that is. Hundreds and hundreds of nuclei,
all with individual functions, and we're trying to discover what those are. Now,
these different systems and the nuclei are the gray matter of the brain. So remember that the gray
matter are the nuclei of the brain. And this is how we subdivide these nuclear groups into these
systems. We can also take the axons in the brain, which are the processes that go out other neurons,
and we can classify those. So let's look again at our generic neuron. So these are the dendritic
trees up here. This is the neuron cell body in our dendritic trees of our generic neuron.
And then there are axons. Now, the neurons, the cell bodies, the nuclei, those neurons stay
wherever they're at in the brain. The lateral geniculate, the neurons are in the lateral
geniculate, they never move, they never go out of there. It will be the axon out of a neuron
in the lateral geniculate that will send this axon up to visual cortex, again, to start that
process of the formation of a percept. So we actually classify axons not so much by the system
they're associated with, but by another property. And that is related to their general function.
So let's review a couple of the general functions in how we look at axons. So axons make up the
white matter in the brain, they make up the pathways or tracks in the brain. So when we have
bundles of axons which run together, in the peripheral nervous system we call them nerves,
and in the central nervous system we call them pathways. So it's just bundles of axons on their
way somewhere, and they travel in between the nuclei in the brain. So we divide the axons
into three different types basically. And again, this just has some heuristic value,
this is just useful for us as neuroscientists. So the first kind of pathway that we
segregate axons into or classify them into are called association pathways. And this is an old
term again, but an association pathway is just a pathway or a collection of axons that connects
different parts of the cortex in the same hemisphere. So remember we have two hemispheres
like this, and we have all of this cortex, this is all gray matter, this is all made up of individual
areas, that's why they're different colored hair. But now I want you to think about this,
some are motor, some are visual, and we'll learn that they're all something. But they all have to
be connected to each other within one hemisphere, or my motor cortex wouldn't know what I'm looking at.
So what we have are axons which connect all of the different areas of the cortex, and these are
called association pathways. I'm going to give one example of an association pathway, there are many
of them by the way. Right above this area right here is a cortical area that I'm using my finger
to show you. This is a cortical area, so this is where neurons are located. The axons of those
neurons make up an association pathway called the girdle or the singulum. So the gyrus or the area
of the cortex itself is called the singulate gyrus, and the axons come out of those neurons,
and they're going to connect different areas of the cortex with each other.
And you see that this is colored differently, and those different colors reflect that maybe
there's different functional systems involved in this, but overall their function is to connect
things within a single hemisphere. So association axons run in this plane, there's two hemispheres,
they run in this plane and connect all of the areas of the cortex. Our next type of way that
we classify axons in the nervous system are commissural pathways, and these are pathways
that are going to connect one hemisphere with the other hemisphere. So this is easy to understand
why we want to do this. Obviously, well it doesn't take much to show this, I can move this hand,
I can move this hand, I can move them both together. And so for me to make the same movement with both
motor cortices requires that the planning of this movement, the initiation of the movement,
and the execution of the movement somehow be coordinated. And it turns out that the largest
fiber pathway in man is a structure called the corpus callosum, and the corpus callosum connects
what we say homotopic parts in one hemisphere with parts in the other hemisphere, and homotopic
means same. So the corpus callosum connects this area here which is motor cortex with the same area
of motor cortex in the other hemisphere. And so each of these areas is connected to the other
hemisphere via the corpus callosum. What I have shown on this is you're looking at a dorsal view,
so if you lean down and looked at the top of the brain and then you use your hands to spread the
two hemispheres apart in a real brain, what you would see here is that this entire structure is
the corpus callosum. It's the largest fiber pathway in man. It's made up of 300 million
axons connecting the cortex in one hemisphere with the cortex of the other hemisphere. So it is just
a massive structure. Now let's imagine that we cut down the middle of this brain so the next
is going to look much more like this medial view of our brain on our model. Let's look what the
corpus callosum would look like. This is one of the things all neuroanatomists have to do. They
have to be able to imagine all these structures in three dimensions. So if we cut through that
corpus callosum, now remember the axons are running in this plane. They're running in this plane
connecting this with this, this with this. So they're running like this. If we cut the corpus
callosum and now look from the side, we see that in fact it's this huge bundle of axons here. If we
were to stain a section through here with a viagra stain, this structure would be huge and black
and dark because they're all myelinated axons. So if I look here on my brain model,
this is the corpus callosum right here, right beneath one of those association areas. You
notice the corpus callosum. Here it's yellow, orange, darker, orange, red, brown, blue, green.
All those colors reflect. Notice the cortical areas. This one's connected through there to the
other side. This one through there to the other side. So these travel in this plane.
The last type of way that we classify axons is by calling them projection pathways. And actually
projection pathways are what most of all the axons in the brain are made up of. And to understand
what projection pathways are, they're the axons that leave nuclei and go some other place to connect
the various nuclei that are in these various systems. So we just call them projection nuclei or
projection axons. So we define projects too. And we can use this term in terms of a nucleus or the
axons. But right now we want to define projection pathways. So these would be the axons. Projects
too means connected with. So most of these projection pathways run in this plane in the brain.
So it's the cortex wanting to make something happen and having to have its axons go down to
make it happen. Or its sensory information coming in either from the eye to the geniculate or from
our skin going up to the cortex so that we can have a percept of it or to have a subjective
experience of it. So the axons running in this plane are the projection axons. So let me give you
one example of a projection axon. And what I've done here is I've just complicated our little
generic neuron and shown it as part of a pathway. So let's imagine that our generic neuron
is a neuron located in the motor cortex. And those neurons are called pyramidal neurons. We'll
learn about that when we talk about the motor system. But let's imagine that this is a neuron and
of course there'd be hundreds of them but we have only drawn one. Here's a neuron. It's going to get
its input from areas of the cortex that plan the motor movement. And then if this neuron fires as
we say, we say that it fires an action potential here at the axon hillock, that potential is going
to travel down this axon. And I want you to imagine here's my motor cortex. This axon is
traveling down in between nuclei in the brain down through the midbrain down through the pons.
And now in the lower part of the medulla is going to cross the brain midline to enter the spinal cord
on the other side of the body. And it's going to synapse onto neurons that are located in the
spinal cord. So it's going to make a connection with the neurons that are located in the spinal
cord. And those neurons are the neurons that will project their axons to the muscle. So these are
projection axons. They project, we say. These are the words we use. These axons and the neurons
project from motor cortex to the spinal cord. So that's a very important basic fundamental
principle. It also explains something else we'll talk about in one of our later lectures. And that
is why the motor cortex on this side of the brain controls the movement on that side of the body.
And it's because the projection axons cross the midline to enter the spinal cord on the opposite
side. So the movement is initiated here, but the movement takes place on the other side. So we
have these cross projections. So these are the projection axons in the brain. So to review this
again, let's look at this. We need to have a way that all the neurons in the brain know what
all the other neurons are doing so that we can have normal behavior. Within each hemisphere,
we have axons that connect the various nuclear groups in the various areas of the cortex
in this plane. One hemisphere also needs to know what the other hemisphere is doing. So we have
axons that go in this plane. Different neurons in the cortex project across this way to the other
hemisphere. And last of all, we need to have a way that our axons communicate so that we have
behavior, so that we can think, so that we do see, so that we can reach out and touch something.
And these are primarily axons that run up and down in this plane. So when you cut up the brain
and look and you see just black areas, it's axons, but you have no idea where they came from. So this
is what millions of dollars of the American taxpayers money and millions of hours of work,
neuroscientists have been trying to trace these individual pathways, these individual structures
of the brain in order to understand them. Now, the last thing we need to talk about is that
we also call pathways in the brain in a particular way, or at least most of them,
and this is really very helpful. And that is the first term in a pathway and over here,
this says, decassation of the cortical spinal tract. Decassation means crossing. So this is where
those axons cross in the brain. But this pathway, this projection pathway is called the cortical
spinal tract. The first term cortical means where the cell body of origin is located.
And the second term spinal means where the axon ends, and it ends in the spinal cord.
So for example, for the eye, it would be different. We call that the retinogeniculate pathway.
The retinas where the cell bodies of origin are located, and the geniculate nucleus is where the
axons from the retina or the eye will end. So this is how we talk about the nervous system
and how we identify the projection pathways. And that's very convenient. They're not all that way,
but most of them are. Now, I'd like to end this lecture by briefly making a comment.
A friend of mine who is an engineer recommended this as a wonderful example. This is a circuit board,
and we've grown up in an era where we have computers and we have high definition TVs and
everything. So this doesn't seem mysterious to us. This doesn't seem like magic. But I want you to
think about what it would be like. And my friend thought about this since he's an engineer.
If I was to just take this board and go to him and give it to him and say,
Philip, I want to know what this board does and how it does it. And I've lost the instruction
manual. I've lost the blueprints. And in fact, I don't even know what instrument this thing was
taken out of. So what I would be asking him to do is to reverse engineer this board. And in order
to do that, it would require a number of things. So for example, he would grown, first of all,
and tell me he didn't want to do it, but he'd believe I lost the instruction booklet. He would
want to determine how the different components are connected to each other. He would also want
to know what each of the components do. Now, he'd be looking that up in a book. There's a little
number on each of these components. He'd look it up in a book and it would tell him what this
component does. Well, you already see the analogy with the brain, don't you? All of the components
in our brain are connected to each other via axons. And they all have a specific function. These
would be the nuclei and what they do. But we don't have any blueprint. We don't have any of these
things to do with the brain. This is why all these early techniques and everything were developed,
so that we could even identify where the nuclear groups were at or identify where the axons went
and now to understand what the function is. And if we still have a little bit of difficulty in
appreciating the extent of the challenge that faces modern neuroscience, we only have to think
about this. This circuit board only has about 20 components on it. There are 100 billion neurons
in the adult human brain and they're estimated to be 100 trillion connections between them.
Each of these areas has a different function. We have no blueprint to tell us. And that's what
neuroscience is about. It's about determining the nuclear groups, the connections between them,
and the function. And is it amazing that any of us ever has any normal behavior? Thank you.
