In the last lecture, we learned that the cerebral cortex is just a sheet, an
outer mantle of cells or covering of gray matter over the hemisphere. When we look at
a section through the cortex, we see that it is just this outer part of the cortex.
It's the light areas here on our picture. Within each of the lobes, we also talked about
different structures that were located within the lobes or different areas. A lot of motor
areas here on the frontal lobe, but also very complex functions here, somatosensory
back here, visual here, auditory here, and other complex functions in all of these lobes.
Now within each of these lobes, we saw that there was a horizontal organization that we
referred to by Brogman areas. So Brogman divided the cortex up into those 50 different
areas, and this just shows the lateral surface of the cortex, and you can see these are just
the numbers that were originally given by Brogman. This allows us to talk to each other,
but there's another really important discovery that happened, and that is that one of the
most important early discoveries was not made by Brogman, but later, that each of these
areas actually represents a functionally distinct area of the brain with a different function.
Now Brogman just cut up the cortex and looked at the way the cells were organized, so all
he made his numbering system based on were the differences in the way the cells were
organized into layers. He didn't have any way of knowing that we would later in neuroscience
discover that each of his areas would have a different function. Now that gives a sort
of horizontal organization to the cortex, but if we were to look in any specific area
of the cortex, and to make a little tiny take out a strip of cortex through, say, the six
layers in neocortex, we would discover that there's a vertical organization. So in a drawing
we've made here, shows you that this is just one gyrus here, this would be a sulcus. You
take a strip of cortex about one to two square millimeters, you take it out and look at it,
say, as in neocortex goes through all six of the layers. This little tiny strip is an
independently functioning module, and how all these modules are connected to each other
is one of the, understanding that as one of the goals of modern neuroscience. So while
the cortex is the same thickness in all animals, in all species that have a cortex, the increase
in the surface area in the human brain allows for an increased number of areas, and an increased
number of these little functional modules, and their interconnections with each other,
and this is what's allowed the increased information processing ability that we have as human beings.
So this is just so critically important to understand. Now when we looked in the first
lecture at ancient peoples, ancient peoples didn't even seem to have a conception that
the brain was important at all. So I made the comment that, you know, the brain was removed
in pharaohs, for example, the pharaoh could enter the afterlife without a brain, but not
without a heart. Now of course there's a joke among neurologists that one of the most important
functions of the heart is simply to provide blood for the brain. And without the brain,
the heart wouldn't function. The brain literally controls every organ in the body, and controls
everything you see, hear, or feel. It allows you to think, all of these things are a function
of the cortex. So what we would like to do in the present lecture is to look at how the
cortex has been parceled out in terms of sort of an overall function. So how the cortex
has been viewed conceptually, and this is a little bit different of an orientation.
So let's think about how early neuroanatomists looked at the cortex. In a historical sense,
what they did was say that there's sensory areas and motor areas, and then there's association
areas. Now these early neuroanatomists had very limited knowledge of how the cortex was
organized, so this is really how they parceled it up. You see back here is area 17, or primary
visual cortex. Here's primary somatosensory cortex in our parietal lobe. Down here is
primary auditory cortex. Many early neuroanatomists identified these primary areas. These would
be sensory areas, which are the first cortical areas to get information from the individual
nuclei in the thalamus. Now they also recognized there was a primary motor cortex, but they
also saw all this other cortex, and early neuroanatomists called this association cortex.
And they believed that it was having all of this association cortex that was responsible
for the fact that human beings were sort of at the top of the food chain. We could think,
we could reason, we could do mathematics, and it was because of all this association
cortex. In addition, many of these early neuroanatomists looked at the brains of other animals, so
for example the lowly hedgehog. And lo and behold, the hedgehog had primary areas like
primary somatosensory, primary visual, primary auditory. The hedgehog also has primary motor
cortex, but once you've removed those areas, he doesn't have a lot left over. So the early
neuroanatomists said bingo, that's it. The human beings, we are what we are because we
have all this other cortex. Well, the general classification in the sensory motor and association
cortex is still used in neuroscience, but it's been redefined, and this has resulted in
a major paradigm shift in how we view the cortex conceptually. So one of the most important
discoveries that has been made, and this was made in the last 40 years, so it's very
contemporary, is that much of what these early neuroanatomists thought was association cortex,
so thought it was where we did all this higher order functions. A lot of this higher order
cortex was actually sensory in nature, so it was actually higher order sensory cortex.
Now come back in a minute to why we think that that is true, but this is very, very important.
So much of the cortex, in fact, is made up of more sensory areas. So now we have our primary
sensory areas, just like we did before, and primary motor areas shown here, but in the
last 40 years we've discovered that all of this, and all of this, and all of this are
secondary sensory or motor areas, and so you see that they've chipped away at the association
cortex, so it's been chipped away in a conceptual manner. So the subdivision of the cortex in
modern neuroscience is, yes, we have primary sensory and motor areas, but we also have
a huge amount of secondary and higher order sensory and motor cortex. We also have a little
bit of association cortex, and we'll come back to that. Now let's think a little bit
about why would we have so much of our cortex devoted, for example, to sensory information,
and so the system which has been best looked at has been the visual system, and the visual
system primates our highly visual animals, and it turns out that human beings probably
have, in addition to area 17, 30 or more other areas of the cortex devoted to vision. Now
let's think about what that's about. Here's this cortex we thought was like higher order
association cortex, and now we find out it's sensory in nature. Well, how do we get information
about the world? We get it through our sensory systems, and one of the things that characterizes
human beings is the ability to make very fine distinctions based on sensory systems so that
ever more elaborate behavior can occur from taking in that sensory information and having
this wide variety of behaviors open to us about how we behave in the world. So the more
information we get through our sensory systems, and the more elaborate our cortex is for looking
at that sensory information, then the more complex our behavior can be. So in primates
we have a huge number of visual areas, we also have other areas devoted to other sensory
systems. Now, we want to see how modern neuroscientists are going to subdivide the cortex, and how
the one area that of course everyone is interested in is the association cortex. So it turns out
in human beings we believe that there are three areas that still are called association
cortex. So they're not really devoted, say for example, to vision or to motor behavior.
They are association cortex or higher order areas of the brain. Now these definitions
are constantly changing, so it makes it difficult to talk about it, but right now this is the
definition we have at the present time. That there are three major association areas recognized,
and these are the prefrontal area, which is involved in executive functions, parietal
occipital temporal areas, which are actually multimodal, so it turns out they're sensory,
but the neurons in those areas respond to more than one sensory system, and last of
all the limbic cortex or limbic association cortex, which is involved in the elaboration
of emotion and memory. So if we were to look again on a drawing, these areas show here
is our prefrontal association cortex involved in executive functions. Here we have multimodal
cortex, here we have limbic association cortex. These areas, I really, this is really important
to point out because these definitions are just constantly changing. The way we look
at the cortex conceptually is really our way of dividing the cortex in a way that we can
understand function. It's not necessarily nature's way of doing it. So for example,
when we look at multimodal cortex, well that is sensory, so maybe that shouldn't be an
association area. It's still a sensory area even though it's multimodal. There's also
been a blurring of distinction now between this prefrontal area on this lateral part
of the hemisphere, involved in executive function, and this area here, which is part of the limbic
association area, involved in emotion and memory. The blurring comes because we now
know that without an elaboration of emotion, we aren't able to make rational decisions.
So we're not able to execute executive functions. And so there's been this blurring now, the
distinction between these two areas. So I think as time goes on and we understand more
and more about what these areas do, then I think that we will redefine the cortex again
in this conceptual way. And I think that that will be very, very important. Now, there's
another reason that research in this area hasn't moved as quickly as it possibly could
have, and that's because really only human beings have a really well-developed, for example,
prefrontal cortex. So while other primates do have prefrontal cortex, it isn't elaborated
in the way it is in us. When you look at Broughman's map, you see that this prefrontal area is
made up of a large number of areas. And there's no way to do research in human beings where
you would remove one of those areas and see what happens. What we do have in neuroscience
and what we do have that can give us some idea as to what's going on in these areas of the
brain, we have one unfortunate thing and that would be natural lesions that occur in patients
who say have a brain tumor in a particular area of the brain. So if a patient has a
brain tumor in a particular area and that patient loses a particular function, then
that tells us something about what that area might be involved in. Now, the function isn't
located in that area. All of these areas and modules are complexly interconnected to each
other, but we could make the assumption that something important about that function was
being controlled by that area. So those are natural lesions. Well, the problem with natural
lesions is that nature doesn't care what we're interested in and what happens when people
have brain tumors or any other kind of damage to the brain, it usually isn't just in one
of Broughman's areas. So it covers a larger area, which means again it makes it difficult
to figure out what each individual area of a complex structure might be doing. Now, in
modern neuroscience, we're very fortunate, we have developed newer techniques that are
allowing something never before that we've been able to do. And that is that we have
actual MRIs, we can now use magnetic resonance imaging and combining it with other techniques,
we can actually have people in a magnetic resonance imaging machine, we can ask them
to do various tasks or to think various things, imagine various things, and we can look at
what areas of the brain actually have functional, active neurons. And so when someone is thinking
a word, we can look and see what areas of the brain light up when a person thinks those
words. So these are non-invasive methods, which are giving us a great deal of information
in neuroscience and are going to yield a lot of valuable information about this prefrontal
area, these association cortices. Now, other paradigms, not just this one about how we
divvy up the cortex, but other paradigms have also been challenged by modern neuroscience.
So let's talk about a few of those. So historically, and actually until very recently, it was believed
that only a few functions, for example language, appeared to be related to only one hemisphere.
So when a function is only controlled by one hemisphere or the other, we say that that
function shows hemisphere dominance. So for example, for language, the left hemisphere
of the brain is normally dominant for language, and it doesn't make any difference whether
you're right-handed or left-handed. So whether you're right-handed or left-handed, about
95% of people show a left hemisphere dominance for language. So how has this paradigm been
challenged in modern neuroscience? Well, one of the ways is that we now know that while
it's true the left hemisphere, in order to understand language and to speak language,
we need an intact left hemisphere. We actually now know that the right hemisphere does a
whole lot of things related to language. And it's been the discovery of that that has helped
us see what certain areas in the non-dominant hemisphere are actually doing, and it will
be a topic of one of our later lectures. Now, it's also known that for other functions,
the historical position was that this hemisphere, so as I'm standing here, this would be my
left hemisphere, the historical position for other functions that didn't show dominance
was that this hemisphere would process information from that half of the world or that half
of the body and control the movement on this other side of the body, which we refer to
as the contralateral side of the body. So this was a basic principle that in general
is true. One hemisphere controls the movement and process information from the contralateral
half of the world or body and controls the movement on the contralateral side. So if
you have brain damage to your motor cortex on the left, it's the right side of the body
that you have trouble moving. And in general, this sort of cross ability or the cross processing
of information. So for the visual system, if I do a line straight down here and I look
straight ahead, this half of the visual world is processed by my visual cortex on this side,
and this half of the visual world is processed by my visual cortex on the contralateral side.
And this general principle is true. So that paradigm is in general true, but we're learning
some things that we didn't know before. So one of the things we have learned is why we
have this crossed sort of system or at least why the cross system occurs. And so I thought
I would use the motor system because it's the most obvious and also because you've seen
these before. And so it will just bring back some information that we've covered previously
in the class. Let's imagine that this is a motor neuron that is located in area four
in the frontal lobe. This is primary motor cortex. It's involved in the initiation of
a motor movement. So our general paradigm, which is in general true, it will mean that
motor neurons that are on the left side of the brain in area four are going to initiate
movement on the right side of the body. Why does that occur? Well if we look at this again,
we see here that the axon that leaves this neuron in motor cortex, this neuron is in
motor cortex in either layers five or six. This axon will leave these neurons and will
come down through the brain, down through the brainstem, and in the lower medulla will
cross to the other side of the body and will enter the spinal cord at a particular level
to make connection with neurons in the spinal cord. And it's the neurons in the spinal cord
that go out to the muscle on that same side. So this is why motor neurons on this side
of the brain control the movement on that side of the body. And so for many of the pathways
we've been able to trace out how the neurons are connected. So we at least know why it
is true or why the general paradigm holds true, that one half of the visual world, one
half of the world in general, or one half of the body, either in its ability to feel
or to move is processed by the other side of the cortex. Now while the statement is true
and while this paradigm is in general true, modern neuroscience has revealed some very
interesting things. So for example, we have learned that there are many functions that
are handled very differently than this. And that is that it isn't just cross that there
are some very higher order functions that seem to be the province of one of the hemispheres
in a very interesting way. So for example, individuals who have strokes that involve
their left hemisphere have a tendency to be depressed. Now the assumption was made that
individuals were depressed because if you have a stroke of your left hemisphere you
may lose the ability to move on the right, you may be paralyzed, you may have difficulty
speaking and understanding language. These are pretty important human functions. So the
assumption was made that individuals who had strokes in the left hemisphere were depressed
because they lost these very, very human abilities. Well it turns out that that's probably not
so. They may be depressed for that reason, but in general any kind of damage to the left
hemisphere causes a depression of mood. Whereas if you have damage to the right hemisphere
you're much more likely to be manic in your behavior even if it's inappropriate. So patients
who have lost incredible function from right hemisphere strokes for example may seem very
up in their mood even though they're paralyzed on the other side of their body. And that's
because mood is being processed in very different ways by the two hemispheres. Now a last example
here of how a paradigm is being shattered in neuroscience is related to that old structure
called the little seahorse, the hippocampus. The hippocampus is an old cortical area located
in the temporal lobe involved in learning and memory. And the hippocampus was always
believed, it's an old cortical area, so it was basically believed to be doing the same
thing on both sides of the brain. So you have two hemispheres, you have a hippocampus on
one side, you have a hippocampus on the other side. Well modern neuroscience has shown us
that in fact the hippocampus on the left side of the brain is more involved in being able
to remember words and being able to remember episodes in your life therefore contributing
substantially to an ongoing story your brain creates which we call an autobiography. And
your right hippocampus is involved in spatial memory. Now this is very important to me because
I get lost no matter where I go so I'm pretty sure I don't have a right hippocampus. So
this spatial memory on the right and many of the functions overlap between the structures
but actually there's like a dominance for structures on the sides of the brain that
we never before thought there was a dominance. So let's stand back from this information.
We really look at it, it looks like the two hemispheres, what's happened is some functions
are being taken over like and elaborated by one hemisphere versus another. And it's
like we really have two brains in our head. We have two independent brains in our head.
And this may be a strategy that evolution has used to increase the number of functions
that our cortex can do without adding a lot of areas. So you have the hippocampus on one
side specialized in a certain way rather than the other side. In other animals the two hippocampi
on both sides basically do the same thing. So this may be a strategy so that our head
doesn't have to get much bigger which would be difficult for women to give birth to a
baby because the brain has to be developed to a certain point. So this may be a way of
increasing functional areas by keeping the cortex approximately the same size. So if
we have two brains in our head, how is the information in the two hemispheres coordinated?
Well, it's coordinated via that corpus callosum, those 300 million axons that connect one cortical
area and one hemisphere with the same area in the other hemisphere. We saw earlier if
you were to look down on the brain and you were to take your fingers, I literally do this
for students, push the brain aside like this and look down on top of the brain, you see
300 million axons connecting the two hemispheres, the cortex of the two hemispheres. And so
it's like we have two brains in our head but everything is coordinated because of the
corpus callosum. Now, I want to give you an interesting clinical example so that you
understand what we mean by having two brains in our head. In individuals who have uncontrolled
epilepsy, often an epileptic seizure will spread across the corpus callosum to the other
side of the brain. And if drugs are not able to control these seizures, each time a seizure
occurs, neurons die. And so it's very important to control seizures. So if medication can't
control the seizures and can't control the spread of the seizures, sometimes neurosurgeons
will go into a person's brain and they will sever the corpus callosum. And that prevents
the epileptic seizure from spreading to the other hemisphere. Now, what was amazing about
this is when they first did this, neurosurgeons were amazed that the individuals where they
sectioned the corpus callosum, they seemed to be perfectly normal. They didn't seem to
have any functions that were lost. If you think about this though, normally when we
do something like cook or we talk to someone or whatever, we have both of our eyes open,
both of our ears are working. And notice when the corpus callosum is sectioned, all the
projection pathways are still intact. Remember, the projection pathways are the pathways that
are going up and down in the brain and connecting neurons between each other, but they're independent
of the corpus callosum. The corpus callosum is just connecting homotopic parts of the
corpus callosum in one hemisphere cortex with a homotopic part in the other hemisphere.
So the projection pathways are still intact. People can see whatever. So neurologists did
some very careful testing of these individuals and here's what they found. I want you to
imagine that I'm such a patient and I'm being asked to look straight down to focus forward
like this, to foveate on something in front of me. And an object is presented in one part
of my visual field. So there may even be a partition here so I can only see with one
eye or the other. If something is held up here in this half of the visual field, which
is processed by this part of my brain, and I'm asked what this is, if this is presented
in my left visual field, I can see it, but I can't say what it is because there's no
communication via my corpus callosum to language areas in the left hemisphere that talk. Now,
if this is presented in this part of the visual field, which is processed by my left hemisphere,
this is my right visual field, then I can not only see it, but I can also say that it's
a pen. And so what we discovered is that in fact, individuals who have had their corpus
callosum section do in fact have two independently functioning brains in their head, but because
they have both eyes open and they experience the world still as a unitary experience and
you have to test very carefully to be able to see any lost function. Thank you.
