Welcome back.
In this part of the course we've been talking about sensory systems, so we've been talking
about how information comes in and gives us details about an external world.
We've looked at the visual system in detail and the auditory and somatic sensory systems
in less detail.
Of course there are other sensory systems.
There's taste, smell and the vestibular system and these two provide information to our brain.
But in general the most important sensory systems for human beings are in fact going
to be the auditory, visual and somatic sensory systems.
So what are the commonalities that we see between the various systems that we've looked
at?
Well first of all that there are various types of receptors that respond selectively to different
types of stimulation.
In the visual system it's light, in the somatic sensory system it's stimulation of a particular
type of receptor somewhere on the body's surface.
We also see that different subsets of information within each of the systems is transmitted to
the brain via parallel pathways.
This is just a very common way that information is transferred in the brain.
Now in order for conscious appreciation so that we can develop a percept we need to have
the information transmitted to the cortex and first it has to go through the thalamus.
So again anything that wants to get to the cortex has to go through the thalamus first.
There are rare exceptions to that rule but in general most everything that wants to go
to the cortex has to go through the thalamus first.
So we saw that each of the pathways is going to synapse in its own nucleus in the thalamus
and that's why in one of our first lectures we talked about how the thalamus is this large
subdivision of the dynesophalon that has many individual nuclei in it and now we understand
why it's called anti-room and what the names of some of those individual nuclei are.
From the thalamus each thalamic area will then project to a primary area of cortex.
So for example if we think about vision the lateral geniculate nucleus projects to area
17th posterior pole of the brain.
The medial geniculate nucleus is going to project to area 41 which is in the temporal
lobe and the ventral posterior nucleus is going to project to areas 3, 1 and 2 for somatosensory
sensation.
From each of the primary sensory areas in the cortex that each of these subsystems projects
to then those areas are going to project to higher order sensory areas and it's these
higher order areas that are going to start creating the percepts that we experience subjectively
as seeing, feeling, hearing and any of our other senses that we have.
In this lecture we want to review information that's gained from clinical cases that's
going to contribute to our understanding of how the brain forms these individual percepts
which are related to sensory systems.
Now we're going to focus primarily on examples where there has been damage to cortical areas
which has caused the loss of the percept itself and this is what is just incredible to learn
about.
We're going to talk about patients who have actually lost some aspect of their subjective
experience of one of these systems.
Now in animal research we are able to do a lot of things that we can't do in human beings
obviously.
In animals we're able to make very specific lesions in very specific areas of the brain.
So just like there's a Brogman's areas for the human brain there are Brogman's areas
for other animals as well.
Now their cortex may be organized differently but we know where the different areas are
at.
So if we were doing research on an animal we could go in and we could lesion a specific
place and then we could see what the animal would lose.
Now this is very interesting.
Note, we would not know what the animal lost in the sense of a subjective experience of
what was happening.
So we don't know what the animal experiences subjectively so we can't look at that in animals.
We can only tell what function is lost.
If we want to know about these higher order areas of the brain then we have to go to the
human clinic.
We have to look at clinical cases where individuals have had damage for one reason or another
to specific areas of the brain.
Herein lies the problem.
In nature you don't just have some kind of lesion or damage to like one of Brogman's
areas, not very often anyway.
So in human cases you have a brain tumor that is in one place but it has an effect which
is mass so it's hard to tell exactly what these different areas do or what is lost.
But over time what we've been able to do is to amass enough clinical cases of individuals
who did in fact have individual lesions in very, very specific areas and we have gained
an enormous understanding of what it means to say that certain areas in these higher
order visual areas, certain lesions can actually produce a loss of a specific subjective aspect
of experience.
Now another reason that clinical literature, it's difficult to interpret the clinical
literature is because we are talking about subjective experience so it's also difficult
for the patient to try to explain to us what exactly is lost and I'm going to read from
some real patient files and you're going to see that people are looking for language
to try to explain what it is that they think they've lost and this is because it's a personal
subjective experience and again I put forth to you, imagine explaining blue to someone
who had never seen blue.
It's a personal subjective thing, very difficult to put into language but let's go ahead and
look at some clinical cases.
In these clinical cases one of the things that I think is also important is don't worry
so much how we test it.
Think of the lesions as being bilateral unless I say otherwise and that's just to remove
a complication from exactly how the physician would test the individual.
In later lectures we're going to return to these clinical cases and we're going to
return to these clinical cases because it turns out that what we think is actually lost
in these patients is a little bit different than what it obviously looks like so we're
going to return to these cases and look at them in more detail examining these rare cases
that occur in the clinical literature and with particular patients is actually telling
us something very critical about what we even mean by consciousness in human beings.
Now as I give clinical cases any time in this class it's very important for me to state
at least once.
We give these cases although they're just interesting and we want people to be fascinated
by them of course but we always recognize that this is something that happens in a person
and causes a great change in their lives so we recognize and respect the fact that these
are patient cases.
So let's begin by looking at what happens with particular lesions of the cortex itself.
So let's start with a lesion that involves area 17 or primary visual cortex.
So we've talked about this before and when you have a lesion of primary visual cortex
back here at the back of your head when you have a lesion of primary visual cortex here
we'll assume it's only on one side.
The person reports that they are blind or cannot see in the contralateral half of their
visual field and this should make sense to you.
This visual cortex processes information from that part of the world.
What we want to do now is to go into more detail about other types of lesions in which
area 17 is intact.
So what we want to do is we want to look at area 17 being intact but look at some visual
disorders that occur when people have lesions in even higher order areas of the visual system
where these percepts are being developed.
So area 17 is intact.
So first of all let's make sure that we all understand what it means to talk about these
extra striate visual areas.
Extra striate remember area 17 is also called the striate cortex.
So extra striate cortex is any visual cortex in occipital, parietal or temporal lobes that
processes visual information that's outside of area 17.
So let's look at some of the disorders that occur when you have lesions in these extra
striate areas.
Lesions in higher order areas cause what is called agnosia or produces an agnosia and
the term agnosia means a loss of knowledge.
So the individual can see because area 17 is intact but the individual loses some kind
of knowledge about the object or what it is.
Not a language problem, a visual problem, a higher order percept.
So there is a specific type of visual object agnosia in which area 17 is intact but now
the individual can no longer recognize what the object is.
So if we were to test this in a patient for example, if you held the pen up in front of
the patient and you said can you see this, the individual would nod yes or say yes I
can see it.
If you ask the individual what is it, they don't know on the basis of sight alone.
Now there are other types of agnosias for the other sensory systems.
In an individual who had a somatosensory object agnosia, you would ask them to close their
eyes and they would feel the pen with their hands and they would not be able to tell what
it was on the basis of touch alone.
Now if any of these types of agnosias, if the individual is allowed to use other sensory
systems, for example their auditory system, if you were to accidentally shake keys that
you were showing to someone, then they would be able to identify it.
So these are agnosias, these are a loss of knowledge about something, it's not related
again to language, it's not that the person can't say pen, it's that on the basis of
sight or auditory system or whatever system you're testing, they're not able to tell
what something is even though they can see perfectly fine.
Now there are other types of agnosias as well and it tells us that different areas of the
higher order cortex are going to process very higher order perceps.
For example, a lesion and part of the junction between the occipital and temporal lobes,
so right back here between occipital and temporal lobes, can produce in an individual
what is called a motion agnosia.
And this is where an individual actually loses the ability to perceive motion.
It isn't that they can't see, areas 17 is intact, other areas are intact, they simply
lose the subjective experience of motion, they lose the ability to perceive it.
So the visual world consists of still frames to them.
And I have a patient case here that talks about such an individual and talks about how
this individual could not distinguish any longer between stationary and moving objects.
She had difficulty pouring tear coffee because the tear of the coffee would suddenly appear
on the cup, she never sought move from one place to another, it was like still frames
happening to her.
She also developed a lot of social difficulties because when she talked to someone she couldn't
see the movement of their mouth nor could she see the movement of their face.
And so this is one of the most important ways that we communicate with each other is human
beings and so she developed a lot of social problems.
She had a great deal of difficulty in crowds because people would suddenly appear or they
would not appear.
And so she had difficulty because everything was seen without motion, motion was gone.
That individual had to be taught how to cross the street because a car would suddenly appear,
she would see it in one place and then suddenly it would be in another place and obviously
was very dangerous.
She had to be taught how to use auditory cues to allow her to tell when a car was approaching
and how close it was.
You can have other types of agnosias.
For example you can have a particular type of color agnosia which is going to relate
to the loss of the percept that relates specifically to color.
So there are various types of color agnosias and you can have a specific agnosia in which
you can distinguish the different wavelengths of light but you lose the ability to perceive
individual colors.
This occurs from a lesion to an area we talked about and that's area four.
So area four is an area of higher order visual cortex which is intimately involved in being
able to have a subjective experience of color.
In this disorder what is lost is that percept, that subjective experience.
Now this needs to be contrasted, this is not color blindness so it needs to be contrasted
with that.
In color blindness a person lacks a particular type of cone or they lack something that allows
them to be able to process different wavelengths of light.
An individual who has a color agnosia has no difficulty distinguishing wavelengths of
light.
There's nothing wrong with the retina.
It's specifically a higher order visual area and this individual no longer experiences
color.
Now there's a very famous individual who's been written up many different times who
had this, an individual who was a painter and this artist developed a number of problems
as a consequence of his loss of color vision.
So he had color agnosia after an accident and this occurred when he was 65 years old
and he became a person who had this color agnosia.
He tried to describe this to physicians by saying that he was viewing the world in black
and white like you were looking at a television screen.
He had been a painter.
He did abstract very brightly painted paintings.
What happened was he lost his interest in art.
He was no longer able to appreciate most art because he lost his ability to have a subjective
experience of color and so he stopped painting.
That's a major change in someone's life over one thing but he also developed other changes
which were very, very significant for his life.
He said that people's flesh looks gray to him and because the flesh of other people
looked grayish to him it became almost abhorrent and he shunned intercourse with people socially.
He didn't want to interact with people because he couldn't stand looking at them.
He developed marital problems because he was unable to have sexual intercourse with
his wife because he found her skin repugnant and he was simply unable to see her in any
way except tones that brought out this emotional response.
This painter is also famous for another reason.
He had synesthesia which is a sort of special development of a sense where when people listen
to music it evokes colors for them.
Very few people have this but he had it to a very high degree.
Well it turned out after he had this brain damage from his automobile accident he was
no longer able to have any sensation of color when he listened to music and he lost his
interest in music.
Now these are pretty big changes for a person's life.
This individual has been followed for a long time.
There are post scripts that are written up in the literature on him.
One of them is that over time he even forgot what color was which is very interesting.
So it also affected his memory of what had been.
So initially he had a lot of problems emotionally because he remembered things had been different
and even though he couldn't bring up that subjective experience he remembered they were
different.
Years later he could no longer remember that he experienced things differently and the
last follow up that I was able to find on this individual he was divorced, he had become
a night person, he slept during the day and only interacted with the world at night.
It was though he became a primate who no longer had color vision and was only able to hunt
and to interact with others at night.
So having these types of agnosias may seem interesting to us but they certainly cause
tremendous changes in people's lives.
There are other types of higher order areas of the brain that when you have brain damage
to some of them you lose some other aspect of subjective experience.
Now another one of these disorders is prosopagnosia.
So prosopagnosia is going to occur from lesions in the temporal lobe that are in those areas
of the brain that allow us to recognize faces.
So individuals who have lesions in these areas can see perfectly fine and in fact if you ask
them to describe the face of a particular person they know well they can describe the
face with no difficulty at all.
But if that individual is sitting out in an audience and they're asked to identify that
specific person in the audience they go from one person to another and they are unable
to identify that individual's face.
And so here again we have a very, very higher order subjective experience which seems to
be lost with a particular brain lesion.
And again I have another clinical case on that, a write up of a clinical case and here
again you see the patient struggle to describe to the physician what it is that has been
lost.
So its higher order is subjective and it makes it difficult for the patient to describe exactly
what is lost in the disorder.
So this patient who had prosopagnosia talks about how when he looks at a person's face
he can see the eyes, the nose, the mouth and everything quite clearly but they don't add
up to anything that makes sense to him.
He uses what the person is wearing to determine whether the face belongs to a man or a woman.
This individual can't recognize himself in a mirror.
He can't recognize himself or his loved ones in photographs.
This changes people's lives.
He talked about going to the theater and how he couldn't make sense out of any of the plots
because he couldn't tell who anyone was at any given time.
He couldn't put the character with the face and so he could no longer go to the theater.
This particular individual also had another problem and that is that he had a lot of difficulty
in distinguishing animal faces.
So animals have different faces as well and he would generally look at the rest of the
body of the animal to tell what an animal was.
If he was shown a photograph in which he only had the face of a cow or the face of a dog,
a face of an animal, he couldn't tell from what animal that face was taken.
So this is a higher order loss in a person who isn't blind.
There are other higher order losses and this is where we've been leading in this part of
the class when we talk about sensory systems the way we have.
It isn't just whether you're blind, it's the loss of these higher order percepts.
So for example, it is our brains that allow us to see ourselves in our own bodies as separate
from extra personal space.
This is something that doesn't just happen, don't take it for granted.
And people who have lesions, and this is good because this is actually a right hemisphere,
people can have a lesion in areas five and seven of their parietal lobe and they can
have a very specific type of disorder in which here are the areas five and seven are up here
in the parietal lobe, they can have a very specific disorder called contralateral neglect.
Now contralateral neglect is a little bit different to describe to people but basically
it occurs from lesions to the right hemisphere in areas five and seven and what it produces
in the individual is contralateral neglect which means the individual ignores the left
half of their body and the left half of the world as though they were just no longer there.
So it's called contralateral neglect.
There appears to be a loss of awareness of part of one's own body and of the personal
and extra personal space.
So for example, in the doctor's office, a person who has this disorder and this occurs
from unilateral lesions, so lesions that occur in the right parietal cortex produce left-sided
neglect.
You hold up the person's arm and you say, whose arm is this?
Do you see it?
The person looks at it, they can even tell you it's an arm.
When you say whose arm is this, the patient may hesitate and then say, well doc, there's
only you and me in the room, it must be yours.
This occurs even if the doctor and the patient are of different races and the person can
clearly see and the doctor points out, don't you notice that that arm is a different color?
And the person will look at it and say, well doc, I don't know what that means but that
must be your arm.
The person does not recognize the left side of their body as being a part of them.
Now individuals who have contralateral neglect often get brought into the emergency room
by their spouses and the reason for this is, for example in a man, the man may stop
shaving the left half of his face.
He may not put his pants on the left side of his body.
A woman stops combing her hair on the left side of the face.
Lipstick won't be put on to the left side of the lips.
The person, it's like they're unaware, see we take it for granted that this is our body
and this is where this stops and this is where extra space begins.
But that's something that's a percept that's created by the brain and so it's not true
that we should just take it for granted.
This is something that is a development of the brain.
What is interesting in this is that lesions of the left parietal cortex do not produce
right-sided neglect.
And that is also told as something about what's going on in the brain.
So neglect is due to lesions of areas 5 and 7 in the right hemisphere that causes a loss
of the percept on the left side of the body.
Now scientists have worked a long time to try to figure out exactly what contralateral
neglect is about.
They have come up with a hypothesis about it.
And this hypothesis tells us that the right and the left posterior parietal cortex are
processing information from different parts of the world in different ways.
So let me tell you the hypothesis which is currently put forth to explain this.
This is the body midline here, this is the body midline, this is the posterior parietal
cortex on the right, this is the posterior parietal cortex on the left.
The current hypothesis is the right posterior parietal cortex contains a representation
of both the right and the left sides of the body and the visual world.
Whereas the left parietal cortex has only a representation of the contralateral or
right half of the body and visual world.
That means we have a patient who has a lesion on the left side and remember this doesn't
produce any disability.
We believe it's because the right projections are still intact.
So it has a representation of both sides of the body so an individual with a lesion
here does not experience contralateral neglect.
An individual who loses the right posterior parietal cortex however is going to lose that
representation which tells them about the contralateral or left half of the body and
space.
Now there are some very interesting studies that have been done on people who have this
particular disorder.
One of them is remarkable because it also gave us insight into another aspect of this
devastating disorder.
What they did was they asked individuals to imagine buildings that they were very familiar
with.
For example a town square and just to imagine the buildings that were on the right and the
left well predictably the individuals could remember objects that were on this side but
they couldn't remember anything on that side.
So this disorder extends even to memory but even more amazing if the individual was then
asked to imagine the buildings from the back side from the other side and asked to remember
buildings on the right and left side they could remember the buildings that they formally
could not.
And so what we believe happens with these individuals is they have a very specific type
of memory loss.
The individual has like lost access to some aspect of memory and it is also told us that
spatial memory is referenced to the body image.
And so these are higher order somatosensory visual areas where everything comes together
and it turns out that visual space is also mapped to body space and when one is lost
the other is generally lost as well.
So the bottom line is that the distinction between our own bodies and a world which is
outside of ourselves is one of the first percepts that a child learns.
It's one of the first percepts developed by the brain.
So initially it's probably true that the child does not see themselves as separate from
their mother or from the external world.
This is something that develops.
These are the so-called agnosias of the brain, agnosias being the loss of knowledge, this
higher order subjective experience that we have of the various sensory systems.
Thank you.
