Hello and welcome to our course on a brain.
In our previous lecture we reviewed how the concept or the idea of a limbic system actually
evolved.
We now think of it as this huge mega system with many individual subsystems that are integrated
in nature and provide this umbrella to our experience, add this emotional texture to
our experience.
We also talked about some of the very famous cases, clinical cases in neuroscience that
led us to an understanding of this system.
One was of course, Thineus Gage, very tragic case of an individual who had a 13 pound tamping
iron through the front part of his brain.
What was significant again is that at the time it wasn't recognized that this really
had relevance to the localization of function in the brain.
So Gage was no longer Gage after this tamping iron went through his prefrontal lobes and
not only had his personality changed, but he no longer had a moral code that could guide
his actions.
And the reason for this is because we now know that this orbital frontal region, which
is right above the orbit of the eye, is specifically able to abstract the cultural rules or mores
from whatever culture you're exposed to.
So you remember when we talked about language, we talked about how some areas of the left
hemisphere seem to be specifically involved in the ability to understand phonemes in
a language to understand them.
Well this area of the brain abstracts rules as well, that's what it does.
So whatever culture you're exposed to, those are the rules that your brain will abstract.
So what subculture you're exposed to makes a difference.
And so this area of the brain is specifically made to do that, so to speak.
And so this is the area of the brain that was damaged in Gage.
He could no longer use his moral system.
He could reason through what a moral was, but he couldn't use that system to guide
his actions.
And our last case that we looked at was also HM, another very, very tragic case of an individual
who to keep him from having seizures had a bilateral medial temporal lobectomy.
And what happened was the hippocampus and these other structures that are critically
involved in short term memory and learning in particular were removed bilaterally in
this individual.
And so from that point on he was no longer able to learn new material and in fact has
been followed for at least four decades and has been unable to learn new material.
Another very important thing about HM is his IQ was not changed.
He had an IQ of about 117 before the surgery and he still has an IQ of 117.
His attention span wasn't changed.
What changed specifically in him is that he could no longer learn new material.
And so everything that he faces in his life is a new event, a new happening.
So what is our definition of the limbic system in the modern neuroscience era?
It's this huge mega integrative system of complexly interconnected nuclei that play
a role in learning, memory, emotion and executive function.
And now you're beginning to see why I place executive function in that limbic system.
So just to review a little bit of the anatomy and remind you of the structures, some of
which we're going to talk about, we have here's our hippocampus.
Now it really is part of the temporal lobes.
So this is a view through the brainstem.
This is the hippocampus.
This is one of the structures that was removed in HM.
This is the ventral tegmental area and its projections up here to nucleus accumbens
and to this prefrontal cortex we're going to see is going to be involved in addictions.
We have an amygdala down here and the amygdala being very critically involved in the processing
of emotions and in particular most work has focused on fear and we're going to have a
specific lecture devoted to that.
Now these are only a few of the areas.
There are a huge number of nuclei involved in the limbic system and all of them are organized
into these circuits where there's a constant feedback and those smaller circuits are connected
to more structures and so there's this sort of hierarchy of connections and that's one
of the reasons it's been difficult to study and probably took a long time to be recognized
as a system because in fact it's so complexly interconnected.
Now each of these pathways, each of these nuclei in its projection are going to use
particular neurotransmitters.
That isn't going to surprise you.
And just like we saw in the extra-parametal motor system, this is going to turn out to
be important functionally.
So what did we see in the extra-parametal motor system?
Remember that was a system that's involved in habitual movements, motor programs that
get set into play and what we saw was that there were many circuits, feedback circuits
and if you removed any one nucleus in that circuit or you removed one neurotransmitter
from that circuit because of damage, you could have incredibly different types of malfunction
or lack of function.
So for example, the examples we gave at the time, if you lesion the subthalamic nucleus
which is one tiny little nucleus in the extra-parametal motor system, you get hemi-bilismus.
So if you damage the subthalamic nucleus on one side, you have abnormal motor movements
that are ballistic that the person cannot control.
If you on the other hand damage the substantia nigra in the midbrain, these dopaminergic
cells that are in the midbrain that project forward in the brain, what happens is you
remove dopamine from a critical circuit.
So now you remove from the degeneration of that one nucleus, you remove a major neurotransmitter
and what happens there, Parkinsonian signs and symptoms.
So initially the tremor at rest, the abnormal postures and over time a freezing of behavior.
The reason I bring up the extra-parametal motor system here while we're talking about
the lumbic system is because the same kind of idea is going to happen here in the lumbic
system.
You have these complex feedback circuits, these mega system that's set up that's made
up of all these different nuclei and the connections between them.
If you damage one of the nuclei, you remove it from its circuit and from the bigger circuit.
If you do something that changes the neurotransmitters between these nuclei, you're also going
to change function.
So what happens, let's step back again and go back to something that was said very early
in the course.
What happens is that you disrupt the balance of excitation and inhibition and when you
disrupt that balance of excitation inhibition in these pathways, then you have syndromes
that result as a consequence of that.
In the extra-parametal motor system, it would be motor signs and symptoms.
So here in our lumbic system what you see are profound changes in the way the person
relates emotionally or relates to the world.
Remember that's part of what the lumbic system does.
It's the system that allows us to engage with the world.
And so whenever you have any kind of damage, whether it's to a nucleus, a pathway, or you
change the neurotransmitters between these nuclei, you're going to have a disruption
of the system.
These imbalances are in fact believed to underline most of the so-called mental or psychiatric
disorders that afflict human beings.
In this course, we will use depression as an example of a system in which the balance
of neurotransmitters is disrupted.
So what we want to do in this lecture is to talk about some of the neurotransmitters and
molecules that are used because these are the ones that get disrupted under certain
conditions if you have damage to a nucleus.
So it doesn't mean that this is the nucleus that's only nucleus for depression, for example.
What it means is you remove it from a complicated circuit.
And that throwing off of the balance is what results in a subjective experience of depression
that the person relates to the physician.
So before we can do that, before we can talk about neurotransmitters in the limbic system,
we have to talk about our other integrative system in the brain.
And we've talked about it before, and that's the reticular formation.
And the reticular formation is that other integrative system.
And just to remind you, it's a core of nuclei.
It's about actually the size of my finger of about 110 or more nuclei that extend from
the lower part of the medulla up into the forebrain.
So it's like a column of cells that are divided into individual nuclear areas.
When we spoke about it before, however, we spoke about it in a context of it being involved
in vital functions like breathing and heart rate.
Those are pretty vital.
And what we did was use an example that many of the nuclei of the reticular formation that
are involved in vital functions like breathing are located in the medulla.
So we talked about how if you have a brain tumor up here or you have a hemorrhagic bleed,
there's space taken up here and it forces the brain down.
And that causes the brain to herniate and forces the brain down through the hole that
connects the medulla with a spinal cord.
And that squeezes the area where there's nuclei which are involved in breathing, heart rate,
these vital functions are located.
And that's why the person dies.
So when the brain herniates like that, you basically compromise the function of these
nuclei in the reticular formation now.
But the reticular formation has 110 nuclei in it.
So those are only a few of them.
So in the context here in the limbic system, other nuclei of the reticular formation that
are located more rostrally are involved in functions that are going to be very important
for limbic system function.
For example, nuclei in the reticular formation regulate sleep, arousal, attention, and even
consciousness.
Well it's obvious that all of those things are going to be complexly interrelated with
functions of the limbic system like learning and memory or even our emotions.
I always give an example to students and I think it's a very good example.
If you want to see how the limbic system and the reticular formation are complexly interconnected,
you have only to think about how your mood changes when you don't get any sleep.
These systems are not only complex in and of themselves, they are complexly interconnected
with one another.
So in the context of what we're talking about here and the importance of that for our discussion
here, it isn't just about the neurotransmitter that one limbic system nucleus uses in its
projection to another limbic system nucleus that matters.
It's also about the reticular formation nuclei that project the limbic system structures.
And so these are all tied up with each other because the two systems are tied up with each
other.
So some of the neurotransmitters we'll talk about will be transmitters of reticulitis
reticular formation projections to limbic system structures.
And again, just think about how your mood changes when you don't get any sleep and you
see how these systems are related to each other.
So what neurotransmitters are involved?
Well our list looks pretty similar to other lists we've seen for other systems that we've
talked about.
For example, glutamate.
Glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the nervous system in human beings in the
central nervous system.
And so we're going to see many of the connections in the limbic system use glutamate.
Many of the connections, for example, between the hippocampus, enteroidal cortex, many of
these projections are excitatory and they use glutamate.
So they can be involved again at stroke both sides, that penumbrial region that can develop.
Glutamate is a key player in seizures.
And the limbic system has the lowest threshold for seizures of any system in the brain and
part of the reason for that is because it has so many glutamatergic synapses.
The next one is after glutamate is serotonin and serotonin is also called 5HT.
Serotonin is one of the monowamines.
So it's one of those neuromodulators, one of the monowamines, utilized primarily by nuclei
which are in the reticular formation.
The graphene nuclei are particularly small groups of neurons that utilize serotonin as
a neurotransmitter that are in the reticular formation extending from medulla to midbrain.
So there's these tiny little collections of cells that make up little teeny nuclei that
have widespread projections to limbic system structures.
This is the system.
When there's a disruption of these projections from these graphene nuclei using serotonin,
two limbic system structures, depression results.
So these tiny little nuclei have incredible consequences in human beings when something
goes wrong.
The next neurotransmitter which is going to be a major neurotransmitter in the system
is dopamine.
It's used by that ventral tegmental area which is part of the midbrain.
Dopamine is going to be a major player in addictions, for example.
The ventral tegmental area being that small group of dopaminergic neurons that have widespread
projections again to the cortex.
And that's going to be actually a subject of one of our lectures.
Another neurotransmitter that's used in the system is norepinephrine.
Along with dopamine, norepinephrine and dopamine, you remember, are the catecholamines and they're
both part of this monominergic projections in the brain.
So norepinephrine, which is one of these catecholamines and also called monomine, is
used predominantly by a nucleus of the reticular formation again called the nucleus lococeruleus.
And the nucleus lococeruleus, that means blue nucleus, is a tiny little nucleus in the
pontine region of the brainstem in that reticular core, tiny little group of neurons that have
widespread projections to limbic system structures as well as other structures.
Now this tiny group of neurons plays a role in selective attention, the regulation of
blood flow in the brain and sleep wake cycles, a tiny little nucleus and its projections.
So now you see that anything that would disrupt that would obviously disrupt behavior and disrupt
an individual's personality.
Another neurotransmitter, obviously, is going to be GABA.
GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain, so you have that balance between
glutamate and GABA in general, then you have these other modulators.
And GABA is particularly a neurotransmitter which is used in those little tiny inner neurons
in the limbic system, so that's why it's important.
Now these aren't the only molecules that play a role in this limbic system.
And some of the most interesting work has been done on opioids.
We identified primarily opioids, these peptides in the brain, like the endorphins, as helping
relieve pain, physical pain, so they're found in areas of the brain that are going to regulate
the transmission of pain information.
Interestingly enough, and people were initially surprised at this, opioids are also found
in high concentration limbic system structures and it's now believed that they actually play
a role in the diminution of emotional pain.
And emotional pain and physical pain for human beings are related to each other.
And so these opioids may actually play a role in helping to decrease emotional pain that
individuals experience.
Nuclei also, some of them, a few of them, have a very high concentration of oxytocin.
Oxytocin is a hormone, it's known as the love molecule.
And there's a reason why it's called that.
For one thing, it does happen to be one of the targets of drugs like ecstasy.
So young people feel bonded to each other when they take a drug that increases oxytocin
because it makes them feel bonded.
Oxytocin is found in very high concentrations in limbic system areas, specific limbic system
areas, in animals that socially bond.
And most of the research in this area has been done on that cute little mouse-like creature
called the prairie vole.
And the prairie vole is an interesting little animal.
He's one of the very few animal species on the face of the planet that's truly monogamous.
And it turns out that little prairie voles have a very high concentration of oxytocin
in particular limbic system structures that we believe plays a critical role in their
bonding to a mate for life.
If you block the receptors for oxytocin in their brain, they no longer mate for life
and they become promiscuous.
And if you look across species, the more monogamous the species, the higher the oxytocin and the
greater the number of receptors for binding oxytocin in the brain.
Now one of the reasons this is interesting is because oxytocin is a hormone and it plays
a role, for example, in physiological processes like milk let down after a woman's given birth.
So we used to think that one of the reasons why women bonded to a baby is because they
nursed the baby.
And you know, here oxytocin is flowing and the woman held the baby and this led to it.
In fact, oxytocin is released in very large quantities when we interact socially with
each other, when in fact we socially interact like with a baby or with pets.
When we have sexual intercourse, oxytocin levels go up and this is believed in social
species to play a role in the bonding that's necessary for survival of our species.
And it's seen in species in which this is important.
Now just to give you a little idea, here's a picture where you can just see the oxytocin
flying.
This is Heine Steadmuthin and his main squeeze, Buttercup.
And you can just see the oxytocin flowing in their brains.
Now the limbic system is this huge system that's involved in learning, memory, emotion
and executive function.
And it is the system which is going to give us largely what we refer to as mood and temperament.
So let's see how do physicians or how do psychiatrists separate these two things.
Mood is an emotional response that fluctuates.
So for example, if you don't get any sleep and your mood changes, so your mood fluctuates
depending on context, depending on what's happening in your life.
And mood can change just like that.
Have you ever been like in a conversation with someone and you misunderstand something
and they say and immediately you feel angry?
Well part of that's because the mood can change very rapidly.
Temperament is something different.
Temperament is a very stable part of an individual and we now believe has to do really with how
your limbic system is wired.
And it's a fairly stable characteristic.
So you have people that are highly reactive, you have people who are sanguine by nature,
you have people that have like different ways of engaging in the world.
That's what this system does.
It allows us to engage with the world.
And we engage with the world with our unique limbic systems.
Part may even be genetically transmitted.
So you might notice a father and a son who have very similar personalities.
Well they may be raised together, but you will often see children have personalities
very different from their parents.
So the way the genes combine and all the rest of this, we have some sort of genetically
determined factors involved and then other things and this is very active area of research
because people's temperaments seem to be fairly stable parts of their personality and we believe
it's related in fact to how the limbic system is wired in individuals.
So I said that we have a system that if you throw off the balance there's a lot of changes
that take place.
The way the person relates to the world changes.
The way the person engages themselves in the world.
All you have to do is think about an individual who suffers from serious depression.
They withdraw from interactions with others.
They don't want to eat.
I mean their whole way of engaging in the world changes.
So it's very obvious and that involves just one neurotransmitter or can involve just one
neurotransmitter in the limbic system throwing off the balance of that one neurotransmitter
which we'll talk about in our lecture on depression.
So the point being that changing the system changes how you feel and another distinction
that neuroscientists make is between an emotion and a feeling.
So when we talk to each other in a general vernacular we use these terms sort of loosely
like they mean the same thing you say well I feel angry or and you might say that's the
emotion that I'm having.
Well neuroscientists are taking a step back and trying to separate out components of this
experience and separating these definitions is one of the first steps in that.
They see the emotion as a basic physiological state that has a lot to do with your autonomic
nervous system and the changes that take place in your body as a result of this limbic system
reaction to something.
The feeling however and let's think about this the feeling is that internal subjective
state that you experience.
So if I say to you I'm depressed you don't actually know exactly what I'm feeling.
What you try to do is relate it to some state you've had before.
So what we believe is that the limbic system just like we saw in vision and audition just
like we've seen in all the other systems we've talked about we believe what's happening
in the limbic system is your cortex is actually constructing that internal subjective state
and in this case it's a feeling and in vision for example you have an internal subjective
experience of color color isn't in the thing out there and we saw that it could be taken
away and so we have this internal subjective sense of things and for the limbic system
that is going to be our feelings and so we attempt to describe our internal state to
other people with words and we think that this is one of the things that is important
in talking about depression as we will see later.
Now we've also learned that feedback from the body plays a role in the construction
of this feeling.
So a feeling is an active story basically that the brain concocts from the information
that's taken in.
It's a creative process that results in the subjective feeling.
We know that feedback from the body is important and we know this because of a number of lines
of evidence.
One is something I mentioned before and that was it was noticed that individuals who have
trans sections to their spinal cord very high trans sections of their spinal cord seem to
over time develop a different emotional response to the world.
Their personality changes in some very fundamental ways and initially it was concluded that that's
just because they're depressed because of what's happened to them that anyone could
understand but we now believe that that's not true.
Part of what the brain uses to construct feelings is feedback from the body and these individuals
are no longer getting the feedback from the body and in fact there's a decreased emotional
response and also a decreased intensity to emotions that are experienced by long term
survivors of very high level cervical spinal cord damage.
Now the conclusion that the brain constructs our feelings or this internal subjective state
is also evidenced by something else and this was something that fascinated psychologists,
fascinated people for a long time philosophers too and that is many of the same physiological
states are interpreted by us in a different way depending on our experience, our expectations,
the social context, whatever.
For example your heart beats hard if you're angry but it beats hard if you're in aesthetic
joy so if you're feeling this incredible exuberance with life then your heart also
beats faster so these body states the brain just doesn't take it and then say well this
feeling goes with that.
It takes all these other things into consideration.
The limbic system of this mega system involved in learning memory, emotion and executive
function and it takes the whole context, it takes your memory of past experiences and
it interprets that increased heart rate in a particular way.
It constructs the feeling and whether that feeling is positive or that feeling is negative
you can actually do experiments where you can artificially stimulate the body sensation
but lead people to think that an outcome of something will be positive or negative and
they'll report having an internal positive or negative sensation even though the body
sensation is exactly the same.
So what we're going to see in our next lecture is that when you disrupt in normal individuals,
when you disrupt this finely balanced system of all these nuclei that are involved in
creating this internal subjective state that we call feeling something, regardless of what
that feeling is, that you throw off this system and we will use depression to be the example
and we will also talk about how it's treated and why certain antidepressants work.
Thank you.
