Hello, and welcome back.
Up to this point in the course, we've considered the human brain as though it were generic,
focusing on a sort of general understanding of how different areas of the brain are involved
in a variety of different functions.
Here we're going to examine some of the data indicating that at least in some ways the
brains of males and females are different.
So finally, we're going to talk about sex.
Well, human sexuality and how it's expressed in particular cultures is a very, very complicated
subject.
We'll come back to this a little bit later.
Biologists, however, generally break it down into various categories, and they're obviously
interrelated in most individuals, but these categories would include genotypic sex.
So genotypic sex is determined by the inheritance of either two axes or an X and a Y chromosome.
This determines how the development of the embryonic gonads takes place.
These are the sex organs.
They differentiate either to an ovary or into a testis, and this is determined at conception.
So genotypic sex is determined at conception and depends on whether the father contributes
an X or a Y to the fetus.
So when you hear things about Henry VIII and how he beheaded and killed all those wives
because they didn't have any little male children, we now know that that doesn't make any sense
because it was Henry who contributed all those Xs that resulted in all the female children
that he had.
At any rate, the next type of category of sex that biologists generally make is phenotypic
sex.
And this is determined by the development of internal and external genitalia.
So obviously, genotypic sex and phenotypic sex are generally related.
I have to tell you, however, there are disorders in which, for one reason or another, genotypic
sex and phenotypic sex are not the same, so they don't always occur normally together.
And in human beings, we also have something else, and that's called gender identification.
And this is determined by the subjective experience or perception of one's own sex.
So the latter is a construct created by the brain related to one's perceived sexual identity.
So this is a construct created by the individual related to which sex they identify with.
Now what we have found out in neuroscience, and we think that gender identification is
more related to this, neuroscience has in fact found another category, it's revealed
another category of sex called brain sex.
And brain sex means that the actual structural and thus likely to be functional differences
in the way brains are organized in male and female may in fact relate to differences in
how males and females relate to their environment and also gender identification.
The differentiation into two forms, so we say a male and a female form, is referred
to as sexual dimorphism of the brain.
So what does it mean to say that a nucleus or an area of the brain is sexually dimorphic?
Well what it means is that somehow an individual nucleus or a structure is different in the
size, the number, or the density of neurons.
To a particular area may be different in males and females depending on the number of neurons
found in that area.
An area is sexually dimorphic if the connections between it and another area are different
between males and females, or you could have a difference in the expression of particular
molecules and receptors for example in different structures of the brain in males and females.
Now what is important here is this, there's a lot of variability in every one of our brains,
so all of our brains aren't exactly the same.
So if we looked in any structure, if we looked at a group of females for example, there'd
be a certain amount of variation in that structure among that group of females.
If we looked in males the same would be true.
So when we're talking about sexual dimorphism, we're seeing that the differences between
males and females are much greater than the differences that exist within either of the
groups.
So these structures are very different, different enough that in some cases any trained scientist
could immediately look at a section of the brain through particular areas and would be
able to tell you whether that section came from the brain of a male or the brain of a
female.
So we're talking about pretty big differences here.
Now we assume that the differences in structure or molecular structure or gross overall structure
play a role in how that nucleus operates or works.
So we think that this underlies difference in function, which is, we'll get to some of
the functional data here in a minute.
Now before we talk about the areas of the brain that are involved, let's turn our attention
to what induces sexual dimorphism in the brain.
This is just a really, really interesting area.
So first of all, originally in development, the central nervous system of the fetus is
equi-potential for developing either brain sex.
So it doesn't make any difference whether you have two X's or an X and a Y. Your brain
is equi-potential for developing into the brain sex of either male or female.
So what happens in the male brain?
What happens in the male brain?
Well normally in males, the immature testes produce a tiny amount of testosterone.
And this testosterone is going to masculinize the male sex organs.
It will also cause the regression of some of the tissues in the body that would have
developed into female structures.
And in addition, it plays a role in masculinizing the male brain.
Actually minute amounts of testosterone will enter the brain and will actually get inside
the neurons in particular structures of the brain.
And only those structures will then develop and become sexually dimorphic.
So the testosterone only enters particular structures in the brain.
What is interesting here is that once the testosterone is inside of these neurons, it
in fact is converted to estradiol, which is an estrogen.
And it is actually that estradiol that masculinizes the male brain.
Thus in the presence of estradiol, those particular neurons in the brain become male in their
pattern of the neurons, how the neurons are packed, and in their connections with other
structures.
So what happens in female fetuses?
Well let's think about this.
Since it's estrogen that actually masculinizes the male brain, why isn't the female brain
made masculine by the high levels of estrogen that circulate in the mother?
It turns out that circulating in the bloodstream are actually proteins that bind estrogen.
But I want you to think about this.
Even in males, it isn't circulating estrogen that masculinizes the brain.
It's the conversion within certain groups of neurons, just the conversion within certain
groups of neurons from testosterone that is critical, that results in a male brain.
So this is what is involved.
Testosterone in males must enter certain cells and there be converted into estrogen.
So it's not circulating estrogen that does it.
So in the female brain, in females what you have is the absence of a certain level, which
is tiny, that certain level of testosterone causes the brain to develop on a female pattern.
The female pattern of brain development is in fact the default pattern in the brain.
So in a sense it's like a computer program.
In the absence of additional information, a brain will develop along a female pattern.
Now what happens in the little developing male fetus who doesn't produce enough testosterone?
And this does happen.
If those little gonads don't produce enough testosterone so there isn't enough to get
into the brain and thereby be converted within certain groups of neurons and estradiol, that
male will develop a female brain.
In females, in female fetuses, if for some reason the mother is producing a high level
of androgens in her bloodstream, if the mother is exposed to certain kinds of steroids, if
the mother takes particular drugs like barbiturates during pregnancy, or we now know if the mother
is exposed to high levels of pesticides, all of these things will masculinize female brains.
So that means that a female fetus whose mother is exposed to certain things, that fetus will
be exposed to androgen, that will in fact masculinize her brain.
So this is a very, very important and interesting area of research.
Now the brain becomes sexually dimorphic during a critical period or window of time.
And we've seen critical periods talked about before.
So for different kinds of things that occur developmentally, there are different critical
periods.
So depending on what we're talking about, it could be a different critical period of
time.
And in this case, the critical period for humans for sexual dimorphism of the brain occurs
before birth.
So that means that from that point on, brain sex is determined.
There is nothing that can change it.
And it means that puberty, the circulating male and female hormones that circulate as
a result of reaching puberty, already act on a brain that's already sexually dimorphic.
And so this is a very critical part about it.
Brain sex cannot be changed and it's determined before birth, at least in human beings.
So what is the evidence of sexual dimorphism of the brain?
What is the evidence that this is true?
And as with other questions that we've looked at in this course, we're going to look at
experimental data from animals and also look at clinical research and from the clinic and
how that can inform us about this.
Most research in the area is done on rats and there's actually a reason for that.
The critical period for sexual dimorphism in the rat is postnatal, so it occurs after
birth.
And this means that as scientists, we can manipulate the hormonal environment during
the critical period much easier than we could if it occurred in utero.
So rats are a wonderful model for this.
They're also a wonderful model because the behavior of rats is very sexually dimorphic.
So that means adult male rats engage in mounting behavior and certain kinds of behaviors that
are very different than adult females.
Female rats, when they're sexually excited, exhibit something called lordosis, which means
the rear part of the body moves up and their tail moves out of the way.
And female rats also engage in nest building activity.
So you have an animal in which its adult behavior is also very clearly dimorphic, so you can
watch their behavior very carefully.
And when you manipulate them or you manipulate this critical period, you can see what happens
or how this plays out.
So they're a very, very good model for studying this.
So what happens if we manipulate the hormonal environment of a male or a female rat during
their critical period right after birth when their brains are going to become sexually
dimorphic?
Note that the animals that we manipulate, we can determine what their genotypic and
obviously phenotypic sex are.
So let's imagine that we take a female rat pup and we give them testosterone during the
critical period.
Now these animals are females genotypically and phenotypically.
If we manipulate by giving testosterone during that critical period and never give testosterone
again, as adults, those females engage in mounting behavior.
They act as males, not as females.
If we take little male pups and we castrate them during the critical period, now remember
it's the critical period that's important, not if you do anything any other time, but
that critical period.
If you castrate little male pups during their critical period, as adults they show lordosis
when they're approached by males and they also engage in nesting building or nesting
behavior.
So they act consistent with their brain sex.
When I was a student there was this incredible film that was just hysterically funny.
And there were three rats who were the stars of this little film, rat pornography we used
to call it.
There was one rat named Bob and he was one color and he was genotypically, phenotypically
and his brain sex was all male.
So that was Bob.
And then there was Susie and she was genotypically female and phenotypically and brain sex was
all consistent and she was another color.
And then there was a little rat named Ralphie.
And Ralphie was genotypically and phenotypically male but he had a female brain.
So he had been manipulated and he was a multicolored rat.
And this film showed these three rats interacting with each other and Ralphie very confused.
The other male rat getting upset when Ralphie behaved certain ways and Ralphie getting upset
when the male rat behaved certain ways and it showed the little Ralphie over in the corner
building a nest while the other rats were having sex, it was just a very funny film.
And so, and I'm sorry I don't have a copy to show you.
But the critical thing here, the most important thing to take home is that as adults, if you
manipulate hormonal environment of rats during their critical period, as adults they will
behave consistent with their brain sex.
This is what guides their behavior so that's what's most important.
Now it also tells us something else and I think that this is very important to understand.
Both male and female genotypes and phenotypes are compatible with either brain sex type.
So you could be a genetically male or female person and have a brain of the opposite sex
and is perfectly compatible with it.
Now sexual dimorphism also occurs in human beings but the critical period is before birth.
So this is the difference, again, we are born with a brain that is either male or female.
This cannot be altered by experience, it's due to the hormonal environment that existed
or did not exist during female development or fetal development.
So what areas of the brain have been shown to be sexually dimorphic?
Well, this is just a few of them, areas of the hypothalamus.
So it turns out that the hypothalamus is one of those areas, remember, controls autonomic
nervous system and also controls hormonal events that take place in the body.
It controls mating, courtship, sexual behavior.
So it makes sense that there are specific nuclei in the hypothalamus that would be different
in males and females.
In all animals there are things that are different about male and female sexual behavior and
so that's reflected in the hypothalamus.
Note however that the other areas up here that are sexually dimorphic, the hippocampus,
the amygdala and some cortical areas including this orbital frontal cortex that we talked
about in a previous lecture, are all areas that are sexually dimorphic.
They're all limbic system areas and they involve processing of memory and emotion.
So and play a role, obviously, in executive function just as we talked about this orbital
frontal cortex being involved in the abstraction of moral behavior.
So these are three areas that are also sexually dimorphic.
And a lot of work being done on the hippocampus because in adult females the hippocampus has
a huge number of receptors that bind estrogen and it turns out that when these receptors
in adult females bind estrogen it causes spines to increase and dendrites to grow.
So remember we were talking about plasticity?
This is one of the plastic responses and as women go through their cycle monthly what
happens there are changes in the hippocampus in spines and in the dendritic branches of
hippocampal neurons.
So this is an area people are very interested in.
There are differences in the amygdala which indicates that we respond differently to emotional
stimuli.
Now there are also differences between the male and female brains in the way information
in general is processed by the brain.
And this is something that has also been of great interest to neuroscientists and psychologists.
So for example the male brain pattern results in an earlier and a stricter hemisphere lateralization.
So we talked about hemisphere lateralization, we have two hemispheres, we have a right hemisphere
and a left hemisphere and that in most individuals for example the left hemisphere is specialized
for language and there are other things that are specialized as well but this has been best
studied in language.
It turns out that in young males who have left hemisphere damage, little boys who have
left hemisphere damage may forever have difficulties in speaking or understanding language.
And in fact more males and females suffer from dyslexia, more males than females have
trouble reading in school and other things related to language.
Now it turns out that in females in a small young female child if the left hemisphere
is damaged the right hemisphere will take over the functions for language.
And so as an adult you may not even be able to tell that that individual ever had brain
damage and this is true even as adults.
Males who have strokes in the left hemisphere that involve language have difficulty being
able to recover from the stroke whereas females recover language ability very readily.
When you look with functional MRI what you see is that the female brain seems to retain
a certain equi-potentiality so the male brain's strict lateralization very early on that's
a result of sexual dimorphism works against the male for recovering from damage to one
hemisphere or the other for functions that are very strictly lateralized.
Now there's some evidence also that even the corpus callosum may be a little different
between males and females and you remember the corpus callosum are these group of fibers
which go this way that connect homotopic parts in both of the hemispheres.
So it turns out that when you ask females to solve certain types of problems they utilize
parts of both of their hemispheres in solving the problems whereas the same problem may
be in fact solved in males by the use of only one hemisphere or the other hemisphere.
So we think that perhaps there's a difference either in the hemisphere lateralization of
males and females that contributes to this or in the corpus callosum fibers.
Now there are other findings that suggest there are differences in behaviors between
males and females that are also likely to be related to sexual dimorphism of the brain.
There's accumulating evidence and in fact a lot of evidence to suggest that females in
general and that this occurs shortly after birth that you can actually measure this difference
between males and females.
That females are better at being able to read faces and to hear in the tone of voice changes
and emotional expression.
So even as infants female children are more attuned to facial expression and tone of voice
and that this occurs or can at least be measured immediately after birth.
So women in general read faces better.
Now you remember that the amygdala was one of those structures.
Remember the amygdala is involved in the fast processing of events that have a very
strong emotional content.
Well it turns out that on tests of emotional memory women always score higher than men
do.
So these are overall scores of course.
But women apparently have a much better emotional memory for things.
Also if you have males and females you look with functional MRI to look at what areas
are activated.
When there's conflict for example in some kind of image that's being shown to males
and females the amygdala is more likely to be activated in females than in males during
signs of conflict.
What is interesting is viewing conflict seems to cause testosterone to be secreted in males
that is bound to particular brain structures and that doesn't occur in females.
So the way information is being processed and how it will obviously be dealt with on
some level or processed by the brain at least is very different in males and females.
Now finally while there are no overall differences between males and females in IQ and while
male brains are larger than female brains when you take into account body size and also
packing density there are no significant differences between the sexes in the number
of neurons even though this is true.
That doesn't mean that males and females don't have different strengths.
So for example females appear overall to show enhanced language ability and empathy or ability
to read emotion in other people and also to have a superior emotional memory.
Males on the other hand are clearly superior in spatial ability and in their ability to
build systems and so we're trying to learn how this lateralization of the brain or dimorphism
in particular areas might lead to these different strengths that seem to exist in males and
females.
Now on top of the native differences that might exist cultures around the world typically
exaggerate the differences between males and females.
So it's like the differences between us become exaggerated and particularly for whoever's
in charge of establishing rules in the culture makes the behavior for example of males very
clear about what's acceptable but also for females what's acceptable behavior and so
it makes the differences greater.
Also we have to realize that cultures assign values so let's take one example because
I think it's a good one.
In our culture little boys have more trouble learning how to read but in our culture we
also value education we value reading so many schools meant there are many programs
that are designed specifically to help little boys learn how to read better.
So the brain is still plastic you can't change brain sex but that doesn't mean it's not
plastic and that you can't help someone achieve another level by a directed input.
Notice what happens when little girls aren't very good at math though.
There aren't very many special programs to help them be better at math to try to develop
spatial abilities so it doesn't mean even if we have strengths it doesn't mean that
something can't be done that couldn't help us be better.
It also doesn't mean that there aren't men who don't have a lot of empathy or that there
aren't women who aren't good at spatial concepts or systems building.
It means that overall when you look there are different strengths between males and
females.
So finally what is the evidence that sexual dimorphism of the brain influences human behavior
such as the choice of a sexual partner as an adult and this is something a lot of people
are very interested in.
Very famous neuroscientist was one of the individuals who looked in the homosexual male brain and
the heterosexual male brain in one of these areas in the hypothalamus and indeed it was
dimorphic between those two groups and that in homosexual males that nucleus was organized
more like the female brain.
We're not really sure what this nucleus does in humans though so it's very hard for us
to tell whether or not or how that plays out in the expression of sexual behavior.
So to do that I think a better example is to look at actual clinical disorders in which
the genotype and phenotype and the brain sex are not the same because I think this informs
us on a different level.
And there is such a disorder and this disorder there are many of them actually.
This is one of them and this is called adrenal hyperplasia and individuals who have this
disorder are genotypically and phenotypically female.
So they are definitely females but during their critical period of development their
adrenal gland which is located above the kidneys was making too much androgen so it was producing
male hormone and thus their brain was masculinized.
Now these individuals who have this disorder a huge group of them have been studied and
followed over many years of their lives and if you look at them number one they are more
likely to behave as tomboy's as children they engage in very rough aggressive behavior
that's typically associated with males so the little girls can be pretty rough too.
But they identify with males even when they are very young.
They identify with boys and identify with the kinds of activities that boys typically
participate in and probably even more importantly they show a significantly increased preference
for choosing other females as sexual partners as adults.
And so this is a clinical disorder in which clearly the brain sex is different from the
genotyping and phenotypic sex and so this plays out.
Now in conclusion I think that most neuroscientists would agree that there are differences between
the sexes in the body we all would agree with that and that would also include the brain.
I don't know any neuroscientists who don't think that the brains and males of females
are sexually dimorphic.
We also think this is sexual dimorphism in the mind in a sense since the brain is the
biological substrate of the mind.
And lastly we think that there are differences in behavior although the role of culture and
how that influences how the behaviors and how they are expressed is obviously very important
too.
I think that we can stand back from this and we can say that the scientist doesn't put
a value on it, doesn't say that the male brain or the female brain is better.
It doesn't make a valuation.
What it says is that the brains are different and we have this incredible ability to interact
with one another and to appreciate a very different perspective particularly in how
emotions are processed in the brain and how these emotions play out in our behavior.
These are the areas that show the greatest dimorphism.
We also can be able in physicians in the medical community be able to use this material.
Some fraction of babies is born with what is called ambiguous genitalia and that means
that by surgery they can either be made into a little girl or made into a little boy and
parents are typically asked to make this decision only a few days after birth.
If we can gain an understanding of whether that baby has a male or a female brain we
can make sure that the surgery will match the two appropriately.
So this is not just basic science.
This is information that can help people's lives in a very, very real way.
And not to mention that sex is just an interesting subject anyway.
Thank you.
