Welcome back.
In our previous lecture, we used Alzheimer's disease as a clinical example to try to bring
together much of the information we've learned in this course.
If you look at the signs and symptoms in the patients and you know something about the brain
areas that are involved, you could have predicted that they would show the changes they do.
And so understanding about the structure of the brain really helps us understand this
disease.
Let's just summarize a little bit of what we found.
Alzheimer's is characterized primarily by the loss of neurons in certain areas of the
brain.
So while there's neuron loss throughout the brain, there are specifically a few areas
that show an abnormally high loss of neurons.
These include the highest order areas of the neocortex.
So these are specifically the areas, the prefrontal areas and others of the higher order
areas in the neocortex.
The primary areas are left intact so the individual can see, they can hear, they can
walk, but they simply can't do the higher order processing that's necessary to live
in the world as a normal human being.
Other areas that are involved are limbic structures.
So we saw that the hippocampus was one of the main structures that was involved.
The entorhinal cortex was one of the neocortical areas involved.
You also saw involvement of the amygdala.
And in this disorder, you see the short-term memory loss, long-term memory loss ultimately
because long-term memory is widely distributed in neocortical areas.
And so if you lose these higher order areas, then eventually you lose long-term memory
as well as short-term memory.
The amygdala, that little nuclear complex involved in emotional processing, is lost
and it causes the person to not be able to relate emotionally in a normal way to the
world as a person.
And lastly, we saw that many little tiny nuclei that probably early neuroanonymous didn't
even think were important at all have widespread projections to the cortex that are fundamental
somehow for the integration of many different functions.
And the loss of these neurons contributes to the dementia that we see in the disease.
Now, for most cases of Alzheimer's, there's no cause known.
Only a small percentage can be inherited.
For all the cases, there's no cure.
So at this point, the medication simply tried to replace some of the neurotransmitters which
have been lost from the loss of the neurons.
In this lecture, we want to focus on what neuroscience is discovering about what factors
increase or what factors decrease the risk of developing Alzheimer's.
Now, even if you follow everything and you do everything the way you're supposed to,
it doesn't mean that you might not get this disease.
But there are risk factors which are associated and so this is really important.
This is the number one neurological disease in the United States and it matters that we
identify factors, particularly those under our control, that might help us be able to
decrease the risk of getting this terrible, terrible disease.
Much of what we've learned about risk factors has come from basic research, obviously.
Now, animals don't get Alzheimer's disease, but we've actually created animal models that
we can use to study the disorder.
And so we can do other things to these animals to see whether or not the types of changes
in their brains, these tangles and plaques, develop more or less under certain conditions.
And the other study that's really helped us understand something about risk factors is
called the NUN study.
And this is a study of Catholic sisters who show a very low incidence of Alzheimer's disease.
We're going to be talking about how they have contributed to our understanding of this
disease and the risk factors.
So while the studies indicate that some factors are not under our control, it turns out some
are.
So there are factors that either increase or decrease the probability that you will in
fact get Alzheimer's disease.
So let's start with the ones that increase your risk for getting Alzheimer's.
Well, the very most important one is age.
Age is the number one risk factor in the development of this disease.
One in eight people, 65 or older, have this disease.
And if you're over 85, as many as one half of individuals will be diagnosed with this
disorder.
So age is the number one risk factor.
Now we want to live a long life, so obviously we don't want to do anything about that one.
Well, another risk factor is the inheritance of what are called E4, E4 alleles for apolipoprotein
E. Now alleles are simply gene variants.
So alleles are gene variants for a particular molecule that's produced.
In this case, the alleles are for apolipoprotein E, which is a normal molecule found in the
brain that's involved in lipid and cholesterol transport.
You inherit one gene from each parent.
So for apolipoprotein E, there are three different alleles or variants of that gene that you
could inherit.
So inheriting E4, E4 alleles for apolipoprotein E increases your risk of getting Alzheimer's
disease or at least certain forms of Alzheimer's disease.
And so it's a very critical one.
It's obvious that this is one of the factors that you don't have control over.
And so it might be important, there are companies that will look at your allele and determine
whether or not you have the E4 alleles for apolipoprotein E, but you can't really alter
it.
You can't change it.
So in general, most physicians do not recommend that people do that.
Another risk factor which is associated with an increased risk for Alzheimer's is head injury.
And this is either at a concussion or more severe level.
So anytime that a head injury has significantly interfered with neuronal activity at either
a concussion or more severe level, we actually discovered this because it turns out that
professional boxers who can take more than or sustain more than 50,000 hits to the head
in their professional careers have a significantly increased incidence of Alzheimer's disease.
And so we actually were looking at these boxers and now there are scientists who are looking
at individuals who play various sports in which head injury is common, looking and following
to see whether or not these individuals are more likely.
And at this point, the consensus is yes.
So you want to protect your head.
This is really, really important.
Another risk factor is a high fat diet, elevated cholesterol levels and obesity.
Boy, now this is under our control.
So having this as a finding is very significant because this is something that we can make
lifestyle changes so that it decreases our risk.
So high fat diets, elevated cholesterol and obesity, which are rampant in our society,
increase the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
There are also a number of chronic disorders that increase the risk.
Anthrosclerosis, for example, diabetes, hypertension, these are chronic disorders.
Now some individuals have genetic proclivities to have these disorders and there may not
be a lot they can do about that.
You can take meds, but for other people it's due to lifestyle.
So changes can be made.
For example, type 2 diabetes.
If it's because of obesity, that's something an individual has some control over.
And so they can get rid of the diabetes and also decrease the risk for Alzheimer's disease.
Another factor which has been shown to increase the risk is smoking.
And not only does it cause lung cancer and many other chronic disorders like emphysema,
but actually it's a risk factor in developing Alzheimer's disease.
So if there wasn't enough of a motivation to quit this habit, smokers, by the way I
want to stop here a bit to remind you of this, anything that is an addicting drug involves
the nucleus accumbensepti and involves dopamine release.
Nicotine is among one of the most highly addictive drugs known.
So individuals who are addicted to nicotine really need a lot of support in breaking the
habit because the nucleus accumbens is involved and it's part of that endogenous reward system
and when they stop smoking the brain has this craving for wanting to return to the state
and stimulating particular receptors and increasing dopamine transport in the system.
So it's not just so easy to just say quit smoking.
Individuals really do need a lot of help and now you know why they do because nicotine
affects that nucleus accumbens.
Another risk factor that increases the risk for Alzheimer's disease is the history of
clinical depression.
So individuals who are chronically depressed or have a history of having true unipolar
depression actually have an increased risk of developing Alzheimer's.
Another risk factor which is one that has been discovered is a diagnosis of what is
called mild cognitive impairment and this used to be thought of an entity in itself.
So mild cognitive impairment is defined as a disorder that involves short term memory
loss but no other cognitive deficits.
So we thought that it was really a disease that probably just involved the hippocampus
for example.
Well we now believe that it's more than likely the earliest stage of Alzheimer's.
Studies, long term studies have shown that 80% to 100% of individuals diagnosed with
MCI will in fact go on to develop Alzheimer's disease.
So most experts now believe those individuals have just been diagnosed at an early stage
that doesn't normally occur.
Now hormone replacement therapy, individuals, women who are greater than 65 years of age
who start either taking estrogen alone or estrogen and progesterone have an increased
risk of dementia and of developing Alzheimer's disease.
So there's still studies going on about what happens if the woman is younger when she starts
the regimen.
All this is an active area of research for obvious reasons.
I want you right now to stop for a minute and note that the majority of risk factors
that increase the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease are exactly the same risk factors
that increase your risk for heart disease and increase your risk for stroke and heart
attack.
And so this is really, really important discovery and we'll talk a little bit later about how
that discovery was made.
The point is that many of the factors that increase your risk for stroke and heart attack
and heart disease are under your control and we now know that it's the same risk factors
involved in both of these terrible, terrible diseases.
Well now that was the bad news.
So what factors actually decrease the risk of Alzheimer's?
Let's end on a sort of positive note here.
Well one of the factors that decreases your risk is one you have no control over.
Inheritance of E2, E2 alleles for apolipoprotein E actually protects you from ever getting
Alzheimer's disease.
There's a very active area of research for obvious reasons.
Another factor that decreases your risk is eating omega 3 fats.
Now these are cold water fish like salmon.
This actually decreases the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
The word is still out on whether or not taking supplements has the same effect.
It isn't always true that the body can be fooled by supplements.
And so at this point eating them through eating certain kinds of fish is recommended.
Maintaining a normal weight, avoiding obesity and it's associated disorders like diabetes.
So these are things that are under our control and that we can do something about and it's
very, very important.
Eat low fat foods, keep your low density life of proteins low.
Do all the things that are recommended to help you with heart disease and this will
help you stave off Alzheimer's disease.
Drinking fruit juices, vegetable juices, eating fruits and vegetables and certain kinds of
teas that are high in antioxidants is definitely implicated in decreasing the risk of developing
Alzheimer's.
And again these are simple changes we can make in our lives that it may not prevent us
from getting the disease, but it certainly plays a role.
So it's very, very important.
Now the next one is one of my favorites, exercise.
Want to tell you something, some of the cutting edge research that's going on in neuroscience
right now.
Recent studies have shown that the hippocampus is one of the few areas of the brain that
continues to undergo mitosis throughout life.
Furthermore the most recent studies have shown that exercise increases mitosis in the hippocampus.
So by staying physically active you actually generate more new neurons in the structure
that's involved in memory in your brain.
And so this is just unbelievably important.
Now it's not going to replace your old memories to generate new neurons, but it will allow
you to form new memories.
And so this is a very, very positive thing.
We need to keep ourselves active.
We become so sedentary.
We need to keep ourselves active.
And this is going to help us, even if we don't develop a disorder like Alzheimer's, is going
to help us maintain our memory and mental activity into old age.
One of the other factors that's been shown to be important is going to be continuing
mental challenge.
So we find that in individuals who continually challenge their minds, and it has to be something
that challenges you, like taking a course like this, learning a new language, learning
how to play the piano, doing something like that.
It has to involve a challenge to the brain that this actually is a major way of decreasing
the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease.
Now many of these risk factors were actually discovered in this NUN study.
And this was just a wonderful little study.
This study has gone on for more than 20 years now.
And it was observed that there were women, nuns, who lived in certain convents, who seemed
to have a very low incidence of Alzheimer's disease, and very little evidence of cognitive
decline.
Some of these women were 104 years old learning foreign language.
They sit around and they debate political questions.
They're very active mentally.
They had a lifestyle which was incredible.
We'll come back to that in a minute.
But in order to understand their longevity and their decreased incidence of Alzheimer's
disease, scientists approached these women and they agreed to help benefit science by
donating their brains to the National Institutes of Health so that their brains could be studied
after they died.
And some of the most important findings that have emerged in our understanding of risk
factors have actually come from the NUN study.
One of the most important is that the only nuns that showed evidence of Alzheimer's disease
also showed in their brains microinfarctions, which means the only women who demonstrated
Alzheimer's disease were also women who'd had small strokes in their brains.
And we now know that these two diseases are comorbid, which means they occur together.
So atherosclerosis and Alzheimer's disease occur together in a comorbid way.
So this was one of the main things that came from this.
A woman could have died at 106 and when you examine her brain, she showed none of these
massive changes seen in dementia, 106 and mentally sharp, able to carry on an intelligent
conversation, learn foreign languages, do these things.
The ones who developed Alzheimer's showed evidence of these microinfarctions.
This is really important too on a scientific level because we can actually induce the formation
of neurofibrillary tangles and plaques in the brains of animals by causing their brains
to be ischemic.
So while animals don't normally get Alzheimer's disease, we can actually induce the same changes
in their brain by cutting parts of their brain off from oxygen.
And so this is one of the animal models that's used to study this disease.
Note again, the risk factors for developing this disease overlap with the risk factors
for heart disease.
And it's no wonder in America where we have obesity, diabetes, high cholesterol levels,
overeating habits, sedentary habits that both of these disorders are on the rise.
Now another interesting finding that emerged from this nun study, which I think is like
really cool, is that they actually did a blind study looking at the journals that these sisters
kept throughout their careers.
And so when they enter the convent, say when they're in their 20s, they kept these journals.
They had individuals who didn't know which of the sisters had developed Alzheimer's and
which of the sisters had not developed it.
And these individuals rated the complexity of ideas and the emotional content of the
writings.
Well, it turns out that the only individuals who later developed Alzheimer's already showed
changes early on with the lack of ability to use language in a complex way.
They showed a positive ideas in their writings, and also their writings had less emotional
content in them than the sisters who never developed Alzheimer's disease.
And scientists are still thinking about what this means, but it could be that this disease
in its incipient sort of forms begins early.
And then if you have poor lifestyle habits or you have some kind of genetic tendency
towards cholesterol accumulation in the brain, you have some other kind of thing like that,
that the disease then manifests itself many years later.
One of the other things that came from this study is very important.
It focused on normal aging.
There have been a lot of reports in the scientific literature, you know, is cognitive decline
a normal aspect of aging.
We're not just talking about little changes, but major cognitive decline.
Is this something we can all just expect is going to happen to us?
More recent studies that have been done very, very carefully and the non-study indicate
that that's not so, that normal aging does not have to be associated with major cognitive
decline.
No, you're not going to be 20 years old again, but it doesn't have to be associated with
major cognitive decline.
But this is related largely to lifestyle.
And so they went back and they looked at the nuns in these convents.
Many, many women, hundreds of brains of women who have died, have been examined.
And I'll recommend to you at the end of this a delightful book on the non-study, which
is just really fun to read.
They went back and looked at the lifestyle.
So let's think about the lifestyle of a nun.
You live a relatively protected life that has relatively low stress.
You have many friends that you share similar viewpoints and ideas with that you interact
with every day.
It turned out that these women had incredibly good eating habits, very low fat diet, ate
a lot of fruits and vegetables, you know, the fruit of the earth and all that.
And it also turned out that they do yoga every day and do aerobic exercise multiple
times a week.
These women had a lifestyle that contributed to being mentally healthy.
And again, some of these women and in this book that's about this study, some of these
women are 104 years old and the scientist who is doing this study always makes this comment
about how he couldn't believe how bright these women were.
And he could sit for hours and talk with them about politics, about what was going on, what
the meaning of life was.
They were reading philosophy books.
They were well read.
And he said the time would just fly by and he would sit with these women and he would
talk with them, someone 104 years old or 106 years old.
And then they would die simply in their sleep.
But their brains would look like a brain of a person much younger.
Now this is pretty heavy stuff, but there's a message here.
And that message is that many things are in fact under our control.
Some are not.
We can't control what alleles for ApoE we inherited from mom and dad.
But some things really are under our control.
Now to lighten things up here a little bit, I thought what I might do is to share with
you because it turns out that my pets have given me some wise little things over the
years, a wisdom that goes right along with what we've been talking here about how to
decrease the risk of getting Alzheimer's disease.
So I thought I would just share a few stupid pet pictures with you.
But the take home message will be to live a good life and take care of yourself.
So the first is it's very important to take time to smell the roses.
Now this is my deck that overlooks where the sun sets.
Here are roses that are on this deck.
Here's a little buttercup.
It's important if you're going to smell the roses that your nose be pointed in the right
direction.
You'll notice that her buddy, who is little apple blossom, has her nose pointed off in
the wrong direction, which is sad.
So take time to smell the roses and make sure your nose is pointed in the right direction.
Get lots of really restful sleep.
It's very important to enjoy sleep and get lots of good, restful, energizing sleep.
Get lots of exercise.
Take up a new sport.
This is Heine Studmuffin, and Heine of course took up football, that's Claire, and he loved
that football.
But get out there and do something, move.
Take up dancing.
Take an aerobics class.
Go for walks with your friends.
Get out of the chair and go do something.
Keep your mind and body active by learning new things.
This is little apple blossom, and she's learned how to sit up, and she's very proud of this,
and she walks around and then suddenly just sits up for no reason at all.
She seems to think that something good always occurs from that.
It doesn't necessarily, but go ahead and learn new tricks.
Don't keep yourself from learning new tricks in life.
I think this is really important.
Take courses from the teaching company.
Keep your mind active.
Learn new things.
Learn another foreign language.
Take piano lessons.
Take violin lessons.
Does it really matter that you don't become concert level?
No, it doesn't.
So learn new tricks throughout your life.
Keep friendships strong.
These are the Bell Sisters.
This is Flos Hilda, named after a Rhinemadon and a Wagner opera, and little Shatzi, which
means my little treasure, my little darling, and it's Flos Hilda and Shatzi Ringenklinger.
So they're the Bell Sisters of Tennessee.
Keep your friendships really strong.
And don't be afraid to make new friends in your life, because new friends add something
really special.
And even if they're very different from you, don't be afraid to make new friends.
Keep stress at a minimum.
This epitomizes the peace that this beautiful cat dickie had most of his life.
And so keep stress as much as you're able to at a minimum.
Stress kills neurons in the brain, and we're going to be talking about that.
It's important to practice habits that keep stress as much as possible under some kind
of control.
Don't eat too much.
Now eat a low-fat diet.
You can have pancakes every once in a while, but make sure they're made with low-fat ingredients.
This is my rescue bird, Pumpernickel, and she used to always try to eat my pancakes.
So on Sunday morning, I would make her own little stack.
And that goes to a really important thing, and that is, eat small portions.
Keep your weight under control, eat a low-fat diet, but enjoy what you eat.
Keep oxytocin flowing, our little lovebirds, Heine and Buttercup.
Keep love strong in your life.
We know that this enhances the immune system, and this enhances the ability of the brain
to function.
Now lastly, every once in a while, just do something really stupid.
This was my very first dog, Frankie, who every Christmas had to wear that little Santa Claus
hat.
Don't be afraid to let others laugh at you, and by all means, laugh at yourself.
Laughter, it turns out, is one of the most valuable things for the brain, and valuable
things for having a really good life.
So to end this, I want to say, and in all seriousness, there are changes we can make
in our life.
Life was meant to be lived every day.
Live it with passion, live it with joy, and appreciate each moment of it, and appreciate
your brain and take care of it.
If you are interested in reading more about the Nun Study, there's a delightful book called
Aging with Grace, and David Snowden was the scientist who studied these women, and he
has written this book, and I highly recommend it.
And it's a book that adds to our feeling about life being something that should be enjoyed
and appreciated, because these women, that is the message that this book and these nuns
will communicate to you.
Thank you.
