Nathan Jacobs podcast. I'm here with a good friend of mine, Chris Firestone,
and we'll be talking about the very popular myth, and it is a myth, that all one day, all of a
sudden, a bunch of religious folks decided to use reason and poke and prod some stuff,
and they became atheists. That's coming up today on the Nathan Jacobs podcast.
All right. Welcome, Chris Firestone. Wow. It's been a while, Nathan. So good to be here with you.
Yeah. Well, it's good to see you. And for anybody, since this is in a visual podcast,
we're here recording, actually, at Trinity University in Deerfield, Illinois, right down the
street from Michael... Is Michael Jordan still here? He's not, but his house is. I don't think
he's been able to sell it for the mega-millions he's looking for. Well, fair enough. I do hear the
housing market in Illinois leave something to be desired. Yeah, I wouldn't want his text, Bill.
That's for sure. Well, this place is a blast from the past for me, as are you, of course, Chris,
although you're still part of my present. So what I want to talk about today with you,
and let's just contextualize this for folks so they know what to expect, there's a very popular
myth out there in the cultural sphere, right? In the cultural consciousness
that a lot of folks presume, look, there was a time when people were religious,
and they were engaged in faulty reasoning, sort of Monty Python style, fallacious reasoning,
ridiculous assumptions. And then one day, a bunch of folks woke up, right? They were enlightened,
right? They had enlightenment. And all of a sudden, they were like, you know what we should do is we
should maybe think about some stuff, maybe use reason, maybe poke and prod some stuff, look at
the world. And lo and behold, all of a sudden, they realized through investigation that all that
crazy, ridiculous religious stuff they thought is false. They all became atheists. And then science,
you know, propelled us forward and advancement and all the rest. And here we are. And, you know,
religion is just sort of a silly remnant of the past for folks who haven't gotten the memo. And
obviously, you and I have spent a lot of time together working in a variety of ways to dispel
that myth, because it is a myth, right? It is a very, and not the true myth like Tolkien. It's
an absurdity. It's a totally false myth. It has nothing to do with any of the history of ideas
proper. So I want to talk about that. But before we get there, let's just give a little context
about us. So I'd said you're a blast from the past because I was, once upon a time, a student of
yours when I first started studying philosophy. I don't even remember how long ago that was. What
was that, like 99 or something like that? It was 25 years ago. Oh my gosh. Seems like yesterday.
Yeah. And then after I finished my PhD, or actually while I was finishing my PhD, a good friend of
our Steve's pointer who we dedicated a book to once upon a time, one that we'll probably mention in
this, went and sniped me. He was like, oh man, there's schools looking at Jacobs. Can we get
Jacobs? And they brought me back here. And I taught it here for a while before going to
moving on and doing some other things. So we went from teacher and student to colleagues, right?
And then, and we wrote, we wrote a couple of books along the way, you know, well, co-authored,
co-authored a book, co-edited a book, wrote some articles. You make it sound so easy and so simple,
but obviously it wasn't it? No, just like, oh my goodness, there's so many awesome stories in
there. I hope we get to tell those stories sometime. Yeah. Well, you know what we should maybe do,
just as a side, just for folks to get a sense of our wild and crazy. I know what my favorite
story would be. Do you have a favorite from, from our past in terms of our time working together
before we jump into the real stuff? Right. I do. Yeah, I do. Okay. I'll be curious to hear this one.
I wonder if this is the same story. Maybe you should go first. No, no, no, you tell me. Oh my
goodness. Well, one of the things that you were well known for as an undergraduate was rising
above your place to do professional papers at conferences you weren't supposed to be in.
Okay, so I do suspect we are about to tell the same story. Okay, so let me contextualize this for
listeners. So, yes, so Chris, when he first met me, I had left art school, I was studying philosophy,
anybody who's read about my sort of journey where I went into existential crisis from LSD and, you
know, started studying philosophy and religion. And I talked about certain people who took me under
their wing who recognize, oh, this guy's a little different, right? Like he's, he's rough around
the edges. He's not a typical academic student, but he's a really sharp guy. And it seems like
he's really more about the questions and the answers than he is about, you know, about the
grades or something like that. And Chris was, you know, bar none, you know, he was, he was
definitely the guy in that category of folks who took me under his wing. And, and I've always been
one who, you know, enjoys a good challenge. And I think I recognize that early on. And so I just
kept throwing them out there wondering which one he'd give up on it. Really, there weren't many of
those. So one of the things that Chris did for me that you did for me was you were like, you know,
there's these academic conferences. And that blew my mind, right? Because I had read all these
different books I dug around. And I was never bashful about, you know, going and approaching
somebody. In fact, that's how I ended up here in the first place, number of the people I had read,
I was just like, oh, they teach somewhere outside of Chicago, I grew up there. I'll just go make
an appointment, talk with them. At some point, they were like, do you go here? Are you a student?
I'm like, no, I mean, I just just walked into your office to talk to you. And so Chris introduced me
to conferences like the American Academy of Religion, I think was the first one you probably
introduced me to. And it blew my mind because it's thousands upon thousands of people from
all over the world, scholars, students, things like that. And there were all these people I had,
you know, I had read things about like Nicholas Woltersdorf, I think was there. You know, the
first session I ever walked into, John Hick, the religious pluralist, we met him. And so I'd seen
these, you know, they go there and they talk about their latest ideas or their latest book project
and whatever. And I was fascinated because I was like, well, this is where the stuff is really
happening. And you had the audacity to be like, well, I couldn't you submit a talk
or a paper to one of those. And I was like, well, I mean, if Chris thinks I can, maybe I can.
I do wonder if we have two different ones. There's multiple ones here, right? And the one I'm
thinking of is in a regional, but there's also one in an annual conference. Oh, yeah. Well,
which one do you want to tell? Because I think I'll tell the regional one.
That one is funny. Yes. So again, a little bit more context here is that I had started submitting
these papers and much to, well, maybe I should go first with the annual one.
That was the first one, I believe. I think it was, right? So like, I submitted all these,
you know, I submitted proposals like professionals do. I didn't realize that
undergraduates do not typically submit proposals. And, you know, there's hundreds of proposals
coming in. So if you beat people out, you get selected, it's a real honor. And so like,
I had submitted one on the problem of evil, I think was the panel. And I ended up getting
selected as an undergrad. Yeah, we were all amazed, you know. I wasn't amazed. I knew it could be
done. It was early in the conference sort of growth and they weren't really aware that students
might try to pull this. And so Nathan was eager to give it a whirl. And he did and he got in.
I think what happened next was shocked us all because we thought probably a room with, you know,
30 people present, you know, little side rooms or something. But we get there and we come to
realize it's basically a plenary. I mean, it's a huge ballroom with, you know, I don't know,
let's let's call it three to 500 people. I didn't count them all. And Nathan's one of the main
presenters. I remember the guy who organized that panel coming up to me because they had asked for a
bio. And I said, Chris, what do I say? I mean, what's my bio of a student? I'm an undergrad.
And so I sent some really ambiguous short bio. And I had a respondent, John Stackhouse, right,
who is a well-known, you know, Christian apologist guy who'd done a book recently on the problem of
evil, I think it was, which is why he was the respondent on the panel. And I remember in the
bathroom, you know, he ends up in the urinal right next to me. And he's like, so I didn't catch in
your bio, you know, are you, are you a professor at the, at the grad school or the Divinity School
or the, I said, yeah, I'm a, I'm a student at the, at the undergrad. He was like, really? Well,
good for you. I think he realized like what in the world? So yeah, sure enough, we were there,
big, big ballroom. Yeah, there's some, a couple of features about that that were extraordinary.
I sat up in the front with a number of other students. I believe, wasn't that the day I gave
you that philosopher's jacket? Because you were like disheveled. I was like, this guy can't go up
to the front with that, with that button down. He's got this all wrinkled. He's got the sleeves
rolled up the side. I said, here, take my jacket, put this thing on. It'll be just fine. So he,
Nathan gets up there and he reads his paper and all's going well, except that John Stackhouse
is not a joke of a, of a thinker, philosopher, theologian, apologist. And he came to play
ball. He was, he came to take this undergraduate to task. I'm sure what happened in the urinal,
just what has happened. So to speak, gosh, but he came out after you with a series. I don't know,
seven was it? Seven critiques. Look, the, and the fact of the matter is for, for good reason,
like what was, what was interesting, I mean, as anybody again, who's looked at my history knows,
like I went through, I was an overt, like heretical, philosophical theology guy. And Stackhouse
recognized that. Like he was saying, like, look, man, there's things in here that, that sound like
Pelagianism, right? And he's like, like, sometimes that's just a slur. But I think this guy's like
actually a Pelagian. Like he was right. I was. Well, those early leaders, you were dabbling with
lots of interesting ideas. And I'm sure Pelagianism is one of them.
But yeah, so he came out hard in like, just sort of like,
cataloged a whole host of concerns he had. By the time he was done, I'm sitting here with these
other students and I'm like, slouched in my chair thinking, oh, good Lord, what's Nathan going to do?
So he, I remember the, the, the moderator says, okay, Nathan, you can come forward and you have,
I think it was two minutes to reply or something. No, I mean, maybe, yeah, about five minutes.
It was something short with seven critiques to deal with. Yeah. And you did something that,
I think, set you apart in my mind from all the other students that I was dealing with at the time.
And you, you stopped and you said, you know what, there's too much here for me to address.
I would like to open it to the audience and have you pick, I think it was two of them for me to
answer. Yeah. And I was like, dang, that's pretty bold and pretty good. And he actually got the
audience hands popping up and they, they gave you two, two of the critiques to answer and you did.
Yeah. No, I actually remember, I don't remember what the second one was, but I remember I had
talked about John Hicks, like epistemic distance argument, which for anybody who doesn't know is
basically Hicks saying like, that part of the hiddenness of God is there in order to preserve
freedom. And I had reiterated that in the sort of theodicy I had posed, sketched out in my paper.
And, you know, Hick was like, or, and Stackhouse actually said like, well, and, you know, he gave
an example of like Mount Sinai and he's like, how much epistemic distance is that? And, you know,
and I, and I pointed out, and somebody brought that up, could you talk about the epistemic
distance? I was like, yeah, I was like, okay, so he brought up exorcists. I was like, well,
actually one of the things that says in the passage is it says that, you know, Moses tells
the people that God did this in order to instill or instill fear in you in order that you might not
sin. And I said, so that indicates that, that text, even the one you're ushering out indicates that
the violation of the epistemic distance has effects on your behavior, exactly as Hick and myself have
proposed. So it was that sort of thing, right? Like where it was, and, you know, so there were a
couple of those that were just out there. And I think you're right, that did have a little bit
of an effect of saying, well, maybe, I mean, that was my intent, right? Say like, look, I'm happy
to address any of these. I don't have time. So happy to take you guys name, which one you find
most effective. Yeah, no, that was, that was pretty stellar. And to do it with that kind of crowd on
your first go around, like, dang, that's impressive. Yeah. Well, and I remember there was, that was
the time when Fordham decided to like, come and try to scout me out, right? Because there was
a guy in the, in there, some guy from Fordham who was like, I missed it. Like, so he has the same
thing that stuck us. Did I missed it in your bio? Are you a professor at the Divinity School or at
the college? Or, you know, it's like, no, I'm an undergrad. And all of a sudden, like Fordham was
writing to me regularly going like, you want to come over here to the Ph.D. program? You were the
first because we, we ended up, as you know, having like 10 year run of really quality young
philosophers coming out of the program. And you were the first, but you're not the only one who
was basically offered a job at one of these things, but without their credentials. Yeah, that's right.
So, but it was an impressive run. And then that jacket that you initiated, that became a fun little
tradition in our department, because all of these sort of rogue, you know, rebel philosophy guys who
are doing things that you weren't supposed to be doing, like speaking at professional conferences,
that became essentially like, what would you call it? It's like the, it's like the, you know,
some sort of rite of passage that, you know, you broke through. So you get to put this on.
That's right. We utilized it for years. I don't know how many students probably in the range of
15 to 20 actually wore that jacket in subsequent years for professional presentations of one sort
or another. Yeah. And I honestly think, and I don't think this is an exaggeration. I think we
ended up being the reason that some of these conferences changed the rules to specify that
undergrads couldn't indeed. It was somewhere in the 2010, 2015 range where it started coming,
you started seeing everywhere that you had to have certain degrees and other things
to get into the conferences. Yeah, because they noticed a little too many of us like
breaking through and pushing out to the margins. It was so great to be a first mover in that area.
Yeah. So then the second one, I'm certain I know what your second one is.
Yeah. Well, this is another time you wore the jacket. It was at a regional conference,
I believe it was downtown Chicago. And the interesting thing was, I think it started
because we thought you had submitted a paper to a conference, but you, we forgot the date.
And it ended up being like a month later. And you said, let's submit it anyway. And it was to a
conference, it was on, I believe it was on Augustin. Was that right? No. So what it was,
was the regional, because you and I would ever, you know, the American Academy of Religion would
roll around or, you know, APA or whatever it was, we'd always look at the call for papers,
see what we can latch hold of. And I remember it was the regional one, they decided to focus. I
mean, who came up with this? They're like, let's do the whole conference on philosophy and humor.
And we were like, I was just like, man, I don't have anything to say on that. And so we were
going to just let it pass. But then I remember one night we were hanging out. And we were like,
look, you know, I think, I think it's the, the call for papers ends in like 10 minutes. Let's
see if I can quick throw something together. I think we threw it together, we submitted it,
and we realized it was like a month late or something like that. It's like we got the wrong
dates. Yeah. Anyway, they write back to you, it's saying, you're in. That's great. That's a great
proposal. And I was like, oh man. But the, the fund doesn't stop there though, because when we
realized you got a paper on, I think it was Augusta, maybe Aquinas as well. So what it was was,
this was where I was really fudging, because I was like, what's the angle I'm going to take? And
it was on theological anthropology. And I was taking, I was putting John Hick and Augusta
and Hippo in dialogue and springboarding off of being there. Yeah, the movie with Peter Sellers.
And I was like, so I used being there as like this excuse, like, oh yeah, yeah, I'm going to talk
about humor. Right. Right. But it was like, really, I'm going to talk about anthropology.
And then Chauncey Gardner was in the title. Right. So anybody who doesn't know that film, right?
From Chance to Chauncey. Right. Yeah. Yeah. From Chance to Chauncey. Yeah. So in the film,
right, it's a, it's a story, it's a story of mistaken identity, right? This guy,
or at least that's what it seems at the beginning, the ending raises some questions. But like,
a guy named Chance, who's the gardener. And then when the guy he works for dies and he seems
touched, you know, he seems, he seems like he's maybe a little off. And then people miss here
his name as Chauncey. And so he becomes known as Chauncey Gardner. That's right. A mistaken
identity piece. Right. And he goes through the heights of power. And it's one of our favorite
movies. We watched it a couple times over the years. It's really fun and funny. And,
and, but the, the irony of, and this is why it comes to my mind all the time, is that you're
going into this thing, we find out that it's been accepted. It's kind of a, what you might call a
Western paper, right? It gets accepted in the section on Eastern religion, religion, laughter
in the East or something like that. God laughs in the East. That's what it was. That was the title.
And he gets this paper on Chauncey Gardner in, and it's like hilarious. How in the world did
he possibly get this in? Anyway, again, I bring a number of other students with us. We're sitting,
and it's, it's up being a fairly large square seminar-based type thing with a podium in the middle.
Yeah. And, and they, they have these papers on, I don't know, Harry Krishna, you know, just.
Yeah. Well, I remember what I sat down on the panel. The guy next to me sits down and he pulls
out this little Vishnu idol. And sits in front of him. I'm like, man, where am I? What am I doing?
This is hilarious. So the first three papers go, and then Nathan's called up, and I'm just
in stitches at this point because here's this undergrad doing a professional paper on a Western
philosophical tradition in, in a laughter, and God laughs in the East. You can't make this stuff up.
Right. And when you get up there, he introduces-
Well, yeah. Well, all right. He introduces you as Dr. Nathan Jacobs.
Yeah. Well, before that, I mean, that's what like you guys, I could tell, like you guys
nearly lost it. We totally lost it. But before that, he starts with, he's like, so he's going to be
talking about, our next presenter is talking about being there, which we all know is like a metaphor
for Sunda Krishna. Like he said, I'm like, I don't even remember what he said, but,
and I'm sitting there thinking, it is. And I can hear you guys like repressing
chuckles at that point. And then he culminates and he's like, now, without further ado, Dr. Nathan
Jacobs. And so the, yeah, it was chance, chance turns into Chauncey Gardner right before our very
eyes. And he walks up there as undergraduate with a sport coat on, becomes Dr. Nathan Jacobs.
At this point, what are you thinking? I'm just thinking, I just hope we get out of here.
I mean, once this guy is, it was the emperor has no clothes on, right? We're going to be ushered
out of the room. But what transpired next is just continue to boggle my mind to this day,
because he reads the paper, gets a number of questions on it, then they open it up to a
wider discussion. And they, they basically say, well, the best paper here is one on chance to
Chauncey Gardner, like Nathan Jacobs. And every question was on that paper.
Yes, I remember getting up there. I'm walking up to that podium. I'm side eyeing you guys who are
chocolate, which I can't blame you. I'm just thinking Lord have mercy. How did I get myself
into this? And I get up there and I don't know if you remember my opener. I said,
now the title of today's conference is God laughs in the east. But I wonder if it'd be more aptly
titled God laughs at me, because my paper is not in fact on any Eastern shaman or sage,
nor does a deal in Eastern religions generally, other than the fact that Shirley McClain is in
being there. But to watch the rationalization of the, of the moderator who says, but, but, but,
but Nathan, it really is an appropriate piece for this group, right? And then I don't even know
who she was. But do you remember there was some woman who clearly had this gravitas in this group
where like, we don't know who she is, but obviously everybody here knew she was, and she was like,
well, I would like to circle back to Dr. Jacobs's paper, because even though he insists that it's
not relevant, there is no paper here that is more relevant. And then she goes out and gives
some exposition about why it's the most relevant piece. And I think that's, in all honesty, that's
what took the jacket from being just a thing, to being an icon of the philosophy department.
It's the ring of power, yeah. Because everyone who wore it says, I mean, here's that story from us
somewhere along the way. Yeah, yeah. So those are the, the, the lots of great stories, lots of
memories with this place, with you and all the rest. But so let's circle back now that people
have a little bit of a taste of your, my history, because obviously I went off from that point and
I did grad work and, you know, I doctorate and then Steve Pointer had always had his eye on me as
somebody who would love to get back here to sort of continue that philosophical trajectory that we
had going and he did for a while at times. Yeah. Well, he and I talked a lot about that possibility,
because you were kind of iconic of what Trinity in its better days was hoping to produce.
Right. Somebody had been through the undergrad, been through the grad school, onto a PhD, was
beginning to make some noise. Let's get them back here and, you know, he'll be sort of like the,
you know, poster child of what we're trying to accomplish here at Trinity. Right. And, and at
some point in there, specifically in the grad years and then into the PhD, you and I had moved
from sort of mentor mentee to co-authors, right? We were doing joint research on Immanuel Kant
and we even published our notorious, you know, our infamous book, right? In defense of Kant's
religion. And then it was while we were here, we were here that we were editing The Persistence of
the Sacred Root, which is the one that's most relevant to what I wanted to talk with you about
today. That came out while we were here, right? Because we dedicated it to Steve and I remember
us presenting it to him like right as he was around, like winding down his time here, right?
I believe that's right, you know. And boy, it's because we were working on so many projects
simultaneously. This one, this one we had in our head over a number of summers because of
the Communitas Fellowship thing. We were there talking about how we might get some authors to
do certain essays in the book and, and so forth. So I remember us starting that editing process
took years and that was largely because of slowdowns with Notre Dame. But anyway, maybe I've
already given a little bit of an intro to the folks in terms of what I wanted to talk about here,
but why don't you sort of offer to us a quick abstract for what that book was, was really all
about? Yeah, I think to capitalize on what you said earlier about the myth, we knew early on,
because you and I had both done a lot of work in modern philosophy that very little of that myth is
actually true. Yeah. I mean, from the first modern philosophers, Descartes and Bacon, you realize
their motivations are not to dispel religion or God or anything of the kind, but quite the opposite.
They saw some of these malicious sort of philosophies beginning to emerge and they're
trying to stake claims to defend theology. Right. You know, I mean, it's well known that, you know,
in the meditations, he's writing to the theological faculty for that very reason. Right. Right. And
so we knew that in our own studies, you know, in Emmanuel Kant and philosophers in and around
Kant there, we realized that the best readings were always the theologically affirmative readings of
these of these thinkers. And yet we'd been trained, or at least we've interacted with, you know,
contemporary, I guess what I would call them now as revisionist historians of some sort,
who systematically remove God from the from the center of their philosophical purview.
And we had seen that in Kant pretty clearly, because there's this standard traditional Kant,
you know, the all destroyer of metaphysics and the one who is just a moralist and not really,
he's really an agnostic borderline atheist. But when we started reading Kant and realizing,
hold on, none of this holds together without his theological affirmation throughout his writings
really. And when we started following those trains of thought, we realized this really
could lead to a potential solution to one of his most maligned texts, religion within the boundaries.
Yeah, any reason. And we did it all that hard work over many, many years, you know, and found
some real fruit out of that. We started asking ourselves, I wonder if this is going on any
other of these? Well, don't forget, I was finished, I had finished up my dissertation by this point,
and my dissertation was on the same thing on liveness. Now, nobody doubts that liveness believes
in God, but the thing I had discovered was, he's always read in some contemporary analytic
and anachronistic sort of way. And I was, when I read him, much like when I first started reading
Kant, right? When, when I was reading Kant with you, I was like, wait a second, this is Augustine
here, that he's talking, this, this is Aquinas here. And so I recognize all these sort of theological,
you know, markers that were in there that Kant was, was doing, which is how I got into the texts
in the first place with you. And then you had been in that down the road for a while, but that's
how I got sucked into it. And, but, you know, from same thing with liveness, when I read liveness,
I was like, wait a second, I know with the guys that liveness is citing, I know, I recognize
this stuff and liveness isn't shy about it, but I noticed that liveness scholars don't read what
liveness read, which is all the theology stuff. And so all of a sudden I was doing that revisionist,
and you're right, we started reaching out. You just a side note as you're going on with this is one
one of the themes you and I discovered very early on is the many times contemporary philosophers
can't understand the modernist because they're not theologically sophisticated. You can't read
liveness or Kant without at least some theological sophistication, or else you have to dismiss it
as philosophical dribble, you know. And so I think we, I saw it first in Kant because that's
how I invited you into reading Kant with me. I said, look, I'm kind of bumped my head theologically
here, Nathan, have a look at some of this, tell me what you're seeing. And that's how we started
partnering on reading Kant together. But I think you were seeing something similar with liveness,
a sophisticated philosopher and a sophisticated theologian. And a lot of contemporary thinkers
who are reading them don't have the theology part. And so they can't understand where he's
going. That's right. And we, and that was the thing, we were curious, we're like,
there's got to be other people. And so we started just kind of at random, not total random, right?
We, we looked at guys like, I remember I had been spending some time with Hegel. And I noticed
that the more theologically robust texts in Hegel had been translated by Peter Hodgson. So we just
took a whirl, you know, we're like, okay, let's send an email to Peter Hodgson and be like,
Hey, Peter, this is, this is what we're seeing. This is what we're thinking. We're thinking about
putting together a book that tries to show that this is actually more par for the course, right?
The idea that these guys actually are theologically robust and theologically concerned,
but, you know, they're readers or not. And, and Hodgson was like, man, I've been waiting for
somebody to say this, like, yeah, absolutely. Sign me up. Then we got the same thing from John
Cottingham, a famous sort of Descartes scholar and translator of Descartes work. He was like,
thank you. Finally, somebody gives me the platform. Those two guys in particular got us their essays
in like record time. Oh, yeah. It was like they had been waiting to write it for years and we gave
them, we gave them the runway. But, you know, so, yeah, so that was, that was how that book came
about. You know, one of the things that I find so interesting about this myth, right? And it,
like Walter Storff, Nicholas Walter Storff, well-known philosopher, analytic philosopher,
well, what do you call them analytic? Anyway, contemporary philosophy,
dabbles in a lot of different things, but he sort of hung out with a lot of analytic guys like
Alvin Planiga. But we knew Nick because he, we won him over on our book on Kant and he had been a
big opponent of Kant and then he wrote the forward and said, it's the best, it's the best treatment
of Kant on this topic that we got. And so we talked with him about anybody you'd like to talk about.
And he called out, like he did Locke, he did the John Locke essay. And he really called out the fact
that this is, this is traceable largely, the contemporary version is traceable to like Leo
Strauss and the Straussians, which is really kind of a conspiracy theory, wouldn't you say,
in terms of? It was a conspiracy theory until we started digging into it for the introduction.
And we kind of come to realize, I think Nick's on to something. And we started tracing the sort
of atheistic revisionist historians that emerge after, you know, the Strauss and the, and I
guess you would call them basically Straussians. And realizing that what was happened, what had
happened in the 20th century was a systematic downplaying of the theological side of these,
these persons, that not only makes them less formidable, you know, it also makes them antagonistic
to religion and the sacred. And that's really the genesis of the book. You know, when we started
realizing somebody has to tell the right side of this story. Right. Yeah. And, and, and I say it's
a conspiracy theory because really the Straussians, they just sort of start with the premise that it's
like, well, any sophisticated person would be an atheist like me. Right. And so Plato, I mean,
yeah, he talks about God and the good and all that. But I mean, he doesn't really believe that.
Like the real, the real stuff, if you read between the lines, right, you know, the truth between the
lines is that he's an atheist like me. And that was kind of, I mean, to caricature a little bit,
that's, that's just, that's just the gist of it, right? That the main hermeneutic guide is
these guys are sophisticated enough to not be
theists. And so they're sort of saying what they have to say in order to like fly under the radar.
But they're all part of a wink and a nod that, you know, later generations will finally have,
have the balls to go ahead and say what I'm saying. That's right. Yeah. I think we, I think it was
called, was it Walter Storff? I can't remember, it's called the esoteric reading of these things.
Right. That somehow the good stuff is the stuff that has to do with material reality, physical,
you know, appearances and so forth. And when they start diverging into metaphysics, you know,
they're tongue in cheek, they're just doing it for the sensors or whatever. But that is,
that is a hard sell when you look at the logic, you know, logic of these. And that's why we brought
all these authors together because they were experts on the relative, you know, the various
modern philosophers and they were all saying the logic doesn't work without God. It doesn't work
without their positions on the soul and mortality or whatever. And so that was convincing to us at
the time. And, you know, that book came together in record time for a contributor volume. Yeah,
yeah. That's right. So one of the things that I find so interesting about that myth, right,
is that usually the sort of the pop version of that myth is that you essentially have shoddy
religious renown, right? Superficial, you know, sort of
philosophical religious jargon, right? That's really just, you know, it's really just church
dogma, right? It's superstitious nonsense. And then one day like reason awakens and people decide
to question their presuppositions. And as they begin to question it, all of the prior stuff just
unravels in their hands. And it gives way to modern science. And eventually, like God of the
gap starts to fall away. And soon we realize we're in a materialist world. One of the things like
the first step in that entire narrative that I find so insane, right? It crazy is like, let's
start with the scientific portion. So this would be the sort of thing that Richard Muller talked
about in his piece on Robert Boyle, Robert Boyle, the scientist. So what I find so fascinating
is that none of the like, none of the scientists, right? So early on, the early empiricists who
go into the scientific, you know, you mentioned bacon, right? So bacon's like, we've got to go
into empirical, not just empiricism, right? When we trust the senses, well, we've got to find a way
to do like a scientific method where we have hypotheses and we observe stuff and, you know,
we tested and all that sort of stuff. So that's the, you know, this is the birthing of the empirical
sciences. And what's interesting is when you look at, when you look at what the empiricists are
questioning, they're not actually questioning the religious stuff, right? So what's funny is like
those guys are questioning the philosophical stuff, right? So if you look at the history of Christianity,
right? There's like Judaism, Christianity, the religious realm eventually converges with
like Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism and things like that. And that's what sort of grows into
the scholastic stuff in the medieval West. And a lot of the empiricists, like guys like Robert Boyle,
they were still 100% fully in favor of Christianity. They just doubted the metaphysics. So the irony
is the narrative is like, oh, they doubt the theology, they doubt the God stuff. And all those
guys are like, no, it's the metaphysics stuff we doubt. We doubt Aristotle, right? Like that's
what we doubt. And you can see that in the fact that the first step is nominalism, right? The first
step is let's get rid of the realist metaphysics of Aristotle. And that was largely because so
much of Aristotle's metaphysics involved invisible stuff, right? Forms matter, matter not as particles
and things like that, but as the substratum of potential. And they wanted stuff that you could
poke and prod. So they went back to an alternative philosophy, which was the mechanical philosophy
of the Greek atomists. So one of the things that just on the surface of it, right from the get-go
that jumps out to me is exactly that, that it's like the theology didn't bother them. It was the
philosophy that bothered them, right? And yet guys like Walter Charlton, who are, you know,
part of that mechanical movement, you know, he was convinced he's actually what he suggested is their
return to atomism, Greek atomism and this materialist philosophy. They're like, this is the true
Christian philosophy. There's really no evidence that the Straussian side was, was right. I mean,
quite the contrary, Muller's article is all about his worry that they might be greasing the skids
toward atheism because largely because they were in removing all non-empirical stuff. He was like,
well, meaning purpose isn't really an empirical object, guys.
We said the only things that are real are things you could poke and prod. Meeting is going to go
away pretty quick. Teleology, purpose or end is going to go away pretty quick. So there were
worries about it going in that direction. But at the end of the day, it wasn't a theological
movement at all. It wasn't an anti-theological movement at all. It was an anti-certain type
of metaphysics we don't like movement. Yeah. No, that's, I think that's fair because they're
coming at it as scientists, right? And so, I mean, the one that came, that comes to my mind
out of the book is, you know, is Newton, you know, because Schnablin has done all this work and
Newton is an interesting character because he's, he's a Christian. He's a sort of mystic or, you
know, he's, he's not wanting to throw out faith by any means. In fact, he's just trying to get
science to, you know, to, to find the sort of causal principles that undergird it, right?
And to, and to stabilize it and to show how it can make progress. But he wasn't by any means
throwing out his faith or, you know, the belief in the spiritual realm or anything like that.
He was really, you're right, he's trying to fix the philosophy so that it could handle
the kind of movements we're seeing in science. Yeah. Well, and the funny thing is when it comes
down to it, you know, Newton's laws are descriptive. And then when you get to the mechanical question
of like, yeah, but why do they move? Why do they move that? Why do those laws function that way?
Why are they the way they are? Newton's answer is just because God wills it. That's right.
And that's it. And he, he's not putting it, it's not a punt to go out of the gaps. Like
Newton's actually recognizing they don't have, objects don't have to move this way. This is
just the way God's ordained that they move. And so for all that, and Schnablin, you know,
in order to reinforce that, I think he talks about, yeah, he talks about the fact that Newton,
a lot of the things that he's unearthed was things like that. Newton's doing
things that we would associate with like Southern Baptist fundamentalists or something like that,
which is like, he's doing like End Times chart space, then the book of Revelation is like that.
Yeah. No, they, he definitely, you know, seems to be drinking deeply from theology,
from the Bible, from Revelation. And yet obviously his contributions to science are legendary or
prodigious. But, but yeah, I mean, that's a story that Schnablin happily tells in the book,
you know, about that side of Newton that's oftentimes marginalized and pushed aside.
I do think that some of those, you know, what you might call
backstory presuppositions are distinctly sort of meaningful and, you know, metaphysical and rich,
right? And when you get, when you fast forward to 21st century, the 20th century, 21st century,
you get to things like reformed epistemology. There all, there would be an agreement, Newton
would be in agreement that there's certain basic things that we just assume are God centered.
And we have every right to hold them. We don't necessarily have scientific evidence for them,
but we're properly functioning in the environment for which we were made, in which we were made,
and they work. And that's how science can be done and done fruitfully.
Now, of course, the Leibnizian in me wants to come in and say, oh, now this is a problem,
but this is, so I'll bring up the rationalist side, right? Because the earliest modern discussion,
right? When you're talking about modernity, at least that the original fork in the road for
maternity is, are we going to be rationalists? Are we going to be empiricists, right? Is it going
to be that the most important things are things we observe and can poke and prod and describe,
right, like the laws of motion? Or is it going to be the analytic stuff? Is it stuff like math
and logic and so on? And that's your rationalist, right? And that's the fork in the road. Which
one's more important? Which one is more explanatory? So I think what you just said is true of how
so many empiricists talk and think, I think it's also true of like the common sense realists,
which is sort of where a lot of the contemporary reformed epistemology guys go, right? Guys like
Thomas Reid, who are just like, you just trust your faculties, common sense realists.
This is a certain amount of prima facie truth that everybody can sort of get on board with.
Right. And that's where guys like the contemporary reformed epistemologists tend to,
they grab Reid as their guy, right, Thomas Reid. But what's interesting is on the Leibnizian side,
it's like, okay, so, so what are the rationalists saying? Are they opposing it? And the answer is,
no, God becomes even more important in the rationalist systems because Leibniz, somebody like
Leibniz is going to come along and he's going to say, well, look, here's the problem, right? The exact
problem is what Newton grants, which is that the laws of motion could be otherwise, right?
There's no reason objects tend this way rather than that way. I mean, your laws are descriptive
of what is so that they're not prescriptive. They don't explain anything. That's right.
And that's Leibniz's concern. I would like an explanation, please.
Exactly. And what's interesting is once Leibniz bring rushers out like the principle of sufficient
reason, you know, for anybody who doesn't know basically that, you know, you need an explanation
that is, you know, that is complete, right? So, you know, if there was an explosion in this room,
and I said, Chris, what happened? And you're like, well, obviously there was oxygen in this room.
And it's like, well, okay, that's a partial reason is not sufficient. Every room I walk into
is it blowing up, you know, that's got oxygen in it. And so Leibniz is like, you need a sufficient
reason, right? Something that really does offer a complete and closed answer. And where Leibniz
traces that too is he says, well, once we start tracing from one explanation to the next, soon
we start going down a long, long, long explanatory rabbit hole, where we find every explanation is
incomplete, right? Even if we explain everything about why you're here, Chris, we get to, we get
to your parents at some point in that equation, and they need to explanation, and it's going to
trace on and on. And so Leibniz is convinced that what you've got to get to eventually is get to God.
But Leibniz doesn't even think and that's, this is where his rationalism comes in, right? He's
like just saying like the God, you know, sort of is self sufficient, he's a necessary being,
you can sort of just by understanding what he is, you get an explanation for why he is,
that doesn't explain why he does the stuff. And that's where you need the principle of the best.
So Leibniz is theodicy, right? That our world is the best of all possible worlds,
even though it's addressing the problem of evil. In some ways, what it's really addressing for
Leibniz is it's addressing everything else, right? Leibniz isn't just concerned with answering like,
why would God permit evil? Like Leibniz is concerned with answering why are the laws of physics the
way they are. And if you can get to something, like if you can get to in the idea of God,
not just that he exists, but also that he always does the best, now you have an analytic explanation.
You've reached an end point of the inquiry. And so like what's interesting is for Leibniz,
without God and without the sort of classical understanding of God as the optimal being,
you can't explain anything, physics, history, anything.
That's a, I think that's a pretty good way of assessing the empiricist-rationalist debate,
right? The empiricists are going to accept certain things that are only premised because the world
is meaningful and that it's orderly, it's essentially, quote unquote, Christian or theistic in some
fundamental way, and they can get science and everything else off the ground. The rationalists
are not quite so eager to simply assume that these things are functioning properly, but they want
a sufficient explanation for it. And so, you know, the rationalists quickly go to God to,
to, to, to, is the only possible way to hold that all together.
Yeah. No, it's true. And yet somehow for the empiricists, so many of them, you know, it does
end up, it does end up requiring when you ask the why, they do have to grant, well, you know,
God wills it, right? Like, that's what you get with so many of these guys.
So then how does it begin to unravel, Chris? Like, if everybody's there, right? Like,
you know, maybe there's a fork of some kind. It's a reference for anybody who doesn't know
to Hume's fork. Yeah. Well, you know, this, this, I mean, there's a lot of ways to tell the story.
You and I are familiar with Kant's sort of watershed of the rationalist empiricists saying,
look, both of those two are contributors to the knowing process, but nobody's ever analyzed
reason as it and its contribution to the knowing process. And this, of course, where we get the
watershed philosophy that is a manual Kant's transcendental thought, that space time in the
12 categories as well as freedom and the moral law and some other things are part of the rational
makeup of what it means to be a human being. And that's just a huge moment in Western thought.
Everybody sort of is aware of it. You know, I've taught it a couple of times in different venues,
but nobody seems to be really understanding. And so that's why guys like you and I are so
important these days, I guess, trying to translate this for, for, for audiences that don't want to
wade into those 800 page tombs. Yeah. Well, and so I think by way of context, you know,
it's really is that, and this is incidentally something that I think is very relevant
to how we think about these things. I always consider David Hume, who precedes Kant,
occasions Kant, right? This is part of what Kant is trying to answer address is, is Hume's skepticism.
And so I, I always like to say that Hume is the most honest of the empiricists. And the reason is,
because Hume, Hume is all four, like, yeah, let's just trust the senses. Absolutely. The only thing
that's real is sense experience and so on. But then the problem is rather than going from there
into supreme confidence, because that's what the empiricists want it. They're like, oh, I can trust
my senses. So see, you're right there in front of me. Hear this? That's a table, right? It's hard
right there. And so it's like, oh, supreme confidence and all this stuff about sense experience.
And yet Hume comes along and says, yeah, there's a lot of bad habits
with the way reason interacts with these things. So just as a simple example is causation.
So it's so easy for us to be like, you know, when you, when I do something like this and knock on
a table, you know, that if you were sitting there watching that, you're going, yeah, of course,
I observed the causation, right? I saw your hand hit the table and then I heard the sound, right?
But what Hume recognizes is those are two different empirical events. One empirical
event is the sound. The other empirical event is the sight. You don't actually observe the
connection. Your mind puts them together. But you don't observe the causation, which is
incidentally why foli artists and movies can swap out the real knocking on the table, replace it
with a fake one and you don't know the difference. And so people like Hume, and he goes through a
whole heck of a lot of, you know, examples of bad habits of mind, right? That he suggests
are all fallacious and so causation goes away, the self goes away, you know, all these sorts of
things that Kant tries to bring back. But it's that skepticism that that's at the stage. Now,
the reason I want to just pause there before we go to Kant is because there's a certain naivete
about the contemporary world. Like the folks who want the Straussian narrative,
so many of them tend to be empiricists, right? I don't believe in your sky daddy. I only, you
know, I only believe in what I could see and taste and touch. And, you know, they fancy themselves
to be scientifically minded and things like that. But it's as if they skipped over the entire part
of history where empiricism totally unravels in the hands of everybody who tries to embrace that.
Every attempt in the subsequent decades to resurrect it has failed.
Right. That's right. And so with Kant, you know, we get his particular attempt. Now,
I suspect you and I disagree a little bit, not so much on what Kant thinks, but on, you know,
how good or successful or whatever he is. I think there's a published exchange between us
where we take differing sides on that. But anyway, we don't need to get into a fistfight
or anything here. Well, yeah, I think what we both agree on is that he is in fact the next
major movement. Sure. Absolutely. And his, it's instructive as to how he gets out of that skepticism.
Right. And it is predominantly theistic, you know, the way he does it. Right. That the whole system
of reason is in danger of going retrograde unless it's moving forward in its understanding of the
archaeology of faith, a rational faith. And that's, I think, you know, what makes the
work we did on the religion text so interesting to people is that we show how he holds it all
together, that he's not an old man dribbling on himself as philosophers cloak, but he's in fact
doing reasonably good metaphysical work in the transcendental mode of discourse that's uniquely
Kant. So let me translate that for my audience here. So, I mean, basically what ends up happening
with Kant is he, like so many others like Bishop Barkley and others start to recognize that part
of how, you know, skepticism is getting a foothold is because there's a world out there and a world
inside. Right. So part of the question is I'm looking at Chris and it's like, okay, but does Chris
really look like what's in my head? Right. And that, and that's how you start to get to skepticism
is this inability to bridge that gap. Yes. And so you have the initial bridge with Barkley,
where he's like, well, let's get rid of the thing outside of your head and just say that the only
thing there is are minds and the ideas inside of your mind. But, but Kant does something similar
but different, right? A turn to the subject where he's like, well, well, you know, there'll be a
certain level of agnosticism about whether the thing out there is exactly like it is in my head,
but that doesn't really matter. Because what I have is what's in my head. And so,
the turn to the subject is really a turn to the mind and the structures of mind and saying, like,
well, let's, let's analyze the thing that we have access to, which is race in itself.
And so the appearance and various immediate types of experiences, he kind of has a
common sense of view of, he thinks we have them and that they're, they, they have to be
coming from somewhere other than pure sense perception or other than just logic. They must be
rooted in the recesses or the contributions of reason. And that's his big transcendental turn
to the subject in a nutshell. Yeah. But the religious part is that basically Kant recognizes,
and this part I think has always been recognized even though some people try to dismiss it as
non-realist, we'll say. But like, it's always been recognized that Kant needs God in some sense.
He's going to talk about morality. He's known as a moralist. He recognizes that, you know,
morality requires certain things like that you have free will. If I'm going to be held responsible
for my choices, I need to have the ability to do or not to, you know. And then he also recognizes
that there's certain things about your moral instincts that just grow unstable unless there's
a God and, you know, somehow, you know, you're held accountable for your choices.
That's just pretty well known. I mean, I would say that's not terribly controversial. Now,
how people interpret that, how sincere he is or not varies. Yeah, exactly. Right.
But nonetheless, I don't think there's many people who would give pushback the Kant's at
least arguing along those lines. That's right. For anybody who doesn't know, what would you say?
I just said like that some people treat it as non-realism. What's, if you want to give a
nutshell, non-realist, like what's, what's non-realism for folks who have never heard of it?
Yeah. Well, non-realist position would be you need the ideas in order to have certain
pragmatic results, but you don't need to have anything behind those ideas.
Exactly.
Except the ideas themselves.
Right. And you definitely have people in the world like this right now, right, who talk about God,
but a lot of us sort of raise an eyebrow and go, do you really believe in God or do you think
that's a useful symbol? Right. Or something like that. Anyway, so that's, that's how the
Straussian types try to take over Kant's. Like he doesn't really mean it.
That's probably related to evolutionary ethics as well or theories where it's emergent, you know,
that we need these ideas to hold, you know, communities together and for survival and whatnot.
But that's, that's, you know, that's a classic, you know, genetic fallacy of some kind, like just
because it emerged some way or if you have that, you're not describing whether or not it's true.
Yeah. And Alvin Planagas does some good work on that in his, what is it, warranted Christian
belief? I think he's got the Marx Freud objection where he's pointing that out and analyzing it.
But I think the thing that you and I really, what our work, which is so beloved in Kant's studies,
that's sarcasm, by the way, we deeply hated. I mean, there's, there's really a sense in which,
you know, there's our work has stored, stirred up a hornet's nest. It's definitely
required a lot of people to weigh in. And oftentimes there's, it's quite divisive.
But you, I mean, as another side note, one of the outcomes of persistence of the sacred in our
work on Kant was the realization that a lot of the readers and receivers of these historic figures
have a kind of religious relationship with them. Yeah. That if you fundamentally show that they're
wrong in their reading or that they're misguided in some way, they do come out with some, you know,
viciousness. And, and, you know, I think we discovered that in, in, in Kant's studies,
but then we saw it happening in other fields as well. That is these, I don't know what you'd
call them, revisionist readers of these figures really have religious motivations for why they're
reading them the way they are. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and, and our, our reading, you know, not that we
have to go deep into the weeds on it, but the fact of the matter is you mentioned that
Kant wrote a text later in life, a religion within the boundaries of mere reason, that most people
just dismissed, you know, they thought it's incoherent. It doesn't fit with Kant's philosophy.
You mentioned that he's dribbling on his philosopher's cloak. He's just an old seal,
an old man who's worried about the fact that he's going to die and he destroyed Christianity.
Like that's kind of like the old man was wrong, right? Like that's the, but you and I were like,
well, we're just going to treat this text with the level of seriousness that Kant seemed to treat
it with when he wrote it and try to make it coherent. And when we did, the result was a Kant
that really it's hard to just treat him like he's just some, you know, either senile old guy or
some guy who really doesn't think there's any importance to, to faith or religion or Christianity
or anything like that. Yeah. I mean, we did stir up a hornet's nest, but we also stirred up some
real interest from other scholars who said, you guys said what we were struggling to utter here,
and that's the Kant I read as well. Yeah. So now there's a king of the hill sort of thing going on,
who, who can get the right interpretation, but, you know, but putting that to one side, you know,
there's definitely a robust sort of treatment of Kant's religious thought going on, which we were,
I mean, we weren't the originators of that. Obviously, there had been other people who,
I mean, he did the holy edited volume with Palmquist before this that was talking about that
burgeoning ring, but I don't want to get too far into the weeds with Kant. I mean, obviously,
things went awry, right? So, and I'd just be curious, you know, like at some point it did
begin to unravel, right? There's no doubt that even though these guys had religious bents and,
you know, the folks after Kant too, right, Hegel, Hodgson is absolutely right. I mean, Hegel is
very clearly, even though he's like a pantheist or a pendant theist, like God is indispensable
in Hegel's thought. And guys like, you know, FWJ Schelling, right, these other sort of guys
after them are really critical, but at some point it does start to unravel and a certain,
you know, movement really begins to emerge, not in modernity, but sort of on this back end of it,
where people are like, you know, what if we could get rid of the God thing, right? So like,
how would you, I know how I diagnose it, but I'd be curious, like, how do you diagnose that sort
of end of the era where all of a sudden the skids are greased and we end up here, right?
And obviously, we've talked about how the narrative gets here. That's the Straussian
sort of narrative. But if we're getting rid of Strauss and we're saying that's rubbish,
which it is rubbish, these guys were deeply sort of philosophically rich, theologically rich. I mean,
God was essential to their thinking. They weren't anti-Christianity. They were unconventional,
probably a lot of them are heretical, whatever, but like, they were all sort of deeply, you know,
rooted in the importance of God and religion and so on. But at some point, you did hit this point
where it drops off into the abyss, right? And so, how would you diagnose the unraveling?
Typically, the way I try to frame it, and I think this is among the simplest ways I've heard it,
and I think pretty explanatory, is that, you know, all of our thinking is driven towards
better and better metaphysical paradigms for understanding reality, but it's driven by logic
and ethics. And these are fundamental philosophical fields, analytic logic, and, you know, what you
might, I mean, let's call it the moral law, freedom and the moral law.
I was a fan of a manual con. Well, there's some basic sort of things that have driven
Western philosophy to the heights that it has achieved. And in the 19th century, we see both
of those two pillars of the quest for truth, beauty, and goodness undermined. I think we first see it
in the movement towards understanding the very mind of God to be synthetic, and that is somehow
A equals not A is a fundamental ingredient of how truth comes into being. And this is, I guess,
you know, I look at an apologist who isn't oftentimes right on philosophers, but on this one,
I think he is, a guy named Francis Schaefer talked about him and destined off the old Francis Schaefer.
I am, I am. I mean, he's known for this line of despair, and it really is the breaking the back
of analytic truth in replacing it with synthetic truth. Now, that alone isn't enough to cause the
problems that we see in the 20th and 21st centuries, because there is some truth to synthesis.
Right. So let me pause you there. I presume it's been a long time since I read Francis Schaefer,
but I'm presuming he probably pigs that with Hegel, right? That he's, so Hegel's dialectic.
Kant discovers synthesis in a sense based intuition and concepts being united in the
act of synthesis, but Hegel takes it to be fundamental to God's self-understanding,
presenting the world and coming to a self-understanding in and through the
synthesis that happens in the human mind. So let me translate this for some folks again.
You know, I did this, you know, so when, when Chris is here talking about synthetic, right,
he's talking about Kant's synthetic notion is somehow that the, the mind has certain innate
ideas in it. Right. And then it encounters the world and then those two things merge and that's,
that's where we get, you know, that's where we get understanding. Right. Yeah. Some sort of direct,
you know, what we presume is sense experience, right? So if you're going with a standard empiricist
stuff, right? Like that's just the encountering of the world is, is, you know, and, but for Kant,
it's synthetic, right? The mind meeting, whatever it's meeting. Yes. That's the contribution,
synthetic, a priori contributions of the mind that make an appearance to us a viable thing.
That's consciousness. Right. And then Hegel is known for his dialectic, which is the idea that
there is a thesis, right? Some stated something and an anti-thesis, right? An opposite, you know,
an opposition at least. And then a synthesis that moves things forward where it's neither those two,
but, you know, it gets a third, third sort of thing. And, you know, I know that I don't know if
this is what Schaefer is citing, but certainly when Hegel starts to give a creation narrative,
which incidentally what I'm about to describe is Von G. Lessing before Hegel, but,
but Lessing wrote a little essay where he talks about this, but Hegel basically
thinks of the world as like you have God who is the absolute, right? And then, you know, sort of
you have the absolute nothingness, right? Like this sort of being and non-being. And then the
synthesis is where you get finitude. So you go from like absoluteness and not absoluteness, right,
to like finitude, right? Finitude to the world as we experience. Right. And this is how Hegel
understands the world. I said he's a pantheist or a panentheist. Panentheist is a newer term. So
in his day, he was called a pantheist. But the idea is like that the world itself is sort of this
unfolding of God, like, which is not entirely contrary to the ancient world, right? The ancient
world did have this notion that somehow the world is an articulation of God, right? Like that God is
somehow expressing all the different dynamics of his wisdom and his being and his power through
all the different stuff, right? Right. And Hegel is playing on that, right? And it's the unfolding
of God's own being and self-realization. So that's what Schaefer doesn't like that, huh?
Yeah, prior to that, you know, the way he tells the story, analytic thought was all
about understanding the world, breaking it down to its composite parts and better understanding
the whole. But after Hegel, something different's happening, we think we've unlocked the hidden
mysteries of God's understanding of the God-world-man relationship. And that is what he calls the line
of despair, where the old rationality of the Greeks is overcome by a new synthetic rationality
that is distinctive to the 19th century. The other movement, and this is on the ethic side of it,
is the coming of Friedrich Nietzsche. And Friedrich Nietzsche is beyond good and evil,
overcoming the very notion of any separation between good and evil for people who are,
of say, a higher historical, you know, the end of the earth, as he calls them, the Superman.
And it's the breaking the back of analytical logic with a new synthetic logic, coupled with
the breaking the back of the moral law, with the emergence of the Superman who creates his own laws
through the will of, you know, act of the will to power, conscious act of the will to power,
that we get this kind of double piston that used to drive our collective understanding of how we
formulate a worldview in the first place. And both of those two things are taken, in a sense,
off the table. And this promotes the individual, it promotes the notion that we're conscious
manifestations of the will to power and a lot happens that then transforms itself in the 21st
century to what we now call postmodern philosophy rooted in this, this, this twin thing that's
happening in the 19th century. It doesn't mean that people wholesale have given up on these things.
In fact, lots of people hold to the importance of logic and the importance of ethics. But now
we're getting separation on these issues, you know, moral relativity, you know, atomistic
individualism based upon the individuals, the one who makes discerns where meaning is to be found,
what things, you know, what things mean and, and how we can now reorganize nature through an
act of will. And so that's, you know, if I'm trying to describe what's what, you know, the origins
of what went wrong and a lot goes wrong in the 19th century. And these are people who fancy
themselves as somehow related to Kant and yet transcending him fundamentally.
Yeah. So let me give you my diagnosis, see whether or not you see overlap or dissonance
between you and me on this part. And then I want to ask you a question specifically about
the Enlightenment. So, well, my journey generally, but so anybody who has tracked my work,
and I don't know how much you track my work, Chris, I don't, you know, you never write anymore,
you don't call. So I think that kid, no, but, no, it's been complicated years. Anyway, but so they
know that, you know, one of the ways that I think is, is how I think, you know, the lens by which
I look at the history of ideas that I think is really, really useful is the entire idea that in
some ways, the history of ideas is really the story of two roads, the road of realism and the
road of nominalism. And folks who listen to this know what I mean by those terms. And obviously,
you do as well, right? The idea that the mind looks out into the world, we see, you know,
we see categories, we see genera species, we see groups, we see numbers, we see logic, all this
sort of stuff. So the question, right, the question of realism is when the mind does that,
is it doing that because those things are real, right? And it's abstracting out of reality,
those structures that are there and informative. Or are they mental fictions, right? Are they
names and nominalism from no man for name that the mind projects on reality to organize a
reality and give it structure that isn't really there. And, and basically the way I think is a
really useful way of looking at the history of ideas is exactly that, right? That it's the story
of these two different different roads. So very early on in the pre-socratics, you have people
testing these different roads, you have folks like the Pythagoreans who are noticing like,
I think there's this immaterial stuff. It's called math, right? That's just sort of like
an important feature of reality. And then you've got Adamists who are like, no, I think it's just
like hard bits of matter, like colliding and coalescing and all this sort of stuff. And eventually
you have realism when the day, right? With people like Socrates and Plato and Aristotle and Stokes
and the New Platonist. The Jews and the Christians get in on this, right? Alexandria and Jews end
up embracing realism. The early Christians, East and West embrace realism. And now like
the, the pagan world and the Christian world and all of that is sort of converging into this
burgeoning trajectory of realism, right? That this is the nature of reality primaries mind,
right? And specifically the divine mind. And then the structures of reality that follow from that.
And then, you know, and that really what we as images of God, or if you were a stoic divine
sparks or whatever it is, you know, are capable of discerning that. And that's discerning what
those structures are and figuring out our place in that is what offers us a way forward in terms
of knowing how we ought to live, right? And, and so that's sort of like the realist trajectory.
And then nominalism enters in and, you know, at first enters in, in the late medieval period.
People like William of Occam, who are really sort of initially pietistic about it, right? They,
they want to say in some ways, like, I don't like saying that there's certain things God
can't do, right? He can't make square circles, which was a quintessentially, you know, realist
sort of thing to say, like, yeah, you know, logic, structures of reason are structures of
reality reflective of the divine mind. But a nominalist like Occam didn't like that. So they
want to say, well, those are just sort of our structures, they're the imposed structures that
God's given to us, but they're not sort of like innate in reality. But, you know, nominalism
really becomes a driving force in modernity. The empiricists, we always refer to them as
empiricists, but they're really nominalists first. People like John Locke, you know, the whole opening
of his, you know, new essays on human understanding, or sorry, that was liveness, his essays on human
understanding, but liveness did the new essays. But, you know, Locke's essays on human understanding
is really an attack on innate ideas and really Plato, right? It's an attack on realism. And so
empiricism is, and I had said, you know, early on in this, this discussion that it's first and foremost
attack on Aristotelian philosophy, not on religion. And that's true, right? Aristotle had won the
day in the Latin Medivals, and they all recognized that. So they're really sort of attacking those
metaphysics more so than anything about the religion. And so the way I see it is I see a certain
flourishing of morality, of politics, of metaphysics, of human understanding and civilization
in the culmination of realism. And in many ways, I really sort of identified the underlying rot
that gives way to postmodernity as nominalism itself. And so when I look at it, I think,
you know, empiricism is the let's give nominalism a try. And I say that not sort of like,
hyperbolically, literally, the mechanical philosophy was a let's dust off the atomism of the Greeks
and give it another whirl. So it really was that sort of like nominalist materialism.
And I think Hume is the right culmination of that, that like once you start to go this route,
you end up alienated from the world, you start to have trouble justifying basic things like
causality. And even though I recognize that what somebody like Immanuel Kant does with the term
to the subject is meant to remedy the problem, I really do think Kant in some ways perpetuates
the problem or at least embodies the fact that you're what you're left with is like a certain
amount of agnosticism, right, that there really is this, well, we're sort of left with what reason,
you know, like reason philosophy almost becomes a form of psychology more so than metaphysics.
And even though people like Hegel tried to reintroduce metaphysics with his pantheism,
pretty quickly, you know, the sort of empiricist impulse here of the underlying nominalism of
the age says, well, yeah, but we don't really have access to the God stuff. We still only have
like the human stuff and the material stuff. So now Hegel gives way to people like Karl Marx,
where it's like, you know, you know, well, first Feuerbach, right, that we're really
play acting that this is about God, let's be honest, this is about man projecting, you know,
and then Karl Marx, the dialect is really just about politics. And in some ways I see Marx as
sort of the leftist version of this and Nietzsche as the right, right, it either devolves into a sort
of Superman Nazism, right, or a leftist Marxism, right. And so in some ways what I see is I see
the destruction of, you know, words, right, and the reduction of words not from objective
definitions like in Plato, but reducing them to subjective things, which then means they can be
controlled and manipulated, you know, that the political sphere is not about transcendent good
and bad, right, it's about here and now gritty, good and bad, which is not really about morality
per se, but it's about utility, right, it's about what we can get, you know, in order to
increase pleasure and decrease pain, right, where morality becomes utilitarian in nature and so on.
And so in some ways I think Hume rightly nails the problem of nominalism and everything else is
sort of flailing to get out from under that problem and it just keeps on collapsing down into at some
point this really is a struggle for power, this is a struggle for resources, this is a struggle for
getting what we can here and now and objective meeting, objective morality, you know, objective,
you know, really anything other than, you know, what I objectively want for myself,
whatever object I want for myself, it tends to be what it keeps on collapsing into and the
reason I bring that up as relevant here and now is that I see that divide, that realist,
nominalist divide is between all of the divides and culture, right, like trans says like its first
premise is gender is a social construct, that's an inherently nominalist premise, like the premise is
that all the sort of categories we use of male and female, you know, penis, vagina, right, like
those are just words imposed on a world that really is just a bunch of matter floating around.
And if we hack it apart and reshape it and give it a new name, it is that thing, right,
and that's a nominalist worldview, whereas then the man on the street, he's going, you know,
I'm pretty sure a man can't become a woman and I'm pretty sure that that hacked up penis
isn't a vagina, I think it's still a penis, right, like that's a realist instinct, right,
he thinks the world just is a certain way and you can't just by force, right, make it another way.
And, and in some ways, that's the divide where you have one group that, you know, the original
oppressor is reality itself. And that's why we can manipulate and remake it. And, you know,
we need to be the Superman in this situation, somebody who realizes
that realism is false, right, the Superman is the one who realizes that reality is whatever
we call it and whatever structures we give to it and therefore let's just give it new structures,
right. And the realist is the one who's going, you know, I think reality is our friend, right,
like I think meaning is found by figuring out our place in it, submitting to it and like,
you know, moving through it in a way that leads to flourishing and so on. So that's how I would
diagnose it. I guess my question is, I have two questions for you. So the first is, given your
sort of Schaeferian diagnosis they gave, do you think that there is harmony or dissonance between
that? That's the one question. Yeah. And then the second question is, as someone who has lived
and breathed caught for as long as you have, do you see, I mean, I obviously see modernity
and the enlightenment in a negative way. I do. I think it's step backwards. And I think
the fruit of that tree is shown by where we are right now. And so, but I guess my question for
you would be, would you defend the modern turn? Because, and I'm not saying defended in the sense
of like, these guys aren't atheists, agnostics, but do you think it was a good thing or a bad thing,
you know, step forward, step backwards, whatever. So those are my two questions. So take it away.
Wow. Nathan, that's a tour de force. You know that your account on the realist,
nominalist thing has been influential on me. I think you're right. The way I think of
our approaches and why they appear to be different is that the big questions of life,
the way I understand what I call the tree of philosophy, can be approached ontologically
or can be approached epistemically. And I choose to approach it epistemically,
probably a son of the Enlightenment. You're not a son of the Enlightenment. Maybe more medieval or
early church or, you know, and so the ontological move of understanding the realism, nominalism piece
as the lens through which to see the problem with our worldview these days makes a ton of sense to
me. So I guess in answer to your first question, I do see them as compatible. Where they differ is
when I'm looking at the question of knowledge and the Kantian turn, I see that that can be done
critically and well and critical in the sense of the Kant's understanding of critical, where you
take the truths in both positions to find a higher order position, articulate that analytically,
and feel like you've made progress in your understanding of the world. I see that as kind
of what happens in the history of ideas. And so with Kant's turn to epistemology, really,
you know, one of the things I think you and I discovered with Kant is that the best reading
of Kant is to hold on the ontology in favor of the epistemology until a full excavation
of reason is done. And when you do that, you see that Kant's rational faith starts to look strangely
familiar to metaphysicians because he's trying to do a transcendental analysis of what we must
believe for moral hope. And if you hold out long enough, you get a kind of understanding of rational
faith that looks awfully amenable. And the leap from rational to empirical faith isn't quite as far
it was. It's not the Kierkegaardian sort of leap of faith in an irrational sense, but a very
rational movement. If I can't see, Kant talks about, if I can't see any divergence from the
prototype in an empirical manifestation, Allah, Jesus, then that's a reasonable kind of empirical
faith to have. So I do think there's renditions of Kant that are actually epistemically very
reasonable to hold. And I'm not sure I'm all the way there with Kant, even on that rendition,
but I do think something does go vitally wrong after Kant. And the receivers of Kant, epistemically
speaking, they give up on God, they give up on immortality, they give up on faith in the moral
law, as I've stated previously, logic and ethics become problematic in the 19th century in a way
they hadn't been before that. And so when I'm looking at the big questions, I'm approaching it
from that epistemic problem of logic and ethics. Without those things, we're not going to really
be able to have a round table discussion that aims at truth, a Socratic dialogue that actually has
the hope of getting the truth, beauty and goodness. And so that's the way I'm approaching that same
kind of problem. But I'm very sympathetic to the metaphysical, you know, sort of ontological
approach to the big questions where the realism piece, which has been so fruitful to Western
intellectual history, has been systematically replaced by nominalism. And that explains an
awful lot of what we're seeing in this sort of crazy universe we're now living in the 21st
century America, where all these things are reversed and flipped under head. And what we
take to be rather obvious, we can reconstruct through our own creative means and come up with
something just as good as reality. Yeah. So here's what I think is interesting as I listen to you,
is that I've always known from our early days of working together and talking that we had
differing dispositions on these sorts of things, not necessarily overtly differing worldviews,
but I always knew that I was more of a purist in metaphysics. And obviously, you know, you knew
that about me as well, right? I was one of the rare people who goes around calling themselves a
metaphysician. Do those exist anymore? That was exactly your disposition. And I've also always
known that I don't know that I would call you a pragmatist, but there always was something about
you that was like, well, okay, let's work within. Okay, this person has these presuppositions or
they have this point, let's work within that. And I've never been opposed to that, right? Obviously,
I think like with Aquinas or even Gregory of Nessus, you know, a great catechism, right? The idea of
starting with what are the, you can't reason with an atheist the same way you could reason with a
fellow theist, right? You know, you have to deal with the views that are there. And I've always
known this that I'm more of a purist, where I'm like, I want to know whether the entire worldview,
the metaphysics down at the foundations, I'm going to go in and I'm going to exam the foundations,
whereas you've always been a little more like, well, let's look at the house and
working within this house. What's the best version of this? Now, I do think though,
and I'll be curious to see over time whether you'll be more and more persuaded to my side,
because I dare say, I think I've seen movement with you on this, which is that as we're getting
down the road, where we're no longer talking about gray in worldview, we're talking like cosmic
differences, where like in this culture, it's like, people are looking at each other going,
we literally live on different planets, like that it's all of a sudden, it's starting to look more
and more like, maybe you have to go down to the foundations, because at least I would diagnose
that as I think we've benefited from something that the Enlightenment generally, modernity
generally benefited from, which was the fumes of Christianity. So even when people were like,
ah, yeah, let's cast off Christianity, we've still thought, well, we can have a common sense
discussion here. I mean, these people aren't crazy, but in some ways, the boundary lines of the
discussion were nicely constricted by the fact that we all grew out of this Judeo-Christian
culture. And we didn't really ever sit across the way from the Marduk worshiper who's going to burn
his children, you know, like the valley is a sacrifice to the pagan god. Like we were never
really that far apart, but I think what you're seeing is the fumes are dissipating, and now the
polarity is starting to merge, and it's almost like, wow, maybe we can no longer have that good
faith discussion, and we do have to go down right to the foundations. I think you're almost
certainly right. I don't want to give up quite yet, but I do think that your charity has no
no bounds. Yeah, well, you know, maybe I'm an eternal optimist or something, but I do see the
fact that we're now talking past each other, right? That the circle, not you and me, but not you and
me, but the cultures talking past each other. We once upon a time had dignity, civility,
basic, you know, things that we agreed upon in the Western intellectual tradition.
But this type of skepticism that we're seeing is a little different than the skeptics of the Greek
world. They're now calling everything a manifestation of the will to power, and everything's on an
equal plane, and everyone is potentially your enemy. And so we no longer have that kind of
civility that we once did and how we see the other. Everyone's a political animal now. Everyone
has some axe to grind. And you can no longer assume that you are common human beings questing
after truth together. And that does put a real stress on the epistemic approach to the big
questions of life. I have to admit, because I can no longer have cosojourners on this quest with me.
I really have to smack them in the face with reality now in ways that I could assume we would
agree upon in days of old. And so that's giving me a lot more charity and pause and
amenability to your view on the realism, anomalous side of things, because that's a much
stronger tool when you get to open discourse with people. It's no longer, let me give you another
argument, because you're seeing that as a power play. And now I just say, let's look at reality,
and how's that working for you? No, I mean, it is true. I do think there was a time,
and I think you and I saw this. There was a time when you and I can even remember where we were
standing and thinking back. And I think we were listening to a talk by Harold Nettlin,
and we were, who's for anybody who doesn't know, is the area's religious pluralism.
And I think we were sort of like snickering a little bit, to our shame, that we were
snicking a little bit, listening to some of these doomsday Christian apologists who are
like, what's coming? It's like a pure relativism, and we're like, what? Who really thinks that?
I mean, this is some straw man. It would never get here. And the funny thing is,
we were shown to be the ones who were naive, because they did see what was coming down the pipe,
and we didn't. We thought it was all a good, good faith, intellectual discussion.
We didn't see where it would end up. You know, guys like C.S. Lewis and Schaefer,
you know, they had blind spots in their understanding of some of the big questions,
but they were really acutely aware of where this could go, how quickly it could go there.
And then a number of other, you know, thinking of the 80s, 90s, 2000s, when Christian philosophy
was flourishing, a number of these apologists were warning, this is not good, what we're seeing,
and what you're going to see 30 years from now is going to be really bad.
And I remember there was a chef, right? You and I went from like going like, no,
I think it's a good faith discussion. And that's where it seemed more like preference,
right? Me being like, I think like a metaphysician, you're willing to work within the boundary lines
of whoever you're engaging. But it seems like now I have to say, I think the sifting out,
the separation happening in culture, almost requires in order to have a coherent discussion,
you have to go down to the foundations at this point, because the divide is so big, you know.
I think you've convinced me of that over time. And current events have convinced me that
there's no amount of, you know, discourse, arguments, and so forth. I used to really
appreciate the apologists who would go into the secular environments and stake these powerful
analytic arguments, you know, like, you know, pillars or something into the ground so that
we had the sort of social imaginary, as Charles Taylor talks about it, to actually breathe and
live and breathe the faith, the Christian faith in the midst of that. I'm not sure that's sufficient
anymore. I think that era, I was about 50 year era is kind of over now. The plethora of podcasts,
not unlike this one and other things that people are listening to, the voices are, you know,
the postmodern cacophony of voices is just too overwhelming to people. You really do need to
get down to those basics again. So this is, I think, where you've convinced me for sure.
Yeah. So last question is the one that I asked, like modernity, right, the modern term.
We're going to go back to basics, let reason have it say all this sort of stuff. Step forward,
step backwards, somewhere in between, how would you diagnose it? Wow.
You know, I guess, I mean, my gut tells me it's a step forward, but then a step forward can sometimes
be off a cliff. But I'm particularly thinking of, you know, social contract theory, the sort of
founding documents of the United States of America, separation of powers, certain sort of what I would
call instrumental or technical achievements that have proven themselves to be worthwhile over time.
And as a bastion for holding to traditional Western values, you might say, there's some
really good things that have happened there. I think, again, what we're seeing in recent times
is a shaking of these structures. Because now you have philosophical systems, this nominalism
you're talking about, this will to power, this dialectical materialism, all out against those
structures, as those are illegitimate in some way, even though they have proven themselves time
and again to be tried and true. And so, yes, it's a mixed bag. And the verdict is still out on whether
or not America is going to be able to weather this and its structures are going to be able to
weather this because there's some great wisdom that went into the Enlightenment movement that made
possible the government, democracy, this sort of democratic republic we have now.
But it's unclear if without the roots, the realism, the metaphysical foundations being
imbibed by good people. And they're the majority of people. Whether or not those structures are
just sufficient to withstand what's coming. Yeah, I think you're spot on with that, which is that
I would say the naivete, I mean, I spoke about our naivete 30 years ago. I think you see the same
sort of naivete in a lot of the founding principles, which is that on the one hand, they're doing
separations of powers, those sorts of things that you're talking about. On the other hand,
where they left vulnerable was that none of them saw coming post-maternity. And so, there's the
certain naivete that as long as the texts are clear, as long as the principles are there,
obviously future generations will be able to navigate these things and that'll hold.
Now, they recognize that you needed a moral society in order to do this.
But there really was a sense in which the documents themselves left up for grabs,
the worldview side of it. Because on the one hand, it tacitly presumes it, mention of God,
of a creator, things like that. But certain things like, obviously, natural law is clearly
part of the founding documents. A natural view of rights is there, where you have the statement
about the people have more rights than are here enumerated and they retain those rights, or
statements like that that clearly indicate a natural view of rights endowed by the creator.
That's a natural view of rights. And yet, somehow, in the early discussions about,
could an atheist hold office? The answer was, well, I guess so. And there was no recognition
that if you leave the worldview commitments up for grabs, there's a certain naivete that says,
the documents and the principles that take care of the worldview side. And it's like, well,
that's not true. And we're seeing that it's not true, that you really need the idea that somehow
you would have a system of government that's based entirely on a natural view of rights,
but you could have somebody with a positivist view of rights that thinks they're just governmental
inventions, holding office and interpreting the documents in a judicial capacity is insane.
Because they can't be trusted. And so there's this weird sense in which so many of the founding
principles had a distrust in government, but an odd trust in human reason. And we're seeing
the fruit of that. And so I do think you're right that there's a lot of good fruit that comes out
of modernity. But there's a lot of vulnerability because there's still this sort of a certain
level of assumption, naive assumption about man and reason and documents and language
that doesn't anticipate the postmodern turn and leaves it vulnerable in a certain sense.
And this is where I would say, obviously, you know that in the narrative I just painted earlier,
that I would look at the modern turn as in some sense negative, right? The turn to
toy with nominalism and so on. But I guess here's where I see that going. And this is where the
verdict is still out. I could see that narrative going to its logical conclusion and collapsing
the whole thing, right? Which is what you hinted at about, I don't know. I could also see it going
to its logical conclusion and it's like a drug addict hitting a rock bottom where they're like,
man, reality doesn't play nice when you decide that reality is the enemy and we can manipulate it.
And all of a sudden there's a turn back to how do we rediscover reality? And I actually am seeing
signs of that. When I look at the generation of folks who have walked away from religion,
many of them are sort of hitting the end of that road and realizing something is still lacking
and then turning back to religion oftentimes more traditional religion than they were raised in.
And so I think you're seeing hints of that, right? Hints of this turning back from having stepped off
a cliff, right? The question is, you know, is the critical mask going to go with those folks?
Or is it going to go with the folks who continue to war against reality? And I really don't know.
I don't know either. But I totally agree with what you're saying here. And I'm
trying to be cautiously optimistic. And then I see... You, the eternal optimists are still
optimistic. And I see, well, part of the sifting that's going on that we're seeing in the academy
is optimism, right? Schools are going down, one of which I was teaching at, went down,
but other schools are rising up with like-minded sort of metaphysical realists focused on,
you know, the canonical books of the Western intellectual tradition and, you know, biblical
principles and, you know, some of the good founding elements of our nation, recognizing
lacunas, but still seeing that that synthetic wedding, if you will, of those things,
can have a future. And that maybe we ought to, you know,
nostalgically return to those roots as our point of orientation for getting back
something that we used to call the American dream, a hope in the future. If you just work hard enough
and believed, you know, in human dignity and God, you know, God's got a plan for your life and that
it can work out well if you put the pieces together and face reality head-on. And so,
but I am vitally concerned that, you know, once you have let the demons loose, as it were,
that they are very difficult to put back into the cage as in the Western intellectual tradition
coupled with this marriage to Christianity was successfully able to do that. And you see people
flocking to these places around the globe. These are what we call colonies that have gotten such a
bad rap has, but they're still dying to get to those places because there's something about them
that is true, good and beautiful. And yet they're under assault, full scale assault right now.
And without those things, without the things that made us great in the first place,
I don't know if I can be as optimistic as I want to be on this thing.
Well, I suspect that maybe we're getting to a point in history where the real bottles for how
truth and goodness and beauty rise above that is probably actually the early church when it was
thrust into a pagan culture, because I think we're pretty quickly getting back to that.
That might be the model. You know, I have heard about the martyrs and the saints.
And I was hoping we'd never have to go there. But it does seem like there's some strange
similarities with what Jesus, the apostles, the early Christians encountered and what we're
starting to encounter once again here in the West. Well, on that note, we'll hope your eternal
optimism proves to be right. And maybe we'll end it there. Thanks for being with me, Chris.
My pleasure. Looking forward to, you know, chewing the fat on some of the other great
stories of our past 25 years. Sounds good. All right. Well, on that note, I'm Nathan Jacobs,
and this is the Nathan Jacobs podcast. Hey, everybody. Thanks for watching. Thanks for listening.
If you haven't done so already, please go ahead and follow, subscribe, hit like if that's an option
on whatever you're listening to, all that sort of stuff really helps us out here. So I greatly
appreciate your support. And until next time, I'm Nathan Jacobs, and this is the Nathan Jacobs podcast.
