Welcome to the High Existence podcast where we challenge the way you live.
We bring you the wisdom and tools to help you grow into a more enlightened version of
yourself.
Join us by taking the ultimate life experiment, our 30 challenges to enlightenment course,
a complete spiritual path to help you overcome the limitations of your mind and to embody
the highest philosophical realizations.
Use the code wisdom at checkout to get a huge 25% off the course, available only to
podcast subscribers at store.highexistence.com.
I'm your host John Waterlow, you can find me over on High Existence and on my own podcast
Voices in the Dark.
Hi everyone and welcome to the High Existence podcast.
Before I introduce the guests, I just want to circle back to the pre-recorded promo there
that you just heard about the 30 challenges to enlightenment.
I know pre-records aren't always the most exciting way to hear about something.
I want to recommend it myself just on a personal level because it's something that I actually
read and worked on whilst I was spending a month in a Buddhist monastery on a hilltop
in Nepal and believe it or not, just by all the teaching, all the other reading I was
doing, it was actually just the handbook that goes with that course that was maybe the most
profound, insightful and life-changing thing that I experienced, worked on and thought
about during that month.
The boys who put it together, the High Existence team, did an incredible job of pooling together
all of their knowledge, self-growth experience and put it in this format which you can really
directly apply into your life and it not only gave me a lot of insight into myself but
it showed that so much of what I was learning in the monastery via Buddhism is something
that goes beyond any particular school of thought from Joseph Campbell to Nietzsche to
psychology books to other self-help manuals.
A lot of them are kind of saying the same thing in different language and in the 30
challenges course, you get it pooled together and you begin to see, you find the ways in
which the message can connect to you through the different modalities that they pull in
and I definitely recommend you go check it out and with 25% off with that code, it's a
really great opportunity and I think there's a free version, a little sampler booklet,
so you can take a look and see for yourself, see if it is something that you think would
connect for you.
Anyway, moving swiftly on, our guest this week is Daniel Schmacktenberger of the Neurohacker
Collective.
If you haven't heard our first episode with Daniel, you can go check it out on the feed
if you want to hear more about the macro level, the fate of humanity from ecological
economic perspectives, what new systems do we need to put in place if we want to preserve
our world and ourselves as a species.
Daniel could be introduced in so many different ways as a philosopher, a great thinker, a
strategist, someone who can deal as easily with talk about quantum mechanics as he can
about the human body and the systems that draw the world together and make it function.
In this particular episode, we're talking about how we can make change at the level
of you and me.
We talk about health and it's not just a kind of biohacking podcast that we do talk about
Neurohacker's principle first big product called qualia, which is a new tropic that
isn't like most new tropics that give you a little buzz and then kind of screw up your
system.
Qualia is actually specifically made to raise the baseline of the human regulatory system
that's making you more able to deal with everything in your life down from the biological
level up to the consciousness level is how we experience things.
If you want to try qualia, we do have a deal with the Neurohacker Collective and you can
go to the show notes, click that you get a 10% off, offer using the code high existence.
Martin has tried it out and says it's absolutely phenomenal for him.
It allows a huge amount of mental clarity, but beyond that, as you'll hear in this episode,
it's doing so much more to help you be the best version of yourself.
But why use it?
That's kind of the theme of this episode.
We talk about how given that we are physically embodied, everything that we do is mediated
through our biology and therefore we have a responsibility to ourselves and to the world,
everything that we do to understand that so that we can actually be that version of
ourselves, put the work out, do things that help us connect with other people in the world
around us.
But most of us, we don't really know how our body works and we don't have practices
and thought processes which help us to do that.
Daniel unpacks things down at the level of the key pillars, the foundations that we need
to put in place in order to be able to be the versions of ourselves that we most want
to be.
So we dig into those foundations.
There's lots of practical advice in this on how to alter your life and effectively upgrade
yourself.
But we also reflect on how difficult this is to do and to overcome that resistance in
a world or at least in our Western societies in which the medical system is essentially
set up to treat acute problems without really getting down to what's causing them, which
can be as simple as a nutrient or mineral imbalance.
He breaks that down in language that's so much easier to understand than the kind of
deep science that he's actually drawing on and has a significant amount of command over.
Talking about Daniel is something that I could do at enormous length and so I'm going to
cut it short here and let him speak to himself.
This is an incredible episode and from a very wise man that was a real privilege for me
to speak to.
I know you're going to love it and if you have questions, he invites it at the end that
he's happy to come back on the show and answer questions directly, then email me.
I think it's probably the easiest thing to do.
And the address is Jay Waterloo, that's J-W-A-T-E-R-L-O-W at highexistence.com.
Let me know what your questions are for Daniel.
We'll collect some together and see when we can get him on next time and address those
directly.
Now, please enjoy the episode.
A welcome back, Daniel Schmacktenberger to the High Existence podcast.
This is part two, strongly advise people want to hear about the future of the world, that
they go and listen to the first part where we took a really macro view of where we are
as humanity and where we may be going next.
And in this part, we're going to dive more into the personal development, the biohacking,
the neurohacking and how we can develop ourselves in order to do anything positive in the world.
Daniel's founder at Neurohacker Collective, which is a movement dedicated to upgrading
our individual and collective capacities and to safeguarding the well-being of all.
As you would hear in the first episode, it's pretty tricky to sum up Daniel, though I guess
it's pretty tricky to sum up anyone in a fair and rounded way.
And we had a really great conversation, so welcome back, looking forward to this second
part.
Thanks for having me.
It's good to be back.
I really enjoyed our last conversation.
So to begin in the given we've already got, I guess, if there were any soft questions
in the first one, we had them in the first one.
So we can dive right into the bigger picture here.
We'll talk about qualia, which is the new tropic that has been developed by the Neurohacker
Collective, which is having incredible results for many people.
Martijn, who joined us last time, was sharing some of his own experiences, which were very
positive.
He found it very powerful.
So we'll get into that, but first, at the more general level, the personal level, there's
a theme in your work, and it's something that a lot of people who read high existence really
resonate with.
It's the idea of taking responsibility for ourselves before we can do anything for others.
What does responsibility mean to you, and what do you think are the first steps that
anyone needs to take in terms of personal responsibility, and how perhaps if the first
step is admitting that we haven't been doing so, how do we make that first the first step
to find that truth?
Well, in this context, when we're talking about our own physical and mental and psychological
and spiritual health and well-being, ultimately, if a doctor does a good job or messes up with
a procedure or with a drug recommendation or whatever, with our health, we're going
to be the ones who benefit or suffer from it.
So we're more invested in the medical care and the psychological care and the health
that we get than anyone else is.
And so it's really a responsibility we want to take to understand our system well enough
that even to the degree we're interacting with professionals, that we understand what
they're saying, we understand the alternatives, we understand the consequences, we understand
the risks and upside ratios, and if we don't, then we just kind of trust an authority to
know everything about a topic and always make good decisions for us and then just be mad
at them when they don't.
It's just not a very empowered approach, and as soon as you realize that we're already
in an exponential information ecology where you've got so many journal articles coming
out on any new topic and a clinician is a busy person that's having to mostly see people,
they can't stay up to date with what is new and relevant and there's so many kind of key
breakthroughs.
I don't know in the different European countries that your listeners are in what the stats
are, but in the United States where I'm at, itrogenic disease, meaning disease that is
caused by the practice of medicine, so interactions from drugs and complications, complications
from surgery, infections got in the hospitals, et cetera, is depending upon what you include
in that is either the first leading cause of death in the US or the third.
And so it's a big deal for people to realize that and even the people who aren't dying
are mostly, they are experiencing side effects from other meds or treatments they're on,
or they just have suboptimal quality of life because the medical system is mostly not oriented
towards optimizing human flourishing, it's oriented towards treating acute illness.
And so if we want to have a really richly flourishing life in all dimensions, there are causal dynamics
that are associated with health that we can actually progressively understand better and
there are choices that we can take that make a huge difference from the foundations of how
we sleep and eat and move and process stress and information to what we actually engage
in in terms of life extension, integrative medicine, you know, personalized medicine,
or genomics, et cetera.
Yeah, I think if anyone has had more than just a common cold and they've been to their doctor,
it can be kind of shocking, I've had it a few times where you rapidly realize that the limits
of current medical knowledge, at least in terms of when you go to a doctor, you brush up against
them surprisingly quickly and that a lot of, I guess it's part of the convenience of seeing
so many people, they're trying to push you into a flow chart of expected situations and going,
okay, well, you've mentioned this symptom, so I'm going to need to prescribe you this and that's
kind of the end of the story here. I had a junior doctor friend of mine who gave me some
cause for hope who said that he'd been taught that patients know their condition better than you do
and you should listen to them because they also know the history better than you do
and can tell you how things have gone. But even with that more open mind, you're suggesting we
need to do some of the work ourselves and go looking, but there's, you know, if you type almost
any set of symptoms into Google, you're going to see a fairly scary and bunch of misinformation
mostly. How can we try and understand and what is the thing that we should be trusting when we
go looking for it ourselves? Yeah, let's understand the problem space a little bit better and then
let's understand how people can approach empowered responsibility well. So you said there are limits
of knowledge. Let's not even get to the limits of knowledge first, let's just look at the limits of
time. So the way that modern medical system in most developed nations, the way the financial
structure of it works, doctors just can't afford to spend much time with people unless it's a
concierge medicine practice, where people are paying a huge amount of out of pocket money because
that doctor racked up a tremendous amount of student loans in the process of learning medicine
that they have to pay back and etc, right? So they, if a doctor's seeing you for five minutes
or 15 minutes and sometimes two minutes for a health issue and sometimes a complex health issue,
it's not even the limits of knowledge that are going to be bumped up. It's the limits of time to
be able to get enough data. I have a doctor friend here who I actually think is one of the most
knowledgeable integrative rheumatologists in the world and really has a profound understanding of
causes of autoimmune disease. But as a result, his clinic got so inundated with incurable cases
that came that he started having shorter and shorter sessions. And then I started watching
him actually practice really poor medicine because he only had a minute with each person.
And so he didn't even get to ask the questions that would give him a holistic picture again.
So the first thing you can be pretty sure of is that if your doctor isn't getting a really good
sense of your whole medical history and your symptomology and when your symptoms started and
how that corresponded to different exposures and events that might have happened and looking at
really good laboratory data and corresponding and seeing that it makes sense, they just couldn't
possibly have a decent picture of what to do. Yeah, I think my doctor that I try and hold on to
even as I move around the place, what I like about him is he's always running late and he's
running late because he tries to give people the time that they need. But obviously there's
knock on consequences for him. Right. So then let's explore this a little further.
Conventional medicine, modern Western allopathic medicine has done a brilliant job of saving a
tremendous amount of lives from things that we used to die from that are mostly acute onset
illness. And it's really an exceptional system of medicine for acute cause suffering. So if we're
talking about injury, it's not that we can't do a lot better in the future than we will,
but anybody who gets in a car accident or gunshot would much rather go to the ER than any other
healing system. And if you have acute poisoning, so dealing with toxicity that is acute high-level
toxicity or acute infection, it's really good at dealing with all that. If you have chronic
complex illness that did not come on from one acute cause, so we're looking at cancer, we're
looking at autoimmune disease, we're looking at neurodegenerative diseases, we're looking at psychiatric
disorders. It's interesting to know that there's pretty much no actual cures for any of those.
There are symptom treatments. And of course, if someone's body has grown a cancer, we can cut it
out, we can radiate it out, we can poison it out. And its chance of coming back, depending upon the
kind of cancer is fairly high because we didn't actually understand why the body is growing
cancers there in terms of why are cancer cells proliferating more than normal and why did the
body's immune response not know how to deal with them effectively. It's actually only in the last
year or two with the proliferation of immunotherapies that cancer is actually starting to be looked at
in a causal way at all. Chemotherapeutics radiation and surgery, the only things that have been approved,
are exclusively symptomatic without addressing why the body's doing this. Same is true with all of
those disorders. And so one of the reasons is that we don't have a good type of science for
understanding in a very complex system like the human physiology, how dysregulation works,
that's not acute. If it's acute, it's kind of easy to tell they got exposed to this poison
and they got sick instantly. They ate this sushi and they got food poisoning and other sick.
That's kind of straightforward. But and there are some things where we have pretty good correlation
like someone has, you know, eats way too much carbohydrate and we see type 2 diabetes come on,
they're still a pretty straightforward correlation. But with the other diseases that I mentioned,
they're more complex in origin. It's because one, the cause and effect are very separate in time.
We have time dilation, which makes it very tricky. Two, you have many different causes that are
contributing to the disease oftentimes. So it's not actually that there is one thing that was wrong.
It might have been some nutrient deficiencies. And it's actually really important to talk about
this for a minute. When we think of nutrient deficiencies in modern nutritional theory related
to modern medical theory, we think of, again, an acute level of deficiency such or a level of
deficiency sets that it causes a acute disease. So vitamin C being so low that you get scurvy,
or vitamin B1 being so low, you get berry berry. Well, if you look at where an optimal level of
that vitamin is versus where the level is at which you get an acute disease, there's a pretty big
range in between there of suboptimal levels, right? It's not low enough yet to be a disease state,
but it's pretty far from where an optimally healthy person is.
Yeah, there's a threshold issue in terms of diagnosis.
Right. And so there's a lot of subclinical deficiency that doesn't show up as deficiency,
because in a disease model, it's not yet causing an acute disease. But that doesn't mean that it's
not causing the regulatory processes of the body that are supported by that particular
nutrients to regulate less well. Well, if it's regulating less well, you can start having,
you know, all kinds of sub adequate regulation occur that can eventually lead to disease.
The same is true with subclinical toxicity. So someone can have acute lead exposure or
a mercury exposure where they get sick right away and it's really obviously sick.
You can look at what the ideal level is, which is there's no mercury at all. There's a pretty
big layer in between, which is a much higher amount of mercury lead or cadmium or PCBs or
styrenes or whatever glyphosate that would have been there in an evolutionary environment,
but not yet enough of a level that we would call it an acute poisoning or toxicity,
but it has an effect, has a sometimes massive biological effect as a carcinogen or a neurologic
disruptor or a necron disruptor. And so now imagine that we start stacking these, right?
Now imagine that we recognize that in the United States, and I imagine it's similar in
with pretty big variants actually in different developed nations.
When we look at the breast milk of mothers in the United States and not mothers in industrial areas,
but randomized areas, we find in the vicinity of 200 different petrochemicals in the breast milk.
And this is things like volatile organic compounds from carpet and paint, as well as
you know, styrenes from the memory foam bed, as well as things like organophosphates from
the herbicides that are used in agriculture to, you know, things that come from industrial
manufacturing and et cetera. And those all have effects. So now you look at a world where our
agriculture depletes the topsoil of minerals. And so we, and then we only put back in with
our fertilizer just a few main minerals, right? We put NPK back in, but we remove
all of the 72 give or take trace minerals. So then we get trace mineral deficient topsoil,
and the vegetables still look like vegetables or the feed that goes to livestock
still looks like what it is, but it's missing really key nutrients that are parts of enzymatic
process, et cetera. So we have, you know, kind of ubiquitous nutrient deficiency as a result of
agriculture that is not regenerative to the topsoil, while simultaneously having
ubiquitous exposure to chemicals that were not part of our evolutionary environment. And it's
kind of important to understand like the detox systems of the body that and detox is kind of a
bad word because it's been so abused by fad diets, but it's a real thing that your cells are producing
metabolic outputs, which are the toxin, the toxic output of the metabolism and the body gets rid
of them. The kidneys do that, the lungs do that, the liver does that, the lymphatics are involved,
et cetera. The exhaling of CO2 is doing that. So our body has detox systems for dealing with
things that were in its evolutionary environment, but glyphosate was not in our evolutionary
environment, right? And neither was like any significant amount of refined heavy metal.
And so we don't even have good evolved mechanisms to deal with those things.
So when you start looking at multiple different types of subclinical chronic toxin exposures
and deficiencies and psychological stress and pathogens, and again, I'm not talking here about
acute pathogenic exposure, meaning you have a flu or meningitis. I'm talking about
dysbiosis in the gut. And I think now most people are probably pretty familiar that
there are a huge number of interactions, biochemical actions that are necessary to make
human health that human cells don't do, that our symbiotic microbiome does. And in an evolutionary
environment, the baby always got the genome of the mom and dad, but it also got the microbiome
of the mom in particular. And so the microbiome and the genome were passed down together.
Genome does not actually code everything necessary to do a human well. 80% of our
GABA is produced in the gut, main anti-anxiety neurotransmitter. Give or take 50% of our dopamine
is produced by bacteria in the gut. Give or take 50% of serotonin produced by bacteria in the gut.
Vitamin D binding protein that actually is what makes vitamin D able to go into the
vitamin D receptors mostly produced by specific bacteria in the gut.
So in evolutionary environment, again, we didn't have antibiotics. Now this doesn't mean
antibiotics haven't saved lots of lives, of course they had, but then you also throw off.
And chlorine has helped us in sanitation tremendously save lots of lives, but then
chlorinated water is also having an effect. So most people have
There's so many different ways in which to pick up and go with these different
points that you're making and like the over focus on hygiene that potentially leads us to
not having the kind of immune responses we need or C-sections, meaning the babies are not getting
the microbiome of the mother and so on. But what the main thing clanging in my head right now is
this is kind of scary. They're genuinely scary. And to circle back to the question that
I asked just a couple of minutes ago is how can we find the trustworthy information to be able
to make informed steps? Because it seems like it's a full time job to try and be on top of it.
And when it's at the below the threshold where it's a condition that people can
clearly say, Oh, you've got this issue. Isn't there a big danger that we just run around
imagining that we've got this deficiency, this deficiency, this deficiency. And we're just kind
of guessing and we don't really know. Yeah. So the just in kind of wrapping the the major point
I was trying to bring there is that when it comes to disease that doesn't have an acute
cause, oftentimes, it doesn't have one cause at all. It might be the dysregulation of regulatory
systems from exposure to toxins, exposure to pathogens, dysbiosis in the gut, chronic stress,
postural issues, lack of movement efficiency. And you have one thing that is suboptimal,
that makes the system regulate slightly less well, that makes it more susceptible to other
things that are suboptimal and you get a vicious cycle. And eventually there's enough dysregulation
that you actually start to get damage in certain tissues or certain systems and those cluster
together and we call it a disease, we call it MS or rheumatoid arthritis or whatever. But the
reason that we haven't had good cures is because we're not going to find a single cause for it.
We find a number of different things that statistically correlate but none of them statistically
correlate enough that treating that one statistical correlation always cures it because that's one
of a set of a number of things that can be involved and it's not even the same set in everyone.
So this is a key thing in terms of understanding why we have to take a more complex approach to
understanding something as complex as the human body. When you're trying to understand issues like
aging and issues like chronic disease and on the other side human flourishing, variable isolation,
right, what is the one thing that is wrong when one drug that will treat it is just not going to work.
So that's important just kind of from an approach point of view.
So how do we find good resources and how do we process? Well, a couple things.
Like all areas there's a pretty good Pareto principle, an 80-20 kind of principle here
where if people do a good job with the foundations of well-being they're going to have a lot less
disease in their life and the foundations of well-being are relatively straightforward. So
in order, sleep enough and sleep well. That's all the regeneration that happens in physiology,
any nutrients that you take in, their ability to actually support the genesis of new tissues,
etc., any exercise you do, the ability for those tissues to regenerate, all of that's
going to happen during sleep, mostly during delta sleep. So sleeping enough and sleeping well,
foundational, eating. Just as a side note, before we get to the next part there,
there's such a cult these days I think about the highest achievers in the world go on four hours
sleep and is nonsense. Yeah, I wonder about that. Like how are they managing to continue to function
or do some people only need four hours sleep? Yeah, I know a lot of
world-class high achievers and almost none of them have four hours sleep. Most of them actually do
pretty good job of self-care. There are people who will push very hard for a period and then burn
out and then they're either done with their creative time period or they have to learn a new way of
being. There are people genetically who need less sleep. There's a few genes that actually code for
more efficient sleep, but this is actually a tiny percentage of the population that can,
that will end up needing in the vicinity of five hours sleep. Most people genetically do best on
something in the vicinity of eight hours sleep. There's a whole lot, it sleeps a very complex
topic. In general, how do you know if you've slept enough and slept well that you wake on your own
feeling well rested and energized and you have good energy throughout the day?
Now, obviously that's oversimplified because your energy throughout the day is going to suck even
if you slept well if your blood sugar is unstable or if you are not exercising which is a key to
circulation and generating androgens and things that are necessary, but if you are waking tired
then sleep is not sufficient yet. So it's a deep topic. We could do a whole
thing on sleep. Over at our site, Neurohacker, we have a couple whole podcasts just on sleep,
world-class sleep researchers, and there's a lot of sleep tech that's coming out. We're in the
process of developing some products for sleep optimization, but that's one of the foundational
pillars. Okay. The other foundational pillar is like everybody knows these, but most people
have not studied them well enough to know how to optimize them, like sleep, making sure that you
aren't exposing yourself to blue light and stimulants in the last little while, that you're
not exposing yourself to things that have your mind anxious, that you do something to relax your
body, whether it's a hot shower or a hot bath or some stretching before bed, that you create a sleeping
environment that is dark, that doesn't get disturbed by noise, so it has a white noise generator if
needed, where you're not being disturbed unnecessarily, like there's a whole bunch of practices.
So it's both learn these practices and implement them or deal with the consequences of not having
done it, which we'll end up looking like going to doctors for illnesses later.
The next one is movement, and
there's a whole lot to get into in terms of what fully optimal movement looks like. You can check
out real movement specialists like Paul Check and Edo Portale, who will teach you about the
difference between strength training and balance training and coordination training and endurance
training and why it's important to develop different patterns of movement that stimulate
neurogenesis, but in which genes get up regulated by different kinds of exercise and which brain
regions get stimulated, but again there's an 80-20 even for exercise, which is if you are getting
your heart rate up near its maximum for some period of time, even a short period of time daily,
you're going to do a lot better than if you don't, and if you break up being sedentary,
meaning you aren't sitting for multiple hours on end without movement, you get up every hour and
do a few jumping jacks, it doesn't have to be a lot, your life will be radically better than if
you don't, your health will be radically better, and again then study more because those who do
exercise not just more but better really will have a radically higher quality of life, you drop
body fat percentage and you drop all-cause mortality, etc. Diet is the next one, which is
as much as you can take in foods that look like parts of your evolutionary environment, meaning
things that are not highly processed, and as much as you can avoid things that
are highly processed, that's the good first rule of thumb, it's not perfect, obviously there are
plants that are poisonous, obviously you can have a protein powder that is processed that's
actually good for you, there's a lot of good books on nutrition where you can dive deeper,
but if you just start by thinking okay well we evolved to have a diet that had
a lot of plants but not a lot of the same plant, right? We would have had different plants in
different seasons and they would have in a hunter-gathered environment been just little
bits of lots of different types, all that have different nutrients, so can I do a variety of
different kinds of plants and animal products and they should be organic, should not be covered in
pesticides, meaning that if you spray a chemical toxic enough to kill things like ants and cockroaches
on your food and then eat it, that's kind of silly, and should come from as well a maintained
soil as possible, so if you can get even better than organic, if you can find local farmers that
do biodynamic farming, permaculture farming even better, and as much as it sounds like that's
fancy, all it is is trying to get a little bit closer to what all food was before the industrial
revolution. It's not that it seems that it's fancy exactly that it can be expensive, like I
remember I lived for a little while in the US and I found it was really expensive to try and buy
things that seem to be labeled organic or to shop in whole foods, I think it is maybe a bit easier
in some countries in Europe unless the labeling system is misleading, but is there kind of a
barrier of entry that's based on money for a lot of people here? No, yes going to whole foods can
be expensive, there's a couple ways to look at this, one if you find your local farmers markets
because they aren't having to pay to have a big box store with lots of, I mean they're basically
disintermediating the grocery store part, you can get even fresher, better quality food cheaper,
and cheaper than what you would pay for the conventional agriculture at a normal
store, the conventional produce, so the cost really can be dealt with. The produce is usually not that
expensive, the things that are expensive in places like Whole Food usually are the healthy packaged
foods and pre-made foods, the produce is a little bit more expensive, but it's still like not super
expensive, and there's a whole bunch of reasons why farmers markets and co-ops are like really valuable
things to explore, so that's one topic on cost. It also sounds fun to be able to go there rather
than just be in another supermarket. It is fun, you're supporting local farmers to actually get
paid better than they get paid other places, especially the ones that are doing organic
and permaculture, which supports environmentalism and agriculture and climate change dynamics and
micro-economies, and it's just every reason that that's a good thing to do, and yes you can start
to actually make friends in the community there and have this fun experience of what markets have
been for a lot of human history. So that's a way that cost is not a barrier of entry. The other
thing though is when we say solar is more expensive than coal energy-wise and that solar still needs
to get cheaper to be at grid parity with coal in some areas, it's just complete nonsense, because
99% of the cost of coal energy is just- the coal company doesn't have to pay for it, so they
don't internalize it into the cost of coal, it's externalized to the commons in the form of
CO2 and mercury vapor and nitrous oxide and zinc oxide and the mountaintop removal mining
that it took to get it, and there's a massive cost to all people, to the environment, to future
generations, to whatever, that if you had to say, hey, burn coal, but just don't leave the
environment worse as a result, so whatever it takes to clean up the effects in real time,
do that, and if it costs some money to do that, you have to include that in the cost of coal,
coal would go up by- the price of coal would go up by hundreds or thousands of times,
and solar would have been at grid parity the moment it existed, so the same is true in healthcare.
I can eat shittier foods that are cheap, but there's a cost and it's- a cost that's being
externalized to the decreased health of my future, and so then I'm going to have to pay the medical
and or just have a shorter or shittier life, and so it becomes important to think about
what does cost really mean and what is actually worth investing in.
Right, yeah, so cost we can think of, it's not just a financial cost, but there can be the other,
until I think it's a- it's a funny human thing that we tend to ignore that sort of personal
cost until it actually hits us, even though we have all the evidence to see you see someone who
smoked their whole lives and didn't think about it, then the cost becomes evident later,
we see it over and over again, but seem to have trouble when it comes to ourselves.
Humans suck at this topic everywhere, and it's why we are so close to self-induced extinction
as a species, which is short-term gain and long-term expense, and there's some reasons why we suck at
it, is in our evolutionary environment, pre-advanced technological capabilities, we just didn't have
the ability to affect our own future negatively that much. It's kind of- this is actually an
important thing to understand. In our evolutionary environment, 250,000 years of being homo sapien,
something like 8 million years of hominid history, before the plow and, you know,
grains, refined carbohydrates, etc. For that whole time period, there was not
an easy way to get sugar, fat, or salt, right? Sugar, every once in a while you'd find some
berries, but the berries that we see today are radically hybridized from the heirloom berries
back then that were like a few on a very thorny bush for a very small amount of time in urine
competition with the birds, right? And honey is a super hard thing to actually deal with the bees
in that kind of world, so are there sugar? There's such tiny little bits of sugar, the same is true
with access to salt in most environments, and the same is true with access to fats, because,
you know, getting game, every time you go out after a big game, you can die in the process of
hunting with spears, and it's mostly pretty lean meat, right? So whenever we did have access to
those things, they conferred so much evolutionary advantage in terms of the caloric density of
fat and sugar made it easier to live through a famine, and the ability of salt to replenish
electrolytes and help us keep water on in hot environments. So we had a major, we evolved to
have a strong dopamine response when we would eat those foods, meaning, and it's actually important
to get that those that had a stronger dopamine response, meaning a pleasure reward circuit,
actually survived better, because they worked harder to go find those foods, and then they
made it through famines better, right? So we're the descendants of the people that had the strongest
dopamine responses to those foods. Now post-industrial revolution, we have made so much abundance of
sugar, fat, and salt, but our evolutionary genetic response to those hasn't changed.
So now we're dying of obesity rather than starvation. And so it was important to get that
evolutionary response of getting this major pleasure hit when you eat sugar, fat, salt, and
ideally all three together, right? Like imagine almost every fast food meal, if you do the whole
meal is all three of those together. And you get such a dopamine flood that you become addicted
and you can't not eat it, even though you know that you are decreasing the quality of your life
in on every metric, your social life, your sexual life, your health life, your ability to
generate finance, your emotional life, everything, as you are doing that more.
And so we actually had an evolved set of responses that were appropriate to an environment,
and then we became these amazing tool makers and we changed our environment faster than we could
be genetically adapted to. So we have to actually know how to navigate this built world that we've
made that is actually not a natural environment to us, still being the genetic creatures that we
are. And this is why those, you know, the two marshmallow experiment of the kids that had
better delayed gratification and impulse control doing better in every area of life.
Impulse control ends up being a really, really big part of the whole picture here.
But when you look at the fact that natural selection mostly selected for things that were
adaptive in the moment, whoever could, you know, not lose at that fight made it through, etc.
That's a short term orientation. And we mostly couldn't do things that damage the long term
that much, meaning over fish the entire ocean or eat foods that would make us totally ill
chronically, or, and so we're in a position now where when you look at people's health, and
whether it's the smoking situation you talked about, or the getting to exercise later and
it never happens, or climate change, or the fact that we knew Fukushima was going to have
a earthquake five years before it happened and nobody wanted to spend the money this
quarter on buffering against it. Our orientation towards short term ease and short term gain at
a probable possible long term expense is one of the main things that if we want to survive as a
species, and if we want to have a good quality of life as individuals, we have to get past. So
if you if listeners want to hear, you know, biohacking secrets, there's heaps of biohacking
secrets that we can share, what ends up mattering like more than any of those is being able to
get good at making decisions that are good from a long term focus.
Yeah, I think there's something about the tyranny of the quarterly financial report that
has kind of mirrors and maybe feeds back into on the individual level that we think about
what I want now rather than what I want in the future. And if we we want to get into
making better choices, I want to I want to talk about qualia the neuro hackers flagship
product. So real quick one one more thing that I just want to share that I think I think you
guys will appreciate is absolutely one application of VR tech that I thought was really beautiful.
And it's it's in development. I don't remember the name of the company that's developing it. But
they're doing VR avatars. And so you can have cameras get the right pictures of you to render
you as an avatar, then you can go into the VR space, see yourself as an avatar. And one of the
things that was done was age progression, where you could see a version of yourself as an older
person, while you're a younger person, but it's actually you right, like you're looking in the
mirror, you lift your left hand and you watch your hand move. And so you get a look at yourself as
this older person be like, Whoa, that's me. And then it will do the age progression based on how
you're eating, how you're exercising, if you're smoking, etc. And you can actually watch
the 60 year old version of you look different habits, the yellowness of its teeth, the skin,
the health of vitality, everything look different based on the lifestyle habits based on real data
of how those things statistically work. And one of the things that happened in some of the research
was that as people were relating with the older version of themselves, because right now the
idea of ourselves as older people is just a completely abstract topic, but us now is totally
real and visceral. And we feel our hunger now, we don't feel our fatness as an older person,
right, or our body pain or whatever it is. And so it's easier to make decisions based on something
concrete than something abstract, something that we're feeling in real time versus something that
you know, it's hard to actually even imagine or relate with. So as they were doing it,
these people started making concretely, tangibly better choices for their long term
life, because they had a clearer relationship with that being. One of them was actually financial,
that the people today who are younger started saving money more as they were relating with their
older avatar. And another one's health decision. So even if you don't have access to that VR,
just just thinking about it, hearing it can be useful. Yeah, I think that that personal
confrontation sounds really interesting. And I'm finding just in myself, really,
it's making an impact on me to be in my early 30s to realize my body is not working as well as it
used to. And to not just kind of despair and accept that. As I think, I know a lot of older
people who just go, Well, you know, that's how it is, you get older and everything hurts more
and things don't work so well. But we can actually make some differences, we can make some changes
which can actually affect us positively. And I guess one of the main ones is that the conscious
input of better things into our bodies in the way that you describe just in terms of food. But
when it comes to the world of biohacking, which is ever more widespread, seems to me there's
was a lot to talk about biohacking. I'm like trying to formulate three questions at once. I
guess it'd be better to start by saying, ask for like your two minute description of what
qualia is, and then we can really dig deeper into it. Yeah, so qualia is a notropic, which means
some chemistry that enhances cognitive function, different aspects of cognitive function,
beyond one's previous baseline, without causing negative side effect. That's the
general best accepted definition of notropic. The different classes of chemicals are the primary
classes of notropics that are generally well studied. And so this is a notropic stack,
meaning a blend of different chemical supplements that affect different neurotransmitters,
different pathways, different aspects of neurochemistry and biochemistry to enhance the
underlying physical substrate that supports cognitive process. And so why did we create it?
It's the first of a bunch of products that all have the same design philosophy and methodology.
The next ones will be launching early this next year. But when we started this, we saw this kind
of meteoric exponential rise of the use of smart drugs, and specifically even illegal off-label
smart drugs. We're talking about Adderall, Medaffin-L, Riddlin, Vivantz, Wellbutrin, and mostly
dopamine heretics, but some other categories. And we saw Adderall do an estimated $5 billion
in illegal sales in the US per year. When we started smart drugs as a whole to about $15
billion, this just domestically, right, so internationally a lot more. And this is because
people had such strong pressure to perform and produce and really wanted to while simultaneously
having so much that it was damaging their ability to focus from all of the social media
kinds of distractions to gut brain access being out, like we talked about, where 50%
of dopamine is produced and the nutrient and deficiencies and toxicity and etc.
And other than people going to off-label smart drugs, we also saw energy drinks
where people were doing 300 and 400 milligrams of caffeine. And caffeine is a cool molecule.
Quality has a very small amount of caffeine in a unique form in it because it's a really
neat central nervous system stimulant. If we have caffeine bound to an antioxidant from
blueberry skin called terostilbine that affects the pharmacokinetics of it, so it releases much
slower so you don't get a jolt and then a drop, you get a very slow central nervous system release
over a longer period of time. But that is, it also helps the uptake of some of the other more
specifically active neurochemistry. But at those kinds of doses, this is really not a healthy
relationship with caffeine and you start getting, you know, you'd get increased focus and attention
and alertness to a certain point and then the jitteriness and inability to focus starts getting
a negative response curve and a central nervous system stimulant like caffeine or a dopamine
enhancer like Adderall are really only affecting a very narrow range of the total
aspects of chemistry that are important for cognitive enhancement.
And so one of the things that you find is when people are going to those kinds of solutions
is that they work, right? Like people are taking them for their midterms or their finals or their
tech startup or for their gaming or whatever because they actually can focus better, longer,
concentrate and they have more motivation. But one of the things very interesting is
some of the other cognitive capabilities that you'd want online at the same time,
there are studies that actually show they go down. So different aspects of memory like total
working memory goes down on Adderall and creativity goes down and the ability for fluid
intelligence and task switching goes down. And it happens to be that empathy goes down
for most people and irritability, anxiousness, depersonalization go up. And so that's one problem
is that it's a very narrow set of positive effects. The other problem is that your body
regulates dopamine, right? Your nervous system regulates dopamine in a very kind of complex way
and you don't want fixed high dopamine levels all the time. You do want your body to be able
to upregulate its dopamine when you're doing a dopamine or a kind of task like working on a
project and then you want it to be able to chill when you want to go play with your kids or cuddle
or something else. And so rather than take a chemical that externally exogenously over rides
in endogenous regulatory process, and in the process of doing that, it actually creates
dependence and addiction, which most medicines that affect the brain and mind end up doing.
We're much more interested in understanding how the regulatory processes worked and providing
chemistry that supported the regulatory processes to be able to regulate better so that you could
actually upregulate endogenous regulatory capacity. Because we can actually define health, and we were
talking about these earlier, we can actually define health as the robustness of the regulatory
capacity of the system, which means that any kind of issue can come up, any kind of deviation from
homeodynamics in the system can actually respond to it. And so we wanted to work on
increasing the regulatory capacity of the system so that rather than causing addiction,
meaning the person's on it for a while, they get off and another screwed, we wanted it to be that
if someone was on any product we made for a while, then they got off that they would actually have
lasting benefit in terms of elevation of some positive functions from the baseline before
they started. And that's true for quality and it's true for all the other products that we're
making, it's the design methodology. And so with quality, the way we started was we said, okay,
when people are seeking cognitive enhancement, what are they really seeking? It's not just cognitive,
it's usually emotional cognitive, psychological, energetic together, right? They're seeking focus
and concentration and attention, those dynamics and memory, the ability for working memory to hold
more in their memory and their speed of recall, verbal fluency, etc. And they want increased
analytic capabilities and synthesis capabilities and creativity. They also want increased motivation
and drive and emotional resilience. And they also want some complex things that are like
the dialectic of pretty opposite things, which is I want the ability to concentrate really hard on
one topic and not get distracted, while simultaneously having the ability to task switch
from one thing to another thing when I need to do that.
It's like we're asking for a magic pill to fix everything here.
Well, it has nothing to do with a magic pill, it's that a well regulated system
is good at shifting modes, right? Like that's what adaptiveness is. And an adaptive creature can go
from sleeping to waking, can go from very different kinds of states. And the quicker that one can go
between different modes and the better they can be in those modes is the adaptiveness of the creature.
And so what we wanted to support was the overall adaptiveness. So if we were just driving the
chemistry of focus and concentration, it would make tasks switching worse. We could drive things
that would support task switching make focus worse to make both better. You have to not be
exogenously driving the chemistry in one direction or the other, but supporting the
regulatory processes. And so this was, you know, this is kind of at a high level, but this is our
design philosophy for how we wanted to approach anything in the health and well-being space is
let's make sure that we are well, and specifically in the enhancement space, biohacking so often
isn't looking at the disease model, but the enhancement side. And again, modern medicine,
that's one of the other differences is that it is a disease model process. So it's really not looking
at optimization. So why we mapped all those things to start was to say, you know, people really
don't just want increased focus while being more irritable and less creative and with less good
memory. They want this whole suite of things together that means that they have increased
creative, productive capacity and flow. And so then we said, all right, well, what do we know
in any of the various biosciences, human biosciences about the physiologic processes that
mediate those cognitive and subjective dynamics? What do we know about the neurochemistry that
mediates focus that mediates task switching, memory IO, etc. And so we started to map those
processes. Some are acetylcholine mediated, right? Some have to do with the NMDA complex,
some have to do with how catecholamines process, some have to do with sodium ion dynamics. So we
were mapping these and then saying, how does the body regulate those on its own? Can we draw the
regulatory processes? And then why does the body get less good at regulating? Because of course,
kids actually have this ability to focus on something they're interested in and also task
switch and fall asleep pretty quickly and then be energetic, right? That's adaptiveness. So
starting to look at why does a system have decreased capacity to do those things? What are
the rate limiting factors in the system and what can we offer to support the system's capacity to
do that better? So just as a four instance, if your listeners are interested in an example,
let's just say we take dopamine that we were talking about earlier, rather than give
you know, something like an amphetamine, right? Adderall's amphetamine, that is an
in chain dopamine agonist, where you get a big rush of dopamine, but it is decoupled from changing
acetylcholine levels or glutamate or looking at how the other catecholamines are focused
or the neuro inhibitory chemicals or anything else. And it doesn't look at the whole process of how
the body normally regulates dopamine. So you do get down regulation addiction. We said, well,
how does the body normally do dopamine creation? And there's this whole complex process of how
protein is broken down into amino acids and phenylalanine is converted into tyrosine is converted
into an acetyl tyrosine is converted into al-dopa crosses the blood brain barriers converted into
dopamine travels down an axon crosses the synapse has to cross a whole bunch of different kinds of
enzymes that break it down in the synapse and then goes into one of multiple dopamine receptors
that affect how it's processed, you have to have the right dynamics happening in the cell,
Krebs cycle processes to have enough energy to process that some of it will hydroxylase
in an orbe nephrin you map this whole thing out and then say, how can we support each step in
that process? And so then we have, you know, what are the vitamins, what are the amino acids,
what are the minerals, what are the different dynamics that convert one step to the other
step that can be at suboptimal levels that lead to rate limiting in those processes.
And so we made a database of like 500 chemicals that were associated with the underlying physiology
of all of those subjective states and capabilities. And then we started paring it down in terms of
which ones are well tolerated and have positive synergies with other ones and don't have negative
synergies and support each step in the various pathways. And, you know, that led to an initial
hypothesis of how to make something with things that we wanted to test. Do we need more or less
choline donor in this more or less dopamine agonists in here, etc. And that led to about
100 iterations with testing and we get qualia. And we've done preclinical tests, we're in clinical
trials now, but we did preclinicals preparing for the clinicals where we did people's QEG
brain scans as well as a bunch of biometrics like HRV and topography and etc. And psych metrics
and cognitive metrics before people took it. And then once they did qualia just once and then once
they were on it for a month. And we saw really awesome results. The data set was too small and we
only had it single-blinded. So I won't speak to the numbers yet. We're going to speak to them once the
full double-blinded larger scale clinical trial comes out. But, you know, and we would of course
have done larger trials earlier on except they're expensive and trying to pay for all of it is a
tricky thing. And this is where it's like we could have taken more venture capital money earlier,
but then we would have been more beholden to have to maximize profits as per their goals. And we
really wanted to do something that we could really control with what our own capacity to fund was so
that we could keep making the highest quality things. So like for instance, our cost of goods,
just the raw material cost for us on this is more expensive than the retail price of most
notropics. And it's because being like, you know, we have a versions of each ingredient like
benphotimene version of B1 for the effect on peripheral neurons that we wanted is something
like a hundred times more cost per kilo than thymine that is the normal form of B1 that you could
put. But we have those kind of expensive forms because those are the ones that actually do what
we wanted. Now we're trying to get the cost down through economies of scale. But that was longer
than two minutes. That was the gist of what we were trying to do with quality. And it's really
is clearly a super complex. I mean, even beyond the super complexity of the ingredients in there,
it's a very complex and deep thinking approach that you've taken. So it kind of already sidesteps
a lot of the the reservations that people have about biohacking and new tropics where there
tends to be some sort of downside, some kind of burnout element, which you've already said this
is, you know, from the foundation up is not what quality is about. But I also wonder when, when I
think and people I know who who try to take supplements to enhance their performance one way
or another, it does seem to still matter what it is that they want to do when they they take it.
So I mean, a crude a crude example can be you could take medaffinol. I had a pretty unhealthy
relationship with medaffinol for much of a year, a few a few years in the past. And after a time,
I realized, but I still kept doing it that I would take it because I would feel like I was
on and I felt like I'm great. I'm doing great stuff. I'm really focused. But if I really broke
it down and looked at it, I wasn't achieving anything, you can take it to get the sensation
of being on it, but then do nothing. So yeah, is there does this still play a factor in taking
quality? Because if you if you're just taking it, but without any sort of purpose in mind,
is that enough? It's a tool, right? Yeah. And there is right use of tool, somebody can use a hammer
wrong and break their thumb. Or they can use a hammer right and buildings. And so. And to the
other point, somebody can build things that aren't worth building. So those medaffinol towers that
I built. I bet I bet, right? I mean, it's a classic thing where somebody is using meth and
is just cleaning their grout with a toothbrush because they have a tremendous amount of energy
that needs to do something, but they're not really clear on what a super useful thing to do would be.
So if someone already is sleeping well, is exercising well, is meditating, is dealing with
stress well has a empowering outlook on life is clear on what they want to create. And then they
add quality to that. It's going to be a much different experience than if someone is
thinking in ways and living in ways that have them aggressive and scattered and etc. And they
take quality like that. They're not going to instantly just know what to do with their lives
because they have some neurochemical support. So in general, I would encourage people to do
the foundational things before I would have them do any kind of more advanced biohacking.
That said, there's an exception to that that I've seen, which is
there are a lot of people who just can't do the things they know will make a difference for them.
They're the habit patterns, the addiction patterns have just been too strong. They beat
themselves up for not exercising, but they just, you know, many years of wanting to and it's still
not happening. And we've had a lot of people and I can't make any claims about this, but we've
had many people tell us that they took qualia and then after years of wanting to exercise and not
they started exercising or they started eating well or they started doing things that they actually
felt that they had increased energy and motivation and capacity to do that they they were just overwhelming
and daunting previously. And so yeah, my general recommendation would be do the foundational
things first, unless there's difficulty with the foundational things and you want to see if
this is an experiment that can increase your capacity to do it also. Yeah, it sounds a bit
like some of the effects of a regular meditation practice where you certainly in my experience,
I end up finding that there's more sort of space and energy and capacity in myself to set about
doing things that I want to do, but usually provoke a kind of it feels like fear, I think,
quite often the onerous task or it's like the the kind of paradox of procrastination in a way,
the thing that is causing you so much stress and grief, you keep looking in the other direction
because it causes stress and grief and yet the only way to change that is to go and do the task.
It's kind of the opposite of our instinct is. This is related to that topic we were mentioning
earlier about delayed gratification. So there's the other side of that is
facing difficult things now. And in general, the degree to which we can put off
easeful and pleasurable things till later and face more difficult things now,
we will have a more meaningful, higher quality and actually more pleasurable life.
This is actually an important point. Let's let's touch on this one a little bit. Sure.
Okay, so I take the chocolate cake in the moment and I'm getting a
flood of dopamine, allergic response. The chocolate cake tastes so good. It feels awesome.
And I'm not actually feeling myself increase inflammation or store body fat or have dysregulated
blood sugar or whatever in the moment. I'm just feeling awesome, right? Tasting this.
And so in the moment, the chocolate cake is absolutely increasing my pleasure.
But it is doing those other things that I said. And so it's going to
if I'm eating the chocolate cakes more often, I will have a life with more inflammation,
more unstable blood sugar, which means lower energy and mood issues and etc.
All of which will lead to a life that has less pleasure when you factor the entire cause and
effect set, right? Right. And because having shitty energy and unstable mood and inflammation
is less pleasure. But then when your pleasure is low, you and you're feeling really shitty,
then you crave anything that will make you feel better again in the moment. So that that's the
addiction cycle, right? And so in blood sugar is a classic example, you take something that
spikes your blood sugar, you feel really good, but then it also crashes your blood sugar. Then
once your blood sugar is crashed, you're kind of desperate. And so you will go for sugary things
that will raise it again. When had you eaten something that wasn't sugary earlier, you would
have never had your blood sugar crash in the first place and been stable. So the addiction cycle is
a cycle of hyper stimulus that dysregulates baseline that leads to more desire for hyper stimulus.
Right? Yeah. And it's possible to to have some of that attitude towards exercise if you get on
the exercise wagon, but then that also can lead to an addiction that you over exercise because
you're getting your your kick but probably still avoiding something. Okay, so I'll get to that in
a minute. But let me run the other part of this food analogy, because then we'll be able to relate
it. So let's say instead of the chocolate cake, I'm looking at eating a salad. The salad is not
going to give me the same dopamine flood in the moment the chocolate cake did, even if it's a
good salad, right? For the fat sugar salt reasons we mentioned earlier. And that said, as I'm doing
the salads regularly, I will have a body that is more mobile that has more energy that has less
fatigue that has less blood sugar crashes, that has less excessive weight, and that all translates
to a body whose baseline pleasure is higher. Right? And so the opposite of the addiction
cycle is something that does not spike your pleasure, but that doesn't destabilize and decrease
your baseline and that leads to slowly up regulating baseline. And so here's the the
difference addictive things spike your pleasure, and then crash it and then it spikes and then it
crashes. But the baseline lowers two things you both get more highs and lows and progressively
more lows in the addiction cycle. In the healthy cycle with anything, you get less extreme highs
and lows and progressively more highs. Right? That's a kind of key difference in the relationship.
And so what's interesting is, while the addict is controlled by pleasure, they actually have much
less pleasure in their life. Right, because the baseline is very different. Right. And so
when we're talking about what is healthy, we're actually also talking about what is more pleasurable.
Now, you mentioned exercise. And you mentioned it as an addiction and also as an avoidance.
Can someone exercise because they hate their body and they're fat and disgusting and they
need to exercise as almost like a form of bulimia, right? Yeah, totally. I can eat and throw up or
I can eat and then go exercise with body hatred. Now, is that radically different than being grateful
to be alive and get to create and have experience and that all of that only gets to happen because
I have a body and so I want to take good care of this vessel that I'm in. Yeah, it's a totally
different motivation. Right. And one of them happens after binging and one of them happens just
because it's a good thing to do and one might happen so that I can avoid feeling certain things
and the other one is happening just to support feeling good in my body. So the motivation and
how one relates to anything can determine sex can be addictive or it can be healthy and healing.
Meditation can be actually a way to avoid dealing with real shit in one's life.
Yeah, some people just get that and float tanks as well. They can be incredibly powerful tools,
again, tools or if you spend like 10 hours a day in a float tank, what exactly are you doing that for?
Well, I see so many people who will pray for world peace and not do
anything that actually tangibly makes the world better and
in a way that is worse than not doing because if they didn't do it, the pain of not contributing
to what they cared about might make them find something actually tangible they could do.
But the reason they do that is because they don't know what the fuck to do about climate
change or about species extinction. It's too painful and they can't do nothing and so that's
something they feel like they can do. But it is then importantly kind of a avoidance of something,
right? The bypass of something. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, I'm wondering when so individual motivation
is important too, but then we also have individual biology and I wondered even if you've tried to
create the most rounded product in qualia, are there still certain person specific rhythms and
biology that we can't overcome such as times of day where we enter flow state? So I know from
what I've read on some of your profiles online that you're definitely a night owl and right now
we're talking at quite late night where you are early morning. I feel like I'm definitely a very
low capacity when I end up in the late night. Is that something that can just an example,
I guess, of something that we can't really change at the individual level?
All right, that was a few different questions that I heard. One is is qualia appropriate for
everyone or do we need personalized chemistry and then are there things that we can't change
with our physiology and that need to be personalized? So on the topic of personalization,
first with regard to qualia, is qualia the right chemistry for everyone? Totally not.
It was the best that we could do at making something that worked well for the most people
interested in that thing and it was actually much better than I thought we'd be able to do because
my background in starting to explore it was based on full personalization. So working in
integrative medical clinics with different kinds of integrative doctors, helping design
customized chemistry and neurochemistry support, but we got to actually see people's labs,
see their QEG, have deep medical history and so I got to see how much we could actually help people
feel radically better, not just in terms of cognitive enhancement, but in terms of their
psychological well-being and yeah, all of that. I wasn't sure what we would be able to do
without personalization and I was really curious because if there were things that we could do
that were meaningful to wide audiences, that obviously would allow us to bring support to a
lot more people and the cost of the personalization work was still prohibitive. So we were able to find
that with there are certain axes that are so sensitive one person to the next or a different
kind of genetic clusters, different phenotypes, that I just don't include them in qualia and
won't use them in any of our products. Like for instance, you'll see we don't have folic acid
because whether you use folic acid or you use some version of methylated folic acid is there are
so many people in each of the groups and it makes such a big difference whether they are
over or under methylating on that particular axis that it's just something without personalization
I don't mess with because I couldn't actually do it for a wide audience effectively and so we work
with axes that are pretty commonly supported by the same things for everybody the right
Krebs cycle intermediaries that upregulate ATP production in that being pretty great for everybody
and for the people that are seeking cognitive enhancement supporting their acetylcholine
processing and supporting their dopaminergic processing and then also supporting neurogenesis
and synaptogenesis ends up being pretty effective across the board and so those are the ones that
we work with now there are still you know there's something like 80% of the people that have tried
qualia that had a good response and felt that it was meaningful for them and something like
half of those that it was like life-changingly positive for and other ones it was just you know
enhancing and then of the 20% that don't have great experiences they're mostly no experience they
just don't experience much of anything and that's usually either because they have sleep issues or
digestive issues that we've found in the tens of thousands of people that have used it and given
those feedback so far and there are a few people that don't and neither of those are true and and
just not chemistry they need so we regard to personal personalization is right for everybody
know but a lot of people that's why we offer a you know people can try it if it doesn't work get
your money back kind of thing now we are working on rolling out a doctor program right now where
for people who either do have real medical issues that they want to address or real psychiatric
issues because we're not treat we're not doing medicine we're just you know providing enhancement
tools or they want to do enhancement that is customized that we have doctors trained in
integrative medicine and integrative neuropsych in particular and we're bringing additional
protocols to them that can actually help test people and do really good work so when you really
good personalized work so when you're asking how do you know what good resources are we're working
on curating doctors that really can do a good job of psychiatry and psychopharmacology both
you know and and not just what we think of a psychiatry but um neurochemical optimization
and that'll be cool in the meantime I would say if people are interested uh the integrative doctors
it's it's hard because some of them are awesome and some of them are terrible
but at least the integrative doctors are working on understanding personalization and root cause
in a deeper way than just what med is going to be given for this symptom in general the
institute for functional medicine doctors seem to be getting pretty well trained
but finding finding someone that you actually like and resonate with who will spend time
and who seems knowledgeable is a is a valuable tool
yeah the next part I'm sorry do you do you want to respond to that or do you want me to go on to
the circadian rhythms part oh I'm definitely interested in the circadian rhythms yeah
um are people circadian rhythms fixed or are they changeable uh different opinions on this
um there is a hypothesis that circadian rhythms are um
um have a strong genetic component and that um there are the morning larks the kind of normal
people and the night owls and that you have give or take 70 percent of people who have a normal
circadian rhythm um that basically you know wakes in the in the morning with light and
about 15 percent of the people that wake much earlier and 15 percent of people that stay awake
much later in the evolutionary biology story is that there always had to be some people awake
in evolutionary environments for tribes to be safe some watchmen and that there is a
genetic predisposition to be in those groups I don't know how solid that is I know there are
some genes that are correlated but we all obviously also know people who were night owls when they
were teenagers or in college and now they work a job where they wake up at 5 a.m every day um
most people can adapt their schedule fairly well most people also if they control artificial
lighting and stimulants and exercise and like that most people do better on an earlier schedule
than a later schedule now I'm saying that at 1 a.m my time yeah podcast and when I hop off here I'm
hopping on to another meeting um the rules of thumb like that are really good starting places
and then personal exploration is important because um I've had very early schedules and later
schedules and I actually do better on later schedule and uh so it is valuable for people to explore
what works best for them well part of the underlying question there is like
so it can be changed potentially maybe maybe not but also why why do we want to change it
and I think that can be down to the the personal needs say if you're in a relationship with someone
I experienced this in the past where you seem to be on the opposite timetables that can be
remarkably destructive um and can also seem to be a case that somebody has to compromise
for somebody else so it can be much more personal as opposed to simply you know the practical case
of I need this kind of job yeah it can be that it can be uh someone starts a spiritual practice
where they are in the meditation group at 4 a.m I think almost everybody when they have kids
gets a different circadian rhythm than they had before um because they are going to wake up
whatever time their kids come in um so lots of lots of reasons there but I will say getting
enough sleep is critical and um in general also getting enough light during the day is critical
and most people like I said do better if they're waking up with
with sunlight so they're waking up in the dawn vicinity and then getting an earlier bed and
a regular bedtime those are the general starting recommendations that any sleep expert will give
you and and then like I said some percentage of the people will find that they do better or
have personal reasons like you said to do otherwise so again we're back to the the
importance of sleep in and of itself and we we also talked about how to get better nutrition
into our bodies when it comes to the the other element that can make the difference to absorbing
these things that was the the gi piece that you you mentioned and for those possibly including me
there's some basic steps to get a sense of if there is a problem in the microbiome and what
can be done short of going into a specialist lab which I think in most cases is not immediately
available or affordable are there some steps that we can take
yeah so um for most people there are dietary things they can do that will
help their gut if they notice that they are having gi symptoms they're having gas or bloating
or tenderness in their abdomen or constipation or diarrhea or upper gi issues acidity etc
it gets complex and the you know the allopathic answer is to say you have IBD and which catches
so many things that's not that that's not that descriptive or useful right the integrative
approaches to the functional medicine approaches to try and figure out what's going on and is it
a food allergy is it dysbiosis is it actually pathogens um bacteria parasite etc many of which
even when they're there the tests have a lot of false negatives so it's kind of tricky to figure it
out um so the foundational things one can do uh someone can do an elimination diet and you can
read online on how to do an elimination diet where you um eliminate the foods that people commonly
react to so you eliminate the gluten grains the dairy the soy and corn um and sugar and
you know but different people react to different things so when you're doing elimination diets
there's different things you can eliminate and then after you know some period of time off of
them see do their symptoms get better if so then reintroduce the foods one at a time see
which one kicks the symptoms on and you start to get some insight this is the way people can
experiment on their own with what foods are bothersome the ones i mentioned are ones that
are classically bothersome for a lot of people and uh there are people who have bad gi reactions to
plants who have lectin sensitivities um but uh you know the the gluten thing is obviously a very
um heated controversial difficult topic uh for the most part the gluten sensitivity gluten sensitivity
thing is not just a marketing ploy and or like some weird fad um it is largely the result of
ubiquitous glyphosate use on wheat um and so it's not actually gluten itself it's this associated
dynamic there's a lot we could get into there um and there's a lot of books that are critiquing
grains and why there are problems with grains the paleo world is pretty big into this um where
people can study further but there are also a lot of people who leave the us go to europe and find
that they can eat bread and pasta when they're in many european countries and they come back here
and they can't and it actually does have to do with different agricultural methods in different
countries so again you can explore that topic but cutting out hard to digest foods and foods you
might be reacting to and finding which ones you react to is a first major step um some other
steps that are worth noting is not overeating is kind of a major step people are going to have gi
issues if they're overeating or if they're eating too fast or if they're not chewing well uh eating
too fast and not chewing well go together and especially if people are on the run or they're
eating while they're distracted um and the the mechanical part of digestion the actual chewing
and mastication is really critical for the chemical part of digestion to come later because
the acid and the enzymes are not designed to break down large chunks of food right they're
designed to take already tiny particles with a lot of surface area and break them down further
so eating in a slower calm environment healthier foods the right amount of them chewing that's
all a pretty big deal to what's going in your gi track um drinking enough water is actually quite
important so your gi track can flush and peristalsis is stimulated by water so specifically drinking a
lot of water first thing in the morning like half a liter to a liter first thing in the morning and
then waiting until that leaves your stomach before having breakfast something like a half hour uh
very helpful for a lot of people and then um taking the right pro and prebiotics can be very
helpful and the prebiotics are foods that are going to feed the uh healthy bacteria in the gut
and there's a lot of prebiotics that people can get into but just even starting simply with
things like resistant starch um just kind you know these are kinds of fiber that uh help feed
good bacteria differentially more than um bacteria that cause problems so a prebiotic supplement
taking it at night in particular is usually quite helpful and you can take it with a probiotic
and probiotics are tricky this is also one that you can personalize you can do an a test at home
for your microbiome with companies like biome or ubiome and see how your microbiome's doing and
start to personalize it you can do deeper tests with integrative doctors which is going to be super
useful um uh so i won't get into specific brands of probiotics uh but there there are ones that
can be quite meaningful yeah there's uh kind of taking a lot of mental notes there and took
a swig of water whilst you were talking as well there's a lot of things to to think about and
it's i guess something to to emphasize um people listening that it's not just i think a lot of
new tropics are thought of in terms of being for the mind and yet it's really this connection this
intimate relationship between the mind and the body and more and more it seems that
mental health issues such as depression can be caused or exacerbated by the things that are
happening in the microbiome and in the physical body i guess we know at the superficial level
if you go and do some exercise you probably feel better mentally and emotionally but when we talk
about diets and so on i think not everyone is making the the connection that there is a connection
between these things okay right before we hopped on i was talking to a friend who's just starting
her first business and she was um asking me if i would tell her just exactly what to do a checklist
for how to start a business and i said this is not the mindset it's not the appropriate mindset
to start a business it's that's the appropriate mindset to be an employee which you've always been
which is will someone else tell me what to do and i'll and i'll just do it right which is a mindset
that our parents in school and religion trained us well to do but if you're going to run your own
business then you actually have to figure out what the fuck to do you have to figure out what is
relevant what's needed does it make sense um and ultimately you're responsible for what if if your
business fails because of something your employees did it's still your business that failed you're
still the one that hired those employees that trained them that manage them that you know whatever
it was and um so and if your business succeeds it's ultimately yours right so the that the responsibility
well even more so when it comes to your own health um and when you if you coming back to the beginning
when we were talking about empowered responsibility and health
every single experience that we are going to have in this life is going to be mediated through our body
every experience of learning and helping people and making love and staring at a sunset and you
know every everything we're going to do is going to be mediated through our physiology and how long
it lasts and how vital it is and how um cognitively clear we are how emotionally clear we are is uh
uh it is all related to the bio hardware that our consciousness is running on and so you're
born here you got this body you didn't happen to have an education manual given to you for how
to really use it well but you should fucking figure it out like of all the things that everyone
should become an expert in learning how to take care of the vessel that they exist in
that mediates everything else they do should be one of the things that everybody develops
some capacity in yeah i guess because we all have one we take it so for granted that we
forget that it's it's the thing that's so important and ever present that it's easy to overlook um
as you say we people get rid of houses and get new ones that get rid of cars and get new ones you
cannot do that with your body not yet but you have to take care of it yeah as you as you say that
brings us round full circle to responsibility and uh i want to be respectful of your time
i feel like i i would happily um sit uh through your sleep cycle wait for you to wake up and
keep talking and just go round and round and round but um we can wrap things up for for this
particular occasion the there's just one more question we didn't ask you last time but we like
to ask the the guests and i think in the context of this conversation i think there should be it
is very fitting and that is what does living a high existence mean to you
well there's obviously lots of really fun ways to answer that i'll share one answer that's related
to something we talked about today which was you were asking the question of can we
enhance certain capabilities without detracting from other ones can we increase our ability to
focus on a task and do task switching simultaneously
we're we're used to doing a lot of theory of trade-offs in our life where at all scales what's
good for one country is bad for another country in terms of war or particular trade agreement
or whatever what's good for one company is bad for another company that's competing in space
what's good what seems like it's good for us today is actually bad for us tomorrow in terms
of the chocolate cake scenarios that we were talking about or the the smart drug we're using
that seems good for one aspect of life is actually damaging other aspects of life
um the the proposal that we're voting on is that leads to so much political polarization is because
it benefits some things and damages others and so people who care about one side cluster here
care about the other side cluster there as much as we can get over decision making based on
unnecessary dichotomies and unnecessary theory of trade-offs and say how can we factor everything
that is connected to all the things that are interconnected to a particular decision
that are meaningful and enhance them all simultaneously right enhance across dialectics
simultaneously so is there a way to help the economy make jobs and make the environment better
rather than jobs or the environment well there are and if you require that you find something
that does both life is going to be radically better can we find something that helps um task
switching and focus yes and now that starts to extend to everything can i live my life in a way
that is actually enjoyable now and that leads to a progressively more enjoyable future yes can i
figure out how to increase my gratitude of what it is while simultaneously increasing my motivation
to make things better yes so all of the dichotomies where we will typically enhance one thing at the
cost of something else meaningful um you know we could say a high existence is being high
in any particular area but most of the things that people would try to make higher they would
try to optimize would be at the expense of something else in the in the that previous
way of thinking about it so high across all domains simultaneously because we're thinking
about the interconnectedness of all of it and supporting the entire picture consciously
is it one meaningful way to think about high existence yeah i think that's the most
healthy way in which to try and approach it that we live in so many times we seem to think we're
we're living in a world of zero sum games um but what i like the what you're emphasizing which is
that if we begin from the premise of how can we find the best thing that includes all of these
elements rather than thinking i just want to go down one particular rabbit hole but thank you
thank you for that and thank you for coming on the show again and uh sharing a lot of very
deep knowledge that certainly got me thinking that uh i need to go and pursue some elimination
diet and maybe not keep buying cheesecake for me it's cheesecake rather than chocolate cake
it's my particular fascination so people can find links and everything to the neurohacker
collective um in the show notes but that's where to find you and we've linked up with you to create
a promotional offer for qualia that i'll give the full details in the the intro to this episode
and as you said there's it's not a risk to to check it out um and that people can try it and
see if it does work for them but it seems very likely that it will it was a delight to be here
with you and i'm happy to come back again if listeners have questions in particular they'd
like to go in a particular direction so if so uh let me know absolutely that would be awesome so if
you're listening you've got questions you want to ask daniel um then get in touch with us and
you can leave comments at the bottom of the post or on facebook whatever we'll be paying
attention to that and uh yeah for all the more reason to have another mind-opening conversation
so thanks again daniel and um until next time um i hope that we can all try and pursue
living a higher existence thank you john
thanks for listening if you appreciate the high existence podcast the best way to support it is
to invest in yourself by acquiring one or more of our self-development tools at store.highexistence.com
use the code wisdom at checkout to get a huge 25 percent off the 30 challenges to enlightenment
course you can also leave reviews on itunes or share it with your friends on social media
thank you so much for tuning in and cheers to a high existence
um
You
You
You
