I was asked to give an overview of ontic structural realism and this is what I came up with and
my subtitle is how triangulation ties everything together for silly reasons but for the serious
reason that the kind of structural realism I defend, get support, I claim from lots of
different lines of argument.
What I'll mean by ontic structural realism is roughly, positively, a commitment to the
world having a modal structure by which I mean a causal or nomological structure to
there being natural necessity in the world and on the negative side, well on the positive
side as well to be ontologically committed to relations as on a part or perhaps more
fundamental than objects and also on the negative side that we shouldn't get too hung up about
what the fundamental objects are.
Okay, so that's just very quick, I'll say more about all of this, so ontic structural
realism downgrades objects in favour of relational structure, somehow or other, ontic
structural realism may be regarded as different to scientific realism or just as a version
of it depending on what the latter is taken to be.
This is really important for those of you who say that you're not structural realism
because I mean, I don't think it matters much, you know, what the labels are, so I'm going
to defend a view of a version of structural realism which you could just regard as a version
of scientific realism.
And the commitment to natural necessity is what will differentiate the view I'll defend
from Van Frassen's structural empiricism and I'll support it by a conciliance or kind
of triangulation argument.
I'd like to thank the organisers and other speakers and those of you listening.
Very many thanks to Steve French under whose tutelage I originally developed structural
realism and also to Don Ross for more recent collaboration, especially on the book Everything
Must Go, and so how do I get it so I don't have to see a panel of people because it's
making it impossible for me to read my slides, I'll have to guess what I've written.
Thanks also to people, too numerous to mention but many of whom are cited here and apologies
to P. Ainsworth who used the title What is Ontic Structural Realism for a Critique in
a paper that I've cited there.
Okay, good, so let's go.
What's the main argument for scientific realism is usually attributed to Hilary Putnam but
he's echoing a much older form of argument, the No Miracles argument, Huygens stresses
novel prediction and multiple lines of confirmation in the preface to his work on optics.
William Muell talks about the conciliance of inductions, which he says takes place
when an induction obtained from one class of facts coincides with an induction obtained
from another class.
This conciliance is also a test of the truth of the theory in which it occurs.
More recently George Davies-Smith who's an epidemiologist and Marcus Monopho who's experimental
psychologist, both of them colleagues at Monopristal, wrote in nature about the need to think in
terms of what they call triangulation.
So they emphasise also strong theories emerge from the synthesis of multiple lines of evidence.
And here's also John Herschel.
The surest and best characteristic are well found that an extensive induction is when
verifications of it spring up as it were spontaneously into notice from quarters where they might
be least expected or even among instances of that kind which are first considered hostile
to them.
Evidence of this kind is irresistible and compels the scent with a weight which scarcely
any other possesses.
That is to say it would be a miracle if all of those different lines of inquiry confirmed
the hypothesis by chance.
So CF Charles Sanders Purse who believed in what he called thirdness which is just his
name and connected with these ideas about semiotics for the world having natural necessity
for there being a law like or causal structure to the world.
Okay and we can think of the opening line of the Temeos it's all about triangles one,
two, three.
So Robert Noisig also emphasised the idea of invariance as a criterion or a touchstone
of objectivity.
But the really crucial thing is not just invariance but invariance under different modalities
of inquiry or different let's say senses for an example.
So why aren't rainbows real objects?
They're objective they're not personal subjective hallucinations and we can all agree about
when and where they appear in various of their properties but they are confined purely to
the visual modality.
There's no persistent illusion also of smell or touch or audition.
And Ian Hacking I'm sure there are earlier sources for this idea I associate it with
his book representing and intervening from 1983 where he says the detection by independent
sensory modalities is a criterion of reality and this seems to be an important and sensible
idea and one that's of accord with a more general idea of triangulation in scientific methodology.
So the thought here is that we've got this as a criterion in kind of common sense and
it's the reason why we believe in the world around us is the concordance of both our perceptions
and the perceptions of other people.
So obviously the primary example of conciliance or triangulation is Newton's unification of
terrestrial and celestial physics.
But the one that's most important for the scientific realism debate is Perrin's calculations
of Avogadro's number.
These calculations involved predictions for experimental measurements of a whole load
of different phenomena which I've listed some of them I think not necessarily all of them
on this slide.
And the thought is as Perrin says that and he even says miracle right so the same Putnam's
echoing an older line of argument here's Perrin explicitly saying it will be a miracle
of concordance if it weren't for the reality of molecules.
Avogadro's number emerges he says there's an essentially invariant element of various
ways to represent the structure of matter.
The multiple determinations of Avogadro's number by different means and different modalities
of measurement seems to have been a vital factor in theory choice.
And a more recent example I'm not by any means an expert on this but informed that one of
the reasons you know dark matter isn't just you have a problem you postulate something
to solve the problem but rather you have several different ways of calculating a correction
and dark matter concords with those physically logically obviously but physically independent
modalities of investigation.
Okay so what's the upshot of all of this for the debate about scientific realism I think
lots of people probably think well we can always raise these worries about undetermination
but that often takes on a hypothetical character and those kinds of alternative hypotheses
either don't actually exist in the sense that no someone just says well in principle there
could be an empirically equivalent alternative to the standard model but they haven't actually
written one down right or they partly written down but not fully articulated and especially
not articulated in the sense of applied through modelling to all the phenomena that confirm
the ordinary theory.
Then they're often completely parasitic on the theories upon which they're supposed to
cast doubt and I think this is a sort of general point for everyday epistemology about you
know sort of flat earth or conspiracy theories or whatever is the fact that they never actually
predict anything it's not like you can ever go to or like evil demon hypothesis you can't
go to the evil demon hypothesis and say okay so what's the weather going to do tomorrow
you know the answer is always going to be the evil demon will make it look like probably
whatever the weather forecast says right so it's kind of these hypotheses are not actual
actually predictive so you know I think even in the face of this in principle problem of
undetermination we should be scientific realists even the most avowed skeptics such as
Brian Coray were convinced to become atomists after parents experiments. Perhaps Van Frassen
is right that the aim of science is empirical adequacy and I think you know there's something
to the always keeping sciences keeping it keeping a fundamental role for for experimental
confirmation that above theoretical virtue however science you know science does does
seem to have achieved more than that on pain of the kind of miracle that Perrin and later
Putnam tell us that we shouldn't accept and obviously one of the ways in which physics
has developed invariance with respect to a different kind of invariance is the way that
which of course we still need to approach every bit of experimental data through our
senses as knowing subjects but instrumentation makes the way that we do that which sense we
use completely irrelevant right so there's you know a visually impaired person can read
a thermometer. So good so you know triangulation, conciliance it seems to be really important
and you will go so far as to say there's never been a hypothesis that has satisfied this
criterion of conciliance of inductions and laughter was found to be false but of course
we know that's not true. He was thinking of Newtonian physics as his primary example and
we know that it's not the the whole truth and nothing but the truth.
So the problem of theory changes are arguably more interesting more pressing more important
than the problem of undetermination because it's rooted in actual fact what happened.
It's often framed in terms of the abandonment of central theoretical terms like ether and
Chloric and Fujiston.
But the problem of theory change is not solved by finding plausible reference for these abandoned
terms. Why not? Well because on the one hand it's can be quite easy to do so that doesn't
change the fact that we've radically changed our minds about the nature of the stuff so
for example ether was thought to be an elastic solid by Fresnel and it's also quite plausible
to say that ether refers to the electromagnetic field but doesn't solve the problem of us being
quite wrong about the nature of the world in the ether theory of Fresnel and then secondly
there are yeah there's lots of continuity sort of terms between classical and quantum
physics and Newtonian relativistic physics but they're obviously very big metaphysical
and logical differences and I mean I'm just gonna say much much more about all this but
I just won't dwell on it and more importantly it's really not a good indication of whether
we have a problem whether or not the theoretical term has been retained because the term atom
is retained even though atoms arguably have less to do with the indivisible particles of
antiquity than the ether does with the field right then wasn't the field does with the ether
right that is to say atoms aren't particles they're not mechanical they're primarily
electromagnetic entities and they come in all different species and you know that they're
which okay some atom is thought but the point is that they were defined as the
partless particles and they're not so if we say we know there are atoms that shouldn't
trick us into thinking that there's been there hasn't been a radical theory change there.
So Warrell argues and now I'm to structural realism that the project of defending realism
by securing reference for abandoned theoretical terms is missing the point of the problem as
well as the key to its solution. The solution is to point to Heinz post 1971 general
correspondence principle the well-conformed confirmed laws of old theories are retained by the
successors of as approximations within certain domains. So the point is this is a data point
right that gives us a response to cunean radical sort of claims about with the discontinuity
in the history of science and also to the problem of theory change for realism.
It confirms one crazy idea of physics is ruins built on ruins the point being that we don't
clear the ground before the next theory is built the next theory incorporates the old
theory to some degree. And for a realist I say the key point is that more than the
empirical content and phenomenological laws of past theories is retained it's not just
Kepler's laws and Galileo's kinematical laws that are preserved as limiting cases of
general relativity but the new but Newton's inverse square law that unifies and corrects
those laws is also retained in the form of a low energy limit but nonetheless still there
and in general you know in physics the laws take mathematical form and there are special
cases where the very same equations are reinterpreted in terms of different entities but that's not
the general case. In many cases of course mathematical structure is lost and radically
modified on theory change. So of course we shouldn't think of structural realism as the
view that there's this part of theories the mathematical structure which is not abandoned
or changed that's not the point. The point is to respond to the challenge that only
empirical content is retained on theory change by pointing to theoretical structure that's
also retained albeit in modified form. And the particular point I'm going to make is that
we retain modal structure in the sense that we retain some of the warranted counterfactuals
that are made by the previous theory. So for example if Newtonian mechanics tells you that
a bridge would have fallen down or wouldn't have fallen down if the relevant
structure had been you know had the right tensile strength or whatever and then that's
retained in future science as an effective theory and as an effective limit of our more
refined picture. So I'll say some more about this okay so OSR lots more about it OSR is
not pure structuralism as Van Frasen charges because it's realism about the modal structure
of the natural world. So tell us more about this modal structure I hear you cry. I will
don't worry it's what we know about when we know about the basic processes and simple
machines of antiquity. Now why am I picking those because I think that's kind of the beginning
of the difference right that people observed that the basic processes I would say would
be fire and cooking you know fermentation wine and beer making making pots and smelting
or and the simple machines of antiquity the inclined plane the lever the wedge the screw
the wheel and axle the pulley these are stable causal features of the world and I always
imagine people kind of working out that you could kind of curse the gods but as long as
you followed the right rules for the manipulation of physical reality then everything worked
and that that's I think kind of beginning of scientific knowledge and everything else
we've got is sort of more and more of that. So let's consider an example that does not
involve mathematics because we're you know we're often talking about the physics cases
there's lots and lots of literature about those but I like this example of Fujistan so
apologies to people who have heard it many times before it's not really my example
Kuhn and Firehub and popularize the view that theory change in the history of science disrupts
the perspectives of continuous progress and realism. So way back, Naretha Kurtiger in 1968
so before I was born, not by much, considered Fujistan theory as an example supporting the
general correspondence principle and you think what in Fujistan theory was that mad theory that
everyone tells you about according to which all things that burn contain something called
Fujistan which is released when they're when they're combusted but actually Fujistan theory
supported well-confirmed empirical regularities for example what mainly what the Fujistanists
realized was that there was a connection between the calcination of metals, ordinary combustion
and respiration and one of the ways that connection manifests itself is by the fact that air, what
they would have regarded as saturated with Fujistan, what we would regard as air that
privated of all oxygen wouldn't support by combustion so in other words you take some air
and you burn a candle in it until the candle goes out so that air will no longer support
combustion and you find that an animal can no longer respire in that environment and that's
that's the well-confirmed empirical regularities it's projectable so is the general structural
claim that there are that these kinds of process are all the same kind of process and we would
now call that process oxidation rather than defragistication. The George Gaol argued that
Fujistan theory was also a good explanatory theory explained various things though the
point of this example is that there can be even though there's no such thing as Fujistan the
tables of affinity and antipathy of logistic chemistry express real patterns that we now
express in terms of reducing and oxidizing power. So the examples from mathematical physics
cited above which I haven't gone into any detail about and the case of Fujistan theory
show that even though the ontology of science may change quite radically at the level of
objects and properties there can still be continuity of the mobile structure that's attributed to
the world. Okay so I have the problem I can't see a clock while I'm talking can someone turn
their mute off and tell me the time quickly? It's now 12 23. So how much longer do you want
me to talk for? You can go for about 25 more minutes. Okay fine. I don't think I'll I might not
use it all that time I'd be much more interested to hear what other people think about all this
so but let me get on with trying to explain more how I understand structural realism then.
So Stathis Silas wanted to solve the problem of theory change by what David Papineau called
a kind of selective realism and I want to emphasize that structural realism is not like that.
So what Stathis did was tried to discriminate in advance which bits which which theoretical
terms you could be confident would be retained. I'll argue that there's no analysis that would
have told you in advance that Fujistan wouldn't be retained and Atom would be and Ether wouldn't be.
And so this strategy which Philip Kitcher also has this idea of selective realism you know the
thought is get some kind of criteria that we can say in advance what part of the ontology
of theories will be preserved then if we think of structural realism like that it would be the
kind of selective realism that selects structure and that's how Papineau presented it and it's
often presented like that I think just definitely not that view. Why not? Right because we're
not claiming that the structure is preserved and the non-structure isn't as I've as I've
already emphasized and also because the job of predicting what will be preserved and what
abandoned by future science belongs to science itself not to philosophy. As a philosopher I'd be
very happy if I could contribute to that project and I'm sure that other philosophers do contribute to
that project but I don't think it's necessary to have a recipe for looking at current science
and saying what parts of it will be retained and what won't be in order to defend realism.
What is necessary is the confidence to say that future science will overlap in not just what it says
about actually what actually happens but in some of what it says about what would happen if right
about modal facts about modal structure however you want to think of it. So for example we will
get the causal the causal laws of our higher level science in no matter what replaces the standard
model. Now we might find that there are domains in which those causal laws don't hold because for
reasons that we didn't understand until we understood what was wrong with the standard model
so we'll revise that and we can't say in advance what those domains will be but I think we do know
that more than just the empirical content will be retained. So let me say more about this idea
that theories can be literally false as fundamental physics but still capture important
modal structure and relations. And let me in so doing also say why I think this view can be defended
as a conciliance by a conciliance argument. Warrell framed structural realism in epistemic
terms following pancreas said we can only know relations. Warrell was concerned with the scientific
realism debate in general philosophy of science but French wanted a form of realism that could account for
problems of identity, individuality and constant physics and space-time physics. Physics is highly
mathematicised as described by Max Planck and so I quoted in my 1998 paper on structural realism
Planck talks about the mathematicalisation of the description of the world that's given by
science and the idea of physics in particular and the idea I had was really just what if we just stop
insisting that we interpret physics in terms of some set of fundamental objects.
Quantum mechanics seems to involve relations that don't superveen.
So if on structural realism in the philosophy of physics involve inflating the ontological
relation structure. So this is a general thing that is true that in the philosophy of physics
people defend ontological realism as some kind of inflation of relational structure. So I want to make the
connection with modal structure. I'm not going to talk about that. By distinguishing structural
realism from structural empiricism with my emphasis on modality and identifying a problem with
structural empiricism with Van Frasen's alternative to scientific realism which again turns on modality.
Van Frasen has a lot in common with structural realism. He's happy with all the idea of structural
continuity on theory change and using models and a semantic view of theories and mathematical
structure to elucidate connections between theories and so on. He's happy with all of that.
He's not an empiricist about it all. He's not a realist.
What he says is that empirical adequacy is truth about the observable.
And he argues that repudiation of objective modality is central to empiricism.
Now being observable is modal.
The challenge that was always posed to Van Frasen is why are you happy to extend knowledge
or extend belief by induction to unobserved observables but not to unobserved unobservables.
And Van Frasen always had a real problem with dinosaurs and the moons of Jupiter.
In his view they are observable.
And so when we accept scientific theories we should believe what they say about them.
We should believe in the truth of their claims about them.
But they're not actually observed.
Maybe sadly the moons of Jupiter might never be observed. Hopefully they will be.
But at least not in the way that Van Frasen thinks of an unaided observation.
It being present to you and you seeing it.
You don't see any dinosaurs modulating time travel.
In order to demarcate the observable from the unobserved you have to make a appeal to what would happen if that is to the modal structure of the world.
And Van Frasen by his own lights is not allowed to do that.
And so by his own lights the distinction between the observable and the unobserved is not any kind of objective or principle distinction.
And so by I would have thought anybody's lights it ought to be the basis for your view of science.
Okay so that's an extra kind of line of argument here.
Another point is that Van Frasen makes a big deal of Bell's theorem and here I'm a long time ago in 2000 paper in the British general philosophy of science.
I tried to hoist him by his own petard on this.
And I think this might sort of have some foretaste for you of what Emily's going to talk about.
So, I'm not sure but anyway what's my point here Van Frasen says that Bell's theorem tells us that you can't have a common causal explanation for the correlations that you get in quantum mechanics.
So he attributes a lot of significance to Bell's theorem.
More generally, consider entanglement.
It looks like
entangled states always make for violation of a Bell type inequality.
We can kind of operation lies entanglement as
the violation by predicted and actual relative frequencies for repeated measurements
with the correlation functions that we derive from local hidden variable models.
So Van Frasen would have it. The principle of the common cause tells us that we should expect that the correlations will be screened off by a common cause but Bell's theorem another way of thinking about Bell's theorem is that then no such screening off common cause exists.
Now my point here is a simple one. I mean it's just that if you don't believe that there's some kind of modal structure you can't make any sense of the great significance of Bell's theorem here.
Bell's theorem and its generalization are not about quantum mechanics, right? That's what you sort of teach your students when you give your lecture on Bell's theorem.
It doesn't, I mean quantum mechanics predicts violation of the Bell inequalities but that's something separate, right?
We could, in principle, just have derived Bell's, the Bell inequalities and then observed that they were violated by experiment without knowing anything about quantum mechanics.
They're not about the modal structure of the world and if you think about PR boxes, Popescu-Roolic boxes and they tell us that something more about modal structure, they tell us that no signalling, which again is a modal idea for a reason I'll come on to in a minute,
is compatible with more violation of the Bell inequalities than we get from quantum mechanics.
You know, again, line of argument, conciliance, the main motivation for scientific realism in general and structural realism in particular is the no miracles argument, which makes no sense without necessity tying things together.
The reason by that is that it's in the determination of Avogadro's number, it's the causal relationship between their being atoms and all the different phenomena that Perrin examined that it makes it not a miracle, right?
So obviously laws are central to science, I think I should be pushing out an open door here, realists should believe in objective modality.
Signific journals are awash with modal claims, causal powers.
Why are the presocratics important to the history of science? Because, you know, it's not because we think that everything's made of water or fire or, you know, some combination of earth and fire and water or ether or whatever, it's because they began the process of trying to identify a stable modal structure,
some underlying principles that would give unity to the diversity of phenomena.
So, I'm further grounds I think for being realist about modality is the importance of computation and information in our understanding of the world these days, and as Tim Mordlin pointed out, long time ago,
information transmission is modal and I argue computation is too, but it's only true that I send you information, let's say by holding my hand up, right, if there's some bit that would take two different values depending on whether I held my hand up or didn't.
Hence, I can send you information by failing to hold my hand up, therefore by not doing anything, therefore by not transmitting any matter or energy to you.
Only because we think that we have an information channel, and the natural necessity structure of the world makes it such that were the value of the bit to be different, I would have transmitted energy or matter down that channel.
So, like, more generally if I kind of hold up one finger or two fingers you know either way I send matter or energy, but what's really important is the is the correlational structure of what what happens.
Okay, so I could talk more about that, but what I'm really trying to do is throw down why onto structural realism is kind of universal panacea. Well, it's not really like that it's not so much as a solution to problems at this point it's more just like, there's lots of good reasons to believe in objective modal structure, that's what I'm saying.
For example, we get lots of explanations in science and I'm going beyond physics that are equilibrium explanations and here's Eliot sober saying the point about these explanations is that they are.
They show what would have happened.
So they, that's, again, to say that they're modal but without being causal in this place.
We can think of symmetry explanation in physics, David do it she's constructed theory right explicitly tries to build physics around the idea of what's possible, what's necessary, given what and so on.
So, like I say I think that this should be pushing an open door.
Now, my claim would be further more that thinking in terms of objective modal structure as explicated by the idea of real patterns can solve a variety of problems that are actually not separate problems.
So, I think I just sort of keep going until I get told to stop because I probably got more material here than I have time for.
But again, I'm trying to give you a flavor of myself overall conciliants argument and this is what everything must go.
This is the process of articulating and I've written so many papers about this more than anyone would want to read but think about these different problems for scientific realism right we've got the problem of passing current theories and really talked about that we've got the problem
of scientific realism common sense realism how does that world of science relate to the everyday world tables and chairs.
We've got the sciences at different scales, and we've got the ontologies of special sciences and fundamental physics problems are related.
And I say that we can give a unified account of all of them in terms of this idea of real pattern right then it introduces idea into philosophy.
It's very roughly the idea of a simplified description relative to some background ontology.
Right on the beach is a real pattern to a surfer or a lifeguard because it's taken as the basis for prediction explanation waves are very ephemeral real patterns like currents and ties but rocks and sandbanks and more durable.
And the thought here is that this is a good account of all sorts of objects and science so for example, quasi particles, which David Wallace argues for.
So special sciences and in every day ontology we have the problems of vagueness of composition and identity over time as well as the problems of generation and corruption.
Composition is often dynamical.
In general the time scale of the interactions of the past is very short compared to the timescale characteristic of the whole right so.
The separation of timescale seems to be the key to stability of structure from the Born-Oppenheimer approximation kind of to many, many other things including the economy and the climate and so on.
Generation and corruption are not events at the level of the past but real patterns can indeed be created and destroyed by changing the behavior of other real patterns. Okay, good.
So the picture that you get is one of kind of scale relativity.
Different energy levels and regimes at different and different length and timescales feature different emergent structures of objects and properties and causation and law and I would argue for an ecumenical view of all of this stuff as long as we get projectable
polarities and the real thing that I'm not going to do in this talk is is link the idea of real patterns to triangulation. Obviously a real pattern isn't is just we haven't said anything about triangulation just by talking about a rainbow would be a real pattern.
But we haven't yet got triangulation.
But I think being real patterns got to be sufficient necessary.
Good, so in many cases the strongly empirical successful theories of the past are also the theories presently used in the relevant domain.
So we still use Newtonian mechanics, ray and wave optics, classical electrodynamics, classical statistical mechanics, like why, because their ontologies are affected in the sense that part of empirically successful descriptions and projectable laws and regularities.
So this view, I think, is very similar to what Socal and Briemont called the renormalization group view of the world that talked about that quite a long time ago now.
Entities that are now regarded immersion are also often the entities of past theories and are always merely affected with respect to more fundamental descriptions.
So solids and liquids magnetic and electric fields are part of the effective ontology of condensed matter physics even though none of these things are part of the ontology of quantum field theory.
In this sense, much of physics like special science and special sciences in general deal with a plethora of emergent entities, properties and processes.
So I think realism as such has no account of the relationship between ontologies, nor of the relationship between causation and law at different levels and is problematic.
Right, so I'm going to say we should be looking to onto structuralism and the idea of natural necessity as what allows us to be realist that all these different levels.
After all, arguments for realism based on causation intervention and explanatory power are all about effective ontology that usually applied to effective ontology not to fundamental physics.
It's kind of ironic that some sign of it realists argue for the elimination of everything. I mean maybe Sean, Sean has that from cow.
Nothing but atoms and the void.
That's an eliminativist view.
Right, but they often kind of defend the epistemology of scientific realism by the sort of same form of inference of best explanation that we would use to argue for the entities of everyday life for immersion entities so.
We don't need to be eliminativist we can take kind of ecumenical attitude, but I don't think we should be pluralist so don't worry about all this stuff.
Just about five minutes James.
I'm going to finish off right so I don't think we should be complete pluralists. So a constraint I would put on the development of this scientific realist view premised on commitment to natural necessity is that we should understand somehow within it.
There's a virtual place of physics relative to other sciences and the kind of unity that exists due to the atomic theory of matter the four fundamental forces the common system of scientific units and so on.
There's something, you know, more to talk about a desider atom on on a more fully articulated you know metaphysics fit for the sciences as we have them, but I see onto structural realism as
what that's what it should do. Right so that's that's that's what we're aiming for here. And so, you know, in answer to the kind of original question of whether this is in the end of form of scientific realism I think yes it is.
A form of scientific realism it doesn't insist on a fundamental level, except the idea that relational structure might be fundamental justice fundamental and which commits to natural necessity.
So, I don't think I should say anything more because it's loads and loads and loads.
So, oh yeah well I just finished my last line is right, which is that all of this might make you think that.
Van Frosen's right that scientific realism is essentially a metaphysical position, I think it is and I think that's why you know in the end structural realism is a form of scientific realism because it's involving this commitment to natural necessity which Van Frosen repudiates.
Thanks very much indeed in so far as you've been attending.
Thanks James.
People can all wave their hands if you want to do that works to. All right.
So if everyone can can remute please. I see several hands already.
I have a number of questions myself but I tend to prefer to let other people ask first. So if we run out of other questions, I have a few as well.
I saw a hand right away from from Kerry and as Kerry is our next speaker I think Kerry gets priority for the first question so Kerry, please go ahead.
Oh, sure. I'll take it. Thank you James. So I'm wondering what kind of structure doesn't count as model. I mean when we put the qualifier modal realism about modal structure on here and I'm just wondering how much is added so as you'll see, as I've argued before and
as I've argued today and as implicit through loads of structuralist literature. Structuralists are pretty hesitant about intrinsic properties at the fundamental level right you often talk about a disavowal of intrinsic
natures.
Well, if I say something has an intrinsic property that's a really modally loaded statement it means that it could have that property independent of, you know, in all sorts of an arbitrarily different counterfactual scenarios right it has independently of what the rest of the
world is like.
So that seems that's a sort of modal feature, you know that support that's a feature of the world that has all sorts of modal structure associated with it.
And yeah I think of it as not the kind of structure that that structuralists are, or not the kind of thing that structuralists want to reify the fundamental level so what does modal add to structure.
Yeah.
So I mean just just that we, I mean it's not necessarily modal that's doing the work I suppose it's it's the it's natural necessities the modality of the world right so it's not logical structure.
So obviously logic deals with modal structure in the sense of what's logically necessary and logically possible.
And pure mathematics.
Obviously deals with possibility and necessity. Right so
what's different is that I'm talking about the world I'm not talking about I'm talking about the natural world.
I'm talking about its modal properties not the modal properties of logic or of mathematics so
you know,
a round peg won't go in a square hole or square peg won't go in a round hole or whatever you know these, you know just trivial little modal facts about everyday things.
But obviously what we get from science is this incredibly rich picture of all these causal and law like relationships.
Natural properties like David Lewis would hold that fundamental physical properties are intrinsic right that's not a fact about mathematics that's not a claim about mathematics that's a claim about the natural world.
You might want to call it metaphysical necessity, perhaps more than natural necessity but, but it doesn't seem to me obvious that it's a claim about just logical necessity or something, but.
Are you saying that the demarcation of what counts as intrinsic is, because I would say that what counts as intrinsic is determined by the causal structure of the world so for example,
you know it's not intrinsic to me that I'm saying, right.
In particular I need sociality and the lack of it is driving me nuts.
Knowing that that property is not is an intrinsic property is because of how the world is and it's not something.
So, I think, whether or not a given property is intrinsic is, is not due to some separate realm of metaphysical necessity I mean I think just metaphysical necessity is what we're talking about.
I just don't, I don't see it as something different to what we find out about through science.
I thought that I kind of the whole point of this is to say, that's, you know science doesn't just tell us about what exists I mean, you know, that the fact is the other way around the kind of you know we get, we believe things exist because they're, they stabilize the
structure of the, of the world that's how we that's how we kind of grasp it.
But certainly, I mean obviously science tells us about things but going along with telling us about things it tells us about their properties processes and all of that, and all of that stuff is
sort of modal.
Right, in the way that lots of philosophers argue that it is this position lists and all those people, you know, people who argue that Nancy Cartwright about the importance of causation.
I'm just not talking about causal structure because I want to be open to the idea that there could be, you know, there's more general notions of modality in science.
So, some people not just me have talked about normal logical structure and I cited sober talking about equilibrium explanation to kind of say well we want to think motor structure isn't exhausted by causal structure.
Oh, not really.
We may have to pause on that I want to make sure we have time for some of the questions we're going to go until for about five more minutes and then I want to give Kerry an opportunity to set up and give people a chance to take a break.
The next hand I have is from palace.
Thank you for this presentation. I, I wondered, how can you define a relation. If you think that relations are on tick, so that there will still be relations without humans I mean, how can you define a relation without reference to comparison, since things cannot compare
themselves to themselves. So, if there wasn't a human to compare.
Yeah, okay that's a really good question.
I mean, I suppose.
We're always going to think, maybe, maybe this means that you know.
Yeah, I mean to in order to in order to grasp the nature of the world we, we have to use concepts and make comparisons as you say and
maybe the world on on.
We should that we should have some idea of you can canty an idea of the world's is sort of behind all of that. I just, I don't find that that serves me or serves any purpose to talk about something that you can't buy stipulation can't talk about so
I suppose I just say that I don't see the problem there is any worse with relations and it is with properties or objects or any kind of ontology.
Right so I mean to even to identify properties to put it in some kind of structure of relations with other properties and so on and.
Yeah.
Alright, so right I'm going to go to the next question which is from Jerome.
Um, so I had a quick question, more of a clarificatory sort of thing about how we move from something like structuralism as a more epistemological thesis to it seems like a stronger claim here because I could see like a strong
structuralism being something like the structure is what they're there really is that is sort of what constitutes the world versus a weak structuralism, which should be, we're sort of mysterious about whatever the I guess
Rolata are, but we're not necessarily denying them. And we're sort of admitting that perhaps the empirical sciences can only reveal something like the structure, and we don't know the underlying Rolata and I was curious as to how you sort of go from maybe the weaker
claim to the stronger claim.
Um, I suppose by, I mean this is kind of burden of proof thing I mean what why why should I think that they're the right way to think about the world independently of us is in terms of this particular
bit of ontological categories which is objects and individuals and as opposed to processes or relations or events or whatever and I think I mean the way I think about it now is that there are all these things and these are always we have a grasping the
world right now.
What work is the world structure word work is the word structure doing that I don't know but I just I keep finding I you know I want to use it loads of people want to use it it's on the idea like pattern or structure seems to be quite a primitive and helpful notion.
I kind of articulate what structure is any more than someone can articulate what an object is or what which is, you know, we.
So, I don't think it particularly, I mean there's all sorts of interesting stuff there right about individuals discernibility of any identity of discernibles, which I worked on and lots of other people worked on, haven't addressed it in this paper because I've
addressed it so many other times.
But I think when it comes down to I just want to think something like well look quantum mechanics tells me that they're entangled states and I don't have any other way to understand these entangled states is just a kind of pure
stable kind of necessity in that manifests itself in in these statistics that violate their inequalities.
So, so I believe in that, you know,
I don't know if that really helps. And I think part of what's going on here is just like really is the absence of an ontology rather than actually having one.
Whereas it's not trivial right and it's not empty is that I'm saying Van Fransen is denying Steve French is saying to that the world's got this cut this modal structure that we know we might not know it or not in individual cases but there will be statements of the form,
you know, where we know not to have locked down, lots more people would have died that are made true by how the world is not by our theories.
So we have one more minute before I'd like to take a break. Guido if you have a one minute question we can do that now.
I think it's very helpful James how you set up a ontological structure realism by comparison with fun for us on but and I think it's definitely a big difference that you believe in objective modality.
And, and buzz does not.
But I'm just trying to sort of break a lance for for fun for us and see if you really need modality to be objective.
And, of course, you're saying observable is a modal concept, but and all for your rising, you know, contains contains modality.
We need sense of the world, and we need some form of modality.
And, you know, from Fransen needs some form of modality in order to make the distinction between what's observable and and observable.
But thinking of human as another example.
Here's somebody who thinks that the way we make sense of the world is causation.
And he doesn't believe that causation is objective.
So, um, yeah, I'm just wondering whether some fast and can't, in fact, have his cake and and eat it sir.
Yeah, James you've got a minute to answer I do want to give people a brief break and give Kerry a chance to set up.
Just very quickly, I mean, Van Vraasen is kind of human in this sense right so he'd say that there are certain regularities that we raise to the status of laws and then it follows from those that certain things are observable.
The problem is that there's no grounds of raising to thinking that those that.
The problem that human doesn't is that there's no grounds for thinking then that you should make what follows from the bits of theories that you yourself repudiate that is what's modal as opposed to what's just a current into the basis for your, your
view of some science and what his goals are.
So I think that's a circularity that's missing but I also think there's no good reason to be a human as Tim Wardlin says.
All right, we're going to have to cut it off there. Thanks again for James for the wonderful talk and for the wonderful Q amp a so thanks again.
Thank you very much.
I'm going to stop the recording right now.
