Hello, and welcome to Great Inventions to Change the World.
Before we start, I want you to look around wherever you are.
Chances are you're surrounded by inventions.
You probably have a TV, DVD player, or computer on which you're playing this course.
That device is powered by either a battery or the electric service in your home.
You're probably sitting in a chair, maybe at a table.
You're wearing clothes, shoes, and perhaps you're enjoying a soft drink or a snack.
You may have ridden in a car, a train, or an airplane today, and you might very well
have taken drugs or seen a doctor recently.
All of these things and more are inventions.
They were created and designed by someone at some point in history.
Some were invented yesterday, other state-backed centuries.
Yet, how often do we notice them?
Do we know how these inventions work?
Do we know who invented them and why?
Do we understand how these inventions reflect our values and those of our culture?
Now, while I can't answer these questions for all the devices in your life, Great Inventions
will investigate the origins of a select number of devices, those that fundamentally change
the course of history.
Now, invention can refer to human creativity in a variety of realms.
You can talk about the invention of a new political system, like democracy, or a new
genre of literature, like the novel.
But invention in these realms is abstract and non-material.
The ideas are powerful, but they don't necessarily need to be manifested in a particular way
in the material world.
What makes invention in the realm of technology interesting is that the material form does
matter.
An inventor can have all sorts of great ideas, but these ideas don't change the world unless
he or she comes up with a way to make them work in the world.
Innovation for our purposes, then, is all about converting ideas into things.
To illustrate this, let me show you one of my favorite inventions, the Tesla coil and
the low-pressure gas tube.
This device was invented by Nikola Tesla around 1890.
Tesla invented practical AC motor in the 1880s, a device that we'll learn about in lecture
20.
But after coming up with this motor, Tesla became interested in radio waves and their
potential application.
Radio waves had been predicted in 1868 by the great theoretical physicist James Clerk Maxwell,
and in 1889, a similarly great experimental physicist, Heinrich Hertz, created the first
apparatus for generating and detecting radio waves.
To honor Hertz, we measure the frequency of radio waves in Hertz or HZ.
Tesla learned about Hertz's apparatus when he visited the 1889 Parasex position, and
Tesla came back determined to find a practical application for the new waves.
To do so, Tesla drew on his own practical knowledge of electricity, and he souped up
the Hertz apparatus so that it produced high-voltage, high-frequency currents.
So let me show you a Tesla coil.
When you run a Tesla coil, the voltage between the two terminals of the coil is so high that
it breaks down the oxygen molecules in the air between the two of them, thus allowing
a spark to jump between the two terminals.
In running his Tesla coil, Tesla was creating artificial lightning, as lightning is caused
when the voltage difference between two clouds or a cloud on the surface of the earth is
sufficiently high that the electricity ionizes the oxygen and creates a path for the lightning
bolt itself.
But remember that as an inventor, Tesla wanted to find a practical application for radio waves.
In 1890, everyone was excited about the new electric lighting system that Thomas Edison
had invented.
And so Tesla wondered, why not create a new system that could compete with Edison?
To his delight, Tesla found the tubes filled with a small amount of gas, like neon, would
glow when they were brought into proximity with his coil.
This suggested to Tesla that he could create a new lighting system that would be better
than Edison's incandescent system, since Tesla could do away with all the messy wires that
were needed to connect Edison's lamps to the sockets in the wall.
Instead, Tesla planned to place a coil like this one in every home and connect that coil
with metallic wallpaper on opposite sides of the room, and then you would simply align
a tube on a stand so that the tube would be energized and you would get light whenever
you wanted.
Now you might ask, what happened to this invention?
Why don't we have wireless lights today in our homes?
Tesla quickly realized that this invention was inefficient since it worked by induction,
not radio waves, that the coil set up an electric field around itself and it was that field
that made the tube glow.
Moreover, during the economic depression that followed the panic of 1893, Tesla wasn't
able to find any businessmen who would invest in this invention and help set up a company
to compete with Edison.
Instead, Tesla went back to the drawing board and decided to develop not just a lighting
system but an ambitious system for distributing electric power through the Earth's crust.
To do so, he built bigger and bigger Tesla coils, first in Colorado and then on Long
Island.
But I'll tell you more about that wireless power system in lecture 27.
Nevertheless, today you can take advantage of Tesla's invention, the Tesla coil, and
devices that have recently appeared that allow you to charge your cell phone by placing it
on a pad that contains circuitry similar to Tesla's wireless power scheme.
So what do we mean by a working invention?
As I said a moment ago, what's special about technological inventions is that unlike creative
acts in other realms, inventions need to work in the real world.
To understand inventions, we need to inquire about the underlying scientific principles.
To appreciate the Tesla coil, we need to know something about electricity.
In order to appreciate the principles behind an invention, I will use demonstrations throughout
great inventions and these will be supplemented by computer simulations and diagrams.
These visuals will help you understand how an invention works in a physical sense.
Same time, an invention also has to work for various groups and society.
Investors have to be willing to invest in it.
Customers need to be willing to buy it.
Unfortunately in the case of the Tesla coil, Tesla was unable to attract either investors
or customers, but naturally other successful inventions do attract the interest and support
of people.
As we go through great inventions, we'll see that inventors often struggle not only
to get their gizmos to work in the laboratory but also to attract the interest of various
groups.
Inventions are as much about connecting the device with the needs, values and wishes of
a society as they are about getting the science right.
In thinking about inventions, both in terms of their scientific and their social content,
we'll ask the following questions about each invention that we take up in this course.
How was it invented?
What was the creative process or insight?
How does the invention work?
What's the scientific or engineering or practical knowledge that's embodied in it?
How did the invention become important?
We'll want to provide insight into how an invention became great, why people have them
in their lives, and what other inventions followed from a particular device.
And we'll finally want to know how did this invention change the world?
So what do I mean when I talk about great inventions?
As I said a few minutes ago, we're surrounded by thousands of inventions and we could try
and investigate the origins in each and every one of these.
From false eyelashes to crash dummies to Viagra has a history that we could recount.
So how did I decide which inventions to cover in this course?
What do I mean by a great invention?
In studying the history of invention over the last 25 years, I've developed a sense
that we should look for inventions that were great in four particular ways.
And to appreciate these four ways, I want to show you four diagrams.
First, we should look at inventions that dramatically transform daily life by making
more food or energy or information available.
The steam engine and the internet are obvious examples of this sort of great invention.
While the steam engine made more power available for use in factories, the internet has made
more information accessible to millions of people.
We'll look at these inventions in Lectures 14 and 34.
Second, some inventions are fascinating because of the thought processes that the
inventors used to come up with the idea and what they had to do to make that idea into
a useful device.
Two examples that we'll look at in great inventions are the Potter's Wheel and Edison's
first motion picture machine.
And we'll look at those in Lectures 2 and 22.
Third, other inventions are technological tour de force, remarkable designs in themselves
that are worthy of our attention, much as a great painting or a wonderful poem.
Japanese pagodas in Lecture 8 or the airplane, developed by the Wright Brothers in Lecture
26, would fit this category.
Before going to the fourth kind of great invention, you might be wondering why I drew a dotted
vertical line between the two levels before and after in the first three diagrams.
I did so to convey the idea that we frequently assume that an invention is revolutionary
and instantaneous, that overnight people recognize that an invention like the steam engine is
going to be a great source of concentrated energy and that they should immediately take
it up.
But as we'll see, many inventions were not taken up immediately and that decades, even
centuries elapsed between when an invention was first conceived and when it became common
place.
Equally, there are devices that are invented in one part of the world that only really
take off when they're transported and introduced into another culture.
One great example of this is gunpowder, invented in China, but its real impact came when it
was imported into Europe at the end of the Middle Ages.
Consequently, there are some inventions that are great because of what it took for a society
to accept and begin to utilize them.
These inventions are often significant windows into the values and social structure of different
societies.
To show this, a fourth diagram has a sloped line connecting the before and after.
Give you one example of the challenges associated with the adoption and diffusion of inventions.
Consider the fact that water wheels were first introduced into Europe in the first century
BC, Roman times, but they were not widely used until the 12th or 13th century, something
we'll talk about in lecture 7.
Similarly, as we investigate in lecture 30, the origins of the computer chip, we'll see
that Ted Hoff appreciated the great potential for putting a computer on an integrated circuit,
effectively creating the first microprocessor.
But it took him two, even three years to convince his bosses at Intel that they ought to start
manufacturing these chips.
Overall, as we will see in a number of inventions, inventors often know how to do something,
how to make the device work in a technical sense, but the real challenge is to connect
that device with a need or value in society.
In these cases, the connecting line goes from being straight up to having an upward slope.
Now that you know what I mean by great inventions, let me tell you about the overall structure
of this course.
The lectures are organized roughly into thirds.
The first 12 lectures survey inventions that shape the world from the first civilizations
through to the end of the Middle Ages.
We'll look at a range of technologies, from metal tools to cathedrals, clocks, and gunpowder.
The middle third of great inventions explores the industrial revolution of the 18th and
19th centuries.
Here we'll look at both production and consumption.
On the production side, we'll consider classic inventions like the steam engine and railroads
that made it possible to manufacture more goods.
On the consumption side, we'll look at new products like canned food, indoor plumbing,
and motion pictures.
The final third of great inventions will cover the technologies that have shaped the 20th
and 21st centuries.
Here we'll consider again a mix of inventions that changed everyday life, such as television,
appliances, or the internet, as well as the systems that changed the political landscape,
like the airplane, nuclear power, or social media.
Using this sweeping survey from 8,000 B.C. to the present 10,000 years, we won't be
able to touch on every civilization.
But our goal is to give you a sense of the inventions that help define key moments in
human history.
To make sense of the diverse ways that people have used inventions to shape their lives
and their culture over the last 10,000 years, I find it helpful to think about technology
as allowing people to pursue three major functions that are essential for any society.
These are material abundance, social order, and cultural meaning.
These categories are broad enough that they allow us to compare inventions from different
cultures without privileging one culture over another.
First and foremost, humans have relied on inventions across the span of history to generate food,
the wealth, the material abundance necessary to sustain a population, and permit the development
of a distinctive culture.
To provide abundance, people use inventions that generate food, shelter, and clothing.
But there are also inventions that are new materials, such as ceramics, wood, or metal.
There are also new sources of power.
Human muscle, animals, wind, water, steam, electricity, nuclear.
There are new ways to move people and goods, transportation, and there are inventions that
people use to defend themselves or to attack other groups, weapons.
In this course, we'll look at inventions related to all of these categories.
It is the same goes, man is not lived by bread alone.
While food, shelter, and clothing are absolutely necessary for human existence, they are not
sufficient to guarantee that people will be happy or safe.
Consequently, we need to consider how people rely on inventions to achieve non-economic
goals, to order society and to give life meaning.
We're all aware that technology is more than just tools that humans use to provide food.
In many cultures, people like to have technological artifacts, be it a new model of a car or the
latest cell phone, not just because these things are practical, but because they convey messages
about who we are.
These messages can be about an individual's gender, power, social status, beliefs or emotions.
Indeed, you could argue that we only know about some of these intangible qualities when
they're manifested in the objects surrounding an individual.
As with individuals, so it is with society.
Use a simple example about social order.
We know in many cultures who the rulers are by their symbols, by their clothes, by their
palaces, as well as by the inventions they use to demonstrate power, whether it be weapons,
networks or roads or monuments.
Whether one considers the grand monuments, such as the Egyptian pyramids or the American
Space Program, one quickly realizes that humans possess technological artifacts for
non-economic reasons.
Inventions can manifest social status, provide aesthetic pleasure, structure social interactions,
and provide meaning to human existence.
Under these non-economic functions for inventions, it's necessary to ask a series of questions
about how different cultures employ technology in order to create social and political order.
These questions include, how do people use inventions to distinguish between groups by
gender and class, and to confer social status?
What artifacts are used to guide or control the behavior of individuals or groups?
How do society use inventions to deploy political power to designate leaders versus followers?
How do leaders collect information and communicate in order to coordinate the activities of their
society?
Across history, people have used inventions to create and maintain social and political
order in myriad ways.
In the Aztec civilization, just to use one example, only the ruling and warrior classes
were permitted to wear elaborate outfits fashioned from feathers.
In ancient China, the first emperor, Shi Wang-Ti, displayed his power by standardizing all aspects
of language, law, and religion.
He went so far as to place tracks on the imperial roads so as to force peasants to use carts
with a standard wheelbase.
And I would speculate that in the 21st century, our interest in information technology is
partly driven by a desire for social control, by collecting information about our citizens
and our potential enemies, as it has been to improve economic productivity.
Along with social and political order, though, we should also examine how different societies
use inventions to create meaning, to shape the beliefs and values that individuals have
about themselves and their relationship to nature and the universe.
Here we need to consider how technology interacts with the myths, religion, art, and philosophy
of a culture.
With regard to meaning, then, the questions we might ask are the following.
How do groups use inventions to illustrate and reify their worldview?
How do artifacts help groups create a sense of identity?
How do inventions reflect a group's view about the place of humans in the universe?
How do artifacts reflect notions of time and space?
What do inventions reveal about how a group addressed or tried to resolve central puzzles
or traumas?
Just to be sure that you understand what I'm driving at in talking about the relationship
between inventions and cultural meaning, let me offer one quick example, the Pyramids
of Egypt.
If you think about it, the Pyramids served no practical economic purpose.
In fact, their construction took significant numbers of workers away from the growing of
food.
Instead, the pharaohs and the people of Egypt undertook the construction of the Pyramids
in order to make manifest their beliefs about the afterlife, about heaven.
The pharaoh was willing to devote a substantial portion of his fortune to a palace that he
was going to live in the afterlife, then there must be therefore some basis to these
religious and spiritual beliefs.
The important thing about these three functions, abundance, order, and meaning, is that they
should help us discern the different ways that various societies have developed and
used inventions.
While we in the West have emphasized abundance, other cultures have used technology to achieve
a different mix of abundance, order, and meaning.
The cause of this, inventions in non-Western cultures, may look very different, even surprising
to us.
But different, I would emphasize, does not mean inferior.
Before embarking on our journey and looking at inventions across history, there are a
few ground rules I should lay out.
Yes, it's okay to chew gum while you listen to these lectures, but it's not all right
to confuse science and technology or invention with discovery.
Let me explain.
For those of us living in the 21st century, assume that new technology must spring from
scientific theory.
One of the surprising things that you'll see in this course is that many inventions have
little to do with science, and instead grow out of practical, hands-on knowledge.
One reason for why science didn't always precede invention is that science is a relatively
new thing.
The objective study of nature through observation, experiment, and measurement, what we call
science, didn't always exist.
Indeed, as we'll see in lecture 11, science itself was invented in the 1600s, partly in
response to the invention of the telescope and the microscope.
In fact, nearly all the inventions that came before 1600, new metals, crossbows, or clocks,
the result, careful observation, and the hands-on knowledge possessed by practical people.
Yet at the same time, should not assume that all inventions after 1600, after the scientific
revolution, are automatically science-based.
For the next 300 years, 1600 to 1900, most inventions came from farmers, workers, and
engineers, people who depended on the tools or the machines and who possessed a desire
to make them work better.
Indeed, science only comes into the story in the 20th century as companies needed to
innovate on a regular basis to keep factories busy.
And for that reason, they hired scientists and they organized R&D labs.
This is a story that we'll begin telling in lecture 24.
So what about the difference between discovery and invention?
Well, on one level, you might guess, and you'd be right, that discovery is what scientists
do, and invention is, well, what inventors do.
But that guess, you'd be just about on the right track.
However, behind this distinction is a deeper idea about the relationship of humans and
the universe.
One way to get at this relationship is to consider a story that Edison used to tell
to draw out the difference between discovery and invention.
According to Edison, if a man was walking along a road and he found a ring, we'd say
that the man discovered it.
However, to say that the man invented the ring, he would have had to design it and fabricate
it.
Edison's point in this story is that there are two ways of thinking about how humans
interact in the material world.
On the one hand, we can assume that the world is simply out there, structured in certain
ways and waiting to be discovered.
On the other hand, we can take the view that while there is some sort of physical world
out there, it's not very well organized, and that humans provide the structure through
reason and action.
Needless to say, philosophers, scientists, and engineers spent a great deal of time deeply
debating these views.
What I simply want to suggest here is that in great inventions, we'll be much more focused
on invention rather than discovery, on how individuals make and shape their world.
Another ground rule we should talk about is the role of genius and luck in the invention
process.
In our everyday thinking about invention, luck is often invoked as an explanation for
invention.
Charles Goodyear claimed that he learned in 1839 how to make rubber pliable and not sticky
that is to say to vulcanize it when he accidentally dropped a piece of rubber onto a hot stove,
a piece of rubber that he had been needing with sulfur.
Goodyear, however, had been studying rubber for a decade before this accident and he certainly
possessed the practical knowledge needed to recognize that the accident pointed the way
to a new process.
As the famous French scientist Louis Pasteur said, in the fields of observation, chance
favors only the prepared mind.
In other times, we explain invention by invoking the notion of genius.
A genius is a person who has exceptional intellectual ability, creativity, or originality, typically
to a degree that it results in an unprecedented achievement in fields like art or science
or technology.
All too often, however, when we talk about invention and genius, we get ourselves into
circular arguments.
We know that Leonardo da Vinci is a genius because he came up with a host of amazing
inventions like an early helicopter and an airplane.
The same time, we explain that Leonardo was able to create those inventions simply because
he was a genius.
In other words, I find that calling an inventor a genius doesn't really explain anything.
Instead, what we want to do is think about the specific talents that an inventor possesses.
Some inventors are good at manipulating things with their hands, others have a great imagination.
At the same time, we want to look at invention as an intentional activity in the sense that
an inventor is often purposely studying a device or phenomenon.
Yoshi may not have a specific goal in mind, but they are looking for something that they
can exploit.
If we go back to Tesla in his coil, we can see that he was being intentional.
He wanted to understand better the circuits devised by Hertz, and he was determined to
shape those insights into some sort of new product or business.
As we go through the lectures, I'll make a special effort to talk about the specific
ways that inventors have thought and acted so that you can see how invention is more
about purposeful action and less about luck or genius.
With these ground rules in mind about the differences between invention and science,
luck and genius, we're ready to begin our exploration of great inventions.
Over the course of this journey, I hope that you will come away with at least three things
about invention.
First, is that you will learn about both the scientific and social factors that inform
invention.
Second, is that you will come to understand the material and technological underpinnings
of different cultures across history.
Or to quote Karl Marx, you'll learn how the handmill gives you society with the feudal
lord, the steammill society with the industrial capitalist.
And third, above all, I hope you will come away with an appreciation with how the creative
human spirit manifests itself as much in great inventions as it does in art, literature and
philosophy.
