I want to start this lecture by having us consider two ordinary objects, a clay flower
pot and a screwdriver. While we take these items for granted, we don't even notice what
they are made of or think about using them. Clay pots and metal tools represent two great
inventions in human history. Both pots and metal tools allow humans to perform a number
of valuable tasks. Without pottery, humans could not store food or cook it over a fire.
As we will see with pottery, it was also possible to create both beautiful and sacred objects.
And in building on what they had learned making pottery, early humans progressed to working
copper and bronze, which gave them not only a whole range of new tools, but also jewelry,
decorative vessels and weapons. While pottery and metal tools reveal how humans, about 10,000
years ago, use their hands and their brains to make the final leap from being ape-like
to being truly human. Pottery and metal tools marked the end of the Stone Age, the start
of the development of civilization. That's one of the reasons why both of them are great
inventions. Yet another reason is to set both of these inventions. Pottery and metal tools
required significant ingenuity and hence they reveal a great deal about the nature of the
inventive process. To appreciate just how significant pottery and metal tools were in
history, it helps to have something with which to compare them. We need some context, what
came before. And so let's look for a moment at the Stone Age and the sort of tools that
early man had. The first humans appeared only about 4 million years ago and the first civilizations
began taking shape about 10,000 years ago. That stretch of time, 4 million to 10,000 years
ago, is what we generally call the Stone Age. Probably the most important thing about the
Stone Age is how long it lasted in comparison to how long humans have been civilized. If
you divide 10,000 into 4 million, you'll see that civilization with all of its inventions
only represents one quarter of 1% of the time that humans have been on the planet. In the
truly great scheme of human history, technology has really only been around for a little while.
But as we'll argue in this course, human inventiveness has been the critical, if not the decisive
factor. During this long period, the Stone Age, early humans fashioned tools out of wood,
bone and stone. Now because wood and bone tools decay and disappear, we don't know as
much about them. What archeologists and anthropologists do know about early humans comes from the
stone tools that they've been able to discover. Some of the earliest stone tools came from
the Old Iwan Valley in Africa and they date back 2 million years. These stone tools are
chipped on one side and that's done in order to create a sharp edge. Significantly, the
Old Iwan tools seem to have been the only tools that humans used for the next million
to 2 million years. Why you might ask? Well anthropologists think that because the physical
environment in Africa was so stable, there was enough food to eat and relatively few
threats to humans, that there was no need to innovate. This probably seems surprising
to us since we tend to assume that innovation should happen all the time, that change is
the normal state of human affairs. In reality, stability may be the more typical human condition.
About a million years ago, humans evolved into Homo erectus. Homo erectus had a larger
brain and it allowed humans to develop more language, social structure and technology.
The new technology came to include baskets, fences, animal skins and fire. And these inventions
helped Homo erectus to move out of Africa and into Europe and parts of Asia. Eventually,
Homo erectus began making even more sophisticated stone tools that archaeologists call echelon
tools. Echelon tools are two-sided and they're created by careful planning and working of
stone. Typically, they're made of flint or obsidian. Echelon tools reveal a close relationship
between cognitive development, the way people think, and technology. And we'll look at
this theme between cognitive development and technology more fully in a few moments with
pottery. Homo sapiens, the kind of species that we are, appeared sometime between 100,000
and 200,000 years ago. Homo sapiens appeared in Europe and Asia, but they ultimately migrated
to all parts of the world, including Australia and the Americas. Homo sapiens competed with
Neanderthals and other archaic humans for resources in their environment. So why, you
might ask, did Homo sapiens predominate? Homo sapiens didn't have a biological advantage
over the other humans. For example, Homo sapiens have about the same brain size as Neanderthals.
Instead, Homo sapiens were more effective thinkers. They were better able to plan and
organize, and they were able to adapt to the changing environment, the ice age at that
time. Homo sapiens were capable of symbolic thought, and this is illustrated in several
ways. The earliest musical instruments, such as a flute, date back to 32,000 years ago.
The cave paintings that many of us have seen come from this time period, about 25,000 years
ago. And they reveal that Homo sapiens have begun to develop a key trait of humans, the
ability to use pictures and representations to make sense of our environment. Digging
advantage of their greater capacity for thinking, Homo sapiens gradually developed into communities
so that by about 10,000 BC, we see them living in small kinship groups. They primarily were
hunters and gatherers. They were nomadic, following the game wherever it went, often
going to more plentiful places. And they began to experiment with planting seeds to grow
vegetables and grains. And Homo sapiens, by this time, possess some sort of myth, religion,
or meaning. Nevertheless, humans were dependent still on the vicissitudes of nature. If a
drought drove off the game, or ruined early farming efforts, then people would starve
and die. But while all the groups are at subsistence level, what happened next to permit a shift
to abundance? The answer I'll suggest is twofold. First, new techniques came about for
growing and processing food. And we'll talk a lot more about that in the next lecture.
Second, there was the development of a new level of technology. Technology created using
human ingenuity, and that brings us to the story of pottery and metal tools.
So let's talk about pottery. Clay occurs all over the world, and it will become hard and
brittle when it's heated in the sun or when it's placed in a hot fire. Chemists tell us
that clay is made up of tiny particles that are flat and plate-like, each of which carries
an electrical charge, and the charge causes the particles to cling together. Now the presence
of water permits the particles to slide over one another without breaking apart. Too much
water results in a formless mass, which potters call slurry, and ordinary people call mud.
While too little water makes it difficult to work the clay, any movement or pressure
may crack the clay. As the water in the clay evaporates, the clay shrinks and it becomes
hard and it becomes brittle. Because clay was widely available, the development of pottery
was probably a simultaneous invention, discovered separately by different peoples around the
world. Not all inventions, as we see, have a single inventor.
Craft of pottery involves three different activities. First, the clay has to be mixed
with water until it's soft enough to work, but stiff enough to be shaped. Next, the clay
needs to be formed into a vessel or other object. And finally, the vessel must be fired
to convert it from a plastic to a rigid condition.
The first examples of clay objects that we have are not actually pots, but rather figurines.
Around the time that early humans in Europe were producing cave paintings, again that's
about 25,000 BC, they also created small statues of women, carving them out of ivory or molding
them out of clay. Perhaps the most famous example is the Dolny Venus, that dates from
somewhere between 29,000 and 25,000 BC, and it was found in what is today the Czech Republic.
While we don't know exactly why people made these figurines, it's generally believed
that they were fertility symbols. The Venus reminds us that people use technology not
only to satisfy their economic needs, but also their spiritual needs as well.
The oldest pots that have been discovered date from about 16,000 to 17,000 BC, and they
come from a cave in the Chinese province, Hunan. Equally early pots have been found
in Japan from as early as 12,000 BC. Archeologists believe that the first pots were made in order
to store food. Whether gathering nuts or berries, fishing or growing grain, early humans sometimes
found themselves with extra food that they wished to store for a later time, to guard
against famine. At first, humans probably tried to keep the grain and dry fruit in leather
bags or woven baskets, but invariably mice would chew through these materials and consume
the food. There's some evidence that people first attempted to carve stone containers
for storing food, but this is nearly impossible to do since only stone tools were available.
Instead, humans began making containers out of artificial stone or clay. Humans may have
come to this idea by first coating baskets with clay, and if you were to visit the Deutsches
Museum in Munich, Germany, there in the collections you can see an example of a basket that was
coated in clay and comes from Africa. The earliest Japanese pots were used to preserve
fish or shellfish, and the Japanese soon discovered that they could also put the pots over a fire
and use them to cook the fish. The first pots were made by hand, probably
by making long ribbons of clay by rubbing the clay together in one's hand. This technique
was undoubtedly borrowed from an earlier textile technique whereby thread or yarn was made
by twirling fibers together. The long ribbons were then coiled on top of one another to
form the vessel, and perhaps this technique again borrowed from basket making. As we'll
see through the course, much of invention is based on thinking by analogy. Can I take
a technique or a material from one situation and apply it to another? In a later lecture,
for example, we'll see how Alexander Graham Bell developed the telephone by joining an
analogy between the human ear and the telephone transmitter.
Now once a vessel has been made out of coiled ribbons of clay, the potter would often put
his hand inside the pot, pick it up, and hold it as he or she smoothed the outside surfaces.
One of the surprising things in looking at the oldest pots at museums is how symmetrical
they are. How did they get them to be so nearly circular? In working on a vessel, the potter
would have either had to move his hands around the pot or physically move himself around
the pot. At some point, potters realized that they could move the pot instead of themselves
by placing the pot on a flat surface that could be turned on a pivot, or what we would
call a turntable. Before long, potters realized that it was advantageous to have the turntable
spin continuously, and they kept it in motion by periodically pushing it with their hands
or kicking it with their feet. Now the energy needed to shape the pot came not from their
hands, but from the momentum of the spinning wheel. The first potter's wheels appeared
in Mesopotamia around 8,000 BC, and with them, potters were able to make elegant symmetrical
designs. The potter's wheel is important because it is one of the first machines created by
humans. By calling it a machine, I want to suggest that it's an artifact used to create
other artifacts. The wheel allowed the potter to make better and more pots. But it's also
a machine in the sense of the Greek origin of the word machine, Michos, which the Greeks
used to describe a cunning device that could outwit nature. A potter's wheel is a cunning
device because the wheel allowed the potter to apply more energy to the task of making
pots, and it did so by storing energy via the momentum of the wheel. That is to say,
the wheel would have a tendency to keep spinning once it had been started. Pottery can be dried
in the sun or even in a cooking fire, but unless you bake it to a high temperature, a pot will
dissolve when it's exposed again to water. So to make a really strong pot, you need to
heat it or fire it in the range of 850 to 1300 degrees Fahrenheit. The pot then needs
to be cooled slowly in order to prevent cracking. Ancient pottery was fired in pits where the
potters could control the heat produced by the fire by using pipes to blow air into it.
However, potters soon learned to create special ovens or kilns in which the pots were stacked
inside a fire built underneath and a bellows used to stove the fire.
This is the first date from the fourth millennium of BC. While the first fuel was wood, early potters
soon discovered the charcoal burned hotter and longer. Now to make charcoal, you start by putting
together a conical pile of wood. You cover it with dirt, but leave holes at the top and the
bottom of the dirt covering, and then you ignite the wood inside. The wood burns slowly, and the
heat drives off water and various impurities, and the cellulose fibers of the wood are converted
to pure carbon. Once the charcoal inside the pile is cool, you can take it out and use it in
special applications like a kiln. Early on, potters decorated their vessels, and again this
reflects the notion that people use technology not only to get a practical job done, such as
storing food, but also to express themselves. To decorate pots, potters often did several
different things. They might press patterns onto the clay surface. They'd also coat the vessel
with a fine clay known as a slip, and that would create a smooth uniform surface. They also coated
vessels with a mineral solution that would create a glaze when fired and make the vessel
impervious to water. It also made the vessel colorful. And finally, potters could paint the
finished vessel with pigments. Like all inventions, pottery had a number of spinoffs, and I often
call those the children of pottery. To be sure, these follow-on inventions didn't come as fast as
they do today, but within a few centuries of making pots using the potter's wheel and kilns,
potters discovered a couple of things. For example, they discovered that in a really hot kiln,
some finely ground materials, such as sand or soda, which is known as natron, confused together
to become glass. And by 2500 BC, Egyptian potters were making glass objects such as beads or
figurines in their kilns. Notably, archaeologists believe that the potter's wheel contributed
to a second child of pottery. That the potter's wheel may have inspired the creation of wheeled
vehicles, and these vehicles first appeared in the Middle East between 3500 and 3000 BC and in China,
circa 2600 BC. But the wheel isn't the most important child of pottery. I'd argue that the most
important child was the development of metals. The ability to use different metals is a central
story in the history of technology. And archaeologists and historians have tended to catalog
and even rate cultures by what metals they had at their disposal. Since the Greek poet Hesiod in
the 8th century BC started the process, historians have spoken of a copper age, a bronze age, and an
iron age. However, we shouldn't take this progression of ages too literally, as various societies
mixed and matched the metals they used at different times. For example, the Egyptians had lots and
lots of copper objects, but they never had bronze tools. Equally, Indian cultures in South Asia
had a very different sequence of metallurgical development, pursuing zinc, copper, and then
jumping to iron. They relied on zinc to make brass out of copper, and Indian cultures don't seem to
have used bronze quite as much. In the ancient world, people knew about gold, silver, copper,
tin, iron, lead, zinc, and mercury. I'm going to focus here on copper and a copper alloy,
bronze, because those two metals had the biggest impact because they tell us a great deal about
the nature of invention at the dawn of civilization. Some metals fortunately occur in a pure state of
nature, and they can be found in rocks and immediately shaped and hammered into tools or jewelry.
A good example of this comes from North America, where Native Americans in Northern Michigan
found large pieces of pure metallic copper, which they shaped into ingots or objects,
which were in turn traded all over North America. Native Americans were using copper in this way
as early as 6,000 years ago. In ancient Europe, people discovered that bits of meteorites contained
iron and that those bits could be hammered into objects. Indeed, the earliest word in Greek for
iron is sidiros, meaning from the stars. And early humans found gold nuggets in streams and riverbeds.
Early on, they regarded gold as a noble and valuable metal because of its reluctance to
interact chemically, and hence, it's hard to dilute its value. Other than these three examples,
metals are almost always found mixed up chemically with other substances in rocks,
and these are known as ores. Hence, the challenge for the first metallurgists or smiths was to figure
out which ores contained a desirable metal and which were worth going to all the trouble of
heating and working. As it turns out, potters were able to help early smiths with some valuable
clues. As you may recall from a few minutes ago, we talked about how potters often decorated their
pots by grinding up pigments and then painting them onto the pots before they were fired so the
pots would come out with a colored glaze. In some cases, the potters ground up ores, and instead of
creating the desired glaze, the heat of the kiln caused the metal and the ore to melt, to be smelted.
By looking at these globs of metal on the surface of pots, smiths were able to work out which ores
contained the metals that they desired and hence pursue the most promising ones.
The story of how early potters and smiths work together in this manner is a fascinating example
of the ingenuity of early humans. Copper was the first metal to be extensively used to make tools
and copper began to be used as early as 6,000 years ago. Archeologists hypothesized that copper was
discovered when rocks of a copper-bearing ore were dropped by accident into a fire. The fire would
have caused the copper to separate and melt from the other stuff, the slag, and the remaining copper
nuggets could then be collected and shaped. It sounds like an accident, but I think the
important thing is that early humans were very observant of their surroundings and the characteristics
of materials. Close observation, as we'll see, is a hallmark of the invention process.
Early copper smiths soon realized that by repeating the process and melting the nuggets,
you could get really pure copper. The process of refining ores by heating them is something that
we now call smelting. When copper smiths melted ore initially in an open fire, they soon discovered
that they could improve their techniques by borrowing a couple of ideas from the potters.
First, they could increase the heat of the fire by using a blowpipe or a bellows. Next, they could
put the ores in a clay pot or what we now call a crucible. Both of these innovations are illustrated
by this Egyptian drawing that shows the smith working with two assistants who are standing on
animal skin bellows that they pumped with their feet. By the second millennium BC, copper smiths
further imitated potters in their kilns and created their own distinct furnaces for smelting.
An early smelting furnace has been found at Timna, which is now in modern Israel,
and was used by Egyptian coppersmiths. This early installation consisted of a hole in the ground
that was pear shaped, tapering up towards the top. Inside, it was lined with clay bricks and it was
fueled using charcoal. When the bottom of the furnace was tapped or opened, pure copper appeared
as globules that were collected and then remelted to form ingots. Some of the earliest ingots that
I've seen in museums are a solid ring and they look like they could fit around your neck,
and that probably made it easy for a trader to carry such a valuable item from one place to the next.
With the right application of heat and hammering, it's possible to make really good copper tools.
For example, the ancient Egyptians used copper to fashion chisels,
adzes, and all sorts of tools that were used to cut the stone blocks through the pyramids.
It's pretty amazing that the pyramids were built using only copper tools. However,
elsewhere in the ancient Middle East and also in China, there were further metallurgical developments.
Among the various ores being smelted for copper, some, particularly those from the
Taurus Mountains in Turkey, included small amounts of tin and arsenic, and when these melted,
it turned out that they created super copper, or what we now call bronze.
This new metal, bronze, was super for three reasons. First, when you get the right mixture of copper
and tin, say 67 to 33 percent, it melts at a lower temperature, 830 degrees centigrade,
whereas pure copper only melts at 1084 degrees centigrade. Next, once it cools,
bronze is stronger than copper, so you can make better tools. And finally, bronze is better for
casting things using molds, since the molten bronze expands slightly as it starts to cool down,
and so it fills the mold and picks up all of the details.
In other words, bronze meant that you could make stronger tools with less energy, and the fire
did not have to be so hot. That's why when I look at that picture of the Egyptian coppersmith and his
two assistants, I like to imagine that one assistant was probably saying to the boss,
hey, enough of this copper smelting. Let's make something out of bronze so I don't have to work
so hard stoking the fire with these stupid bellows. Needless to say, as soon as the super ores
ran out in the Taurus Mountains, smiths throughout Mesopotamia began puzzling about how they could
duplicate the metal that had come from these ores. Somehow, through a lot of trial and error,
the smiths figured out they could make bronze by combining copper and tin ores. Along with being
highly observant, those early smiths must have been incredibly persistent. Because bronze was so
desirable, early humans went to a lot of trouble to get the tin that they needed to make it.
While copper ores are reasonably plentiful in the Middle East and in the Mediterranean basin,
ores containing tin are much more scarce. One of the few places with lots of tin was Cornwall
in southwest England. And early on, trade routes by sea and by land were established to bring tin
to the Mediterranean. We don't know how far back Cornish tin was traded, but we do know that the
trade was in place well before 600 B.C. Early smiths also learned that depending on what you
were making, it was important to get the right ratio of copper and tin. For instance, a text from
the 5th century B.C. in China, The Artificer's Record, recommended the following. You use six
parts of copper and one part of tin for making bells and large cooking pots. You use a ratio of 5
to 2 for arrowheads and a ratio of 2 to 1 for mirrors. As this Chinese text suggests,
people found lots of uses for bronze. It wasn't just for making tools such as axes,
saws, chisels or hammers. Indeed, they quickly developed sophisticated techniques for using
molds to cast bronze into a variety of objects. For instance, by the Shang dynasty in China,
metal workers were able to create elaborate ceremonial vessels using multi-piece molds.
For me, the most important thing about early metallurgy is it reveals how early humans were
able to think and plan in terms of several complex steps. The first metal workers had to learn to
recognize different ores and their characteristics, apply the right heating techniques, smelting,
to separate the ore from the impurities. They had to figure out how to add extra ingredients to
get the desired outcome, like adding tin to copper to get bronze. And then they had to use the
appropriate technique. It might be hammering, tempering or casting to get the desired final
tool or object. Make a mistake at any of these steps or make a change and the smith would not
have gotten what he was hoping to get. In both Western and Chinese cultures, bronze had an
important social impact in that it made possible the creation of new weapons, swords and daggers,
as well as armor. Bronze was used to make breast plates for soldiers by casting and bronze sheets
were beaten to custom fit the armor to the warrior's chest. Bronze was also used to make
helmets, greaves that protect your calves, vambraces that protect your forearms. Since not
everyone could afford a sword and all of this armor, fighting became the domain of a special
class of warriors who were often sponsored by a chieftain. Now note on iron. While people in the
Middle East and China began working with copper and bronze between 4000 and 3000 BC, was at least
another thousand years before smiths started to experiment with iron. While there was lots of iron
around, iron presented two problems. First, iron has a much higher melting point. In Fahrenheit,
it's 2100 degrees and early smiths weren't able to make a furnace with a fire that was hot enough
to melt the iron. Early smelting efforts with iron involved heating iron ores to a point
where the impurities fell away and created a spongy mass that was called a bloom that was then
hammered and shaped. Second, the characteristics of iron depend very much on trace amounts of carbon.
If you have less than one tenth of one percent carbon, you have wrought iron and that's soft
and malleable. If the carbon content goes anywhere from 1.5 percent to 5 percent, you have cast iron
and that's hard and brittle. The sweet spot, steel, falls between 0.15 percent and 1.5 percent
and steel can be made strong and can have a sharp cutting edge that you achieve via tempering.
Indeed, in contrast to bronze tools, early iron tools often had to be resharpened.
Now this is not to say that iron isn't important. Once the Chinese, the Greeks, and the Romans
had figured out how to work iron, they were able to make lots of things.
But my point here is that iron belongs to a much later set of stories and it's not about the fundamental
transition from the stone age to the rise of civilizations. Furthermore, the development iron
was built upon the problem-solving techniques the first smiths worked out using copper and bronze.
So what can we learn from the potter's wheel and early metalworking?
Both of these inventions were essential for helping early humans move from a subsistence economy
to one of abundance. With new materials and new tools, people were able to produce more food
and better hunting weapons. They were also able to store the food longer in pots. Early humans
were also able to express ideas and beliefs through both the form of pottery and the form
of metal objects. And they took great pride in how they decorated these objects. Hence,
is it any wonder that in Genesis in the Bible, God made Adam out of clay, or that Moses forbade
the Israelites to worship a golden, that is to say a metal calf? Both biblical stories
underline how important pottery and metalworking were in early civilizations, and that early people
understood them to be amazing developments, almost god-like, and that these inventions were
folded into theological stories to understand who God is and what man is capable of.
Moreover, both pottery and metal tools are great inventions because they illustrate
several important aspects of human ingenuity. People often come up with important discoveries
by close observation of their surroundings, and both early potters and smiths watched and
studied how different clays and oars responded to heat and mechanical working. Inventions are often
made by analogy, by borrowing a technique from one area and applying it to another. Look at how
the wheel went from pottery to vehicles. Early metal workers were able to develop impressive
multi-step processes where they understood how decisions at one step inform subsequent outcomes.
Pick the right ore, get the right metal, and then you'll be able to shape it into the tool that you
want. A potter's wheel is perhaps the first example of a machine in that it concentrates and brings
additional energy to a task and seems to outwit nature. We'll see additional examples of cutting
devices in later lectures. My final big point about the potter's wheel and metal tools is this.
There's a long-term pattern in human history. It has been a shift from depending on nature
to depending on ingenuity, and great inventions reveal time and again how we have come to depend
on ingenuity.
