Beer, wine, distilled spirits.
Well, it's easy for us to think about these beverages simply in terms of pleasure as accoutrements
to our leisure time.
They actually constitute several great inventions in human history.
In the last lecture, we talked about how humans shifted from the Stone Age to early civilization
by using ingenuity to create new materials such as pottery and metals, and new tools
and new machines such as the potter's wheel.
But another major step in the development of human society was creating strategies for
producing more food.
Indeed, civilization grew up around the development of agriculture in several regions around the
world such as Mesopotamia and Egypt and China.
Now these strategies involve two steps.
First, converting plants into staple crops like wheat or rice or maize corn.
And second, developing ways to make these staples into foods that were tasty, safe to
eat and would last for a long time.
Truly speaking, history books cover the agricultural revolution by talking about crops and not
about talking about how the crops were preserved.
In this lecture, we'll touch briefly on the first step, plants into crops, but we'll
spend a lot more time exploring the second step, particularly in terms of the production
of beer, wine and distilled spirits, all of which were a means for preserving food.
As you'll see, beer as an invention tells us about life in ancient Mesopotamia and Egypt.
Wine is a story about Mediterranean civilizations, especially Greece, and distilled spirits
require us to jump to Europe in the Middle Ages and early modern times.
In jumping around though, you'll see that a common theme is how, like other great inventions,
these beverages provide valuable insights into how different cultures function.
Some inventions are great because they provide a unique window that opens on to the values
and practices of a society.
Now you may be surprised that we're considering beer and wine to be inventions as we tend
to associate technology with inorganic stuff like metal or coal or machines, but indeed
human civilization has depended on harnessing organic materials like plants and animals.
As any attentive TV-watching couch potato knows, beer is made out of barley, a grain,
hops, which provides the yeast for fermentation and water.
Wine, of course, is made from grapes.
Hence, before we can talk about the processes for making these beverages, it helps to know
about the origins of the ingredients.
How do people come to have the grain and grapes needed for these drinks?
This means we need to do a whirlwind tour of what historians call the agricultural revolution,
answering the questions, what, when, why, and where.
So what was this thing that historians call the agricultural revolution?
It's a number of different ideas that surround it.
First and foremost, it was a shift in human societies from a subsistence economy having
just enough to eat to one capable of producing abundance, lots of food.
The agricultural revolution was also about domesticating wild animals and plants and
converting them into livestock and crops.
The agricultural revolution was also all about having only one-tenth of 1% of the plants
on an acre be edible.
That's the situation in Hunting and Gathering Society, to having 90% of the plants on an
acre be edible.
And that means that an agricultural society can feed 10 to 100 times more people.
By the way, the agricultural revolution really wasn't a revolution in the sense that it
was a sudden change.
Instead, it was really more of an evolution taking hundreds, if not thousands of years.
Nevertheless, it was revolutionary in that the agricultural revolution dramatically changed
human history.
Okay, you say.
So why did this revolution take place?
It actually occurred in about half a dozen different cultures around the world, ranging
from the Fertile Crescent in modern-day Iraq to China to Central and South America.
The dates range from 8,500 B.C. for the Fertile Crescent to 3,500 B.C. for Central America.
And now you might ask, we have any ideas why the agricultural revolution took place?
Historians and anthropologists have several speculations.
First, there probably was a decline in the wild plants and animals that were available
for people to eat in each of these regions.
At the same time, there was an increase in selected areas of plants that could be domesticated.
And as we saw in the last lecture, people were already inventing tools for processing
and preserving food, things like baskets, pots, sickles, mortars, and pestles.
But probably the most important factor in my mind, at least, is that there was an ever-so-slight
rise in population, making increasing food production a highly desirable thing.
I often think the following little situation in my mind when I make that point, consider
an early couple, early man and early woman.
And the early woman comes into the cave and she says, guess what, honey, we're having
another baby.
And the early man goes, oh my god, how am I going to feed this kid?
What made the agricultural revolution happen, again, in my opinion, is there's a positive
feedback cycle.
There was a little more food, there was a little more population, i.e., more babies,
and as a result, there had to be more agricultural innovation.
So why was the furlough crescent so important?
Why do we always emphasize that in the history books?
Well, around 10,000 BC, at the end of the Ice Age, the area that's known as Mesopotamia
and the furlough crescent acquired, it's called a Mediterranean climate.
And that favored plants that grew quickly, and plants that grow quickly are desirable
for an agricultural revolution because they put energy into the seeds for reproduction
and not into the woody stalks, can't eat the woody stalks.
Now, included in all of these plants were things like wild wheat, barley, and peas.
All of those were available in a natural form in the furlough crescent and they were already
edible and they gave high yields.
Jared Diamond, in his famous book, Gun, the Germs, and Steel, argues that 32 of the 56
wild grasses that can be domesticated in the world were found in the furlough crescent.
And that means that there were lots of wheat-like plants that could be selectively breeded and
converted into grain crops.
Now, you might ask, what became of fruit trees?
Where did those come from?
They came much later after 4000 B.C. and they include olives, figs, grapes, and pomegranates.
Those were the first fruits to be cultivated.
If I had more time, I'd tell you a parallel story about how humans identified a number
of animals through selective breeding and those animals became our farmyard livestock, chickens,
pigs, and cows.
So the big news about the agricultural revolution is that people in the furlough crescent and
elsewhere in the world figured out, over the course of centuries, how to grow lots
of grain, lots of vegetables, lots of fruit.
And the challenge became how to preserve this bountiful harvest for the winter months and
create a reserve against famine.
As we saw, pottery was a good way to store grain and dry fruits, but people also needed
ways to preserve these foodstuffs that were tasty.
And that brings us to beer.
Beer is one of the oldest beverages that humans have produced and it dates back to at least
5000 B.C. and it's mentioned in the earliest written records of ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia.
One of the ways that early humans cooked grain was to boil it in some water.
It was nice and thick, it would be porridge, thin, it would be gruel.
By the way, if you take the porridge and spread it out on a hot stone in the sun, it'll bake
into a sort of a flatbread.
Now I don't know about you, but neither the porridge nor this flatbread sounds very tasty.
Fortunately, grains like wheat and barley have two magical characteristics.
First, you soak the grain in water and let it sprout, it starts to taste sweet.
This happens because the moistened grains release enzymes which convert the starch into
grain, the starch in the grain into maltose sugar or malt.
Given that humans have taste buds for sweetness and that there weren't very many sweet tasting
things around, people must have really liked this maltose grain.
In response, early people developed deliberate techniques for soaking and drying the grain
to malt it.
Because barley gives off the most maltose sugar, early people focused on that grain.
Second, if early people let a gruel of malted barley sit around for a few days, they found
it became a little fizzy.
And indeed, when you consumed it, you became pleasantly intoxicated.
The result was the, or this came about as the result, wild yeast in the air, which caused
the sugar in the gruel to ferment and become alcohol.
Based on these two characteristics, beer was born.
Maybe brewers realized that if you boiled the gruel, additional enzymes were activated
at higher temperatures.
More of the sugar in the malted grain was released, thus providing more sugar to be
converted into alcohol.
Okay, so maybe brewers in Mesopotamia didn't talk about enzymes, but they did lots of experimentation,
figured out how to improve the process.
We again see how people in ancient times were observant and ingenious, making accidental
discoveries work for them.
By carefully choosing the grain, adjusting how long you boiled the brew and let it sit,
adding honey, fruit, nuts for flavoring, brewers came up with all sorts of different kinds
of beer.
Egyptian records list at least 17 kinds of beer.
And they had phrases to describe these beers that sound almost like they come from modern
beer ads, the beautiful and the good, the heavenly, the joybringer.
About the brewers in Mesopotamia in Egypt were very particular about the mash tubs that
they used to make beer, and they held onto the ones that worked well.
This was because repeated use of the same tub caused some yeast cultures to take up residents
in the cracks and crevices of the tub, and the brewers didn't have to rely on wild yeasts
floating around in the air.
It wasn't until the Middle Ages in Europe that brewers began adding yeast that was derived
from the hops plant.
Because almost any cereal containing certain sugars can undergo spontaneous fermentation
due to wild yeasts in the air, it's not surprising that beer-like beverages were developed independently
by different groups around the world.
Now the main advantage of beer was that it provided a tasty way for people to consume
the calories that were available in the large amounts of grain produced by the agricultural
revolution.
In ancient Egypt, crops were converted into both bread and beer, so that the average Egyptian
diet was largely a combination of those two items.
The workers who built the pyramids at Giza were issued a daily ration consisting of three
or four loaves of bread and two jugs, about eight American pints of beer.
Indeed the hieroglyphic symbol for food was a combination of the symbols used for bread
and beer.
To preserve barley for use in times of famine, the Mesopotamians not only stored grain in
government warehouses, but they also baked sprouted barley into hard cakes that were called
bapyr.
The bapyr would keep for years and it could be crumbled and mixed with water to make beer.
Like other alcoholic beverages, beer had an important health advantage in that the alcohol
kills dangerous bacteria so that beer is safer to drink than ordinary water.
Much like today, beer was consumed by ancient peoples as a social beverage.
Early images from Mesopotamia show people sipping beer from a clay jar using straws.
The straws were needed to avoid the straw and grain and other stuff floating around in the
brew.
But consuming it this way was also highly social.
We were sharing a common drink and it signaled it to whoever offered the beer, drank it with
you and that they could be trusted.
To this day, we still demonstrate trust and friendship by consuming beverages from a common
vessel, be it a teapot or a wine bottle or a keg of beer.
In ancient Mesopotamia, everyone from the top officials and high priests down to the
lowest workers and both men and women consumed beer as a part of their daily diet.
Compared to what we'll learn in a moment about wine, beer was from the start an unpretentious
egalitarian drink.
Much like today, beer was the drink for every man.
Since beer played such an important role in daily life in Mesopotamia, we shouldn't be
surprised that beer turns up everywhere in the earliest written records.
Canea-formed tablets were used by temple priests and officials to record all of the taxes paid
by the people, number of bushels of grain, or the animals that they contributed, as well
as the goods that were distributed back to the people, goods such as beer.
Indeed, beer was sufficiently important to Mesopotamian and Egyptian cultures that it
was regarded as a gift from the gods and figured in many myths and stories.
One of my favorite and one of the most revealing is the epic of Gilgamesh, in which the consumption
of beer is shown to be one of the means by which a character, Enkidu, is converted from
a wild man to a civilized being.
In the story, Enkidu is brought by a young woman to a village where, and I quote, they
placed food in front of him, they placed beer in front of him, Enkidu knew nothing about
eating bread for food, and of drinking beer he had not been taught.
The young woman spoke to Enkidu saying, eat the food Enkidu, it is the way one lives,
drink the beer as is the custom of the land.
Enkidu ate the food until he was sated.
He drank the beer, seven jugs, and became expansive and sang with joy.
He was elated in his face glowed, he splashed his shaggy body with water and rubbed himself
with oil and turned into a human.
Overall, beer was an invention that changed history by providing a means for preserving
the calories and staple crops that could be consumed at a later time.
In so doing, beer played a role in sustaining a larger population in agriculturally based
societies and allowed them to grow to be stronger than hunting gathering groups.
Since wine involves different ingredients for fermentation, grapes instead of grain,
we shouldn't be surprised that its history is different than that of beer.
In particular, from almost the beginning, wine was not just a beverage, but a means
by which people made political and social statements.
Wine is also a great invention because it shows us how the economies in the Middle East
and the Mediterranean evolved in the first millennium BC.
Wine is simply the fermented juice of crushed grapes.
All yeasts in the grape skins cause the sugars in the juice to become alcohol.
Like beer, wine was safer to drink than water, and winemaking was also a way of preserving
fruit.
It's plausible that early hunting and gathering groups made wine from wild fruit, including
grapes.
But since wild grapes are small and sour, additional innovations were necessary, such as finding
better grapes to use, such as Vitus vinifera vinifera, which are the grapes we now use
for making wine.
Another innovation was figuring out how to add yeast and a little extra sugar to aid
the fermentation process.
And finally, was desirable to have pottery jars in which the wine could be stored while
it was fermenting.
The earliest wine grapes are believed to have originated in modern-day Georgia, located in
the south of Russia, and from there they spread across the Middle East.
Winemaking, as far as we know, baits back to at least 5,400 BC.
Based on the discovery of a reddish residue, the bottom of fermentation jars found in the
Zagros Mountains, which are today modern-day Armenia and Northern Iran.
Coincidentally, this is the region where the Bible says Noah's Ark came to rest after
the flood, and one of the first things that Noah did after he came off the Ark was to
have planted a vineyard.
From the Zagros Mountains, knowledge of how to make wine spread west into Greece and Turkey
and south into Syria, Lebanon and Israel, and Lebanon and Israel are known as the Levant,
and ultimately to Egypt.
By 3150 BC, one of the earliest pharaohs, Scorpion I, was buried with 700 jars of wine
imported at a great expense from the Levant.
Initially, grapevines were grown intertwined with fig and olive trees and alongside fields
of barley and wheat.
Since few grapes were grown and winemaking is a finicky process, wine was expensive and
it was reserved as a luxury drink for the rich and powerful.
For example, the Assyrian king, Asher Nasser Paul II, who ruled from 883 to 859 BC, consumed
wine and served it as feasts as a way of demonstrating the wealth and power of his empire.
This image right here shows the great king consuming wine and he's doing so holding
a little bowl, which was the drinking vessel.
The importance and the value of the wine was emphasized by the fact that he only had
this little bowl to consume the wine in.
So while wine became fashionable and available in Mesopotamia, transportation costs kept
it high and limited the consumption to the rich.
In Assyria, wine was grown in the northern regions but consumed in the cities to the
south.
To get wine to the market, it often had to travel by ox cart over rough roads.
Although high transportation costs limited the production in societies taking shape around
the eastern Mediterranean.
By taking advantage of the fact that it cost less to move goods on a ship at sea than overland
in an ox cart, several societies, such as the Greeks, developed wine into a major product.
As Greek merchants and sailors improved their ships, galleys, which we'll talk about in
another lecture, they were able to reach more ports than larger markets.
For example, one shipwreck off southern France contained 10,000 amphorae, the equivalent
of 333,000 modern wine bottles.
Greek winemakers made a number of improvements to wine production.
They planted vines in neat rows and on trellises to ease pruning and harvesting.
And that way they also got more vines into less space.
They modified the wine press in order to get more juice out of the grapes.
They worked to create distinctive wines from each region and each vineyard.
It's an example of early product branding.
And they perfected the clay amphorae for shipping vast quantities of wine all over the Mediterranean.
Now while Greek farmers initially grew grain, olives and grapes, the demand for wine in
Greek cities and elsewhere across the Mediterranean prompted some farmers to focus exclusively
on wine production with the result that selected city-states, such as Attica, had to import
grain in order to feed vineyard workers.
Making the shift from subsistence to commercial farming was highly appealing because by one
estimate farmers could earn up to 20 times more money by cultivating vines as opposed
to growing grain.
Wine production had become sufficiently important that in the city-state of Athens, property-owning
citizens were classified according to their vineyard holdings.
The highest class held 25 or more acres, the middle two classes held 15 or 10 acres, and
the lowest class were those that held less than seven acres.
More than just being the central underpinning of the ancient Greek economy, wine played
an important additional role in Greek life.
For the Greeks, wine represented civilization.
They were civilized because they drank wine as opposed to those barbarians in the East,
Persian, Mesopotamia, who merely drank beer.
Wine measured in terms of vineyard holdings where the size of one's wine cellar conveyed
not only economic clout but social prestige.
The Greeks judged each man in terms of what kind of wine he drank and how much he knew
about different vintages.
For the Greeks, an indicator of virtue was whether a man could steadily consume wine
and not become an obnoxious drunk.
To help achieve this balance, Greeks always insisted on drinking wine mixed with water.
As Escalus, the Greek poet once said, bronze is the mirror of the outward form, wine is
the mirror of the mind.
The Greeks believed in debating ideas, whether it be political ideas in democracy, competing
scientific theories, or dialogues between philosophers.
Much of this debating, political or scientific or philosophical, took place over wine at
special parties known as symposium.
During these parties, wine was seen as the necessary lubricant to loosen the tongue
and allow people to speak freely.
As the philosopher Orassini said in the third century BC, wine reveals what is hidden.
To do so, the host of a symposium would carefully monitor the consumption of wine, striving
to creep the group between sober and drunk, relaxed but able to engage in witty conversation.
Needless to say, this wasn't always easy to do, and symposia all too often deteriorated
into arguments, brawls, orgies, and even rampages on the streets.
Symposium shows how wine came to be associated with social standing and the life of the mind
in European culture.
One enduring example of this symposium is the modern middle class dinner party, where
wine is frequently served and the choice reflects the social and economic status of the host
who serves it.
Let's turn and talk about distilled spirits.
The story of alcoholic beverages like brandy, vodka, or gin grows out of beer and wine,
and it requires us to make a jump of nearly 1500 years from the Greeks to Spain in the
8th century.
Spirits are alcoholic beverages that contain ethanol.
The ethanol is produced by fermenting fruit or grain, and then the alcohol is concentrated
by using a chemical process known as distillation.
Distillation is a method for separating liquid mixtures by taking advantage that different
liquids have different boiling points.
As one heats a mixed liquid, the fluids with the lower boiling point will vaporize sooner
and can be captured with an appropriately designed container.
Since alcohol boils at 78 degrees centigrade and water at 100 degrees centigrade, it's
possible to slowly heat the mixture of alcohol and water and draw off the alcohol first.
Although devout Muslims do not consume alcohol, we have to thank a Muslim scholar, Jabir Abin
Hayan, from the 8th century for distillation.
Although Greek scientists in Alexandria in the 2nd century AD knew how to purify water
using distillation, Ibn Hayan studied and perfected the process.
Using a clay vessel with a long neck known as an alembic, Ibn Hayan slowly heated wine
and captured its essence as its first vapors boiled and traveled inside a long neck and
then cooled.
Show you what he was working with.
Let me show you a modern alembic.
What we have here is a vessel where the wine would have been put in, and then we have the
cooling or the distillation apparatus here.
So if you had a fire down here and you boiled the wine slowly, it would come up, the vapors
would come up, follow down this long neck, and then you'd have some cold water inside
this little bucket, and you have a series of tubing, and as the vapors came down there,
they would begin to cool and condense, and eventually the condensate would come out here.
As a result of his experiments, Ibn Hayan is regarded as one of the fathers of chemistry.
The modern alembic, which we often see as a distinctive round glass vessel with the
long neck, is still often used as a symbol for chemistry.
Through the Middle Ages, distillation was studied by alchemists, scholars who hoped
to turn lead into gold and find the elixir of life.
Hoping to discover the essence of life, alchemists found distillation to be an attractive and
compelling technique.
Impressed that this new clear liquid that came out of the distillation process would
burn if it was ignited, some alchemists called it burning water.
Building on the ideas of alchemists, doctors in the 12th century prescribed distilled wine
as a cure for a variety of ailments.
As Arnold of Villanova, a professor in the medical school at Montpelier, France proclaimed
around 1300, the true water of life will come over in precious drops, which being rectified
by three or four successive distillations will afford the wonderful quintessence of wine.
We call it aquavite, and this name is remarkably suitable since it is really a water of immortality.
It prolongs life, clears away ill humors, revives the heart, maintains youth.
This quote we see that alchemists had made a further discovery that you could increase
the concentration by passing the liquid through several times a process known as rectification.
Since even the hardiest yeasts that are used to ferment wine cannot survive in an alcohol-rich
environment, the upper limit for alcohol content in wine is about 15%.
Rectification allowed distillers to overcome this limit and create really strong drinks,
the hard stuff.
Today, the alcohol content of liquor is denoted by proof, and 80-proof gin is 40% alcohol by
volume, whereas 150-proof rum would be 75% alcohol.
Aquavite involved into a variety of distilled beverages in the 1400s, thanks in part to
the printing press.
Along with the Bible and other religious books, one of the first popular volumes was a guide
to distilling, which was written by an Austrian doctor, Michael Puff von Schrick.
First published in 1478, von Schrick's guide went through 14 editions before 1500.
Consumption of distilled drinks rose dramatically in Europe in the mid-14th century, when they
were commonly used as remedies for the Black Death.
In northern Europe, where wine was scarce, people learned to distill barley mash, which
was normally used to brew beer.
The Gaelic word for aquavite is juseig bethe, and somehow that became the modern word whisky.
Elsewhere, local people learned to continue to distill wine, which in German was called
bronthien, and in English brandywine, and subsequently that was shortened to brandy.
Europeans continued to experiment with distillation, often taking advantage of surplus crops.
In place during the early modern era, when nation states were forming, many of these
new beverages came to be associated with particular nationalities.
For England, it was gin, and Germany, it was schnapps.
For Italy, it was grappa.
Scandinavians took pride in their aquavite, and in Russia, of course, it was vodka.
Rum, by the way, was first made from the waste products produced on sugar plantations in
the Caribbean during the 1600s.
Since rum could be stored for long periods on board ships, soon replaced the standard
beer ration given to sailors in the Royal Navy.
To make the rum more palatable, sailors began adding lime juice or sugar to create grog,
which is indeed the first cocktail.
So how did all of these inventions change the world?
Not only are beer, wine, and distilled spirits something that we still enjoy, there are also
great examples of people learning to deliberately manipulate chemical and biological processes
in order to get a particular outcome, that is an alcoholic beverage.
We've seen that people have been deliberately manipulating these organic processes for thousands
of years, beginning even before the civilizations of Mesopotamia and Egypt.
These beverages remind us that technology is not just about the inorganic, but also
the organic.
To be sure, all three beverages have served the purpose of capturing and preserving the
nutritional value of grains and fruit.
Beer was especially important as a means of converting the calories of grain into a tasty
foodstuff.
The same time, though, we've seen that people didn't necessarily produce these beverages
for practical reasons.
Sometimes a brewed beer made wine and distilled liquor for centuries because these beverages
have facilitated social interactions, served as status symbols, and were thought at times
to cure illnesses.
Beer, wine, and liquor are great inventions that remind us how humans use things to shape
social order and convey cultural meanings.
Here's to inventions being more than just about necessity.
