The
galley, as many of you know, is the kind of ship that Greeks and Romans use for both trade
and warfare on the Mediterranean and ancient times.
Now I want to start this lecture not by talking about the history of ships right away, but
rather the concept of infrastructure.
Cultures as I've suggested use inventions to do a number of different things.
First and foremost, inventions are a way for creating material abundance, like growing
and preserving food.
Inventions also are a way of establishing social order, like using wine to convey wealth,
power, and status.
Inventions can also be used to convey cultural meanings.
For instance, the Egyptians use the phrase beer and bread to denote prosperity.
In the previous lectures, we've seen how societies pursued abundance, order, and meaning primarily
by using inventions to make more and better goods, and care of how bronze tools were preferable
to copper tools.
Inventions, however, are used not only to increase the quantity and quality of life,
but to facilitate the economic, social, and intellectual interaction of groups of people.
Think here of how Assyrians used ox carts and rafts to ship wine from vineyards to consumers
in the city.
Collectively, engineers and economists call all of the technology used to move goods or
resources or people as infrastructure.
Sure, it could be hard to think of as an ox cart as infrastructure, as being the same thing
as telecommunications, but both do the same thing, both carry information from one place
to another.
In one case, it might be the messenger riding in a cart, and in the other, it could be an
email message flying through the network.
As we will see, infrastructure inventions are a mix of material things, like ox carts
or wired networks, as well as practices, such as alphabets, money, Morse code, or the packet
switching protocols that underlie the Internet.
In this lecture, we will begin looking at the first inventions that revolutionize the
infrastructure of the ancient world, namely the ship, coins, and the alphabet.
It was these infrastructure inventions that allowed trade to flourish in the ancient Mediterranean
and ideas to spread.
To tell the story of these three inventions, a good place to start is with the origin of
ships.
We don't really know how boats and ships were invented as they date back tens of thousands
of years.
Yet, it's clear that ancient people migrated to various places, for example from Southeast
Asia to Australia, by using boats and rafts.
We have no idea what kind of vessels they created to make these ocean-going trips.
All we know is that ancient people somehow crossed 50 or 60 miles of open sea to get
from a place like South Asia to Australia.
From an archaeological standpoint, the earliest boats that have been found are dugouts, dating
from about 8,000 BC, and they were discovered in prehistoric Holland and Scotland.
Dugouts were made by hollowing out a large log.
People in the Pacific developed their own dugouts and improved them by adding outwears.
Direct with sails and paddles, people in the Pacific used these outrigger boats to populate
islands all the way from New Zealand to Hawaii.
Well over a third of the surface of the world was explored and colonized using these sort
of dugout boats.
In ancient Egypt, rafts and boats were essential for moving people and goods up and down the
Nile.
Early images show that the Egyptians shaped boats out of bundles of papyrus that were
tied at the bow and the stern.
By 3100 BC, tomb paintings show that the papyrus bundles had been replaced by wood and a square
sail had been added.
Early on, the Egyptians came up with oars for rowing.
The Egyptians fashioned their boats by building the shell of the hull first and adding a frame
or ribs to strengthen it.
The shell was created by fastening planks together with using twine or rope.
Curiously, since the Egyptians lacked lots of tall trees to make long planks, they used
shorter pieces of wood which they joined together using dovetail joints.
As the Greek historian Herodotus, who seems to have traveled everywhere in the ancient
world observed, Egyptian boat builders work like masons who assembled a wall by laying
courses of brick.
With ships like these, Egyptians not only sailed in the Red Sea to ancient Israel in
order to get copper, but they also traveled to Crete and Syria.
Now, if you've ever been in a canoe, which is based on another prehistoric boat built
first by Native Americans, you know how easy it is to tip over a canoe.
This is because canoes lack a keel on the bottom of the boat.
The weight of the keel adds to the stability of the hull as well as to its strength.
The origins of the keel is one part of the story about the evolution of ships that seems
to be a complete mystery.
On the one hand, Egyptian boats don't seem to have one, but centuries later Venetian
and Greek ships do.
Some maritime experts conjecture that the keel evolved from dugouts and that the keel represents
a blending of several boat building traditions.
For me, though, a keel is probably also the confluence of two other factors.
One of those factors is economic, in the sense that societies in the Near East were moving
away from state-run economies to economies built on trade.
The other factor is environmental, and that ships were shaped to suit the new environment
of sailing on the Mediterranean as opposed to sailing on rivers like the Nile.
In other words, it seems to me that as one ventured further out into the Mediterranean,
away from the coast, away from rivers, it would become very important to have a stable ship
lest you lose your cargo by capsizing in a storm.
And a keel is essential for stability at sea.
So let's first talk about the origins of trade in the Mediterranean basin and then begin
to talk about the origins of the galley.
For trade, we need to go back and talk for a moment about river valley civilizations.
In Mesopotamia and Egypt, the agricultural surplus that was grown by the peasants was
controlled and distributed by king and bureaucrats.
Moreover, the king controlled trade between his state and other nations.
However, in the ancient Mediterranean, around about 1800 to 1500 BC, the dominance of Egyptian
rulers was disrupted by an invasion of several groups from the north that were called, in
Egyptian chronicles, peoples of the sea.
We're not really sure who these people are, but they certainly caused a lot of mayhem.
Over the next five centuries or so, the peoples of the sea and different cultures in eastern
Mediterranean established themselves as having their own distinct societies.
They relied on unique resources and skills that they possessed, and they traded with
each other.
Here are some examples.
The Greeks, as we noted in the last lecture, specialized in shipping wine and olive oil,
both of which could be packaged and moved around the Mediterranean in clay vessels known
as emphorum.
In contrast, the Minoans on Crete had obsidian for making sharp tools, and the Phoenicians
had a purple dye, which was made from rotting snails that was found in their homeland in
modern-day Lebanon, and they also had cedar from the Lebanese cedar trees.
To facilitate this trade, all of these groups gradually contributed to wooden ships, generally
known as galleys.
And these were ships that were designed to suit the conditions of the Mediterranean.
Galleys are ships that are generally longer in length and narrower in width, and in maritime
terms width on a ship is always called the beam.
And these ships were narrower than the ships that were produced later by Europeans for
sailing on either the Baltic Sea in northern Europe or on the Atlantic Ocean.
Now galleys could be long and narrow, because the waves of the Mediterranean are not as
tall as you would find on the Atlantic, where you need a short, fat ship to survive the
pitching waves in storms, waves that can pick up the bow and slam it down.
It also made sense for galleys to be long, since they were powered by both sails and
rowers.
More rowers equaled greater speed, and you got more rowers if you increased the length
of the ship.
Traditionally, Phoenicians are credited with being the first to combine rowers and sails
on a galley, but our knowledge of Phoenician culture is so limited that it's hard to be
sure about this.
Broadly speaking, there were two kinds of galleys.
First there were warships, which were really long and narrow, because they had lots of
rowers, maybe even two or three levels of oarsmen in order to have the speed needed for
maneuvering in battle.
A two-level ship was a bi-ream, and a three-level ship was a tri-ream.
Warships attacked each other by ramming one another so they were equipped in the bow with
a ram hidden just below the waterline.
In addition, there were freighters.
Freighters were generally wider in the beam than warships, so they could carry more cargo.
Since oarsmen, even if they were slaves, were expensive, and speed was not quite as important
in shipping freight.
Persian ships tended to have fewer rowers and to have relied more on sails.
By the 8th century BC, a bi-ream might well be 25 meters in length, displace 15 tons, and
be equipped with 25 pairs of oars on two levels.
In all likelihood, the oarsmen provided power as the galley was entering and leaving port,
and the sails were used as much as possible during the main portion of the journey.
This meant that there was reserve manpower for storms, emergency situations, or battles.
While the wind in the Baltic and the Atlantic blows more or less continuously year-round,
though in different directions, the wind in the Mediterranean can disappear for weeks
on end, creating the summer doldrums.
In that situation, it also makes sense to have both sails and oarsmen on board.
In terms of sails, we traditionally picture a galley with just one big square sail, and
that would have been made of canvas or leather, and we assume that it could only sail in one
direction, namely, following the wind from behind the ship.
However, the main sail was often hung from a boom that could be shifted from side to
side on the mast, so the galley could gain a few degrees sailing into the wind.
Galleys also sometimes had a smaller square force sail to increase their speed.
Modern boat builders continue to build the galley, the hulls of galleys, in the same
way as the Egyptians did, by creating the shell first and then adding the ribs.
Doing so seems to have created a flexible long hull that would have functioned well
with rolling waves in the Mediterranean, and the waves would have come at the ship from
all sides.
Think here of a long rectangular box with the ends cut off.
You can twist the box from side to side, but not break it.
That was what the Mediterranean shipbuilders were thinking about.
To make the shell even stronger, boat builders assembled it using wooden pegs and sealed
it with pitch or pine tarp.
They also built ships, caravelle style, with each plank carefully fitted to the one above
it.
In contrast, later northern European ships were built clinker style with the planks overlapping
one another.
By the way, there were warships, there were freighters, and there were no passenger ships.
If you were a passenger and you had to travel in the Mediterranean, you would arrange to
go on a freighter, hoping to find one that was going to the destination you were seeking.
And unless you were very prominent, in which case you got to sleep in the captain's quarters
in the after the galley, most passengers slept outside on the main deck.
My main point here in talking about the details of the galley is that ancient boat builders
shaped the galley in all sorts of ways that made it work well for the environment in which
it operated, namely the Mediterranean.
While the earliest galleys were initially shallow-draft and could be pulled up on a beach, the growth
of trade prompted Greeks to build progressively bigger vessels.
They referred to these bigger freighters as myroof, meaning ten-thousanders, and ten-thousand
referred to the number of amphorae the ship could carry.
Bigger ships, though, meant building ports where ships could either anchor safely inside
a harbor or come up to a dock, and a great deal of Greek and later Roman civil engineering
was devoted to creating piers, caves, artificial harbors, and masonry jetties.
A good example is the ancient harbor in Alexandria, and that was completed by the 4th century
BC and included the famous first lighthouse.
Other impressive ports were at Perius and Antioch.
To build all of this port infrastructure, Roman engineers perfected hydraulic cement,
which, when it was once set, could be submerged under water and would still remain strong.
While the ancient world relied on galleys to move goods and people, the growth of trade
also depended on developing several related practices, the invention of currency and the
alphabet, and these, too, were carried across the world by galleys.
For thousands of years, economic transactions were essentially barter.
If you had some pots that I wanted and I possessed some pigs that you liked, then we
would trade, haggling over how many pots was worth a pig.
However, supposing you wanted to buy one of my pigs, but I didn't want any of your pots,
how then might we strike a deal?
The solution is that we would need an intermediary good that we both could agree has value.
That's what currency is.
Those metals, such as gold, silver, and copper, were relatively rare in ancient civilizations.
Because they didn't lose value, like my pig dying or your pots cracking, they seemed
to be good candidates to serve as intermediary goods.
By 2500 B.C., Egyptian merchants were conducting transactions by using standard-sized copper
rings.
By 2000 B.C., rulers in Cappadocia and Central Turkey issued the first state currency in
the form of silver ingots.
Our good friend Herodotus tells us that there were coins by 687 B.C. and that they were
introduced by the Lydians, another group in ancient Turkey.
Lydian coins were made out of electrum, a naturally occurring compound of gold and silver.
Coins proved popular with traders because they were easy to carry and could always be
melted down for the metal that they contained.
People of course quickly figured out that you could always shave off a small amount of
metal and trade that separately.
To prevent that shaving, Greeks and Romans added a raised edge to their coins so that
any tampering would be immediately apparent.
As another form of infrastructure, coins greatly facilitated trade between different societies
not only around the Mediterranean, but even further afield.
Large hordes of silver coins from Rome have been found in archaeological digs as far away
as northern India.
Although we don't necessarily think of the alphabet as a technology per se, the alphabet
is nonetheless an important, non-tangible piece of infrastructure.
Just as the galley allowed people and goods to move from one place to another, so the
alphabet, a common set of symbols representing sounds, plays an important role in moving
ideas from one person to another.
The Sumerians developed the first writing system, Keneaform, to keep track of transactions
that took place between the king and his subjects.
Keneaform was a pictographic system, with little pictures being scratched on the surface
of soft clay tablets.
Over time, these little pictures became more abstract, probably as bureaucrats rushed to
get through the large number of transactions that needed to be recorded, and also because
only the bureaucrats needed to go back and review the records.
The Egyptians had a similar pictograph system called hieroglyphs.
Most of us are familiar with the hieroglyphs that are carved into stone monuments or on
tombs, with the symbols realistically represent the idea or object.
You're probably less familiar with the fact that the Egyptians scribes developed by the
3rd century BC a more abstract form of hieroglyphs, called demotic hieroglyphs, that was better
suited for writing quickly using ink and papyrus.
And while it's feasible to create a pictographic system under authoritarian rule of an emperor
or the pharaoh, and that's because the emperor can insist that everyone use the same symbol
to mean the same thing, an empire is not necessarily the best place to experiment with creating
a new writing system.
Instead, the next new writing system turned up in the political and geographic space between
the Egyptian and Mesopotamian empires, namely the Levant.
That is today Israel, Lebanon, and Syria.
For many years, scholars believed that the first alphabetic scripts could be traced to
about 1500 BC and that they were created by the Phoenicians, a trading society based on
the coast of Lebanon, and that the Phoenicians were not particularly influenced by, say,
Egyptian hieroglyphs.
However, a discovery in 1999 of two inscriptions that were really kind of a form of graffiti
in Egypt changed that view.
Written in what seems to be a hybrid of demotic hieroglyphs and a proto-alphabet, these inscriptions
were produced by the Semitic-speaking people then living in Egypt.
Based on this finding, scholars now push the origins of the alphabet back to 1900 and 1800
BC.
The transition from a pictographic to a phonetic or sound-based alphabet seems to have taken
two steps, one barring from canaeiform and the other from hieroglyphs.
Writers first reduce the number of abstract symbols in the system.
For example, the euguritic script used during the 14th century and what's today modern-day
Syria employed 30 simplified canaeiform signs.
At the same time, another alphabetic system emerged that was influenced by hieroglyphs.
Called the proto-Sanitic alphabet, it consisted of pictographs in which each pictograph represented
the sound of a consonant rather than a thing or an idea.
Hebrew is a direct descendant of these early alphabets since it doesn't have any vowels
in its system.
Use the Phoenicians who pulled together these two steps to create the modern alphabet where
a limited set of symbols or letters are used to represent the sound of words.
Why you might ask, did the Phoenicians pull this off?
The Phoenicians were traders who created a loose empire of city-states across the Mediterranean
with colonies not only in Lebanon but Africa, Spain and Sicily.
Carthage is probably the best known of the Phoenician colonies.
To facilitate trade with people in all of these places, traders needed a writing system
that was quick and easy to read.
But more to the point of our story, the Phoenicians carried the alphabet in their galleys and
they introduced it to other groups in the region who in turn adapted it to their own needs.
Although the earliest Greek inscriptions date back to the 8th century BC, which was also
about the time of the first Olympic games.
The Olympic games were first held in 776 BC.
Most scholars think that the Greeks adopted the Phoenician consonant alphabet three centuries
earlier.
Curiously, the Greeks did not use the alphabet in any consistent pattern.
Sometimes they wrote from left to right like we do, sometimes they wrote right to left
as you would find in Hebrew and Chinese scripts.
And sometimes one line left to right was followed by another line that went right to left in
imitation of the way the Greek farmers plowed their fields.
Down one row, turn around, do the next.
This is called horizontal bolstra fedon, which comes from the Greek meaning as the ox draws
the plow.
Modern day braille, the system used for blind people, is set bolstra fedonically.
With the Greeks, we see that the letters became more abstract and take on the form with which
we are familiar.
Most importantly, the Greeks introduced vowel sounds.
They had for the first time letters A-E-I-O-U and sometimes Y.
With vowels, the alphabet could be used to capture the exact sound of words.
In Greek, for example, kat, kit, and kat are entirely different words with different meanings.
And in an alphabet with only consonants, you would write them all the same way, and hence
you wouldn't know which word was actually meant.
Like the Phoenicians, the Greeks found colonies all over the Mediterranean and carried their
alphabet with them.
The Greeks settled in southern Italy and there they introduced the alphabet to the Etruscans.
The Etruscans further streamlined the alphabet and in turn passed it on to their neighbors,
the Romans.
The Latin alphabet that we still use today was created by the Etruscans and the Romans.
It only had 23 letters though.
J, U, and W were missing.
J was represented by the letter I, and the U was written as a V, and there was no need
for a W since that sound didn't occur in spoken Latin.
The W, indeed, was added only in the Middle Ages by Norman scribes.
As we can see on Roman monuments, the official Latin alphabet was all straight lines and
right angles, which not only made it bold, but it made it easy to carve in stone using
a hammer and chisel.
However, as both Roman and later medieval scribes began writing with pen and ink on parchment,
it became quicker and easier to write by adding some curves to the letters so that the writing
flowed easily across the page.
Here again, we see how the materials used for writing shaped the form of the letters.
Gallies allowed all of the key Mediterranean civilizations, the Phoenicians, the Greeks,
and the Romans, to engage in trade and to colonize the Mediterranean basin.
The city of Rome, for instance, was only able to reach a population of one million and
become the largest city in the ancient world because Roman merchants could rely on merchant
galleys to carry thousands of tons of grain from Egypt to Italy on a regular basis.
While we often focus on the important land battles fought by the Greeks and the Romans,
their political and military power actually depended much more on strong navies.
Indeed, the desire to win sea battles prompted all of these cultures to build ever larger
and ever faster galleys.
As we have seen, the design of the galley reflected the natural environment in which
it operated, the length of the hull and the way it was constructed, the fact that galleys
had both sails and rowers, all of these features were introduced to make the galley functional
on the Mediterranean Sea.
Here we see the importance of looking at how inventors shape technologies in response
to the environment, a theme that we'll return to in later lectures.
Thanks to galleys and trade, ideas and innovations flowed across the Mediterranean basin in
ancient times.
Two innovations that were developed to foster trade were indeed the alphabet and coins.
Taken together, galleys, coins, and the alphabet were all examples of infrastructure, the technologies
that are needed to allow people to share goods and ideas.
Without infrastructure, economic activity, such as trade, is limited between people and
people are not exposed to new ideas.
Safe to say that by expanding trade, galleys facilitated the exchange of ideas and hence
contributed to the intellectual ferment that we associate with the Greeks.
Galleys carried the idea of an alphabet and coins across the Mediterranean.
Overall, the key lesson here is that some great inventions undergird and facilitate
the intellectual life of societies.
