Although we often say that necessity is the mother of invention, all too frequently we
define necessity narrowly in terms of economic necessity. To overcome this tendency, I like
to suggest that people create inventions to do all sorts of things, and that these activities
can be conveniently grouped in terms of material abundance, cultural meaning, and social or
political order.
Thus far, the great inventions that we have examined have been examples of technology
that contributed to the material abundance of several societies. We've considered how
early humans learned to use copper and bronze to make tools, how pottery and beer making
allowed early cultures to store more food for longer periods, and we've seen how galleys
and coins facilitated trade.
We've also taken note of how some inventions contributed to the creation of cultural meaning,
how people used pottery and early metals to create objects with religious significance,
such as the donly venus, and also how they've used it to create aesthetic pleasure, early
jewelry. We've also seen how the Greeks saw themselves as being socially superior to their
Near Eastern neighbors because the Greeks drank wine instead of beer. In this lecture,
in the next one on the Romans, I want to turn and look at how people use technology to secure
and maintain political power. For a first example of an invention that shaped political
power, we'll visit ancient China. We'll then look at the origins of the crossbow in Europe
since people frequently assume that the crossbow must have been invented once and then carried
by people to other parts of the world. This is a process that is often called technology
transfer. However, as we will see by looking at how they were constructed, we'll recognize
that the crossbows of ancient China and ancient Greece and Rome were dramatically different
weapons, revealing that rather than being a case of technology transfer, the crossbow
is more likely to be a story of independent invention.
Before jumping into the story of the crossbow in China, during what is known as the Warring
States era, and that ran from about 475 to 221 BC, I should sketch in the rise of this
great Asian civilization. Like Mesopotamia and Egypt, Chinese civilization began around 7500 BC
as agriculture developed in the river valleys of the Yellow and the Yangtze rivers. Both
rivers can flood and wipe out the fields. As a result, flood control was needed to channel
the rivers and protect the fields. This led to intensive irrigation in which direct water
was directed to as many fields as possible. All of this agricultural effort and the damming
of the rivers led to the development of two staple crops. In the north, they grew millet,
a grain, and in the south, they grew rice. While Chinese mythology talks about several
early dynasties, the first two dynasties for which we have archaeological and written evidence
is the Shang, which existed for about 500 years between 1600 and 1000 BC. Around about
1000 BC, the Shang were overtaken by the invaders from the west who created the Zhou dynasty.
To justify overthrowing the Shang, Zhou leaders introduced the political concept known as the
Mandate of Heaven. The Mandate of Heaven postulates that heaven blesses the authority of a just ruler,
but heaven would be displeased with the despotic ruler and would withdraw its mandate leading
to the overthrow of that ruler. The Mandate of Heaven would then be transferred to those
who were likely to rule best. During the Zhou dynasty, the philosopher Confucius lived and he
was deeply impressed by the Mandate of Heaven as a guiding concept. Now to manage their territory,
the Zhou king gave loyal sons and allies fiefdoms to rule. And this political system worked while
the Zhou kings were able to expand and conquer more territory and thus create more fiefdoms.
But when expansion stopped, the dynasty lost credibility and individual nobles began exercising
more power. Chaos ensued, leading to what is now known as the warring states era.
The Zhou dynasty disintegrated during this period into hundreds of city states and those in turn
eventually consolidated into seven regional powers known as the warring states. Competition
between these states stimulated technological innovation. Each state built defensive walls
around its key towns. There was a rapid development of iron that was used for both armor and weapons.
And the states began to marshal large armies up to 100,000 men. To mobilize such big armies,
the states became highly organized and bureaucrats began tracking households
and agricultural output in order to collect taxes.
During the warring states era, one particular weapon, the crossbow, came to shape the course
of events. The crossbow is a weapon that consists of a bow mounted on a stock and it shoots
projectiles which look like short arrows but are generally called bolts. The crossbow includes a
trigger mechanism for releasing the bow string. Now the bow and arrow dates back to the late
Stone Age, somewhere between 9,000 and 11,000 BC. And the power of the bow comes from the archer
using his arm to pull back the string and bend the bow. The crossbow is an improvement on the bow
in that the archer puts the bow under his foot and uses the muscles of his legs
to draw back the bow and position it. This means that a crossbow is able to store more energy
and hence fire the bolt with a greater velocity than an ordinary bow. Delivered with more force,
a crossbow bolt did a lot more damage when it hit an enemy soldier or target.
Tribal groups throughout much of China and Indo-China hunt with crossbows but it's not clear
whether the tribal groups invented a crossbow or they picked it up from the Chinese. However,
what seems clear is that during the Zhou era the crossbow was very useful in fighting various
horse mounted invaders who came in from the west. Chinese seemed to have called all these
barbarians that came from the west huns. One ancient fighting song went, take heart my lads
take heart my lads for we have got the crossbow and the huns have not.
The earliest handheld crossbows with bronze triggers were found from about the 6th century BC
in an excavation of the tombs of Kufu in Shandong which was the capital of the state of Liu,
one of the warring states. These bronze trigger mechanisms are remarkable because dozens of
samples have been found in archaeological excavations and in fact I've been lucky enough to acquire an
actual trigger mechanism that's estimated to be about 2,000 years old and I'd like to show it to
you. As you can see right here it's actually a very small piece and this is the top and this is the
bottom, this would have been the back and this is the front where the bolt would have gone. You see
a little tiny axle there and as I'll explain in a moment there are pieces that pivot on the inside
on that axle that drop down and release the bow string so it basically pushes the arrow
or the bolt and sends it off that way. When I first got this piece I was amazed at how small
it was. However if you look at trigger mechanisms in modern pistols they're not all that much bigger.
Equally I suspect that ancient Chinese soldiers may have had slightly smaller hands than we do
and that helps account for the size of this mechanism. Now while this particular mechanism
has corroded over time it once consisted of three moving parts mounted inside a case on two
axles. To understand this ingenious mechanism and how it worked let's have a look at this diagram.
To arm the crossbow a soldier would pull back the bow string so that it came behind the notch
marked B in the diagram. In particular the string had to get behind those two curved pieces but in
front of the tall part sticking up. As the trigger C is pulled back and released it causes a U-shaped
pivot mark D to come down. This U-shaped arm catches the second pivot arm that's B and that
has the notch in the bow string. When the second arm dips into the case the bow string is released
the bolt is fired and things happen. This mechanism was designed so it was able to store a large
amount of energy when the bow was drawn but was easily fired with little recoil when the trigger
is pulled and that allowed for precision shooting. Remarkably unlike later trigger mechanisms
that we find in guns and pistols this design doesn't use any kind of spring. Notably by the
warring states era the parts in this trigger mechanism had been standardized and they were
produced in large quantities. Some historians view this trigger mechanism as the first example
of a machine with interchangeable parts. A development that was generally regarded as one
of the great achievements of the industrial revolution in the late 19th century but here
we have the ancient Chinese making devices with standardized parts 2,000 years earlier.
Standardized parts not only meant that armies could have huge companies across mobin but it
became relatively easy to disassemble the mechanism. Just pop out the two axles and the three parts come
out of the bottom of the case and weapons could be quickly repaired on the battlefield.
As simple as the mechanism may seem to us the Chinese took great satisfaction that even when
the Huns got a hold of one of their crossbows the Huns could never figure out how to duplicate the
mechanism. While it was most likely the crossbows were around before the warring states period
one Chinese myth from the Han dynasty attributes the invention of the trigger mechanism to the
warring state zero and to one particular individual Shin Yin and I quote Shin considered however
that the bows and arrows were no longer sufficient to keep the world in obedience
for in his time all the feudal lords were fighting against one another with weapons that could not
be controlled by ordinary archery. He therefore added at right angles to the bow a stock and
established a trigger mechanism within a box or a housing thus increasing its strength for
in his time all the feudal lords could be subdued. The Chinese continued to use crossbows
for the next 2000 years and they were even used in a battle between the Chinese and the Japanese
in 1895. Over the centuries the Chinese improved their crossbow by developing a gun sight fort
as well as a mechanism for firing bolts rapidly from a magazine.
Depending on the size of the crossbow and the Chinese possessed handheld versions versions
that could be used by soldiers riding horses and even some that must have been the size of a small
artillery piece Chinese soldiers could shoot a bolt anywhere from 300 to 1,000 yards. Chinese
commanders disciplined their crossbow companies to fire information when the first row fired the
second row behind them was advancing and the third row was loading as soon as the first row
fired moved to the back reloaded and the process was repeated again. Using formations like this
experts on ancient weapons have shown that 100 soldiers could deliver 2,000 bolts in about 15
seconds. Such displays of firepower must not only have done great damage but they must have also
been demoralizing to an attacking army. It's hard to say for sure the crossbow was a highly
appealing weapon to the ambitious warlords of the warring states era. Previously the Chinese had
fought battles with armies that used a mix of chariots and infantry and the chariots were manned
by minor nobles. If you started arming the infantry with crossbows however it then became relatively
easy to shoot the enemy nobles in their chariots especially since there wasn't any good armor
that could protect the nobles from high powered bolts. Thus the role of the minor noble in battle
and then society at large became irrelevant and if you were a warlord this was a good thing.
You would have been glad to see that the crossbow eliminated the very people that were most likely
to try and replace you. As a result the nature of warfare changed dramatically in the warring
state era. From fielding armies of perhaps 40,000 soldiers to having armies of over 100,000 troops
clashing. There is however a downside to arming ordinary soldiers with a weapon as powerful as a
crossbow and that comes in the form of two problems. The first was that the was what is the ancient
equivalent of what American soldiers in Vietnam called fragging killing a field officer with whom
you disagreed. During the warring state's era soldiers and ordinary people assassinated any
number of the members of the ruling class and Chinese histories chronicle at least seven
princes being killed in this way during this period. A second problem was that well armed troops
could switch allegiance at any time and align themselves with a different warlord.
In response warlords were often cruel and despotic but the overuse of such practices
could lead to assassination and rebellion. So the crossbow shaped political philosophy.
As mentioned the great Chinese philosopher Confucius and his dates are 551 to 479 BC
lived and wrote during the period that the Zhou Dynasty was falling apart.
During the warring state's era his disciples refined his political ideas in response to what
they saw going around them. In particular Confucius and his disciples called for the restoration of
the mandate of heaven. Together they looked nostalgically upon earlier days and urged those with
political power to model themselves on earlier examples of wise rulers and not to rule by coercion
or bribery. Instead Confucius and his disciples believed that if a ruler were to lead correctly
by action the subjects would simply be inspired to imitate the proper actions of their ruler.
For Confucius relationships especially reciprocal relationships were everything.
The people had to respect the ruler but the ruler had to respect the people. To gain their respect
the ruler had to inspire the people. He had to give them reasons to persuade the people to follow
them. The great scholar of the history of Chinese science Joseph Needham
suspected that because the crossbow had tipped the balance of power away from the warlords
and to the people and that coercion wasn't working that it became likely that the disciples of
Confucius came to argue for a politics based on respect and persuasion. For Needham the crossbow
was not only a marvel of early mechanical engineering but a great invention that shaped the evolution
of Confucian philosophy. It would however take another dynasty before the ideas of Confucius
would take hold in China and begin to guide the emperors. And in the meantime I should tell you
something about how the warring states era ended and the Chinese empire began.
One warlord Shuangti and his dates for 259 to 210 BC was a great military strategist
and he effectively employed companies of crossbowmen to defeat all of the other warring states in
battle. In 221 BC Shuangti declared himself the first emperor of China. His dynasty is known as the
Qin. Perhaps because the crossbow had played such an important role in his ascent to power
Shuangti didn't hesitate to use technology in other ways to consolidate his power.
For instance he confiscated all weapons and he tore down the walls guarding individual towns and
cities. He standardized laws and language and he also made coins weights and measures to be in a
standard form. Remarkably Shuangti also started using technology in ways to demonstrate his power
to reify his authority. He's the one who started the Great Wall in the west. He also constructed
8,000 miles of roads. He dug canals and he's the one who's buried in an elaborate tomb
with 7,000 terracotta soldiers. With Shuangti we see how for the first time political leaders or
the state can use technology to advance their agendas. This is a theme that we'll see repeated
again in the course from the Romans in the next lecture to nuclear power in the 20th century.
The Qin dynasty however didn't last very long. Shuangti and his son who succeeded him spent far
too much time fighting wars in the south. They also rejected Confucianism, killed scholars and burned
books and hence they had no mandate of heaven to justify their rule. As a result the Qin dynasty
ended after just two emperors and was replaced by the Han dynasty which ran from 202 BC to 220 AD.
To justify their coming to power the Han brought back Confucianism fully established the mandate
of heaven. Much of what the Chinese came to value about their culture came into being during the
Han dynasty. The political system of the emperors and the Mandarin bureaucrats, Confucianism as a
philosophical way of life and the development of a distinctive art and culture. As we'll see in later
lectures it was also the Han dynasty during which paper was invented and the east west trading
route known as the Silk Road was established. Now you might well ask did the Chinese crossbow
inspire crossbows in ancient Greece and Rome? As they expanded their empire into central Asia the
Han armies continued to employ the crossbow in battle. Indeed the Chinese penetrated as far west
as Uzbekistan where they fought the battle of Sungdiana in 36 BC against a Parthian army that
included a contingent of captured Roman legionnaires. Some historians think that the Chinese were
victorious at Sungdiana because the bolts from their crossbows easily penetrated the armor worn
by the legionnaires. And as the story goes impressed by the power of Chinese crossbows
Roman soldiers took the idea back to Italy and the Romans add crossbows to their weaponry.
Now much of this encounter of Chinese and Roman armies at Sungdiana has been disputed and it's
pretty unlikely that any of the captured Roman soldiers ever made it back to Italy with news
about crossbows. Indeed it would not have been news since soldiers in the ancient Mediterranean had
already been using a form of the crossbow the gastrophetes for several centuries. The gastrophetes
which in Greek means belly shooter dates back to the 5th century BC. Unlike the Chinese crossbow
that used a single piece wooden bow the gastrophetes was powered by a composite bow.
A composite bow is made from horn or wood and sinew laminated together. The horn is on the belly
that's the part facing the archer the sinew is on the back on the on the back of a wooden core.
When the bow is drawn the sinew is stretched on the outside and the horn is compressed on the
inside and together they store more energy than wood would do for the same in a typical bow.
Much of what we know about the gastrophetes in ancient Greece comes from Hero of Alexandria
who wrote in the 1st century AD and he provided a description and a drawing of this weapon in
his book. Hero by the way will turn up later in a lecture when we talk about the origins of the
steam engine. Hero said that he took his description of the gastrophetes from the lost works of the
3rd century BC engineer Cecibius who was simply recording a weapon that was already in wide use.
But along with documenting the gastritis Hero went on to develop an improved weapon
known as a manubilista. In his design Hero split the composite bow into two arms and connected
each to a torsion spring made of bundles of rope. When the arms of the manubilista were pulled back
the rope bundles were tightened up thus storing energy that could be used to fire an arrow.
Since the torsion spring the mechanism in the front part of the balista was quite heavy.
The Romans often placed this weapon on a tripod and they eventually scaled it up
so they could fire large arrows or stones making it more of what we think of as a catapult.
Now the point of this excursion into Greek and Roman crossbows is to make really a simple point.
Chinese crossbows stored energy by placing a single piece bow in tension whereas the earliest
Greek and Roman weapons stored energy by using either a composite bow or torsion springs and
the springs were what was in the form of bundles of rope. Hence these weapons functioned entirely
differently and it's highly unlikely that the Chinese crossbow was simply transferred east
to west. Instead the crossbow was invented independently in the west and this episode
illustrates how different cultures can solve the same problem how to make a more powerful
bow weapon by coming up with different solutions in one case they use tension and another case
they use torsion or to put it even more simply one case was bending one case was twisting.
Crossbows were used extensively by European soldiers in the Middle Ages particularly from
about a thousand to 1500 AD and they were only to be superseded by guns in the 15th century.
While an archer used a longbow to shoot arrows more accurately than an average crossbow soldier
it took a lot longer to train a longbow archer than a crossbowman and the difference was
in years versus weeks. Most medieval crossbows resembled the gastrophedies in that they used
a composite bow and they had a crank that could be used to draw back the bow string.
Crossbows were gradually replaced by more powerful gunpowder weapons although early
guns had a slower rate of fire and much worse accuracy than late medieval crossbows. Crossbows
today are used by sportsmen for hunting and for target practice.
During the Cold War of the 1950s and 1960s both the capitalist and communist blocks argued for
the superiority of their political philosophy based on their technological achievements.
It was in this context that the Chinese would trot out their ancient crossbow and its trigger
mechanism as a precursor of interchangeable parts and a demonstration of their technological prowess.
To be sure the trigger mechanism is a marvelous example of a mechanical engineering feat.
Frankly in ancient history there aren't really any comparable mechanisms east or west
that compare favorably in terms of effective design and it's clear to me that these mechanisms
were carefully shaped and filed so they were very similar if not completely interchangeable.
So the Chinese crossbow in my opinion is great because it's a remarkable mechanical achievement.
Moreover the crossbow is a great invention because it also shaped the course of military
and political history. By arming soldiers with these new weapons warlords changed the way battles
were fought and eliminated the role of minor nobles in their chariots. Yet the warlords had
to contend with the problem that the crossbow changed the balance of power giving the populace
more clout than it had previously. And this brings us to the third way that the crossbow was a great
invention. More than just changing warfare the problems associated with the crossbow prompted
Chinese scholars to articulate new ideas about the mandate of heaven and how the just ruler
was one who inspired the people. In this sense the crossbow had significant cultural impact.
Overall the key lesson to take away from this excursion into ancient Chinese history
is that while we frequently celebrate inventions that contribute to material abundance
and are created by the private sector there are also inventions that are great because of the
political and cultural work that they do. Throughout the lectures coming up we will continue to look
at inventions that have political and cultural significance similar to that of the crossbow.
Indeed in the very next lecture we'll see how the monumental architecture of the Romans
projects like their aqueducts are best understood in the context of how the emperors
sought to justify and exercise their authority.
