We all know that the Romans were great engineers and we still marvel today at some of the incredible
feats of engineering that they accomplished. Just think about the Colosseum in Rome that
could hold 40,000 spectators, or the road system that included 50,000 miles of roads
that connected all parts of the empire, or the aqueducts that provided millions of gallons
of water to ordinary citizens living in cities and towns throughout the empire, or the magnificent
temples, theaters and baths that were enjoyed by the Roman elite. People still flock to
Europe to admire these ancient monuments and to reflect, much as the 18th century historian
Edward Gibbon did, on quote, the glory that was once Rome. That glory indeed was a vast
empire whose frontiers reached from Scotland in the north to Egypt in the south, from Portugal
in the west to Mesopotamia in the east, and that empire lasted a thousand years from 510
BC to 476 AD. But I want to ask about the inventions behind this glory. How did these
monuments work, both in a technical and in a political sense? What was the secret to
their strength and their size? Why did the Romans go to the trouble of building these
impressive structures? The answers, as we'll see, are related as much to engineering know-how
as to political knowledge. As we saw in the last lecture on ancient China and the crossbow,
invention can be shaped by political change. That is, groups and leaders vie for power,
they appropriate and create the inventions they need to get ahead. In the story of the
Romans, though, the case is much more nuanced. Rather than appropriating inventions that
would allow them to exercise brute force, they took up technology, large-scale works in civil
engineering to demonstrate a political ideal that of a commonwealth. To see how Roman inventions
reflected this idea, we'll look at two examples, their system of aqueducts and the Colosseum
in Rome. But before we can talk about these two engineering wonders, I should let you in on a
secret as to what made Roman engineering possible, the arch. The arch was the essential invention
at the heart of nearly every major Roman structure. Before the arch, most early buildings were built
using what was called post and lintel construction. Monuments such as Stonehenge in England or the
great temple of the Parthenon in ancient Athens was created by laying a flat beam or slab called
the lintel cross two posts or columns. Due to the weight of the lintel, the posts had to be fairly
close together. They were too far apart, the lintel laid across the top would eventually weaken
and crack under its own weight. This limitation meant that a grand building like the Parthenon
needed lots and lots of columns. Roman engineers overcame the limitations of the post and lintel
system by perfecting the arch. To make an arch, builders first constructed a curved wooden
scaffolding between two pillars. They then built up the arch by placing wedge-shaped stones
known as voicers along the curve of the scaffold. In the center and at the top, the engineers
positioned a heavier block known as a keystone. The whole thing worked in the following way.
The downward thrust, the weight of the keystone and the building that was above it was transferred
through the arch to the supporting pillars on either side, compressing and locking the other
stones into place. Once the scaffolding was removed, the arch would stay in place for
centuries. Now having told you all that, let me give you a little demonstration. For a post
and lintel system, as I mentioned, there are always two columns and the lintel is placed
across the top. I think you can readily imagine that as that horizontal piece gets longer and
longer, that eventually, if it's made of stone, will crack under its own weight. As a result,
you always have to keep the columns fairly close together in a post and lintel building.
Now what the Romans did is this is they developed the arch. They perfected it. It again consisted
of a series of stones placed in a curve. And at the very top, there was a keystone which
delivered the force that was transmitted, the downward force here, that was transmitted
to the ground via the voiciers on each side. Of course, when they were building it, they
had the scaffolding underneath. There's the curve structure and a couple of pillars to
support it. And when it's time for it to take out the scaffolding and have the building
opened, they would remove the wedges like this that held up the curved piece, and then
the whole thing can be taken and moved out of the way. And as you can see, the arch supports
itself. What was traditionally believed that the Romans invented the arch, it now appears
that the Babylonians and ancient Persians knew about the arch, but they tended to use
it only for underground construction. The Romans instead realized that the arch could
be used above ground and they employed it in a variety of creative ways. For instance,
for bridges or viaducts that could span valleys, the Romans not only created a long string
of arches, but stacked them on top of one another. One familiar example of such a viaduct is
at Nemesis in Nimes, France, and it was completed in 16 BC. And this viaduct used three tiers
of arches in order to cross the gorge of the River Gardone for a distance of 900 feet.
Another incredible example of a viaduct is near Segovia, Spain. Insisting of two tiers
of 36 arches, this viaduct spans 2700 feet. Dating from the late first century, it was
built out of granite blocks with little or no concrete and still provides water to the
city of Segovia. Along with being strung end to end to create a bridge, the arches could
be placed side by side in order to create a curved roof or vault. In addition, the form
of the arch could be turned through 360 degrees so it created a circle or a dome. The great
dome of the Pantheon in Rome, built between 120 and 124 AD, spans nearly 164 feet.
This dome is wider than the one on St. Peter's Cathedral in Rome and it was only surpassed
in size and width in the 20th century. If you look at Roman buildings then, you can
quickly see that they are generally made up of a combination of arches, vaults, and domes.
Using these three elements, Roman engineers created many of the finest structures in architectural
history and the arch is the secret behind it all.
Well, lots of history books will describe the achievements of Roman engineers. These
books generally say little about why the Romans went to all the trouble of creating these
monuments. The answer, as I suggested a few moments ago, has to do with political power
and to understand this, I need to take you on a whirlwind tour of Roman history. According
to legend, Rome was founded by twin brothers, Romulus and Remus, who were abandoned at birth
and raised by a she-wolf. Archaeological evidence suggests that Rome was actually founded as
a farming settlement and that it grew up on a hill beside the River Tiber in central Italy
sometime in the 10th century BC. By 800 BC, this settlement had grown into a town. The
people who occupied this town were the Latins, one of many different peoples living in Italy
at that time. However, the most powerful and sophisticated group in Italy at the time were
the Etruscans. They lived north of Rome and a part of Italy, roughly equivalent to what
is today Tuscany. Rome was initially ruled by a king who had religious, political and
military authority. King was not always a Latin, sometimes he was an Etruscan. In 510
BC, a group of patricians, supposedly the descendants of the founding fathers that Romulus
chose to be his advisors overthrew an Etruscan monarch. That monarch was named Tarquin the
Proud and the patricians instead created a republic, a word that comes from the Latin
Rez Publica, meaning the public good. Power now passed into the hands of the patricians
who organized themselves as a senate and at their head was the consul. Meanwhile, if you
weren't a patrician in Rome, you were known as a plebeian. In 494 BC, the plebeians formed
their own assembly, the concilium plebis, and they elected their own officers known as
the tribunes. These political arrangements gave Rome its creative energy and that energy
was channeled into conquering territory. Rome now began to expand from being just a small
city state to a larger country embracing first all of Italy. It then defeated the Carthaginians
for control of the Mediterranean and Roman armies led by ambitious patricians pushed
east into the Balkans, Greece, and much of what is now modern-day Turkey. By the first
century BC, they were the masters of the Mediterranean basin.
Conquest of all of its territory changed the political dynamics of the Roman Republic and
triumphs abroad became the route to political success at home. Some leaders, such as Sulla
and Pompey, gained power by forming armies loyal to themselves and then setting out to
conquer even more territory. Individuals like them lavish grandiose building projects on
the city of Rome, but they did little to improve the living conditions of the poor. Julius Caesar
and his dates were from 100 to 44 BC pursued many of the same strategies as Sulla and Pompey.
After conquering Gaul and 49 BC, he defiantly led his army into Rome, effectively bringing
about the end of the Republic. The Senate extended the Office of Counsel for Life, giving
Caesar virtually unlimited power. Some factions in the Senate, however, feared that he wanted
to return to a kingship and so he was assassinated in 44 BC.
Following the death of Caesar, a devastating civil war took place and it ended only 13
years later when Caesar's grand-nephew, a man named Octavian, defeated Mark Antony and
made himself the master of Rome and its empire. In 27 BC, the Senate gave him the title Caesar
Augustus. Augustus made far-reaching changes to the way the Empire was governed. In part,
he preserved Republican traditions by sharing power with the Senate. As a result of the
political stability that Augustus and his successors created, the economy of the Roman
Empire flourished, ushering in two centuries what historians call Pax Romana. During this
period of political stability, trade flourished across Europe and per capita income grew,
but the result that average people were able to enjoy a range of devices and new inventions
such as scissors, candles and glass bottles came into use, things that are still used
every day. One example of everyday Roman life that always sticks with me is the result of
a visit that I made to a Roman encampment just south of Hadrian's Wall in northern England
at Vinlandia. There I remember seeing an incredible collection of leather shoes worn by the soldiers,
by their wives and children, all different sizes, but so much similar to the shoes that
we enjoy and wear every day. But during Pax Romana, the Romans concentrated not so much
on household inventions, but rather on major engineering projects.
Historians sometimes criticized the Romans for not inventing many new technological devices,
but I would argue that their genius lay in shaping technology that suited their political
situation and consequently, Romans focused on inventions that advanced two ideas, Commonwealth,
which I've mentioned before, and spectacle. From the beginning of the Republic through
to the Empire, the Senators and Emperor were faced with an ongoing challenge to justify
their authority. Why was it all right for the patricians to have deposed Tarquin the
Proud? Why should the patricians be allowed to rule the Republic through the Senate? And
why should the emperors be permitted to continue to hold such enormous power?
To answer these questions, the Romans invoked the idea of a Commonwealth. The Roman state
represented all classes of Roman society, an ideal that was embodied in the four letters
displayed on the standards of the Roman army, SPQR, Sinatus populus Romanus, meaning the
Senate and people of Rome. The Roman Republic was a Commonwealth. Its purpose was to safeguard
the Commonwealth being of the Roman people. And to realize this vision of a Commonwealth,
to make sure that they retain the support of the people who voted them into political
office, Roman aristocrats frequently sponsored public works. For example, to demonstrate Rome's
victories over Carthage in the Greek city of Corinth in 144 BC, the Senate used the booty
of war and estimated $9 million to build a 55-mile aqueduct, the aqua marcia, to provide
water for the growing city of Rome. Now, in my contrast to many other societies,
ancient and modern, technology for the Romans was something to be used in the service of
the state for the benefit of everyone. That was a unique idea to the Romans. It had not
been seen before in the world. And once they came to power, the emperors embraced this tradition
of sponsoring public works. Augustus justifiably claimed that he transformed Rome from a city
of brick to one of marble. Augustus carried out a vast program of public building, including
the construction of a new forum, the grand square that was at the heart of the city of
Rome. Later emperors in the first and second centuries
were able to draw on the vast resources of the Roman state in order to build new cities
and harbors, roads and aqueducts, elaborate public monuments, baths and amphitheaters.
For example, the emperor Claudius, who reigned from 41 to 54 AD, authorized the construction
of a tunnel to control the water level of Lake Fusino in Italy. Located high up in the
Apennine mountains, Lake Fusino was not drained by a river, and so heavy rains often caused
it to overflow and flood the farms along a shoreline. Roman engineers spent 11 years carving
a tunnel through 3.5 miles of solid rock to excavate what was going to be the longest
tunnel in the world until 1876. By far the most impressive and famous example of Roman
engineering that was used to serve the idea of commonwealth were the aqueducts built to
supply fresh water to Rome and other cities in the empire. As the Roman Republic conquered
more and more territory and the patricians used their wealth to buy up land, peasants
were forced off the farms and they moved to Rome, eventually swelling the population
to a million people. To provide fresh water for this huge population, the senate ordered
the building of the first aqueduct, the Aquapia in 312 BC. Over the next five centuries, Roman
authorities created ten additional aqueducts, a system of over 300 miles of stone channels
and pipes to provide water for their capital city. It's been estimated that eight of these
aqueducts delivered about 220 million gallons a day. That amounts to 110 to 120 gallons per
person. By comparison, the water system for New York City today provides about 130 gallons
per person every day. Although we associate aqueducts with the impressive stone arch bridges
that I showed you pictures of a few moments ago, an aqueduct is actually much more complicated
than just these bridges or viaducts. The viaducts were only one component. For the Romans an
aqueduct was a system comprised of a whole number of parts, reservoirs, stone water channels,
tunnels, pipes and fountains that gathered and carried the water from mountain springs
to the heart of their cities. Aqueducts were carefully designed so that the water flowed
continually downhill at a gentle gradient, a drop of one foot every 200 feet or maybe
a drop of one foot every 350 feet. To achieve this consistent gradient over dozens of miles
and dozens of miles of changing landscape required Roman engineers to become both master
surveyors and great planners. One Roman engineer, Frantinius, was immensely proud of the aqueducts
he designed and supervised. And he proclaimed, will anybody compare the idle pyramids or
those other useless though renowned works of the Greeks with these aqueducts, with these
many indispensable structures. But along with investing in civil engineering
works such as aqueducts, the emperor and the patricians spent their surplus wealth on spectacles,
elaborate religious festivals or sporting events or parades. For instance, just before Lake
Fusina was drained, the emperor Claudius arranged for an elaborate mock naval battle to be staged
for the entertainment of the people. As popular events, these activities required large public
venues and Roman engineers devoted much effort to designing amphitheaters and stadiums and they
included in these buildings many innovations. Of these venues, the greatest was the Coliseum in
Rome. Built at the request of the emperor of Vespian, the Coliseum took 10 years to build
from 70 to 80 AD. And when it was finished, it was the largest structure of its kind,
615 feet long, 510 feet wide and 159 feet tall. What survives today in Rome is only about one
third of the original structure. Built on land reclaimed from a swamp, the Coliseum has a foundation
that goes down 40 feet, consisting of a concrete platform and stone piers. Using a combination
of hundreds of arches and vaults, Roman engineers created a four-level stadium that could hold 45
to 50,000 spectators. 80 entrances and numbered seats allowed crowds to move in and out of the
Coliseum with reasonable speed. Coliseum was designed with a gigantic awning called the Vella
to shade the crowds and it also had a system of trap doors underneath the playing field that
permitted all sorts of special effects. Using a system of human-powered hoists, wild animals and
scenery could pop up unexpectedly during events, much to the delight of the audience. In addition,
the wooden floor on the playing field could be removed and the stadium flooded to stage mock
naval battles. So what were events like at the Coliseum? A day of spectacle at the Coliseum,
known in the Latin as Munus Ustum Atcu Legitum, or a proper and legitimate gladiator show,
was organized by an individual sponsor who was known as the editor. The emperor could be the
editor, but he was not always. However, if the emperor came, he sat in the imperial box at the
center of the north side of the stadium and his reactions were carefully scrutinized by the audience.
Now a proper spectacle began in the morning with a great parade, the Pampa, led by the
editor's standard bearers and it typically featured trumpeters, performers, priests and nobles.
The first event in the show was the Venatio, the hunt of the wild beasts, and that took up most of
the morning. Some cases the animals were pitted against one another, but at other times they
were killed by specially trained hunters. You can imagine the surprise for the hunter, though,
when a trap door would open and release a couple of extra lions. Accounts of the spectacles
emphasized that the animals were often exotic creatures brought from all parts of the empire
and that a shocking number of animals might be sacrificed. For example, the opening games
in 80 AD, the emperor Titus provided 9,000 animals for slaughter.
Between events, the crowds were kept entertained by stewards who passed through the stands with
trays of cakes, pastries, and of course generous cups of wine. On occasion, wooden balls would be
thrown into stands containing tokens for prizes, food, money, or even title to an apartment.
And on hot days, the crowd would be treated to a mist that was scented with balsam or saffron.
At midday, the next games, the Ludi Meridiani, consisted of the execution of prisoners and
barbarians. In some cases, wild animals tore these poor people apart, but in other cases,
the barbarians were forced to fight one another and still in other situations they were forced
to reenact episodes from mythology in which they were killed. For instance, prisoners who were
made to play Hercules, who by legend is burned to death before he becomes a god. Now, despite
Christian tradition, there is no indication that early martyrs were executed in the Colosseum
for their faith. Finally, in the afternoon came the main event, the gladiator fights. Battles
between individual gladiators followed precise rules and were supervised by a referee.
Though it's unlikely that the gladiators greeted the emperor by saying, those that are about to die
salute you, it is true that the editor, with approval from the crowd, could order the death
of a gladiator by giving the thumbs down. And in those situations, the gladiator was expected to
take his death blow without flinching an illustration of Roman virtue or manliness.
To make all of these events happen flawlessly, a large crew of stagehands had to be at work
as a team in the basement, the hypogenium, that was below the stadium floor. There in the heat
and stench from the wild animals, the stagehands had to, on cue, hoist animals or scenery or provide
the special effects that made the crowd roar. And if they failed, a displeased emperor could order
them executed as well. Now that I've let you into the secrets of Roman engineering, that the most
important innovation was the arch and that Romans built great structures like the aqueducts and the
Colosseum in pursuit of Commonwealth and spectacle, you might reasonably ask, so what became of the
Roman Empire? Why did it fall? Most historians today attribute the fall of the empire to a
combination of two things, cultural flaw and larger environmental events. Let me talk about each of
those. The cultural flaw was that the Romans took a static view of the world. The Romans saw themselves
as the peak of human civilization and they believed that their political institutions would last not
just for a thousand years, but forever. Hence, we shouldn't be surprised that they built roads and
monuments that have lasted for centuries. The Romans were confident that they were going to be around
for a long time and they planned their monuments and their engineering works with that in mind.
But embedded in that view is a degree of inflexibility. If we're the best thought the Romans,
then we don't have to learn new things or engage in discovery. We don't have to change or adapt.
The static worldview meant that the Romans were not ready when change did come along,
first in the form of epidemics and famine and then next in terms of climate change and invasion.
First, beginning in the fourth century, an epidemic in Egypt killed off the slaves who
grew the wheat that fed the urban masses of Roman cities. This food shortage resulted in a great
deal of political unrest. Next, there was a mini ice age in which the climate of the northern
hemisphere cooled. The Romans gradually noticed that their typical crops, grapes and olives,
were not growing very well north of the Alps and as a result, the settlements that they had north
of the Alps in England and in France were not able to sustain themselves. But even more troublesome
was the climate change set off a chain reaction of migrations and invasions across all of Europe
and Asia. In search of better lands, nomadic pastoral groups on the steps of Central Asia
began pushing west and east, causing other groups to move as well. This domino effect
had the result that the Germanic tribes east of the Rhine River invaded the Roman Empire
beginning in the late fourth century and eventually defeated the last Roman emperor in the west in 476.
Like their counterparts on the other side of the world, the Han dynasty in China,
the Romans created a society that thrived for nearly a thousand years. Like the Chinese,
the Romans did so by shrewdly using technology to exercise political power.
But rather than simply employ inventions in ways that gave them military might or greater economic
wealth, the Romans focused on inventions that reinforced their ideas about commonwealth and spectacle.
Large-scale engineering projects such as the aqueducts and the Colosseum allowed the emperor
and the patricians to show that they were worthy of support, that they were contributing to the
common good of the empire. But the Romans then, these great inventions reveal a key idea about
technology and politics. But some inventions are taken up not just so the elite can have military
or economic control over the masses, but rather because these inventions demonstrate a political
ideal like a commonwealth. As we will see in later lectures, this idea that invention should help
create a stable society both politically and economically underpins much of the enthusiasm
for invention in the 19th and 20th centuries.
