Ancient, middle, modern. Even in elementary school, we encourage children to think of
history in terms of these three ages. We tend to have them think about the ancient ending
around 500 AD with the fall of the Roman Empire, the middle or medieval period running from 500
to 1500 AD and the modern period since 1500 to the present. But what really separates these three
ages? What does it mean to say that the modern age is really so different than medieval or ancient
times? The next few lectures will begin to look at the inventions that moved humanity in both the
west, meaning Europe, and the east, meaning China, from the ancient to the modern world.
In this lecture, we'll concentrate on two great inventions that helped move Europe
out of the economic and intellectual doldrums of the Dark Ages, typically 500 to about 1000 AD,
and set the stage for the early modern world. These two inventions are first, the waterwheel,
a major energy source, the first beyond human muscle and animals, and a second invention, clocks,
the devices that Europeans used to define time, life and labor. As you'll see, one of the interesting
things about both waterwheels and clocks is that we don't know exactly who or when these two
significant devices were invented. Nevertheless, it's clear that both devices are great inventions
in a couple of senses. First, their development required some sophisticated thinking and a
genuine creative leap. And second, they both significantly changed how people lived and
thought about the world. When inventions don't have a single inventor, they're called vernacular
inventions, in the sense that they are the product of a group or a community with lots of
individuals contributing various parts to the overall development.
Compared to inventions like the internal combustion engine or nuclear power in the 20th century,
waterwheels may seem rather quaint and irrelevant, something that you might have in an old-fashioned
painting, but not that you would have to celebrate the cutting edge of technology.
However, waterwheels are every bit as important as gasoline engines or nuclear actors.
For waterwheels are the first example of a prime mover in history. So what you might ask is a prime
mover. One of the ways of divvying up the world of technology is to argue that there are tools and
prime movers. Tools are the means by which humans shape materials. Think of a hammer or saw and how
we use those to shape wood. In contrast, prime movers are the sources of power that we use to
drive tools. Think of how a saw can be powered not only by a human muscle, but it could also be
run by a waterwheel, like in a sawmill, or by a gasoline engine, as in a chainsaw.
The obvious advantage of a prime mover, whether it be a waterwheel or a gas engine, is that prime
movers can deliver lots more power that can be used for a given task. Think how much more work
a lumberjack can do using a chainsaw rather than one of those big two-man handsaws.
So what's the big deal about the waterwheel? It was one of the first prime movers, as I said,
and it was invented by humans, and its discovery meant that people for the first time had a
concentrated source of power that could be used to do bigger and more sophisticated tasks.
So let's talk about where waterwheels came from, how they were improved upon,
and how they spread all over Europe in the Middle Ages. As you'll see, while they might seem to be
an invention with obvious value, it took a long time for this technology to spread and come to
be applied across different industries. We don't know who invented the first waterwheel,
but archaeological evidence indicates that they originated in the hilly regions north and west
of Mesopotamia sometime before 300 BC. One of the basic tasks that humans there and everywhere
else around the world have confronted since the agricultural revolution is the challenge of
grinding grain to make flour. And for centuries, this was done by using a mortar and pestle or a
saddle corn, which is a stone roller that is used against a hard surface. Given how labor-intensive
this process of grinding grain was, a first step was to come up with a better machine,
namely a rotary corn, in which the grain is crushed between two stones, the top one rotating in
the bottom one stationary. The bottom stone doesn't turn, the top stone turns, and you can see that
there's a handle that you can use to push the stone around. In the middle of the top stone is a hole,
and the grain goes down in the hole, and it basically is crushed when it falls between the two
stones, and that's where the flour is made. Now, once you have a rotary corn, it's fairly easy
to begin to imagine how people began to improve upon this device. The next step was that peasants
sought ways to harness first animals, such as donkeys, to turn the millstone. And then next,
some bright individuals had the idea that the millstone could be connected to a wheel that was
placed in a fast-moving stream underneath the whole corn. If the wheel had paddles, then the
current would cause the wheel to turn, and as a result, that would cause the top stone to turn,
and for the first time, you'd have a rotary mill.
This early form of mill that I've been describing here is known as a Greek or a Norse mill,
because the flow of the water hits the wheel from the side, these wheels are sometimes known as
horizontal water wheels. One example that you might be familiar with this with in terms of horizontal
water wheels can be found inside a typical garden sprinkler, where the pressure of the water coming
out of the hose hits a small bladed wheel, and that in turn causes the sprinkler head to spin.
Clearly useful for grinding enough flour to feed several families or small village, horizontal
water wheels spread across much of the Fertile Crescent, into Greece and then into Europe.
We know that they reached Ireland and even China by the third and fourth centuries AD.
Many of these horizontal wheels were still used by peasants in isolated mountain communities
as late as the 19th century. Now because there was no gearing, Greek mills revolved slowly,
we could only process a limited amount of grain. Modern estimates place the output of these wheels
around four-tenths to five-tenths horsepower.
While these horizontal water wheels weren't all that powerful, they did inspire Roman engineers to
develop improved versions sometime in the first century BC. Borrowing the idea of gearing that
had been developed by Hellenistic inventors for a variety of ingenious machines used for special
effects in Greek temples, Roman engineers transformed the Greek mill into a much more powerful prime
mover. In particular, they used gearing so that the millstone could stay horizontal, but the water
wheel, instead of being horizontal, could be turned 90 degrees and placed in a vertical position.
In a vertical position, it became power possible to power the wheel in three different ways.
First, the water could flow underneath the wheel, and we call that an undershot wheel.
Second, the water could flow over the wheel. That's an overshot wheel.
And third, the water could hit the wheel in the middle, and that's known as a breast wheel.
Like the older Greek mills, the undershot wheel worked best on a swift moving river.
The overshot wheel, in contrast, because it took advantage of both the force of the flowing river,
as well as gravity pulling down on the buckets, was much more efficient.
To get the water to an overshot wheel, however, you often have to build a chute or a flume
that carries the water to the top of the wheel. Moreover, to locate an overshot wheel on a slow
moving river, you may have to add a mill pond where the water collects behind a dam and thus
creates a sufficient volume of water that can be utilized by the wheel. To avoid having to build
all this extra stuff, flumes and mill ponds, Roman engineers often installed water wheels next to
aqueducts, so some of the water coming through the aqueduct could be diverted, used to power the
wheel, and then the water could return back to the main flow on the aqueduct. So you might ask,
how efficient were these Roman water wheels? Well, archaeological evidence from a mill
on a river near Naples, Italy, reveals that a mill there had an undershot wheel that was
about 1.85 meters in diameter, and it most likely produced about 3 horsepower.
This would have been enough power to produce 150 kilograms of flour an hour, to process that much
flour. And keep in mind that that's significantly more than the 7 kilograms per hour that was
produced by two slaves working a hand corn, or the hand corn was powered by a donkey.
So, the Romans had water wheels. Why was there no industrial revolution?
As we now know, water wheels can be used to power a whole range of technological enterprises.
Not only flour mills, but saw mills, pumps for mines, bellows for iron foundries, as well as
the machines that you would find in a textile factory, like power looms or spinning machinery.
Hence, if the Romans were able to convert the Greek mill into the more efficient Vitruvian
water wheel, why didn't they go further and fully exploit this new prime mover?
Answer to this question takes several forms. First and foremost, in many parts of the Roman
Empire, but especially in the Mediterranean basin, there were simply not that many swift
moving rivers where it would be easy to set up water wheels. As we have seen, the Romans often
found it best to locate a mill next to an aqueduct. Next, when the Romans needed more output,
they generally took an extensive approach. Put more land into cultivation, employ more slaves,
set up additional machines like olive oil presses. It did not occur to the Romans to take an
intensive approach and do something like build a bigger machine, one that could take advantage
of the power of a water wheel. Third, even the most logical and observant scientists in ancient
Greek, Greek and Roman culture took what historians call an animistic view of nature. As the Greek
philosopher Thales once said, all things are full of gods. In describing how a Greek water
mill worked, the poet and tippeter of Thessalonica, who was around in the first century BC, explained
that the water wheel was turned by nymphs. In taking seriously that the forces of nature were
the work of the gods or supernatural creatures like nymphs, then it was not appropriate in the
Roman or Greek mind for man to try and deliberately harness those forces. Indeed, one of the most
important ideas that came from Christianity was to demythologize nature, to get rid of the fairies
and magical creatures and make it all right for people to believe that they could control and
manipulate nature. Even though the Romans didn't fully exploit the potential of the water wheel,
this isn't to say that they didn't appreciate it. Indeed, when the going got tough for the
Romans, they did experiment with large-scale water power. During the fourth century AD,
epidemics wiped out many of the slaves who worked to grow grain in Egypt and elsewhere.
Ever worried about feeding the 1 million citizens of the city of Rome,
Roman engineers built a large flour mill in southern France in Barbagol.
Powered by water diverted from a nearby aqueduct, this mill utilized 16 overshot wheels
and could probably process 240 to 300 kilograms of flour per hour. That would have been enough flour
to feed a city of 80,000, and the flour was most likely shipped to the imperial city.
Even as the Roman Empire disintegrated in the fourth and fifth centuries, the invading barbarians
appreciated the potential of the water wheel. As the Roman author of a book called Derebus
Bellesus wrote in 370 AD, although the barbarian peoples derived no power from eloquence and no
illustrious rank for office, yet they are by no means strangers to mechanical inventiveness,
where nature comes to their assistance. During the Dark Ages, again about 500 to 1000 AD,
written sources mentioned a few water-powered mills in passing, and by the time of Charlemagne,
water mills were sufficiently plentiful that they were considered a good source of tax revenue.
As the European economy recovered after 1000 AD, water mills began to proliferate.
The Doomsday Book from 11th century England listed no fewer than 5,000 mills in 3000
communities south of the Trenton Severn Rivers. During this recovery, Europeans discovered how
water wheels could be employed for a variety of industrial activities. In many ways, the leaders
in this application of water wheels were the monks of the Cistercian Order.
Known for their ability to reclaim barren land, the Cistercians did not hesitate to build
water-powered mills as part of their monasteries, partly out of the belief that such labor-saving
machinery would give the monks more time to pray. Their monastery at Champagne, France, for example,
used water wheels to pound cloth, a step known as the fooling process in making textiles,
manufacture paper, and power a drop hammer for shaping wrought iron. In addition to these mills,
water power in the later Middle Ages was applied for cutting wood and saw mills and also for mills
that crushed ore at mines. Through all this activity, Europeans learned that by providing a
concentrated source of power, water wheels allowed them to work large quantities of materials,
whether it be flour or wrought iron or paper, and thus introduced the idea that power and machinery
could be substituted for human labor. In particular, the concentrated power of water wheels
encouraged entrepreneurs to undertake larger ventures, to dig deeper mines, to build larger iron
furnaces with bellows that were powered by water. And the larger bellows meant that the iron
masters could try producing larger iron products. As we'll see in the gunpowder lecture, this gave
them the opportunity to make cannon. By producing more goods that could be bought and sold, water
wheels helped European society begin to grow after 1080. So one important difference between the
ancient and modern world is that the ancients could only rely on humans and animals for power,
whereas by the Middle Ages, Europeans had developed a new prime mover, the water wheel.
A second way that the ancient world gave way to the modern during the Middle Ages
was the development of the clock. In order to make sense of their lives and the natural
environment around them, people have traditionally sought out patterns and particularly patterns
and terms in the passage of time. And the most useful patterns that have been used for keeping
track of time are those related to the movement of the sun and the stars in heaven. We have the
Babylonians to thank for the fact that we divide the day and tonight into 24 hours, the hour into
60 minutes, and the minute into 60 seconds. That's how the Babylonian astronomers studied
the heavens and kept track of what they saw up there. One way to use the sun to measure time
is to observe how a shadow rotates around a stick as the sun moves from sunrise to noon to sunset.
And the earliest type of timekeeping device that we know about dates from 3500 BC,
and it was a shadow clock or nomen, a vertical stick that casts a shadow.
Taking advantage of their knowledge of geometry, the ancient Greeks developed many new forms in
sundial. Sundials are believed to have been introduced to Greece by an examiner of Miletus
around 560 BC. Along with sundials, the Greeks also perfected water clocks or what are called
clipsedra. Clipsedra utilizes a simple principle that water flows or drips steadily out of a small
hole in the bottom of the vessel. Consequently, one can measure the passage of time by observing
how the water level moves down inside the vessel and keeping track of it by having a marker.
Alternatively, one can let the water drip out of one vessel and into another,
and there in the second vessel place a float and a pointer which moves up as the water level
increases. The pointer would show the passage of time as it moves up relative to that vertical
indicator. Several prominent Hellenistic and Roman inventors, including Archimedes,
Hero of Alexandria and Cespius, worked on improving clipsedra by adding gears and a dial
indicator, gongs and trumpets to sound out the hours, and they even used clipsedra to open doors
and show figurines. In both Greek and Roman times, clipsedra were used in law courts for
allocating the amount of time each speaker could have to make their case. The proceedings were
interrupted for any reason, such as to stop to examine documents. The hole in the clipsedra
would be stopped up with wax until the speaker was ready to resume his pleading.
In the 4th century BC, the clipsedra was also supposedly used to time clients' visits to brothels
and Athens. But while keeping track of the hours, minutes and seconds may be important to us,
it was hardly important to the average person in the Middle Ages. Medieval peasants lived without
any kind of clocks. Their lives were regulated by the rising and setting of the sun, by the
change of the seasons, and by the weekly Sabbath and festival days that were established by the church.
One group that would have been interested in tracking time would have been the merchants
and traders in market towns and cities. These folks needed to regulate when markets would
open and close, and they needed to keep track of the length of workday for their employees.
Another group who cared a lot about tracking time were the monastic orders. In the monasteries,
monks followed a regular sequence of prayer, work, eating, and sleeping, and that was all
dictated by the monastic rules that required specific prayers at specific times day and night.
In both the monasteries and the towns, bells were rung to indicate prayer time.
Hence, monasteries had a need for some device to know during the night when it was time to get up and pray.
While monks relied on sand-filled hour classes and clipsedra, it's also likely that monks
contributed to developing a new timekeeping device, the mechanical clock.
Mechanical clock is powered by a falling weight, and the trick is that you have to control the
fall of the weight, letting it drop a little bit at a time. In my mind, if we go back to the clipsedra
with a steady drip, drip, drip, it's not hard to make the leap of substituting a weight that's falling
bit by bit by bit. Control the descent of the weight, though, you need a new mechanism, an escapement.
Although we don't know for sure who might have made this creative leap
and come up with the mechanism known as an escapement, we do know that between 1280 and 1320,
there were an increase in the number of references to clocks and clock-like devices in church records,
suggesting that a new type of mechanism had been devised.
And that new mechanism was a verge and folly at escapement. Now to understand this mechanism,
let's have a look at this diagram. In this diagram, you can see that the mechanism has a weight that
is connected by a string to a horizontal shaft that turns as the weight falls. Left to its own
accord, the weight would cause the shaft to turn, and the crown gear that's on that shaft would spin
freely. However, the crown gear doesn't spin freely because it engages two special teeth,
known as the pallets, that are located on a vertical shaft, which is called the verge.
The pallets are positioned 90 degrees apart. On the top, the verge ends in two arms, and at the
end of each of those arms in turn, are two smaller weights. Now as this escapement operates,
the folly at arms swing back and forth. As the weight pulls down and forces the crown wheel to
turn, it pushes one pallet tooth and the verge turns. However, before the crown wheel can turn
too far, the upper pallet tooth engages the crown wheel again and stops it from running away,
that is, escaping. Because of the weights on the folly, the pallet and the verge are able to provide
a counter force that stops the crown wheel for a moment. The verge and folly at escapement is a
really impressive invention, and that it plays one force, the swinging arms of the folly, off another,
the descending weight. Well, the diagram I just showed you includes an hour hand and a dial,
most early verge and folly at clocks did not have dials, but were instead used in church
towers for the ringing of bells. In other cases, the escapement drove devices that represented
the movement of the sun, the moon, or the planets. In effect, a miniature planetarium
or what's called an ori. In 1283, a large clock was installed at the Dunstable Priory,
and its locations above the choir suggest that it wasn't a water clock.
Equally, in 1292, Canterbury Cathedral installed a, quote, great horlage,
probably a clock to ring the bells. And the earliest surviving clock dates from 1386
and can be found at the Salisbury Cathedral. A truly remarkable example of what could be
done with a virgin folly escapement is the great seven-sided clock devised by Giovanni
D'Andi between 1348 and 1364. D'Andi was a professor of astronomy at the University of
Padua in Italy. His clock showed the time of the fixed pointer and a revolving dial,
the heavenly positions of the sun, moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn,
the position of the nodes where the path of the sun and moon intersect,
and even a drum showing the day, the number of hours of daylight,
and the name of the saint that was supposed to be honored on that day.
While D'Andi's original clock disappeared in the 16th century,
he left behind detailed plans and several replicas have been created.
Even though they could lose anywhere from 15 to 30 minutes a day and had to be constantly reset
by consulting a sundial, virgin folly at clocks were all the rage from the 1300s to the 1500s.
The next improvement came thanks to the great scientist Galileo Galilei, who noticed in 1581
that a pendulum is isochronous, namely that the period of the swing for small swing angles
is constant and dependent only on the length of the pendulum.
Near the end of his life, Galileo designed a pendulum clock,
but he passed on before he could build one. Here the pendulum took the place of the virgin
folly at and controlled the fall of the weight. Picking up on Galileo's idea, the Dutch astronomer
Christian Huygens showed in 1657 how a pendulum could be used to regulate a clock, and he assigned
this invention that he came up with to Samuel Koster of the Hog, who built a version the following
year. Huygens' design was still not entirely accurate, and 10 years later the English physicist
Robert Hook invented the escapement, anchor escapement, that permitted the use of clocks with
a pendulum that had a small swing. The anchor escapement, the mechanical clock, achieved a
high degree of accuracy, allowing it to be used for navigational and other purposes.
So what about watches? As clocks started turning up in the towers of churches and
town halls, people began regulating their lives by the chiming of the bells,
using them to know when to start work, go to the market, eat meals, go to bed.
Equally the wealthy were fascinated by how such an ingenious machine could measure the passage of
time, and they soon started asking for instrument makers to make clocks not only for their homes,
but clocks that they could carry around with them. Now while you can certainly have a weight-driven
clock at home, you can't very well walk around with a weight-driven clock. To create a portable clock,
a watch, one needed to come up with an alternative to the falling weight, and that alternative was the
flat coiled spring. One of the problems with using a coiled spring though, is that unlike the
falling weight, which exerts the same pull as it descends, the spring delivers more force when
it's fully wound up than when it's unwound. To compensate for this variation, Leonardo da Vinci
sketched a device that became known as a fusee, and the fusee is a conical pulley attached to the
driveshaft of the spring, and using a string as the spring unwinds, the fusee collects the
string from successfully larger portions of the cone. The larger radius at the cone compensates
for the weaker force of the spring, thus keeping the dried torque at a constant speed.
Using a flat spring, combined with a fusee, clockmakers produced the first portable clocks
about 1500, and some of the best were produced by watchmakers in Nuremberg, Germany.
Over the next few centuries, watchmakers learned how to make pocket watches that were flatter,
but they didn't have a minute hand until the 1720s.
Wrist watches were not introduced until the 1880s when the German Navy ordered them for all of its
officers. Civilians, however, took little interest in wrist watches, and they only became fashionable
for women in Paris about 1908, and only acceptable for men to wear after World War I. During World
War I, soldiers wore them in the trenches and relied on wrist watches to be able to coordinate attacks.
It's easy to imagine the Middle Ages in Europe is a bleak and uncreative time,
marked by peasants living in squalor and a few knights riding around battling one another.
Indeed, have you ever noticed that most movies set in the Middle Ages
take place in dark, foggy, miserable settings? As far as Hollywood is concerned,
there never was a sunny day in medieval Europe.
Yet, what we've seen here is that like all human cultures and eras,
medieval Europe relied on technology, and it had its share of great inventions.
Among the two most important inventions to come out of the Middle Ages were the water wheel and
the clock, both technological and mechanical marvels. The water wheels we've seen was the
first prime mover to supplement human and animal power, and it transformed daily life
by providing the power needed to grind flour, saw wood, and drive the bellows and iron furnaces.
It introduced the possibility of using energy as a major input into human enterprises,
and thus the water wheel set the stage for inventors who subsequently created other prime movers,
such as the windmill, the steam engine, or the internal combustion engine.
Likewise, the mechanical clock was an ingenious invention,
pitting two forces, one from a falling weight, one from a pendulum or a virgin foliate,
against each other in order to measure the passage of time.
Just as the water wheel was integrated into daily life after 1000 A.D.,
so clocks spread across Europe after 1300, and people came to rely on them to order their daily
lives at home, in church, and in the marketplace. Very fact that we in the modern world have
ample energy, provided by prime movers and clocks, and that we take both of these inventions
for granted is perhaps the most telling sign that these were indeed great inventions.
