As the old saying goes, east is east and west is west, but the twain shall never meet.
People often use this saying to claim that China and Islamic world are separate and different
from Europe and America.
Yet for the history of technology from 500 to 1500 AD, nothing could be farther from
the truth.
During these centuries, ideas and machines moved steadily east to west, from Chinese
and Islamic societies to Europe.
Much of this technology moved along the Silk Road, a trade route that crossed Asia to connect
China and India to the Mediterranean world.
This route took form in the first century BC when rulers in Central Asia developed strong
cavalry that could fight off nomadic tribes who regularly raided the trade caravans.
Over the next thousand years, these caravans brought Chinese silk, Persian carpets and
steel swords from Damascus to Europe.
In return, the Chinese took home gems, jade, gold and silver.
Roads changed hands along the route, with Arab, Persian and Indian merchants acting
as the middlemen.
Perhaps the most famous European to travel the Silk Road was Marco Polo, who wrote a
book in the early 14th century describing the wonders of the Islamic world and of China.
Not only a trade route, the Silk Road was also a highway for inventions.
The Chinese invented paper, printing, gunpowder and a magnetic compass, all of which came
to Europe via the Silk Road.
They journeyed along the Silk Road and introduced new designs for water wheels, windmills and
other new devices.
New ideas moved east to west as well.
For instance, Arab merchants adopted an Indian numerical system that used zero through nine
since it permitted the rapid calculation of costs and prices.
European traders on the Silk Road also began using these numerals and when they arrived
in Europe at the end of the 12th century, they were called Arabic numerals.
In the next two lectures, we will look closely at several inventions that moved along the
Silk Road from China to Europe.
In this episode, we will focus on paper and printing, both of which started in China and
then moved west through the Islamic world to Europe at the end of the Middle Ages.
In the next lecture, we will explore the invention of gunpowder and cannon and how these technologies
dramatically altered history on both sides of the world.
In both lectures, we are going to take a comparative approach examining how these inventions took
different trajectories east and west.
In doing so, we will see that while people use great inventions to shape their destiny,
there is nothing automatic or deterministic about how inventions shape history.
Instead, we will see how people use inventions in response to the needs and imperatives of
their environment and society.
We will also consider how much hard work goes into making an invention like movable type
a reality.
Before we can talk about printing itself, we need to consider the material on which you
print, paper.
And even before that, we ought to talk about the predecessors of paper.
Prior to paper, there were clay tablets.
As we saw in lecture three, the Scribes and Accountants of Mesopotamia wrote in Canea
Form on tablets of wet clay that were then baked in kilns.
What emerged from the kiln were hard, flat surfaces of pottery, so durable that archaeologists
have found thousands upon thousands of tablets, most of them still in excellent condition
after centuries.
Yet while they have a long lifetime, Canea Form tablets have several disadvantages.
Once baked, you can't erase or change the records.
And the tablets also require a great deal of room to store.
I don't even want to think about how many clay tablets it would take to store one kilobyte
of data, never mind one gigabyte.
In contrast, the Egyptians wrote their hieroglyphs on sheets of papyrus.
Papyrus is a reed that grows in the marshes along the Nile River, and the ancient Egyptians
found that the pith, the soft white tissue inside the stalk, could be pounded into long,
flat strips because it was light, compact and portable.
Papyrus soon became the writing material of choice in the ancient Mediterranean world.
Toward the end of the ancient Europe and into medieval times, important documents and books
in Europe were also written on parchment, and parchment is the untanned skin of sheep
or goats.
Because college diplomas were originally issued on parchment, people still say that when you
graduate from college, you're getting your sheepskin.
As you might expect, parchment was expensive.
To make the equivalent of a book with 200 pages, you'd need skins from a dozen sheep.
Hence the real cost in producing a book in medieval Europe was not necessarily having
someone write the text by hand, but rather the cost of the materials.
In China, the scholars and bureaucrats who served the emperor were faced with a similar
problem.
Although they didn't use parchment, they too were confronted by the high cost of using
bamboo tablets or silk for their books.
As it turned out, paper proved to be the solution to the high cost of writing materials to the
Chinese imperial court.
But curiously, it took 200 years to go from the invention of paper to using it for writing.
Sometime in the first century BC, the Chinese began making paper, and they used it in a
variety of ways, for clothing, small domestic objects, or for wrapping goods.
To make paper, you take fibrous materials.
Say the leaves from a mulberry tree, linen rags, bits of hemp, and you beat these fibers
literally to a pulp.
To soften the fibers, you might boil the pulp in an alkali like wood ash.
You then wash the pulp, spread it onto porous screens, and let it dry.
According to tradition, a eunuch in the emperor's court in 105AD began advocating that books
should be written on paper instead of bamboo tablets or silk.
Paper-making traveled along the Silk Road, reaching the Arab world in the 8th century
and Europe via the Moors in Spain around about the 12th century.
To write on paper, you also need ink.
The Chinese initially made ink using the following recipe.
Take soot from burn pine logs, mix that with some lamp oil and the gelatin from the skin
of an ass, and then add a couple of drops of musk to mask the entirely foul smell.
Around the 5th century AD, Europeans began using another type of ink, made from iron
salts, tannins from oak nuts, and resin as a thickener.
These called this ink in custom, which in Latin means to burn in, since ink penetrated
the parchment or papyrus in a way that looked like the writing surface had been burned.
Now once paper and ink were available, the Chinese began investigating ways to reproduce
numerous copies of materials, and they did so for two reasons.
The first was the spread of Buddhism in China.
Buddhism began as a religion in India, but it soon spread to China and Japan.
In order for people to learn about this new religion, Buddhists believe that it was important
to make copies of prayers and sacred texts available to all people, and this prompted
Buddhists, particularly in China, to investigate printing.
As an initial step, Chinese Buddhists around 200 AD printed texts and pictures by carving
letters and images onto wooden blocks.
These blocks were covered with ink and then pressed against sheets of paper.
In 972, the Trippitaka, a sacred Buddhist scripture of more than 130,000 pages, was printed entirely
using wooden blocks.
Another factor prompting the Chinese to develop printing arose from the examination process
by which government officials were selected.
These exams were based on a mastery of a series of books related to the teaching of Confucius.
Since the examinations were open to all who had the time, or the money, to study and read,
the government felt obligated to make copies of all of these texts widely available.
For instance, the Prime Minister, Feng Dao, spent 22 years arranging for the printing
of the four books and five classics of Confucianism.
When the set appeared in 953, it filled 130 volumes.
In addition, the Chinese imperial government also printed and distributed books to keep
its bureaucrats informed about new agricultural or engineering or military techniques.
The Chinese government saw printing as a means of disseminating key ideas and stimulating
a common culture.
For the Chinese, block printing worked reasonably well.
The blocks for a particular book were often held for generations by a single family of
printers who would run off copies whenever they were sufficient to man.
In some cases, hundreds of thousands of copies of a particular book were printed.
Now as a fan of Chinese brush painting, one of my favorite examples of a woodblock book
is called the Mustard Seed Garden Manual of Painting.
This book first appeared in 1679 and is named after the property in the house where the
publisher lived in Nanjing.
Block printers in China produced not only religious texts, but also volumes of poetry,
alchemy, biography, and they also printed up playing cards.
The Chinese continued to develop a variety of printing techniques such as color printing
and movable type.
About 1045 AD, an experienced block printer, Bi Sheng, began experimenting with making
individual Chinese characters out of clay and assembling those characters onto a tray
in order to form a page of text.
The Chinese scholar Shen Koo, and his dates are 1031 to 1095, described Bi Sheng's technique
in the following way.
And I quote,
When he wished to print, he took an iron frame and set it on the iron plate.
In this he placed the types at close together.
When the frame was full, the hole made one solid block of type.
He then placed it near the fire to warm it.
When the paste at the back was slightly melted, he took a smooth board and pressed it over
the surface so the block of type became as even as a wet stone.
For each character, there were several types.
And for certain common characters, there were 20 more types each in order to be prepared
for the repetition of characters on the same page.
When the characters were not in use, he had them arranged with paper labels, one label
for each rhyme group, and he kept them in wooden cases.
Beginning in the 11th century, the Chinese government also issued paper money and official
documents that were printed using movable type.
On the printed money, there were two spots where movable type was used.
And by varying the thousand characters used on those two spots, the Chinese were able
to render each bill unique.
Until around 1230, Korean printers experimented with typecast in metal, but the impact of
their efforts was limited since the special type was kept in a royal foundry, could only
be used for special projects that serve the Korean nobility.
In general, because the Chinese language requires up to 40,000 separate characters, movable
type did not seem really practical to Chinese printers, and it was not vigorously pursued.
Because block printing was more successful in China than movable type, it was the idea
of block printing, not movable type, that was transmitted east to west on the Silk Road
in the 13th century.
The idea may have traveled with the Mongols who learned about it when they conquered China
in the 13th century and who surged into Russia and Eastern Europe about the same time.
Equally, examples of block printing, such as playing cards, were carried back by Venetian
merchants, and these examples may have prompted craftsmen to experiment with printing.
Now about this time, Europeans learned about paper, again from the Muslims who were manufacturing
it in Spain.
Hence by the end of the 1300s, various block printed items, playing cards and religious
pictures, and a few simple books, were being produced in northern Italy and southern Germany.
To make these images, early printers used printing presses that were derived from the
screw type wine presses, which I mentioned in passing in our lecture on Roman technology.
Nevertheless, the complexity and cost of carving a wood stamp would say all the words for one
page of the Bible would have been prohibitive.
Yet there was a huge demand for Bibles since ideally every church, large or small, should have one.
Because the Roman alphabet employs a small number of standard letters, printers throughout
Europe were tempted to experiment with movable type.
While it appears that several printers in France and Holland were using movable type
in the 15th century, credit is traditionally given to Johann Gutenberg of Mons, Germany.
Gutenberg's father was a goldsmith, and he followed his father into that craft.
And as we'll see in a moment, Gutenberg took full advantage of the metallurgical knowledge
that he acquired while working as a goldsmith.
On one level, Gutenberg's invention may seem incredibly simple.
All he had to do was cast letters in lead and then arrange those letters line by line on
a rack on a wooden tray.
And when the racks were locked onto place on the tray, the tray could then be inked,
pressed onto a sheet of paper, and you could create multiple copies of a page.
After Gutenberg had run off as many copies as he needed,
type could be taken out of the frame and used to compose a new page.
However, this description doesn't begin to capture the problems that quickly crop up
when you start using type, problems that have to do with precision.
One challenge is that for effective printing, the entire type face that presses onto the
paper must be flat.
If the length of the type for one or more of the letters is too short, then those letters
will not make an impression on the page.
That's why Shen Kou emphasized in his description of Bicheng's printing that his type was as
even as a whetstone.
Another challenge is that the height of the type must be consistent.
If some letters are taller and shorter than others, then within a few lines of text,
the letters will not line up, and it won't be possible to read the words.
The words will look like they're floating on the page.
To go overcome these challenges, Gutenberg turned to using an adjustable mold for making his type.
Gutenberg's mold consisted of two L-shaped pieces that could slide into one another.
So one L-shaped piece was like this, the other shape was like that, and in the middle,
was where the type was cast.
Since they could slide horizontally, the molds could be used to make narrow letters like the lower
case I, or they could be pulled apart for wider letters like the capital W.
At the same time, these two pieces could not move up and down, thus ensuring that the height of the type
would be uniform.
To deal with the problems caused when the length of the type varied, Gutenberg added a groove
to one side of the type and a corresponding ridge on the other side.
And both the groove and the ridge were exactly the same distance from the typeface.
When the typeface was set to form a row of text, the ridge in one row would fit precisely in the
groove of the preceding row, thus ensuring that the letters did not float up or down the page.
To cast the letters, Gutenberg placed a matrix at the bottom of his adjustable mold.
The matrix was made of a soft metal like copper, and in the matrix, Gutenberg punched the letter
that he planned to cast.
Significantly, since the metal used to cast the letters must not stick to either the adjustable
mold or the matrix, Gutenberg drew on his experience as a goldsmith and formulated a special
alloy of tin, zinc, and lead that was suited to the task.
As Gutenberg began printing with his new press, he quickly discovered that the encostum ink
didn't work well since it didn't adhere to the type, and it also blurred on the page.
Consequently, a new ink had to be developed for printing, and it was made from soot and
linseed oil.
This formula clung to the type and it produced clean, sharp-carapace paper.
By 1447, Gutenberg had brought all of these innovations together, and he was operating
a print shop in Mons, and this shop is credited with producing about 50 different titles.
The most famous of the titles that he produced was the Gutenberg Bible, a Bible that surpassed
in beauty and workmanship all of the books that had been produced up to that time.
By printing a masterpiece, Gutenberg contributed decisively to the acceptance of the book
as a suitable alternative to the handwritten book.
From a purely technical standpoint, it's remarkable to note that Gutenberg's design for type and his
printing press proved to be highly efficient and reliable, and that these designs were
used unchanged for the next 300 years.
Indeed, Gutenberg would have been entirely familiar with the printing press that Ben Franklin
employed in Philadelphia in the mid-1800s.
The first real change that came to printing presses occurred in 1810, when Frederick Koenig
secured an English patent for a press powered by a steam engine.
So how did printing shape European culture?
Broadly speaking, the development of printing played into two trends, then taking shape
in European culture.
On the one hand, printing was stimulated by the economic prosperity of Italian cities
and the Renaissance.
As the merchant and middle classes grew more prosperous and more literate, they demanded
more reading material.
In response, Italian printers produced secular works such as the newly revived
Greek and Roman classics, the stories of Italian writers and the scientific work of scholars.
On the other hand, the rise of Martin Luther and the ensuing Protestant Reformation, which
was followed by a whole series of wars between Catholics and Protestants, were heavily dependent
on the printing press.
Just as Buddhists in China had felt it was important to make sacred texts available so early
Protestants fervently believed that Christians should be able to read the Bible and decide
for themselves God's message.
As a result, printers in northern Europe turned out vast numbers of religious books
such as Bibles, Psalters and Missiles.
Since these texts were to be read not only by the clergy but by ordinary people, the
books were printed in both Latin and the newly emergent vernacular languages, languages
like Italian, French and German.
In addition, groups on both sides of the religious and political controversies of the 16th and
17th centuries published pamphlets in order to persuade people to join their cause.
Learning also contributed to the spread of technical knowledge as some of the first books
to appear covered developments in engineering.
As we noted in our discussion of Distilled Spirits, a couple of lectures back, one of
the first popular books was a guided distilling written by Michael Puff von Schrick, first
published in 1478, Von Schrick's Guide went through 14 editions before 1500.
Along with Von Schrick's Guide came Bern Guccio's Handbook on Gunpowder, which was called
Pyrotechnia and that appeared in 1540.
Agricolas Opus on Mining, De Ray Metallica, that dates from 1556.
Lomazzo's Age of Building from 1598 and Stevan's Handbook on Navigation, Haven Finding Art.
Looks like these accelerated invention since by knowing about technical developments elsewhere
in Europe, inventors and engineers were able to avoid dead ends and were able to build upon
previous work done.
Altogether, between 1450 and 1500, no less than 40,000 years ago, we were able to build
between 1450 and 1500 no less than 40,000 separate works were printed in Europe.
This was more titles than had been produced in all of Europe over the previous thousand years.
During this period, the number of printers increased rapidly as well.
In Italy, for example, the first press was established in Venice in 1469 and by 1500,
the city had 417 printers.
The first printing press was brought to England in 1476 by William Caxton.
Printing also followed Europeans to the New World.
In 1539, Juan Pablo set up a press in Mexico City and Stevan Day established a press in
Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1628.
Even though there was a great demand for printed works, the brisness of printing and publishing
was nonetheless risky.
Along with the cost of buying type and a press, one also had to pay the workers.
And as a result, a master printer could easily go bankrupt by printing a large run of books
for which there was no demand.
Consequently, printers in the 16th and 17th centuries experimented with different strategies
for coping with risk.
One approach was subscription publishing.
In this scenario, a printer would prepare a prospectus announcing a new book.
This prospectus would be circulated among potential buyers who signed up in advance for a copy.
If there were not enough subscribers, the publication did not go through.
Listed subscribers were often included in books and as endorsements,
showing that a particular printer had the support of the social and economic elite.
This approach appeared in England in the early 17th century.
Another strategy was installment printing.
In this situation, a printer would produce portions of a book and then sell those portions individually.
People would buy each installment and ultimately bind all the installments once they were issued.
This was an effective method of spreading the cost over a period of time
and it allowed profits from the first installments to help cover the costs of the later installments.
Story of paper and printing offers us several important insights into both the invention process
as well as how inventions spread across cultures in time.
First and foremost, I want you to take away from this story an awareness
that what's obvious to us in hindsight is often hardly obvious to the individuals
creating and using a technology for the first time.
For example, we might think that paper should have been used immediately for writing,
but there was a gap of two centuries in China between the introduction of paper
and its first application of writing.
Equally, Gutenberg and other early printers probably had to try a lot of different things
in order to get movable type to work.
In retrospect, printing looks incredibly easy,
but as they say, the devil was in the details.
That brings us to a second lesson.
The developed movable type, whether it be Bicheng in China,
the printers in Korea or Gutenberg in Germany,
all of them had to really focus on the details.
We can see this best with Gutenberg.
Gutenberg had to look at how early type was not producing good pages.
There were misletters, words floating on the page, smudged imprints,
and Gutenberg had to respond by developing a set of interlocking techniques,
namely precisely cast type from his adjustable mold,
type cast from a new alloy, and a better ink.
These techniques do not come about by accident or by luck,
but are the consequence of a careful and determined inventor.
And finally, moving from the inventor to the big picture,
printing illustrates how a new invention
can follow different trajectories in different societies
and have different impacts.
In China, printing was developed as a means
for integrating Buddhist and Confucian ideas into the general culture.
Printing helped the Chinese government to promote a common culture
through the texts that were used for exams to become a bureaucrat.
In contrast, printing in Europe
was drawn into the unfolding intellectual, religious,
and political ferment of the age.
Rather than creating a common and continuous culture,
printing stimulated debate and division.
Printing was used by Renaissance scholars
to introduce new secular and scientific ideas.
Protestants relied on printing to produce new Bibles
that could be read and interpreted in ways that challenged
the traditional teachings of the church.
Different political groups used pamphlets to put forward new ideas.
And because people preferred to read in their native tongue
and not Latin, printing contributed to the development
of multiple languages in Europe.
Rather than helping to create a single culture, as in China,
printing permitted Europeans to develop a diverse
and even conflicting national cultures.
To my mind, printing in paper are great inventions,
not only because they are terrific illustrations of the creative act,
but also because they remind us that technology does not shape
history as much as people shape technology
to suit the needs of their time and their place.
