One of my favorite quotes about technology and invention comes from the science fiction
writer Arthur C. Clark who aptly noted, any sufficiently advanced technology will appear
as magic. For Europeans in the 14th century, gunpowder was a completely unexpected invention,
so much so that they saw it at times as black magic, the work of the devil. In fact, these
dark associations probably led to Joan of Arc being burned at the stake in 1431. Along
with her ability to inspire the French troops, Joan was a skilled battlefield commander,
and more than one witness spoke to her ability to use the newly developed cannon to fight
the English. And I quote, she acted so wisely and clearly in waging war as if she was a
captain who had the experience of 20 or 30 years, and especially in the setting up of
the artillery, for in that she held herself magnificently. As a peasant, a commoner, it
was probably relatively easy for Joan to have mingled with the craftsmen who made gunpowder
and cannon and learned from them the secrets of this new weaponry. The same time as a young
person outside the military establishment, Joan wasn't committed to fighting battles
the same old way. Consequently, if Joan was especially effective and surprising in battle,
would have been quite easy for the English to have branded her a witch, someone in cahoots
with a devil who was associated with early gunpowder. Not knowing from whence it came,
superstitious medieval folks often called gunpowder the devil's distillate. In this lecture, we
won't worry so much about superstition, and we'll look instead at the origins of gunpowder
in China, how it came to Europe, and how the Chinese and Europeans came to develop distinctive
gunpowder weapons. Now, lest you think that this lecture will be entirely about guns and
war, let me assure you that I also talk about how gunpowder changed the politics and the
language of Europe. Understand the origin and history of gunpowder,
it helps to do the science first. Gunpowder is a blend of sulfur, charcoal, and salt
peter. These substances are finely crushed and mixed together so particles of each are
always touching one another. When gunpowder is set on fire, the sulfur burns first because
it has a low ignition temperature of 261 degrees centigrade. The sulfur ignites the charcoal,
which we have seen in lecture two as a hot clean fuel. The temperature of the burning
mix quickly reaches 335 degrees centigrade, which is the ignition point for salt peter.
Salt peter is a nitrate salt. Today, it's typically potassium nitrate. When salt peter
ignites, the nitrate radical releases extra oxygen, which dramatically speeds up the combustion
of both the sulfur and the charcoal. Combustion now produces hot gases which go in every direction,
causing a bullet to fly down at high speed in a gun barrel or a bomb to fly apart.
Gunpowder's origins are related to magic, not black magic, but rather the white magic
of alchemy. Gunpowder was first formulated in the 9th century by Chinese alchemists.
Unlike European alchemists who were seeking the philosopher's stone that would transform
base substances into gold, their Chinese counterparts, inspired by Taoism, were looking for the elixir
of life, hoping that they could come up with something that would allow them to live forever.
In the search, Chinese alchemists had identified salt peter and sulfur as interesting ingredients
and seemed to have tried a variety of combinations in search for the magical elixir.
Salt peter is a white powder that is formed by bacteria and topsoil as they feast on decaying
organic matter. It often appears as white particles, and in the warm, humid climate of southern
China, these particles are leached by water to the surface where they can be harvested.
In fact, when Arabs learned of gunpowder from the Chinese, they called salt peter Chinese
snow. Seeking to purify salt peter and sulfur to create that elixir, Chinese alchemists often
heated them together. The very first reference to gunpowder comes from a Chinese text dating
from 850 AD, and it was titled, Classified Essentials of the Mysterious Tao of the True
Origins of Things, and this text warns, Some have heated together sulfur, realger, and salt
peter with honey, smoke and flames result, so that their hands and faces have been burnt,
and even the whole house where they were working burned down. Chinese scholars interpreted
this interaction of these materials within the philosophical framework of the yin and
the yang, noting that, and I quote, salt peter is extremely negative or moonish, that means
the yin. Sulfur is extremely positive and sunny, that is, that is extraversive, and that's
the yang. When these two supernatural elements, yin and yang, meet each other in an excessively
close space, the resulting explosion will stun every soul and shatter everything around
it. Within a century or so, gunpowder was taken up by the army in the Song dynasty and
used to make flaming arrows and rockets. The most promising application, though, was to
use gunpowder as an accelerant in fire lances, a sort of handheld flamethrower that consisted
of a bamboo tube that could shoot six foot flames for about five minutes or so. Soldiers
soon realized that the right mix of salt peter, sulfur and charcoal could be used not just
to ignite the fire lances, but have the explosive power needed to propel bits of metal or pot
shards that would injure the enemy. This resulted in what today we would call a mortar. Over
time, the Chinese replaced the bamboo tube in the fire lance with a tube made of bronze
or iron. In the 13th century, during the reign of the Mongols, the Chinese military made
further discovery that you could capture all of the force of the explosion of the gunpowder
by replacing the bits of metal with a projectile like a ball. By making a close fit between
the projectile and the wall of the tube, the force of the explosion of the gunpowder caused
the projectile to exit the tube with great force and a high velocity. If you made the
tube longer, it became possible to give the projectile a specific trajectory and aim it
at a target. Through these steps, the Chinese invented the first guns. The first Chinese
gun has been tentatively dated to 1288 and a Chinese bronze hand cannon from 1332s a
foot long and weighs eight pounds. Hundreds of larger cannon have survived from the 1350s
and they were used to shoot both stone and iron balls. Note that gun and cannon barrels
need to be carefully formed. Today, they're usually drilled out. Gun barrels in Chinese
times were made by rolling a sheet of metal into a tube, but that couldn't necessarily
contain the gunpowder blast and frequently blew up in the soldier's face. As a result,
guns and cannon were expensive weapons from the start. As the future Ming emperors fought
and defeated the Mongols in the late 14th century, both sides used cannon in battle.
However, it's not clear to me how extensive cannon were used in Chinese warfare. Much
of the fighting involved repelling vast armies of foot soldiers invading from Mongolia, Tibet,
Thailand and Vietnam and the Chinese found it more expedient to arm their own soldiers
with lots of fire lances and lots of rocket propelled bombs. Because they were dealing
with large hordes of attackers, rockets and fire lances proved to be very effective weapons.
They were light, cheap and could be launched against the horde so as to create both injury
and confusion.
Now let's turn and talk about guns and gunpowder in Europe. Historians are still debating how
information about gunpowder got to Europe in the 13th century. It may have been one
of several inventions that simply traveled along with travelers and traders along the
Silk Road. Alternatively, Europeans learned about it as they fought with the Mongols who
invaded parts of Russia and Eastern Europe in the early 13th century.
Equally, after they overthrew the Song emperors, the Mongols regarded the Chinese as worthless
and turned Arabs and Europeans to be minor officials and to help rule their state. Hence
the Mongols readily shared ideas with both Arabs and Europeans.
The earliest reference to gunpowder in Europe dates to 1267 in which the English natural
philosopher Roger Bacon wrote to the Pope about having seen what appears to have been
a small firecracker and Bacon observes, and I quote, by the flash and combustion of fires
and by the horror of the sounds, wonders can be wrought and at any distance that we wish
so that a man can hardly protect himself or endure it.
As in China, took about 50 years for news of gunpowder to move in Europe from the academic
realm to military practice. By the 1330s, military commanders were adding cannon and
gunpowder to their arsenals throughout Europe. And in the Battle of Cresce in 1346, Edward
III of England used cannon against the French. Not so much to mow down the French knights,
for that he relied on his longbow archers as to terrorize the French with the thunderous
sounds of his cannon and the fire that spewed from their barrels.
Early on, collecting enough salt, Peter was a serious challenge in Europe as the climate
was not sufficiently hot and humid for the sort of rapid natural production that we
saw in China. While some gunpowder makers scoured barnyards, privies and caves looking
for the telltale white droppings, others experimented with recreating natural conditions.
One recipe from 1561 recommended filling a pit with old plaster, horse stung, human
feces and urine. And I quote about the urine, namely the urine of those persons which drink
either wine or strong beer. Although they didn't know it at the time, the metabolism
of alcohol and urine produces ammonium, a favorite food of nitrate bacteria.
Because the major military challenges in Europe were either to break down the walls of castles
or the walls of town or to sink naval ships as opposed to stopping the invading hordes,
Europeans used gunpowder mostly in the form of cannon. But to do so, they had to fashion
stronger and larger cannons than those that had been found and used in China.
Casting large pieces like cannon is difficult and expensive because you have to pour the
molten metal carefully to avoid creating any big air bubbles. Those are known as rat holes,
and the rat holes can weaken a casting once it cools. For this reason, the art of casting
came to be known as being more dependent on fortune than ability. To avoid casting
and its related problems, cannon makers tried borrowing techniques from coopers or barrel
makers. Cannon makers would place long wrought iron rods around a wooden core, heat them
and then hammer them together. They would then fill any cracks with white lead and add white
hot rings of iron which would shrink when they cooled and hold everything together once
the wooden core was pulled out. Now you can see when we talk about cannons and guns as
having a barrel. Known as bombards, these early cannon took an enormously long time
to load and fire. At the seizure of Mets in 1437, for example, officers were astounded
when a master gunner managed to fire three rounds in one day from a very large bombard.
One of the challenges confronting gunners was that gunpowder often got damp and spoiled
quickly. To overcome this problem, powder makers learned to add a small amount of liquid
to the three basic ingredients before grinding them together in a mortar and pestle. Again,
human urine was the preferred liquid to be added and it was thought that the urine of
imbibing bishops made especially good gunpowder. Powder makers then shaped the resulting paste
known as mill cake into corns or granules and then it was allowed to dry. They most likely
called the granules corn since they looked like wheat grain and corn is the general term
used in Europe to refer to grain crops. Not only did corn to powder work better or keep
better but because it had a reduced surface area, it was less prone to absorb moisture
and gunners also found that it was more powerful and easier to load into guns. Whereas a cannon
might have needed 34 pounds to shoot a 47-pound stone ball, it took only 18 pounds of the
new corn powder to fire the same ball the same distance. The main advantage of corning
is that all the granules ignite when the gunpowder is lit and so more hot gas is created more
quickly. Without corning, much of the powder was often wasted since it blew out of the
barrel before it burned. By the way, the same process of granulation is still used today
by the pharmaceutical industry to ensure that every tablet contains the same proportion
of active ingredients.
As with many technologies, one component improves so inventors and artisans need to modify
other components. In other words, the cannon became a system of interconnected components.
Better powder provoked a need for stronger cannon and gun makers studied the production
of bronze church bells since like cannon barrels, bells have to be cast around a hollow core.
Around this time, it also became possible to cast iron to make cannon thanks to the development
of the blast furnace. Up to the early modern era, Europeans could not build a fire hot
enough to melt iron. As we'll see in lecture 13, cast iron only became widely available
when iron masters learned to pump a blast of air into a furnace loaded with iron ore
and charcoal.
Scun makers became more proficient at casting cannon barrel. They learned how much metal
that needed in the different parts of the cannon. What was good to have as much as eight inches
of iron at the breach, the back of the barrel, the pressures of the explosion of the gun
powder decreased even a few inches forward so that by that point, you could get away
with only two or three inches of thickness. Gun makers also realized that if you made
the barrel longer relative to the bore, that's the inside diameter, the gun powder had more
time to burn behind the ball, generate more gases, and thus speed up the exit velocity
of the ball.
Finally, about 1450, Dutch gun makers added lugs to either side of the cannon barrel
so the gun could be swiveled up and down as well as mounted on wheels and could be hauled
to the battlefield by horses.
As both corn powder and cannon barrels improved, so it became desirable to have denser ammunition.
The cannon balls were stoned initially and those were expensive to carve and they tended
to shatter when they hit the castle walls. To take advantage of the other improvements
in the system, artillery officers sought out iron balls that could be cast more cheaply.
Because they could be cast more precisely, iron cannon balls could be made so that there
was a small clearance between the ball and the bore of the gun, meaning that the ball
captured more of the power of the explosion. This overall system, corn powder, iron cannon,
iron cannon balls defined European artillery for the next 300 years, from 1600 to 1900,
and only really changed at the end of the 19th century with new chemical explosives like
TNT. To take full advantage of this emerging system, some army officers took up the study
of trigonometry in order to calculate how high the gun barrel needed to be in order
to reach a target at a certain distance. In France, the king established in the 17th century
an artillery corps and then an artillery school for training these officers. Within a few
decades, the king added new corps and new schools leading to the creation of an engineering
corps in the army and the first engineering school, the École d'Apensé Chose, the school
for bridges and roads. This was the start of modern engineering education and it's
why many of the civil engineers in the American federal government, particularly those that
look after infrastructure, belong to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. It's based on
a French model. Because gunpowder and cannon were expensive, only kings could afford them
and they used them to defeat rebellious town people and powerful dukes. As a result, gunpowder
contributed to the emergence of strong monarchies in the 16th and 1700s.
In addition, corn gunpowder introduced the possibility of making refined handguns and
muskets that could be used by individual soldiers. The earliest shoulder guns, known in the German
as Hockenbush, meaning guns with a hook, and that word was rendered into English as archibuses,
they were made in Germany in the 14th century and these guns needed two men to operate them
more so heavy that they had to be fired from a stand. Muskets were initially a larger version
of the archibus and could weigh up to 25 pounds. Consequently, when you think of the three musketeers,
an elite corps in the French Army, you should envision them as the equivalent of today's
Green Berets or Navy Seals. The phrase lock, stock and barrel refers to having all parts
of a handgun, so let's look briefly at the evolution of each of these components.
The stock was the first part to form. It began as a wooden stick inserted into a socket at
the back end of the barrel, which the soldier could then grip. Over time, the stock evolved
into a wooden piece that allowed the soldier to hold the gun up to his shoulder so that
he could absorb the recoil with his whole torso as opposed to simply his arms. The lock
was probably the most complicated piece to develop as it had to deliver the ignition
charge to the gunpowder. Early soldiers often wished that they had three hands, two to hold
the gun and a third to apply the match to the charge. The first step came in the form
of a small hook attached to a lever. On the hook was placed a smoldering wick and when
the soldier pulled on the other end of the lever, the beginnings of a trigger, the wick
swung down and ignited the gunpowder through a touch hole in the barrel. Known as a matchlock,
this was the cutting edge of handguns from the middle of the 1400s into the early 1500s.
Mechanism was called a lock because the next nearest everyday thing that it resembled were
the early locks found on doors. Because guns were reordering the political and military
world of the Renaissance, many of the leading thinkers and artists devoted themselves to
improving weapons in order to secure or maintain the support of powerful patrons.
Among the great minds that studied weapons was Leonardo da Vinci and as early as 1500,
he sketched an alternative to the matchlock. Instead of dealing with the smoldering wick,
Leonardo developed a wheel lock. Much like a modern cigarette lighter, the device consisted
of a steel wheel which when rotated struck a flint giving off sparks that went through
the touch hole. German gun makers enthusiastically adopted
the wheel lock and used it initially to make hunting guns from the nobility since the wheel
lock was too delicate and too expensive to be placed in the hands of ordinary soldiers.
Eventually in the 18th century, the wheel lock on shoulder guns was replaced by the flint
lock in which a trigger controlled a hammer like lever that had a flint mounted on it
and that flint mounted struck a steel piece that was not mounted next to the touch hole.
Wheel locks though gave rise to the first pistols favored by cavalrymen since they
can then ride and shoot at the at the same time. Wheel lock pistols were also the preferred
weapon of highway robbers leading to laws in many places in the 16th century that limited
who could own pistols. Finally, let's talk about the barrel.
You may have noticed I've been using the word gun here and not rifle. That's because
a rifle is a specific kind of shoulder weapon with a barrel in which spiral grooves are
machined on the inside wall. The grooves impart a spin to the projectiles
that travels down the barrel the result of the projectile travels outside the gun on
a straighter trajectory. Consequently, rifles were much more accurate
than a smoothbore musket. As I understand it though, you have to be very careful with
a front end loading rifle, lest you spoil the grooves as you load your charge and rifle
ball and ram it home. Because it took longer to load rifles than muskets, European armies
didn't take up rifles until well into the 19th century. Further, it was not really until
American gunsmiths began turning out hunting rifles for pioneers, first by hand and then
by machine that became feasible to produce enough rifles for an army.
As you might expect, it required highly skilled metal workers in the renaissance to make guns.
It was difficult to make barrels that would not explode and grave craftsmanship was needed
to assemble the precision trigger mechanism. As a result, gun making was restricted to
a handful of European cities possessing a sufficiently large number of skilled artisans.
Venice was one such city and its armament factory in the nearby town of Bressia became
famous for the matchlocked muskets it provided to the armies of Europe.
Gunpowder, cannon and handguns changed not only the face of warfare in Europe but the
political and social structure as well. These weapons were extremely effective but they
were also very expensive. It was much more costly to equip an army of musket men than
one of archers. The use of cannon inflicted enormous damage on buildings and it made it
necessary to build elaborate fortifications to protect castles and towns. Such elaborate
fortifications that were capable of withstanding heavy cannon fire were much more expensive
than your average castle and those new fortifications could only be built by kings.
For all these reasons, it was now beyond the means of powerful nobles or aristocrats
to support private armies. By the end of the 16th century, war had become the reserve
of kings and other rulers who were able to raise taxes to pay for soldiers and armament
and so gunpowder and weapons played an important role in the appearance of the modern national
state as we know it. As we have seen, gunpowder and guns are truly Chinese inventions and
that they both appeared there centuries before they were used in Europe. But because they
were dealing with large hordes of land armies, the Chinese put much more effort into developing
fire lances and rockets to repel those hordes. In contrast, Europeans took a greater interest
in cannon because those could be used to break down fortifications and thus defeat troublesome
counts holed up in castles or unruly townspeople hiding behind the walls.
As we saw in lecture 10 on paper and printing, new inventions can have dramatically different
trajectories east and west. You could argue that gunpowder and fire lances were effectively
deployed by the Chinese to maintain a degree of homogeneity in their culture to keep out
the invaders, while gunpowder in Europe fed into the forces that were separating people
into different nation states. Here again we see how different circumstances
prompted groups to take the same invention, gunpowder, and use it to create very different
weapons. As with so many great inventions, there is no one best way to develop a new
technology. It depends on the political and social circumstances. It's people, not technology,
that shape the course of it.
