So in our later in our social studies class in elementary school, most of us hear about
Prince Henry of Portugal and his dates were 1394 to 1460. We're told that this prince
became known as Henry the Navigator, not because he actually sailed on ships, but rather because
he sponsored numerous expeditions that sailed from Portugal looking for a route around Africa
to India and China. Thanks to Henry's prodding, Europe discovered the riches of the East
and in so doing woke up from the slumber of the Middle Ages and entered the modern era.
But after being introduced to Henry in grade school, most of us never hear about him again.
He's not an individual who turns up in your typical high school or college history course.
His absence in advanced history courses in part reflects modern scholarship. Scholarship
that portrays Henry as being more of a medieval figure than a modern one and explanations which
tend to put more stock in environmental factors. For instance, lots of books now say the Portuguese
explorers were successful because of favorable winds blowing off the Iberian Peninsula that
carried their ships simply in the right direction. So as Prince Henry, one of those semi mythical
stories we like to tell grade schoolers, kind of like George Washington chopping down the cherry
tree, or was Henry really an important figure in the world of history? In this lecture, we'll have
a look at Henry's life and combine it with a careful examination of ships, navigation techniques,
and winds. In doing so, I hope you will see that Henry was indeed an important, if not pivotal,
figure in history. For me, Henry marks the beginning of the modern world because he was the first to
create and use technology to deliberately shape the destiny of his nation. And this notion that
people can use technology to change their destiny is to me one of the hallmarks of the modern world.
To start our story of Henry, let's go back and talk a little bit about his time period, which was at
the end of the Middle Ages and the start of the modern era. A key idea for Europeans in the Middle
Ages, and remember that the Middle Ages ran from about 500 to 1300. In the Middle Ages, people shared
the idea that they got from their Roman predecessors, but society was relatively static. The rhythms of
daily life, the patterns of settlement, social hierarchy of peasants, lords, and kings all seemed
to be timeless and fixed. Yet beginning in the 1300s, an improvement in climate got a little warmer
in Europe, and an influx of new ideas and products from the Arabic world prompted Europeans to begin
to think differently. They began to think that change was possible, change in all sorts of
different levels. Individuals, such as merchants, could become richer and more powerful. Cities,
such as Venice or Rome, could become more prominent. And even kingdoms could become better
organized and exert their influence. Now all of this change, whether we're talking about individuals
or cities or kingdoms, seemed to be predicated on the acquisition of more wealth. Some wealth could
be acquired slowly and steadily by more effective techniques in farming or in the crafts. But the
fastest way to acquire wealth was to tap into the riches of India and China. But blocking the way for
merchants and princes who wanted the wealth of the East was Venice. Since the middle of the medieval
era, Venice had controlled trade with the East by building up strong ties with both the Byzantine
and then the Islamic worlds. And Venice had grown rich and powerful. Its ships or galleys regularly
sailed across the Eastern Mediterranean carrying cargoes of spices, gold and silk. And other Italian
cities, such as Genoa, did their best to compete with the Venetians. Various European monarchs and
merchants looked with envy at the Venetian monopoly in the Mediterranean trade and wished they could
get a piece of the action. But only one individual took a technological approach to tackling and taking
over the trade that Venice controlled. And that was our man, Prince Henry of Portugal.
So who was Prince Henry? Henry was the third son of King John I of Portugal. That was his
father and his mother was Philippa of Lancaster, an English woman whose brother would eventually
become King of England Henry IV. Now Prince Henry was somewhat eccentric. He was a bachelor. He
lived very modestly, not in a palace. And he only traveled twice outside Portugal. But he was a
technological visionary. Now as the third son, Henry knew that he would not become the king of
Portugal. One of his older brothers would eventually become the monarch. So Henry would have to secure
his fortune and fame in some other way. According to the chronicler Zerara, Henry's
horoscope cast just before he was born predicted that the young prince would, quote,
make great and noble conquests and uncover secrets previously hidden for men.
Henry seemed to have been inspired by this horoscope and was determined to make something
of his life. Now in shaping his life, Henry was inspired by several trends. First, he was
motivated by a nationalist desire to make Portugal, his country, a strong state. Next, he read lots
and lots of books. And in particular, he was taken with the chivalric literature of his time,
stories about knights going off to faraway places and having great adventures. And third,
like many other Europeans, he shared his zeal to launch crusades and to fight the infidels
and convert them to Christianity. As Henry and his brothers came of age, his father,
the king, proposed that they should have a year-long tournament that the king would pay for,
and that his son should invite knights from all over Europe to joust and compete in other events.
Perhaps as a sign of the sort of serious and intense young man that he would grow up to be,
Henry didn't much like the idea of a tournament. Instead, in 1415, Henry persuaded his father
to launch a crusade to capture Ceuta, a Muslim port on the North African coast,
just across the Straits of Gibraltar from Portugal. At Ceuta, Henry saw the luxury goods
that Muslim traders secured by taking caravans across the deserts of North Africa. How wondered,
Henry, could Portugal gain a portion of this trade? Henry's answer was to take a technological
approach to this problem. Since the Muslims didn't want the Portuguese to mess with this trade,
and since the Portuguese were too weak to fight with the Venetian Navy, Henry cited that the best
way was to figure out how to sail along the coast of Africa, go all the way down to the bottom of
the continent, and sail into the Indian Ocean. By doing so, Henry believed that he outflanked
both the Venetians and the Muslims. Based on his wide reading, which included travelers' accounts,
Henry was convinced that there either had to be an ocean passage below Africa,
connecting the Atlantic and the Indian Ocean, or at the very least, there had to be people
somewhere in lower Africa with whom the Portuguese could set up trading relations.
Determined to get access to the ridges of the east, Henry sent out 15 expeditions between 1424
and 1434, all of which sailed down the coast of Africa.
Now, to the modern mind, accustomed to motorized ships that can go anywhere, we may think that all
Henry had to do was order his sailors to follow the coast of Africa until they came to the Indian
Ocean. Just go on, go out there, keep an eye on the coast, and when you get to the bottom,
turn left and go into the Indian Ocean. Hence, when captains and crews refused to do just that,
just to follow the coastline of Africa and sail south in the Atlantic, we conclude that they
must have been irrational, they must have been scaredy cats, and they must have been afraid of
giant sea monsters. In reality, captains and the crews were really quite sensible.
The problem is that sailing ships need favorable winds and currents to get to and from different
ports, and the prevailing winds and currents along the African coast eventually are in the wrong
direction for a ship trying to sail south down the coast. In fact, when crews got to Cape Ojador,
just only a few hundred miles south of Lisbon, the currents in the wind are such that sailing ships
can't go any further. For sailors, Bojador was, for all intents and purposes, the end of the world.
You can't go any further than that. You can't take a sailing ship below that point.
And so as a result, it had nothing to do with sea monsters or superstition. It was simply the
problem with the weather, namely the wind and the currents. Overcome this problem, Henry brought
together the people that he needed to gradually develop a system that integrated three innovations.
The first was better ships, the second was systematic information about the prevailing
wind and currents, and the third was new navigation techniques. I'm going to talk about each of these
in some detail. In terms of talent, Henry was fortunate that he was able to draw on both
ambitious and experienced mariners from parts of Europe, as well as mathematicians,
mapmakers, and astronomers from the Muslim world. And in fact, Henry was very lucky that he was doing
what he was doing in Portugal, which sat kind of, if you will, at the intersection of the European
world and the Muslim world. Now it's important to note that Henry and his experts didn't come up
with the system that they that they eventually developed all at once, and then just go out
exploring. In other words, they didn't come up with a plan and then execute it. As with many
important technological breakthroughs, Henry spent decades from the 1420s to the 1460s,
bringing all the pieces together, and indeed the work was continued by King John II after Henry died.
So let's take up each of those innovations, talk about them separately,
and then see where Henry and his crews were able to go with them.
So the first thing I want to talk about are ships. Henry's group brought together several ideas
from European and Arabic shipbuilding. First, they developed a new hull based on both Portuguese
fishing boats, as well as boats that were being used in the North Sea. Second, they adopted what is
called the Latin or triangular sail. And this has the advantage that the ship can sail in several
different directions. And third, they added the stern post rudder to all of their vessels. So let
me talk about a couple of examples that illustrate this. The first thing we want to talk about are
hulls. Now, a typical galley was long and narrow, as you can see with this model. And that meant that
if you were going out into the Atlantic Ocean, where there are big waves and very strong storms,
the ship would get tossed and turned like this, and eventually it would snap right down the middle,
because the galley has a long and narrow ship, as a long and narrow ship, is very stiff,
which is fine if you're sailing in the Mediterranean, but lousy if you're out in the Atlantic in the
middle of a storm. As a result, Henry and his ship designers developed what came to be known as the
caravelle. Now, this model doesn't quite show it, but it gets at it. The caravelle is compared to the
galley, is instead of being long and narrow, the galley is shortened fat, or excuse me, the caravelle
is shortened fat. That means that its width compared to its length is actually completely different.
And in particular, that meant that when the ship was out in the Atlantic in great big waves,
it was better able to candle the waves, and it wasn't going to get split in the middle.
Caravelles were based again on ideas that came from both Portuguese ships,
or Portuguese fishing boats, as well as merchant ships that were used in the North Sea.
The second thing is that Henry adopted a new type of sail. Previously,
ships like galleys had one big square sail, and that meant that they could only take the
wind from the back. So the wind would always have to be behind the boat in order for it to sail forward.
Somewhere in the Arabic world, we don't know exactly where,
people began using, instead of square sails, triangular sails. Triangular sails have the
advantage that you can point the ship in any number of directions, except for sailing straight
into the wind, and you can pick up the wind and you can sail. That means that a caravelle equipped
with sails like this was far more maneuverable. And the third innovation that I mentioned
was on the stern. And in a ship like, let me go backwards here, in a ship like a galley,
the way it was steered was as you had an oarsman in the back here, who was your helmsman,
and he held a great big paddle like this, and forced that paddle into the water to steer the ship.
And he always stood on the right hand side, which is the starboard side, and I'll tell you more about
starboard side in a minute. In contrast, Henry's caravelles began, instead of having an oar on
the side there, to have a rudder down here, which was a stern post rudder, and that in turn
could be connected to a great big wheel up here on the poop deck. And that completely changed the
ability, again, to maneuver how the ship operated. Caravelles, in Henry's time, carried crews of about
20. They had one, two, or three masts, and they had a displacement of about 50 to 160 tons. Overall,
they were fast, and they were highly maneuverable. Unlike the galleys that the Venetians had used
in the Mediterranean, the caravelles could stand up to the heavy weather found in the Atlantic.
Over time, to make them bigger and able to go on long voyages and carry more cargo,
the Portuguese added more masts and more sails. With sturdy ships, Henry and his mariners now had to
find a course with favorable winds. And one of the important parts that they had to do is just to
come up with a way to get back home. One of the things about exploring that we often forget is,
since it's one thing to be courageous and go all the way out there and visit strange new worlds,
the real challenge is figuring out how to get back to your home from those strange new worlds.
Now, for Henry, in sailing from Portugal to Africa, the prevailing winds and currents allow
you to follow the African coast until, as I mentioned before, Cape Bojador, which is about
even with what we today call the Tropic of Cancer. Below Cape Bojador, by that I mean south of it,
the winds begin to blow north and prevent you from sailing any further south.
Hence, in order to travel further south, Portuguese sailors began experimenting with turning away
from the coast of Africa and heading westward out into the Atlantic. Out there, between South
America and South and Africa, the Portuguese sailors discovered what oceanographers today
called a Gaia, a system of prevailing winds and currents. In the South Atlantic, the Gaia turns
in a counterclockwise direction, and a ship passing just below the equator will be picked up by a
southwesterly wind that will carry it down to where the westerlies will sweep the ship back
towards Africa. In the North Atlantic, the Gaia turns clockwise and is made up of the northeast
trade winds blowing eastward toward North America and the Gulf Stream, which blows westward towards
Europe. Now, to summarize these, let's have a look at this particular diagram right here.
This map shows both the winds and the currents. As you can see, down below the equator,
there is a set of blue arrows that are the South Atlantic Gaia, and they are going in a
counterclockwise direction. In the North, the currents are going in the opposite direction,
i.e., they're going in a clockwise direction. The Portuguese were the first to begin to
absorb these general trends in how the ocean winds and currents operated, and they were the
first to take advantage of it. To find these favorable winds, Henry sent numerous expeditions
westward from Portugal into the Atlantic, and along the way, they encountered the Azores and
the Madeira Islands. But more importantly, they learned about the prevailing winds. And on their
early maps, they called the Gaia the Volta do Mar, which can be translated roughly as mean
return by sea, because remember, the challenge if you're an explorer is not necessarily getting
to that strange and exotic place, but getting yourself back home.
But to take advantage of the Volta, the line on a map that shows you the favorable winds and
currents. One has to not only travel from a port on the southern coast of Africa,
but also to get back to Lisbon, back home. And to do so, a mariner needed to know his position
when he was out on the ocean hundreds of miles away from landmarks. Clearly, better navigation
techniques were needed. Ancient and medieval sailors navigated mostly by following the coasts.
But by the end of the Middle Ages, though, sailors had acquired the compass, the magnetic
compass from China, and that allowed them to know which direction they were traveling relative
to a universal, i.e., they always knew which way was north, based on which way the needle,
the compass pointed. By Henry's time, captains were navigating with written directions. They
kind of looked like a recipe. It goes so long, so many hours this way, then turn right or turn
left, and what have you. But they were using written directions that told them what compass
heading to take to get to a particular port, and a few maps that appeared with lines showing
these compass headings. Although medieval mariners didn't use the terms to understand
the solution that Henry's navigators developed, we need to remember about latitude and longitude.
Latitude is the position above or below the equator. If you're looking at a globe, latitude
or the horizontal lines on a map. And we're going to talk a lot about latitude here in a few moments.
Longitude is the position east or west. Those are the vertical lines on a map. Today,
longitude is measured from Greenwich, England, and that's the prime meridian, and is the basis
and is the navigation system that we use. To calculate longitude requires a precision clock,
and that comes later in the 18th century, and we're not going to worry about longitude in this
lecture. So if a Portuguese caravale wanted to sail from Lisbon somewhere on the African coast,
the captain could begin by using a compass to set a southwest course, and he would be carried
by the northeast trade winds at the top of the South Atlantic Gire. However, at some point the
captain would have gone far enough south, and it would be time to turn east and use a westerly wind
to reach the desired point on the African coast. So how could the captain know that he had gone
far enough south and should turn back east toward Africa? In our terms, the captain needed to sail
far south as the latitude of the desired African port and then turn his ship east and sail across
following that latitude. But how, in the middle of the ocean, with no landmarks could he know his
latitude? Answer is celestial navigation. As it turns out, the captain of our hypothetical
Portuguese caravale could take advantage of a key astronomical principle. Along any line of latitude,
any horizontal line on the surface of the earth, the angle between the horizon and the
north star in the sky is always the same. We call this angle declination, the Portuguese
called it altura. So I'm looking straight ahead and that's the horizon, and then I look up in the
night sky and I can find the north star. There's an angle between my two arms. That's the declination,
and wherever you are in the world on that latitude, that angle stays the same.
So if the captain knew the altura, that angle for the African port that he wanted,
and he measured the same angle while he was at sea, then he would know he was on the same latitude
as the port that he wanted, and he should turn eastward. Therefore, to navigate by the stars,
you need three things. You need an instrument for measuring the altura of the stars. You need
second information showing the altura, the angle, and have that related to particular destinations,
and that meant you had astronomical tables. And finally, you needed a way of keeping track
of your position and your direction, a plotting board. Now, I have for my own collection
a quadrant just to show you one of the devices that the Portuguese used in order to measure
that the declination or the altura. A quadrant basically was first developed by astrologers
and astronomers in the late Middle Ages, and it's a lot like basically a big protractor,
similar to the one that you would have used in grade school or high school,
and it has, basically it has two eyesight here, and it has a set of degrees or numbers on the
outside, and you rotate it this way. So again, if I were looking at the horizon, I'd line up my
quadrant like that so that I've got the horizon there, okay, then I would look up in the sky,
and I would sight through the little eyepiece, the north star, and then in turn I could measure off
of the, off of the numbers here what the angle was. Now, since it was not necessarily easy
to learn how to measure the altura, to use a quadrant, and then to use and look up
information on the tables, and put all of this data together on the plotting board,
and ultimately determine the ship's position, Henry found it necessary to set up a school
for navigators. There, he and his team developed rules and procedures, what we might today call
systematic applied knowledge. Moreover, Henry found it best not to really leave all of this
navigation stuff in the hands of the captain, but instead to send a personal deputy from his own
court to make sure that the navigator did his job right, and that the captain and the crew
followed orders. Now again, you might sort of say, well, it's kind of obvious, I mean, you know,
we understand that there are stars in the sky, you can make these measurements,
these measurements are consistent, all of this stuff will get you from point A to point B,
and you know where you're going, and so why wouldn't a captain and a crew do all of this,
and follow the instructions that they got from the navigator?
I want you to think about the fact that at this particular time,
most people could maybe count to 10, and most people had no real mathematical literacy.
People also hadn't really made up their mind, even crews of ships,
that the world was round. That doesn't say that they necessarily thought it was flat,
but they didn't really think a whole lot about it. So as a result, it was fairly challenging for
the crew and the captain to believe the navigator. The navigator would be making calculations,
he'd be making measurements, he'd be doing all this crazy stuff, and he presumably knew what he
was doing, but not necessarily the rest of the crew. It looked a lot like magic to them,
even though today we might sort of say that's basically science.
That junior night that I mentioned before was Henry's deputy, and he would also have the
responsibility not only of reinforcing the authority of the navigator, but collecting
information while they were traveling about the local populations that they met in Africa,
the goods that were available for trade, and information that could be used to create a
systematic body of knowledge that we today would call geography.
So what was the payoff? As we've seen, the early voyages from the 1420s not only provided
information about wind and currents, but they allowed Henry to claim the Azores and the Madeira.
Two sets of islands out in the Atlantic for the Portuguese king. Henry's ships regularly called
on another set of islands off of Africa, the Canaries, but these had already been claimed by
the Spanish. The king, pleased with what the young prince was doing, gave Henry complete control
over the trade from all of these islands, and Henry sent colonists to the Azores and Madeira.
In Madeira, Henry promoted the production of sugarcane and wine,
and both of them became very lucrative crops. Now, in my mind, everything that I read
about Madeira and the kind of colonies that were set up there reminds me of the popular
board game that I would play with my daughters, Settlers of Catan. And one wonders, the early
settlement of Madeira inspired the German individual who developed the game.
Along with enjoying the profits from trade that came from these islands, some historians think
that Henry imagined that he might someday convert these colonies, these island colonies,
into a kingdom, and that he would finally get to be a king. Through the 1440s and 1450s,
Henry's caravals reached further and further south on the African coast, reaching as far
down as the Senegal River. There, Henry's emissaries were able to trade for gold,
which was their original goal, and they were able to secure enough that the royal
mint and Lisbon began issuing gold coins. Henry's emissaries also unfortunately kidnapped
blacks who became slaves. Henry seemed to have sanctioned the slave trade, perhaps believing
that black slaves brought back to Europe could be baptized, become Christians, and hence have
their souls saved. Henry supervised and financed the voyages largely on his own until his death
in 1460. By then, he had demonstrated that his system of ships and navigation was reliable
and that trade with Africa could indeed be lucrative for Portugal. Henry's vision was
continued by his nephew, King Alphonse V, and his grand-nephew, John II. Under their guidance,
Portuguese navigators explored the rest of the African coast and eventually reached India.
In 1487, Bartholomew Diaz reached the bottom of Africa, the Cape of Good Hope.
In 1498, Vasco de Gama reached India. De Gama was able to do so because he took advantage
not only of everything that Prince Henry had taught him, but he also was able to work with
local pilots and navigators who knew the eastern Indian Ocean.
In 1500, Pedro Cabral discovered Brazil. You might wonder how that came to pass. Well, remember
that the Portuguese were constantly sailing out of Lisbon, going all the way across the
Atlantic, South Atlantic, and is swinging out as far as they had to pick up those favorable winds.
Not surprisingly, eventually, someone bumped into South America, Brazil, and that's why they
speak Portuguese in Brazil today. In 1516, the Portuguese not only reached India, but they got
to China, and they set up a trading port in Macau. Through the 16th and 17th centuries,
the Portuguese set up forts and trading posts throughout Africa, Brazil, India, and China.
And they worked with indigenous trading networks, the local people there, the local merchants there,
and the Portuguese made their money by transporting the goods back to Europe.
They often armed their ships with the new cannon, and that was a means for discouraging
other nations from following them into the Indian Ocean. Overall, the Portuguese dominated trade
with Asia from 1500 to 1700. Aware of Portuguese success, the Spanish equally wanted to get involved
in trade with Asia, but they pursued a different strategy.
The Portuguese were sailing and controlling the South Atlantic. Then the best thing for the Spanish
to do would be to sail directly west to the Indians, Indies. And hence, the Spanish supported
first Christopher Columbus, who went to the Caribbean, and then ultimately,
Ferdinand Magellan, who went all the way across the round the world and across the Pacific.
It's interesting to note that Columbus learned about navigation by studying and sailing with
the Portuguese in the early 1480s. Now, since it was too far across the Pacific,
the Spanish decided to concentrate on colonizing the New World, where they found plenty of gold
and silver and slaves. The English, like the Spanish, had to come up with an alternative.
If the Portuguese were dominating the South Atlantic, the Spanish were going straight west
across to the New World, the English looked for a third alternative passage that they could take
advantage of. They sailed north and west, and they looked for what we now call the northwest
passage around the top of North America. And the English in so doing established trading posts
and colonies in the New World. The Dutch and the French imitated the Portuguese,
worried less about establishing colonies, which was sort of the model that the English and the
Spanish had followed, and instead, like the Portuguese, mainly had trading posts in Africa,
Asia, and parts of the Americas. Clearly, thanks to Henry and his successors,
Portugal enjoyed a technological success, a technological victory. It was comprised of
several things. First and foremost, Henry and his team designed better artifacts, ships.
Next, they developed new practices, navigation, and they acquired new information. We see that in
the star charts. And finally, they came to understand and utilize forces of nature,
the wind, and the currents of the Atlantic Ocean. To be sure, other groups had developed these
individual innovations. As I mentioned, Northern Europeans had improved ship halls, Chinese contributed
the compass, and the Arab world provided the Latin sail and a great deal of astronomical knowledge.
But what the Portuguese did during the 1400s was to weave all of these elements together
into a highly effective system. Henry's contribution was to start and manage this
process of integration, to inspire people to design new ships and to take them to new places.
In so doing, Henry established a key idea for Western thought. Individuals and nations can
bring about economic and political change. They can improve their situation by deliberately
improving technology, by coming up with new inventions and applying them.
Since Henry's time, we in the West have looked at technology different in a different way than
people in the ancient and medieval worlds. And we have continuously expected inventions to change
and improve our lives. In making this technological argument, the kind of point that I'm making here,
I need to be careful about falling into a particular trap, what historians sometimes call
determinism. By determinism, historians mean that it's easy to think the course of history was
inevitable. Now, there are two kinds of flavors, two kinds, two flavors of determinism. First,
you might call environmental determinism. Some prominent historians, including Philippe Fernandes
Armesto, don't think there was anything special about Henry or Portuguese culture in the 1400s.
What made Portuguese exploration possible in their minds was the simple fact that the winds
were favorable just off Portugal. And so their captains would have inevitably explored the
coast of Africa. The winds determine the course of history. Another flavor of determinism,
you might call technological determinism. And here, the tradition is, is that a technology,
say celestial navigation, once it's invented, that technology leads people to do certain
inevitable things, like explore Africa. Once the atomic bomb was invented, so the argument would
go in technological determinism, then it was inevitable that there would be a cold war between
the superpowers of the United States and the Soviet Union. Both flavors of determinisms would
suggest we really don't have to think too much about individuals like Prince Henry. He's kind of
expendable in a deterministic world. But what we've seen in the story of Portuguese navigation
is that winds and celestial navigation and ships are all necessary parts of history. But by
themselves, they are not sufficient to explain why the story turned out the way it did. These
technological factors did not automatically come together and result in the exploration of Africa
by Europeans. Instead, they came together because of Henry's vision and his organizational abilities.
If it was not for Henry's vision that Portugal could become a richer and stronger state. If it
was not for his dream of sponsoring expeditions to send knights his emissaries to find new lands
and new riches, and so perhaps that he might become a king, then nothing would have happened.
And the whole new system of ships and navigation would have never been put together.
In our rush to play up environmental or technological determinism, it's all too easy to
forget about leaders like Prince Henry. Maybe it's time we rescue Henry from great school history books
and give him a proper place in the way we think about the modern world
and how it came to have the form and shape that it does.
