One of the most important changes associated with the Industrial Revolution was the development
of new power sources. Prior to the Industrial Revolution, all work had to be performed using
water wheels, animal power, or human muscle.
The invention of the steam engine, however, humans now had a power source that could be
used with the energy stored in fuels such as wood, coal, or oil. In this lecture we
will look at how the invention of the steam engine came about and how it contributed
to the Industrial Revolution by providing what economists and engineers call economies
of speed. And what they simply mean is that processes could be done faster.
But another important way that productivity jumped dramatically during the Industrial
Revolution was the fact that there were also economies of coordination. And what economists
mean by that is that more output was possible by carefully planning how the work was done
in factories. And this is often discussed under the heading Division of Labor.
Now to fully understand how machines contributed to the economies of coordination, second part
of this lecture we'll look at the manufacture of PINs.
Pin making was an example used by one of the founding fathers of economics, Adam Smith,
and he used it to celebrate the economic and social changes that were occurring in 18th
century Britain. And so pin making is a case that opens a window under what people were
thinking and arguing about during the early Industrial Revolution.
So let's start our story with the steam engine. The steam engine is often attributed to James
Watt. But James Watt's engine was actually an improvement on an earlier engine invented
by Thomas Newcomen. Thomas Newcomen came from an old English family from the area known
as Lincolnshire. In 1536, after siding against King Henry VIII in an uprising, the Newcomen
family lost all of their estates and they were forced to move south to Devonshire.
There in the port of Dartmouth, Newcomens became merchants and traders. They also left the
Church of England and became religious nonconformists. Following in the family tradition, Thomas
Newcomen became an iron monger, that is to say a dealer in iron hardware. He also became
a lay Baptist preacher. While traveling around to sell iron hardware, Newcomen came into
contact with mine owners in Cornwall and soon learned that the biggest challenge confronting
them was pumping water out of their mines. Now you might ask, where is Cornwall and why
were the mine owners there so worried about pumping water out of their mines? Let's take
a look at this map. As you can see, Cornwall is in the extreme southwest corner of England.
It's the toe that extends out into the Atlantic. Since prehistoric times, there have been
tin mines in Cornwall. By the 1600s, the Cornish tin mines had come to extend for thousands
of feet under the sea and the only way that the mines could continue to operate was if
the water was removed quickly and continuously. As mines got deeper in the 17th century, engineers
developed a number of ways to pump water out of the mines. And this diagram shows us several
of the techniques that they developed. On one hand you can see that one way was simply
to lower a bucket down to the bottom of the mineshaft and haul that bucket up. Obviously
you wouldn't get a whole lot of water doing that. Another way was to make a continuous
chain of buckets and that would get you still more water out. A third way was to basically
create a chain that consisted of big balls of wool and those balls of wool would go down
into the water, get soaked and then they would be pulled up and the water would be squeezed
out as they came up in a narrow pipe. Power any of these pumps, one would find on the
surface at the top of the mine a team of horses and the horses powered a gin in which
the horse would walk round and round in a circle and ropes and pulleys conveyed the
power to pump to the pump down in the mine. Hence one of the significant costs of operating
a mine was feeding and maintaining the teams of horses needed to pump the water out continuously.
We shouldn't be surprised then that when steam engines were first introduced, the power of
the new engines was measured in terms of horsepower. Since these new engines were put in the mines
and mine owners wanted to know how many horses the new engine would replace. In 1698, another
native of Devonshire, Thomas Savery patented a steam pump for lifting water out of the mines.
As you can see from this first diagram of the Savery Pump, high pressure steam was admitted
initially into an iron cylinder. Cold water was then poured on the outside of the cylinder
and that condensed the steam inside the cylinder and created a vacuum. That vacuum in turn sucked
water up a pipe and thus provided the pumping action. To pump water out of the mine, we need to
look at yet a second diagram. In this diagram we see that the water was pumped out of the mine
when a lower valve on the delivery pipe was closed and the upper valve was opened. High
pressure steam was then introduced into the cylinder which in turn pushed the water up
the delivery pipe and out of the mine. Savery's pump was not automatic and it required a boy
to manipulate the valves to let the steam or the cold water in adjust the right moment. To pump
water to any significant height, the Savery Pump also required a high steam pressure. For
example, to raise the water 180 feet would have required steam pressure on the order of 80 pounds
per square inch. Such pressures were well beyond the capability of existing boilers and cylinders.
But despite its impracticality, a syndicate of London investors purchased the patent for Savery's
pump in 1716 and they set themselves up as the proprietors of the invention for raising water
by fire. At the same time, the Savery patented his impractical pump, Newcomen was developing his
own practical engine. To appreciate what Newcomen accomplished, let's look at a diagram of his
engine. Drawing on the practical knowledge Newcomen had gained from talking to mine owners, he built
a test model consisting of a piston moving up and down inside a vertical cylinder. The piston was
connected to one end of a rocking beam, while on the other end of the beam was the pumping
mechanism. As the piston moved up and down, it caused the beam to rock up and down, which in turn
operated the pump down in the mine via long vertical rods that ran down the mine shaft. Like
Savery, Newcomen began by creating a vacuum inside the cylinder and dousing it with cold water.
However, in the cylinder of his test model, there was a small plug that had been covered up with
some solder and in the course of one experiment, the solder plug melted, fell out of the hole and
cold water squirted inside the hot cylinder of the Newcomen engine. The cold squirt caused steam
inside the cylinder to condense and create a vacuum. Now because the pressure of the atmosphere
outside the cylinder was greater than that inside, the atmospheric pressure forced the piston to
plunge downward and for this reason both Newcomen and Watt engines were called atmospheric engines.
Newcomen immediately realized how his engine took advantage of both steam and atmospheric pressure
and he quickly devised an automatic mechanism which let the steam and a squirt of cold water
into a cylinder at just the right moments. Sadly, it's only a legend that Newcomen got the idea
for his automatic mechanism by noticing that boys attending his engine were lazy and tied strings
between the valves so they didn't have to watch the engine so closely. Because Newcomen's engine
was coal fired, he installed his first big engine at a coal mine in Tipton in 1712. Tipton was not
in Cornwall but instead located near Birmingham up in the coal fields of the Midlands. Newcomen secured
the contract for the Tipton mine via Friends and the Baptist Church. Even though Newcomen's engine
bore little resemblance to Savory's Pump, Newcomen was dismayed to learn that the London syndicate
claimed that his invention was covered by Savory's patent. As a result, Newcomen was forced to work
with the syndicate who erected Newcomen engines and never bothered to tell anyone that the engines
had actually been created by Newcomen. Nevertheless, Newcomen's engines soon came into general use
for mine pumping throughout Britain in the 1720s and they were erected at mines in Austria,
Hungary, Belgium, France, Germany and Sweden. In 1753, the first Newcomen engine was erected in
America at a mine in New Jersey. Yet despite the success of his engine, Newcomen gained little
in the way of riches or fame during his lifetime. When he passed away in 1729, one newspaper briefly
mentioned the death of quote Thomas Newcomen, sole inventor of that surprising machine for raising
water by fire. Newcomen's engine was approved upon by James Watt in the 1770s. Watt was trained
in the craft of making scientific instruments and one of the first jobs that he got was helping
professors at the University of Glasgow in Scotland. While repairing a demonstration model of a
Newcomen engine at the University, Watt discovered that the efficiency of atmospheric engines could
be increased by squirting cold water into a separate condenser connected to the main cylinder,
which we can see in the next diagram. In this diagram, we see that there is not only a piston
and a cylinder, but there is also a condenser right next to it. And the whole idea of a Watt
engine was instead of heating and cooling by squirting cold water into the cylinder,
you squirted cold water into a smaller compartment the condenser. As long as one caused the steam
to condense somewhere in the system, the pressure inside the cylinder would be less than the atmosphere
and thus the piston would move. Using a separate condenser meant that Watt's engine avoided the
problem of continually heating and cooling the entire cylinder and thus his engine used less
coal to fire the boiler and it was much more efficient than a Newcomen engine.
In addition, Watt connected his rocking beam to a flywheel and that meant that his engine could
not only pump water, but it could also provide the rotary power needed for various machines.
Because the crank used to connect the piston and flywheel together had been patented by another
man, Watt had to invent a whole new mechanism. What he called his planetary gear mechanism
connect his walking beam with the flywheel. Since many machines had to run at a constant speed,
Watt also designed an ingenious governor that regulated the amount of steam passing
from the boiler to the piston. Watt's governor consisted of two brass balls that could swing
outward, but were connected to the main drive shaft via pulley. If the engine exceeded the set
speed, the balls would swing further out, but that would cause the lever arms to close the throttle
valve and that in turn would eliminate the steam going to the piston. Now to give you a sense
of both how Newcomen's engine and Watt's engine were like, I'm going to run my model steam engine.
I got an engine just like this for my grandparents for Christmas when I was eight years old,
and maybe that's why I went into the history of technology. Like the Newcomen and Watt engines,
I'm using a solid fuel tablet, kind of looks like a sugar cube to heat the water in the boiler
and create steam. The steam then travels along this pipe over to the cylinder which has a piston
inside it, and the piston is connected via a crank to the flywheel. And when you turn it,
the steam goes in and out of the cylinder and pushes the piston forward, and that in turn makes
the flywheel fly. Watt was careful to patent all of his improvements, and he was lucky to secure
a savvy business partner, Matthew Bolton, who helped him develop the engine and marketed
first in England and then in the world. One of the first things that Bolton did was to help Watt
secure a new patent. Between 1775 and 1800, thanks to a special act of parliament, the partnership
with Bolton and Watt held a monopoly on steam engines in England, and they were able to install
over 500 engines across the country. Recognizing the importance of the steam engine for remaking
British industry, Bolton would dramatically tell visitors to his Soho works in Birmingham that
we sell here, sir, what all the world wants, power. Bolton could make such a bold claim for Watt's
engines because they could generate the economic power as well as the mechanical power, and they
were rapidly adopted by both manufacturers in England, Europe, and America. Unlike the
Newcomen engine, which was best suited for pumping water out of mines, Watt's improvements to the
planetary gear and the speed gunner meant that his engines could be used to power all sorts of
machinery throughout England and American industry. Watt's engines could turn faster than humans,
animals, and water wheels, and they replaced all of them, meaning that steam powered engines
ran faster and produced more output in the same amount of time. Hence, the steam engine invented
by Newcomen and perfected by Watt contributed to the industrial revolution by providing economies
of speed. But the real impact of the steam engine came when it was coupled with an innovation,
the division of labor. Together, these two innovations caused a dramatic jump in manufacturing
output and profoundly changed what daily work was like. By the 1770s, many people in Britain
sensed that something was profoundly changing daily life. While Bolton and Watt were sure it
was their engine, and hence Bolton's bold claim about power, others like the economist Adam Smith
thought that the big change was social and not technical. Smith was convinced that soaring output
was a result of the reorganization of work in factories. Since ancient times, craftsmen had
produced goods of all kinds by undertaking all of the steps involved in the creation of a particular
good by working in their own home or their shop. Produced cloth, for example, a weaver might purchase
wool from the farmer, have his daughters and his wife clean and spin the wool into thread,
and then he would weave the final fabric and even dye it himself. As the economy grew in the 16th
and 17th centuries, however, entrepreneurs began experimenting with separating out all of these
different steps and hiring workers who possessed a particular aptitude for one task or another.
The separation of different tasks is known as the division of labor.
Since the entrepreneurs spread the work out among workers who lived in different cottages,
the system was known as putting out. And it's one of the reasons why we call small enterprises,
even today, cottage industries. By the 18th century, entrepreneurs realized that you didn't need to
send the work out to different cottages. But indeed, you gained a significant advantage
by having the individual workers perform the tasks all in a single factory. By having everyone
working under one roof, the factory owner not only could monitor quality, but he could also
coordinate all of the tasks to boost quantity. To call attention to this revolution in work,
Smith used the example of pin making in his famous book, The Wealth of Nations, and he published it
in 1776, the same year as the Declaration of Independence. There, Smith argued that while
a typical worker could not make a single pin on his own in a day, the division of labor made it
possible for a worker to produce 4,800 pins in one day. Let me tell you how Smith described this
in his book, The Wealth of Nations.
This business is now divided into a number of branches of which the greater part are
likewise peculiar trades. One man draws out the wire, another straightens it, a third cuts it,
a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head to make the head,
and to make the head requires two or three distinct operations. To put it on is a peculiar
business. To whiten the pins is another. It is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper,
and the important business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about 18 distinct
operations, which in some manufacturers are all performed by distinct hands. I have seen a small
manufacturing of this kind where 10 men only were employed, and where some of them consequently
performed two or three distinct operations. But though they were very poor and therefore but
indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they could, when they exerted themselves,
make among them about 12 pounds of pins a day. There are in a pound upwards of 4,000
pins of middling size. Those 10 persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of 48,000 pins in a
day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of the 48,000 pins might be considered as making
4,800 pins in a day. Notably for Smith, the marble of this division of labor was not only the huge
gain in output, but the possibilities it held for upward social mobility. Smith believed that
poor people might go to work in such a factory, see how the division of labor was performed,
and then go off and start their own new enterprises. Because wealth could be based not on capital or
land or family name, but rather on an organizational technique that could be imitated by anyone,
Smith thought that the division of labor would revolutionize society and would eliminate classes.
But the working class would eventually meld into a single middle class
who shared the same values of buying and selling their time or goods or services.
Smith's idea about the division of labor fascinated the intellectual elite in the
late 18th century and it made his book, The Wealth of Nations, into a classic.
Even Thomas Jefferson was inspired by it and tried using the division of labor to boost
production of nails by his slaves at Monticello in the 1790s.
In using pin making as an example of what was happening in British industry,
Smith was certainly on to something about the changing nature of work. But Smith's example
of pin making, according to economist Michael Perlman, was something of a fairy tale. That is
to say a charming story that conveyed an important idea of feeling, but one that could never be true
for everyone. Now Smith was right that the division of labor was altering the workplace,
but our friend Bolton was also right that the changes were coming about as a result of new
machines and new power sources like the steam engine. To see this, let's look at another
description of pin making from about the same time as Smith was writing.
In 1770, Arthur Young published a book titled, A Six Months Tour Through the Southern Counties
of England and Wales, and there he included descriptions of a whole range of new agricultural
and industrial practices. Among the factories that Young visited was a pin works at Warmley,
a village near Bristol, and there he saw how molten brass was, and I quote,
poured into a flat mold of stone to make it into thin plates about four feet long and three broad.
The plates were then cut into 17 strips and then again by particular machines into many more
very thin ones and drawn out to the length of 17 feet, which are again drawn into wire
and done up into bunches of 40 shillings value each, about 100 of which are made here every week,
and each makes 100,000 pins. The wires are cut into them and completed here, employing a great
number of girls who with little machines work by their feet, point and head the pins with great
expedition, and each will do about a pound and a half in a day. The heads are spun by women with a
wheel, much like a common spinning wheel, and then separated from one another by a man with another
little machine like a pair of shears. All the machines and wheels are set in motion by water
for racing, which there is a prodigious fire engine, which raises as it is said,
3,000 hog sheds every minute. When one compares Smith's description with Young's report on the
warmly works, one is immediately struck by the number of machines involved in the process,
which Smith doesn't mention at all. The thin metal sheets appear to have been
fed through a slitting machine, probably with several sets of rollers so that with each pass
the brass got us thinner and thinner. These pieces are then pulled through a die with a thin hole
that stretches the ductile brass into a 17-foot wire. The wire is then cut into pins,
and the pins are pointed by young girls operating machines powered by a foot treadle,
probably something a lot like an old-fashioned sewing machine. The heads for the pins are
meanwhile produced by women using another spinning machine and are cut apart finally by a man using
a shearing machine. Young reported that all of these machines were originally powered by workers
turning wheels, but by the time he came to visit they were powered by a water wheel. Notably,
the water wheel, in turn, was powered by a prodigious fire engine, which was most likely a
nukeman engine. Now one wonders why they used the nukeman engine to pump water into tank,
which in turn flowed over the water wheel. A modern engineer would have simply connected
the walking beam, the nukeman engine to a crank and a flywheel, but then sometimes simple solutions
aren't obvious. The point here is the warmly works cranked out a huge quantity of pins,
not just because of the division of labor, but because it employed a significant number of
machines as well as the combination water wheel, nukeman engine. It was the integration of the
social and technical two kinds of innovations that allowed the division of labor combined with
new machines and power sources to bring about dramatic gains in output. You can't have one
without the other. So why, you might ask, did Smith neglect to talk about all of the machinery
that we hear about in Young? Why did he leave that out of his discussion of pin making?
All the machinery that Young mentions would have cost money, required upfront investment by the
factory owners. This means that an ordinary worker, even with the best of intentions,
probably could not have launched a new factory unless he got extremely lucky and was able to
accumulate a significant amount of savings. Hence, talking about the machinery and its
attendant costs would have eliminated Smith's dream of upward social mobility for workers
and his dream of a classless society. To express his vision, Smith had to be careful about what
he said concerning technology. As I've said right along, the inventions of the industrial
revolution were all about increasing output. The steam engine contributed to this revolution
in productivity in two ways. First, it brought about economies of speed in the sense that
machines of all sorts could be run faster than if they had been powered by humans or animals.
Second, the steam engine contributed economies of coordination,
in that when combined with the division of labor, it was possible for factory owners
to make more goods more cheaply. And this is well illustrated by the example of pin making.
Yet the story of pin making offers some other important lessons about technology
and the distribution of economic power in society. If you don't look carefully at the technology
involved in economic activities, it's easy to think, as Adam Smith did, that inventions
are empowering the average individual and increasing their chances at wealth and self-improvement.
Are we like Smith with our expectations that the personal computer and the internet will
really empower individuals to launch their own enterprises? Or should we be a little cautious
and recognize that there is a lot more hidden technology in the form of computer manufacturing
and the physical infrastructure of the internet that is provided by private companies and hence
limits the true freedom of economic individuals? The end of the day, maybe Bolton was right,
the steam engine was about power, not just mechanical power, not just economic power,
but the power to structure societies in particular.
