Since the end of the Middle Ages, one of the perennial questions confronting both business
people and government officials is how to stimulate the economy. How do you generate
more wealth, more productivity, more jobs? How do inventions contribute to economic growth?
As we saw in the last lecture, two ways to growth were to develop a new prime mover,
like a steam engine, or create new ways of organizing work, like the division of labor.
But along with manufacturing, the productivity of an economy can be enhanced by improving
transportation. That's a theme we touched way back in lecture four on Gally's coins
in the alphabet. By lowering the costs of getting raw materials to manufacturers and
finish products out to retailers and consumers, transportation systems speed up the flow of
goods and money in an economy and prompt entrepreneurs to launch new businesses.
Transportation systems can also expand markets, making it possible for manufacturers to reach
more customers and thus allowing economies of scale to kick in. That's to say, it's
often cheaper and a lot more profitable to make a lot of widgets rather than just a few.
In this lecture, we'll look at two key transportation systems, canals and railroads, and we'll look
at how they were invented in order to appreciate how transportation played a critical role
in the industrial revolution.
So let's start with canals. Since many of the basic inputs to factories, coal, cotton,
or minerals, were bulky, entrepreneurs in the early industrial revolution first sought
to improve water transportation. It was, and it still is, cheaper to ship bulky goods by
water than using roads or railroads.
So what's so complicated about a canal? First glance, canals can seem deceptively simple.
Dig a ditch, fill it with water, add boats, and voila, you have an artificial waterway.
Sure you might have to line the canal in places with some water type material such as clay
or concrete to keep it leaking.
The tricky part about canals is that just as we saw in lecture six about the Roman aqueducts
and there that the Roman aqueducts always had to have a very slight downward gradient,
so canals need to be level so that there's always sufficient water for the boats and
the water doesn't flow downstream and out of the canal.
While slight irregularities in the lay of the land can be dealt with through cuttings
and embankments, canal engineers often have to include other elements to their design.
You get a cross valley say, it sometimes makes sense to put a canal on a viaduct that spans
the valley.
Other times, canal engineers dig tunnels through hills rather than go around them.
But the most ingenious device engineers developed was the pound lock, which consists of a chamber
within which the water level can be raised or lowered and thus connect two pieces of
the canal that are at different levels.
My point here is that a canal isn't just a ditch, but a system of civil engineering
works that need to be carefully laid out and coordinated.
Now generally speaking, there are three kinds of canals.
First, there are lateral canals which follow an existing stream or river and take advantage
of the level riverbed.
Second, there are contour canals, which minimize the need for cuts and locks by following the
natural contours of the landscape.
When this sort of canal is viewed on a map, they can seem to meander and not take the
most direct straight line route.
And three, there are summit canals.
Summit canals connect two river systems by going over a mountain range.
These are the most challenging because engineers most often make special provisions to ensure
that there's enough water the highest reaches of the canal way up in the mountains.
Like many inventions that we've looked at, canals have their origins in ancient China
where lateral canals were established as far back as the Warring States era.
And the dates for that time period are 481 to 221 B.C.
The longest canal from that era was the Canal of the Wild Geese, which connected several
states, Zong, Zhang, Chen, Kai, Cao and Wei.
However, the most famous Chinese canal is the Grand Canal, the oldest and longest canal
in the world today.
It's 1,115 miles long and it was built to carry the emperor between two cities, Beijing
and Hangzhou.
The project began in 605 A.D. and was completed in 609 and it connected a number of the older
canals, the oldest section of which dated back to at least 486 B.C.
Later emperors strongly supported the maintenance and the extension of the Grand Canal and they
did so by adding feeder canals that connected to smaller cities and they did so in order
to stimulate internal or domestic trade.
Although the Chinese appear to have invented the first pound lock, many of their canals
ran through relatively straight terrain and so they didn't need to use very many of them.
As the economy in Europe gradually recovered between the 12th and the 15th centuries, merchants
sought to expand trade and business in their towns and cities by improving the transportation
of their regions.
Hence we see merchants in the Netherlands, Northern Germany and Northern Italy building
canals to complement the existing navigable rivers.
In doing so, canal builders often puzzled over the problem of how to get their boats
from a river or harbor up to the canal, especially when the lay of the land for the canal was
slightly above the river.
Furthermore, canal builders often added dams and gates, known as flash locks, that ran
across rivers and they did so to ensure a more reliable flow of water along all the
stretches of the river.
However, since other entrepreneurs were busy erecting water powered mills along rivers,
we talked about that back in lecture 7, and the opening and closing of those flash locks
caused all kinds of problems with the flow of water and the millers relied on that flow
of water, canal builders soon found themselves in court arguing with the mill owners.
To overcome these problems, European engineers created the first pound lock.
The earliest pound locks seemed to have been used in 1373 in Rieswijk in the Netherlands,
where the challenge was to lower boats from the harbor down to the canal.
To do so, the canal engineers built a basin with gates on either end.
To start, the gate at the canal end was closed and the harbor gate opened.
The boats then sailed into the basin and the harbor gate was closed.
Next, the canal gate was opened and water flowed out.
When the water was level, the boats moved into the canal.
Since the whole process could take several hours, the villagers of Rieswijk were quite
pleased by this new lock, and they would take advantage of the delay and sell food and drink
to the passing boatmen.
To appreciate this canal design, the pound lock, let's take a look at this model.
In this particular case, the harbor is up here, and again, the canal starts down over
here at a lower level.
So in the beginning, this water level would be higher, this gate would be opened, the
boats would sail in, and this gate would then be closed.
This gate would then be opened, the water level would flow on down, and the canal boats
would then be at this level and sail on their way out.
Other engineers realized that pound locks could be used not only to solve problems with mill
owners or where canals met harbors, but indeed locks could be used to build summit canals
over mountain ranges that were separating two river systems.
Anxious to gain access to the Baltic, for example, the town of Launberg on the Elbe
River in northern Germany built the Stecnitz Canal between 1391 and 1398.
There the challenge was to overcome a range of hills that were 56 feet above sea level,
and the designers succeeded by using a lock that raised and lowered the boats 16 feet.
Canals such as the Stecnitz impressed the Ducal Milan in Italy, who commissioned his
engineers to link Milan with several rivers in the region and extend the trading control
of the city.
One of those engineers was Leonardo da Vinci.
In the course of developing the canal that ran through Milan, he devised both a plan
using six locks as well as an improved lock design.
Up to this time, locks had relied on vertical gates, known as portcullis gates, since they
moved up and down like the gates you see on a castle.
Because those gates were vertical, they limited the height of the boats that could move through
the canals, and in response Leonardo designed the miter gate, which consists of two doors
that swing horizontally out of the basin and into the canal.
All subsequent canal locks use Leonardo's design.
Leonardo's interest in canals reveals to us how important canals were as a form of cutting
edge technology, and Leonardo continued to have an interest in them throughout his career.
Late in life, Leonardo moved to France, and there he served as an advisor to King Francis
I, and Francis I reigned from 1515 to 1547, recognizing that a major canal system connecting
the Atlantic and the Mediterranean would create a great deal of internal trade and help unify
his kingdom.
To say nothing of not having to fight with the Spanish Navy when one was sailing from
the Mediterranean and the Atlantic, Francis and Leonardo began to plan a system.
Although conceived during the 16th century, religious wars and political strife prevented
the building of these canals for a century.
In the 17th century, the King of France gave letter patents to several wealthy individuals
who invested and raised money to build the canals.
In return, the investors were permitted to charge tolls on the boats as they moved through
the canals.
Both canals were huge undertakings, requiring between 6,000 and 12,000 workers.
On the Canal du Medi project, women workers were imported to do the work on the canal.
Many of these women came from former Roman bath colonies and the Pyrenees, where elements
of classical hydraulics have been maintained as a living tradition.
The women were hired at first simply to haul dirt to the dam at San Ferral, but their supervisors
who were struggling to design the channels from the dam to the canal quickly recognized
their expertise.
Engineering in this period was mainly focused on fortress construction, and hydraulics was
mostly concerned with draining mines.
Building a navigational canal across a continent was well beyond the formal knowledge of the
military engineers who were supervising it.
But the peasant women were familiar with classical hydraulic methods, and they were able to help
come up with a practical design.
The women not only perfected the water supply system for the canal, but they also threaded
the waterways through the mountains near Bezieres using a minimum number of locks.
The great sun king, Louis XIV, took a personal interest in the completion of the Canal du
Medi, and his engineers responded by using neoclassical architectural elements to echo
the king's ambitions and to make France appear to be the new Rome.
As a grand piece of infrastructure engineering, the Cadal du Medi was promoted as being worthy
of Rome, and the political dreams behind it were expressed with Latin plaques and walls
that were built with Roman features.
But beyond being an expression of political ego, both of these major French canals were
economic successes.
During the second half of the 17th century, the Brear Canal earned for its parent company
an annual return of 13%.
The annual trade in the 1600s was about 200,000 tons, which doubled in the 19th century and
tripled on this canal in the early 20th century.
Today, both the Canal du Medi and the Brear Canal still operate, but traffic is limited
to pleasure boats.
Now, in the 17th century, the profits made on French canals were not lost on British
entrepreneurs who began building their own canals in the mid-18th century.
With the opening of the Sanky Canal in 1757, followed by the Bridgewater Canal in 1761,
and the Bridgewater Canal caused the price of coal to be cut in half when it was shipped
between Liverpool and Manchester, all of these things led to a period of canal mania in Britain
so that over 100 canals were built between 1760 and 1820.
In Britain, engineers constructed 4,000 miles of canal, and they reached from London in
the south all the way to York in the north.
To pay for the canals, canal operators charged individuals a toll for bringing their own boats
onto the canal.
While a few canal boats had sales, others were pulled by horses who walked along a canal
path.
In general, steam boats were avoided on the canals since the wake of the paddle wheels
caused too much turbulence and the limited water that one found on a canal.
In England, canals contributed to industrialization into several ways.
First, as noted, they significantly reduced the cost of shipping bulk goods such as coal
and other inputs that factory owners needed.
Second, canals permitted manufacturers to ship their products all over England, thus enlarging
the domestic market for manufactured goods.
Canals helped make England into a tight little island in the sense that it was possible to
reach most parts of England by canal by the early 19th century.
So let's talk a little bit about canals in America.
America had its own version of canal mania, and it lasted from the 1790s to the 1830s.
For us accustomed to railroads and highway transportation, canals may seem hopelessly
old-fashioned, but in the early 19th century, they were indeed the most cost-effective way
to move goods.
One way to see this is to look at the data in the following table.
As you can see, if you compare the costs of canal transportation with road, river and
ocean transport, you'll notice that it costs only one cent to haul a ton of freight one
mile on a canal, far cheaper than any other mode of transport.
Consequently, in the early decades of the 19th century, several eastern port cities
in America launched several summit canal projects to funnel grain, timber and other
products from the Midwest to them.
One example was the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal, which was championed by George Washington
and connected his hometown of Alexandria, Virginia with the West following the course
of the Potomac River.
Another was the Erie Canal, sponsored by New York Merchants and Politicians.
Completed in 1824, the Erie Canal was an extraordinarily ambitious summit canal in that it had to
overcome two mountain ranges in order to connect the Hudson with the Great Lakes.
The Erie was by far the most successful canal project in 19th century America.
Both these canals were summit canals, which meant that they had to cross a mountain range
in order to connect two natural water systems, like the Hudson River and the Great Lakes.
In the 1830s, canals began experiencing stiff competition from a new form of transportation,
the railroad.
As Watt improved his steam engine in the 1760s and 1770s, inventors tried to make a steam
vehicle, but for a road vehicle, it was not possible to use a low pressure atmospheric
engine because of the size and weight of the engine cylinder.
Instead, inventors had to develop a lighter and more compact engine that used high pressure
steam to push the piston.
High pressure engines, however, meant that engineers needed to develop stronger boilers
to prevent explosions as well as more precisely machined parts, pistons and cylinders.
A high pressure steam engine was perfected in America by Oliver Evans around 1801 and
in England by Richard Trevithick.
In 1769, Nicholas Canot, in France, built a road locomotive with a high pressure engine.
Canot hoped that the French army would adopt his vehicle and use it to haul cannon, but
the army rejected it because there were too few smooth roads on which his locomotive could
operate.
In 1800, Evans drove a steam vehicle along the streets of Philadelphia, and in 1801,
Trevithick built a successful steamer that climbed Camborn Hill in Cornwall and achieved
the unprecedented speed of eight miles an hour.
The lack of smooth roads limited the use of all of these vehicles, and so engineers experimented
with placing vehicles on rails.
Rails had been used to provide a smooth surface to guide wheels as early as the third century
BC in China, and they were used in Europe for moving carts in and out of mines beginning
in the 16th century.
In 1804, at the Penn E. Darn ironworks in Wales, Trevithick placed one of his high pressure
engines on wheels and used this locomotive to pull five cars with 70 men and 10 tons
of ore along a track.
To popularize his idea of a steam railroad, Trevithick erected a small circular track in
London in 1808.
It was known as the catch me who can, and people paid money to see if they could run
and catch up with Trevithick's locomotive.
By 1820, there were a number of small steam railways operating at mines and other industrial
sites in Britain, and George Stevenson began manufacturing locomotives for use on these
private lines.
In 1821, a group of investors convinced Parliament to pass an act, permitting them to set up
a railway between the towns of Stockton and Darlington, and they were planning to charge
to carry passengers and freight.
Although the investors initially planned to have horses haul the freight and passengers,
Stevenson convinced them that it would be more profitable to use a steam locomotive
to pull a train of cars.
In 1825, using his engine named Locomotion, Stevenson operated the first public train in
the world, carrying 12 wagonloads of freight and 22 passenger carriages.
Stevenson followed up his success with the Stockton and Darlington Railway by helping
to establish another longer line, the Liverpool and Manchester, in 1830.
These two railways were not only technical triumphs, but business successes as well.
While the Stockton and Darlington paid its stockholders a dividend of 14 percent after
five years, the Liverpool and Manchester earned 14,000 pounds in its first year of operation.
The technical and financial success of these two lines helped establish the concept of
a railroad.
Now drawing an analogy with canals, railway officials initially assumed that people would
pay a toll and then would be free to operate their own cars along the railway.
However, the volume of traffic on the Liverpool and Manchester soon showed that operations
had to be carefully controlled by the company and trains kept at a safe distance from each
other by using a signalling system.
Once the feasibility and profitability of railroads had been demonstrated, they developed
rapidly and lines were constructed connecting major cities throughout Britain and continental
Europe in the 1830s.
In Britain, investors built the railways with minimal government intervention, but with
the result that there were often competing lines on the most lucrative routes.
In contrast on the European continent, European railways were either built or closely controlled
by the national governments and that helped ensure that the lines served the social and
economic needs of each country.
One curious aspect to the development of railways in Europe was the use of different
track gauges and gauge refers to the distance between the two rails.
In different countries, different gauges reflected military concerns as well as national pride.
In Britain, Stevenson used a gauge of 1.435 meters, which is believed that he copied from
nearby mining railroads.
France took up the British gauge for its national system, but fearing an invasion by the French
Spain and Portugal deliberately chose a different gauge 1.676 meters for its railways.
This they hoped would prevent an invading army from using their railways.
In Russia, the Tsar hired American engineers to build the railways and they advocated the
use of a gauge of 1.52 meters.
Even today, these different track gauges mean that rail traffic between Western Europe and
Spain, Portugal and the Russian republics has to be transferred at the frontiers unless
it's carried on cars with adjustable or variable gauge axles.
By 1850, Great Britain had 6,500 miles of railroads, the German states had 3,700 and
France had 2,300.
So let's talk about railways in America.
While railways were and remain a major form of transportation in Europe, they fully blossomed
in America in the 19th century.
Even as early as 1850, America had more railway mileage than any of the leading European states
with 9,000 miles already built.
In America, railroads proved to be superior in the 19th century to both canals and steamboats
on rivers because they lowered costs in several ways.
First, canals and rivers froze during the winter, but the railroads could run year round.
Moreover, railroads could reach locations where it would be too expensive to build a canal.
As locomotives developed, railroads could carry passengers and deliver goods much faster than
was possible using canals, roads or even steamboats.
And finally, the railroads proved cost effective because they allowed companies to hold a smaller
inventory of goods, which in turn reduced storage costs.
Railroads, however, posed their own engineering challenges.
Just as canals had to be level, normally railroads cannot operate on steep hills.
In fact, the maximum grade for even the most powerful locomotive is in the range of 2-3%.
That means that a train can only go up a very gentle gradient with no more than 150 feet
of rise per mile of run.
By contrast, the maximum gradient in the U.S. interstate highway system is 6-7%.
Envious of New York's success with the Erie Canal, businessmen in Baltimore launched the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad in 1828, with the goal of diverting a portion of the lucrative
Midwest trade to their city.
Other east-west railroads followed, and those included the Pennsylvania Railroad, the Erie,
the New York Central, all of which reached into Ohio, Indiana and Illinois by the 1860s.
By that time, in the heavily settled Corn Belt from Ohio to Iowa, over 80 percent of
the farms were within five miles of a railroad.
To promote the development of railroads in the uninhabited west, the federal government
operated a land-grant system between 1855 and 1871.
Through this, new railway companies were given millions of acres which they could sell or
pledge to bondholders.
Before the program ended, a total of 129 million acres were granted to the railroads, supplemented
by another 51 million acres granted by the states.
The land grants enabled the opening of numerous western lines, especially the Union Pacific
and the Central Pacific, that linked San Francisco with Omaha and Chicago by 1869.
In order to coordinate rail operations across the continent, the railroads came together
in 1883 and established four standard time zones, Eastern, Central, Mountain and Pacific,
for the U.S.
While the transcontinental railroads dominated the public imagination, much of the construction
in the last quarter of the 19th century took place either in the industrial northeast or
the agricultural Midwest, and this construction was designed to facilitate the movement of
both crops and freight.
The steady growth in railroads helped fuel the development of the new steel industry
since the railroads used thousands of miles of steel rail, and we'll discuss this again
in the lecture on the steel industry.
The capital developed all of these railroads that came from Wall Street.
During the Civil War, Wall Street had developed as a leading financial center in America since
it was the one place where the federal government could successfully market its treasury bonds,
and those were the bonds that were needed to finance the war.
After the war, Wall Street financiers turned their attention and money to developing railroads.
In fact, the New York Stock Exchange didn't carry anything but railroad stocks until the
late 1890s.
During the late 19th century, American railroads were hammered into a national system by a
mix of Wall Street figures.
On the one hand, there were the robber barons like Jay Gould and Cornelius Vanderbilt, but
on the other hand, there were bankers and managers like J.P. Morgan and James J. Hill.
By the 1910s, the American rail system included 230,000 miles of track, making it the largest
in the world.
Over the next several decades, however, trucks and highways would take over the movement
of freight across the country, just as railroads had superseded canals in the mid-19th century.
As we've seen, canals and railroads are the great infrastructure inventions of the 19th
and 20th centuries.
They were truly the backbone of the Industrial Revolution, lowering costs and moving raw
materials from factories and creating larger markets for finished goods.
By doing so, canals and railroads made it worthwhile for manufacturers to install more
efficient machinery to build larger plants.
Although both canals and railroads began with creative devices such as Leonardo's
Mitergate Lock or Trevethick's Locomotive, both canals and railroads required substantial
capital in order to be built.
For this reason, much of their story involves large organizations such as corporations or
national governments.
In fact, we could do an entire other lecture on how railroads alone reshaped how companies
are financed, managed and regulated.
But the thought I want to leave you with is that we should not take infrastructure for
granted.
Over the last 30 to 40 years, the U.S. has not invested in maintaining its infrastructure,
whether it be railroads or highways.
We've gotten to this situation, I think, for several reasons.
Some of it is that we tend to assume that information and telecommunications are more
important than transportation.
Another piece is simply how expensive these nationwide systems have become.
And some of it reflects the ongoing debate about the role and size of the government.
Yet, as we've seen with canals and railroads, transportation is essential to prosperity
and abundance, productivity and jobs.
And we cannot afford to ignore infrastructure if we wish to have a vibrant economy.
