Welcome to any modern supermarket today and you will probably be struck by two amazing
features.
First, there is an incredible range of products to purchase.
Supermarkets today can carry up to 50,000 different items, nearly all of which are packaged,
canned or frozen.
Second, at any given time of year, the produce section always has a wonderful selection of
fresh fruits and vegetables from all over the world.
You want bananas from Central America?
We got them.
Pineapples from Hawaii?
No problem.
Strawberries or tomatoes in December?
Refrigerated train cars and trucks are bringing them in every day.
This lecture will explore the inventions behind this magnificent cornucopia of food that we
take for granted today and will think about what it means that instead of growing and
preserving our own food at home, food now comes to us from large factories and companies.
As we'll see, the development of the food industry was a key aspect of the Industrial
Revolution as it progressed through the 19th century.
Indeed, inventions related to the preservation and distribution of food were essential for
industrialization.
Since workers, as they moved from the countryside to urban factories, had to be fed and large
quantities of food had to be delivered to those workers in order that they would be
happy and productive.
Nevertheless, the effects of industrial food processing are far more extensive than you
might think.
They made it possible not only to produce huge quantities of food, but the ability to
preserve more and different types of food transformed many things.
The landscape of America, the marketplaces and the homes.
Preservation of food also transformed the cultural meaning of what it means to eat and how we
perceive the natural world.
To a great extent, the story of industrial food preservation is the story of hot and
cold.
Canning, an early technique, was invented by Nicholas Appert, a chef and candy maker
in Paris.
In 1795, Appert began experimenting with ways to preserve foodstuffs, placing all sorts
of things, soups, vegetables, juices, dairy products, jellies, jams and syrups, and heavy
glass bottles which he then sealed with cork and wax.
Appert placed the bottles in boiling water to cook the contents.
Now, although Appert didn't know it at the time, putting the bottles in boiling water
and raising the temperature killed the bacteria that causes food to turn bad.
This was a discovery that was subsequently proved by Louis Pasteur several decades later.
Appert's preservation methods were soon imitated by other entrepreneurs, including a British
merchant by the name of Peter Durant.
In order to secure a British patent in 1810, Durant switched from using glass bottles to
metal cans.
Durant sold his patent to Brian Duncan and John Hall, who in turn set up the first canning
factory in 1813 to provide preserved food for the British Army.
By the 1820s, canned food could be readily purchased.
Cans were initially made by hand, a process that was limited to about 60 cans per day
per tinsmith.
This meant that the supply of cans was both limited and expensive until other inventors
created machines that could mass produce cans.
In less than two generations, mechanized can manufacturing solved this problem by increasing
worker productivity by more than 2,500 percent.
Now most tin cans are actually made of iron or steel, and they have a tin coating since
the iron imparts a yucky taste to the food.
In response to complaints about the difficulty of opening cans, Robert Yates invented the
can opener in 1855.
As the cost of cans dropped, processors looked next to reduce the amount of time it took
to preserve the food products.
Initially manufacturers assumed that it was the amount of time that a can was boiled that
determined if the contents would be rendered safe and easy to eat.
In 1861, this assumption was proven false when Isaac Solomon of Baltimore discovered
that the boiling time required to be reduced from six hours to a half hour.
He accomplished this by adding calcium chloride to the water, which raised the boiling temperature
of the water from 212 degrees Fahrenheit to 240 degrees.
With the water boiling at a higher temperature, the time in the bath was reduced, thus saving
on the fuel costs in the factory and further reducing the cost of canned goods to consumers.
By the turn of the 20th century, the can had become an iconic symbol of both modern housekeeping
and the urban trash heap.
While canning had the obvious benefit, and it's done properly, of protecting the consumer,
it also had to have economic advantages for everybody in the food chain, from farmers
to processors to grocers.
In the past, because perishable crops like fruits and vegetables had to be sold quickly,
it didn't make much sense for a farmer to raise more than the local market could consume.
However, once fruits, vegetables and other products could be preserved, the amount the
farmer produced of any given product was only limited by the capacity of the local food
processor.
Many towns, such as my hometown of Charlottesville, grew up in the 19th century by being regional
centers where food processing plants were located.
Farmers from all across central Virginia would bring their produce to Charlottesville, where
it would be canned, and from Charlottesville, the canned goods would be shipped by railroad
all over the country.
The availability of regional processing centers encouraged farmers to specialize.
Rather than produce simply for local consumption, farmers now concentrated on maximizing the
yield per acre of a single crop, which could then be processed by a big plant and they
no longer worried about the local market.
Another advantage for food processors and food shippers was that canning in particular
had the effect of shrinking food by eliminating non-consumable or unnecessary food components.
Now to see this, let's consider what happens when you can tomatoes and peaches.
It takes 11 tomatoes to fill up this entire container of tomato sauce, so all of the volume
of those tomatoes is condensed into just this one jar.
An even more impressive example is what happens with peaches.
These five peaches can be cooked and preserved and they result in a smaller container of
canned peaches that look like this.
Another great example of this is condensed milk.
The American entrepreneur Gail Borden had something of an obsession for preserving food
through dehydration.
Borden realized that removing the water content of food not only increased its edible life,
it also reduced the size and weight, thereby making it more portable.
And Borden thought that this was a characteristic that Americans would appreciate and pay good
money for.
And fortunately in the 1840s, Borden's initial efforts in developing his first product, a
meat biscuit, were met with less than enthusiastic public embrace.
Frederick Law Olmstead, the journalist, social critic and designer of New York Central Park
encountered Borden's meat biscuit in his travels and reported in one of his newspaper stories
that he would rather starve than partake of the nourishment of one of those biscuits.
For Borden, he found a far better subject for dehydration and condensation in milk.
Borden's greatest challenge was not simply preserving the milk but maintaining its physical
quality and taste.
Borden found that he could produce a satisfactory end product by using a vacuum pan for boiling
and then evaporating the milk.
But Borden could not create an industrial useful process because the milk kept foaming
and sticking to the surfaces of the pan.
Leaking a simple practical solution, Borden greased the pan and his problem went away.
So how much milk does condensation actually result in?
We have here 24 ounces of milk and when it goes through the process of condensation,
it results in a can this size, it's about half the volume of the milk and this is 24
ounces and this is 12 ounces.
At first it seemed the solution that Borden came up with might be just too simple and
indeed Borden had trouble convincing the U.S. Patent Office that he had actually done something
novel enough to warrant a patent.
In response, Borden returned to the Patent Office flourishing charts, technical reports
and testimonials so that he could convince the Patent Office that his process was indeed
both complicated and hence unique.
In 1856 he received both American and British patents.
The Civil War broke out in 1861, the Union Army requisitioned all the condensed milk
that Borden could make.
Fortunately Borden was able to take advantage of Isaac Solomon's technique of using calcium
chloride to accelerate production and Borden was able to increase his output dramatically.
Even so, the 16,000 quarts a day that Borden produced in his New York plant was far short
of the military's demand and the situation eventually led Borden to have to license his
process to other manufacturers.
The Civil War had a profound effect on food production.
It greatly increased interest and demand for canned goods.
Things like condensed milk became very popular.
Prior to the war, the demand for canned goods had been pretty limited and canners maximized
their production and minimized their risk by offering a whole diverse product line.
Processors near the coast, for example, in and around Chesapeake Bay, processed fruits
and vegetables during the summer and fall and in the winter and spring, the canned seafood.
After the war, however, with many soldiers having acquired a taste for canned foods,
demand increased significantly.
From 1861 to 1871, the output of the canning industry grew from 5 million to 60 million
units a year.
Along with efforts to can fruit, vegetables and milk, some entrepreneurs tried canning
meat and it resulted in products such as corned beef or canned ham.
The same time, it was also clear that the swelling population of cities might also be
a market for fresh meat.
One could only figure out how to chill the meat and then ship it.
While ice was commercially harvested in America during the winter from ponds and lakes, and
it was used in home ice boxes, a major breakthrough came with mechanical refrigeration, which
was first patented by John Gorey, a doctor in Florida in 1851.
Although Gorey's machine could make ice, it was really the invention of the ammonia-based
compressor that was developed by Carl von Lind, a German inventor and scientist in 1876,
that made refrigeration easier in the process of producing ice more reliable.
Within a dozen years, there were over 200 commercial ice plants in the United States.
Now with the invention of refrigeration, the challenge of preserving or extending a food's
period of freshness opened up a whole new set of possibilities for entrepreneurs.
If so, would not only reduce the waste by prolonging shelf life of food, it also opened
up new opportunities for entirely new kinds of fresh food.
One of the best examples of this is the meatpacking industry.
For centuries, people have eaten preserved meat that has been salted, smoked, or dried.
But cooling and mechanical refrigeration technology offered the potential to eat fresh meat long
after it would have spoiled international conditions.
Over the middle of the 19th century, fresh meat had come to the city under its own power,
alive and kicking.
Local slaughterhouses would then purchase these animals, typically hogs and steers, for quick
sale and consumption.
All of this was an uncertain proposition, and consequently the availability and the prices
of fresh meat prevented it from becoming a staple on most tables for most families.
Although there are many steps in the process by which meat got from the western plains to
the eastern dinner table, the critical link in the network was the refrigerated rail car
or the reefer.
With refrigeration, animals could be shipped by train to a convenient central location,
Kansas City or Chicago for example, where they would be slaughtered, and then distributed
by rail using the reefers to consumers and cities throughout the country.
Following this business model, processors figured they could minimize the loss of animals who
died in transit, and they could avoid shipping costs on the 35 percent of the animal's weight
that wasn't converted into meat.
One of the most important characters in the development of meat packing was Gustavus
Franklin Swift.
While he was still a boy on Cape Cod in Massachusetts, Swift bought a heifer, slaughtered it himself,
and went door to door selling the meat.
Inspired by this experience, Swift went into the cattle dealing business, moving west from
Massachusetts to upstate New York and ultimately to Chicago, where he arrived in 1875.
Now fresh dressed beef had been shipped east from Chicago before Swift arrived, but only
during the coldest months of the year when refrigeration was supplied by Mother Nature.
Now Swift envisioned it doing it year round with the aid of refrigerated rail cars.
Because they had made a substantial investment in the facilities necessary for shipping
live cattle, and because the additional fees charged for the overall weight of the cattle,
railroads were reluctant to cooperate with Swift at first.
Finally, Swift convinced one railroad, the Grand Trunk, to work with him if he supplied
the refrigerated rail cars himself.
Using a few resources that he could scrape together, Swift designed and built a small
fleet of reefers for testing.
These cars had a compartment that could be filled with ice, that came from a local ice
plant, and that way they could keep the meat cold as it traveled from Chicago to its final
destination.
By 1881, Swift had perfected his design that would maintain the quality of the beef, slaughtered
and dressed in Chicago until it reached retail butchers several days later in eastern cities.
Because Swift's methods brought down the cost of putting fresh meat on the dinner table,
this expanded, encouraging the railroads that had originally opposed Swift to jump on board
and take up his business.
Within a year, Harper's Weekly was trumpeting the dawn of what they called an era of cheap
beef.
Even with refrigerated cars in place, to make all of this work required an optimal level
of efficiency.
The transportation network needed to extend seamlessly over long distances and be integrated
with the processing and distribution nodes on either end.
When Chicago Dressed Beef reached New York or Boston, the doors of the refrigerated cars
had to stop exactly opposite the doors of the cold storage warehouses.
Overhead rails inside the car were then lined up with an identical system inside the warehouse,
and as Harper's Weekly pointed out, quote, the meat is easily transferred to the storage
room without being removed from the hook upon which it was hung when killed.
Swift also concentrated on streamlining the process of production before shipment.
Canning had demonstrated that food could be preserved on a large scale, prompting industrialists
to create all sorts of new machines and scaling up existing preservation techniques to mass
produce food goods.
To scale up his production, Swift took advantage of a particular innovation, the disassembly
line.
The disassembly line originated in Cincinnati with hog butchers, and it was in place by
the 1850s.
Finally known in the 19th century as Porcopolis, Cincinnati processed more than 330,000 hogs
each year, most of them arriving in the late fall and early winter.
From the volume of work, it was important to have efficient methods that could take
advantage of these hundreds of thousands of hogs that arrived all at once.
The key was in disassembly, and for the disassembly line, there was introduced a horizontal wheel
that was at about head height from which eight dead hogs were suspended.
Eight workers stood around this wheel, each performing a single step in the disassembly
of the animal as the wheel turned.
Once the carcass was ready for butchering, it was then transferred to a table where two
workers were positioned on either side and shifted the animal while two other workers
hacked away at it.
Once again, we find Frederick Law Olmsted present to share his impressions.
We entered the immense low-ceiling room and followed a vista of dead swine.
Walking down to the vanishing point, we found there a sort of human shopping machine where
the hogs were converted into commercial pork.
No iron cog wheels could work with more regular motion.
Plump falls the hog upon the table.
Chop chop, chop chop, chop chop.
Fall the cleavers.
All is over.
A maze beyond all expectation.
We took out our watches and counted 35 seconds from the moment when one hog touched the table
until the next occupied its place.
This division of labor not only led to tremendous improvements in efficiency, it also led to
specialized methods of dealing with parts of the animal that had previously been thought
as to simply be waste.
The byproducts of food processing were non-consumable commodities and they were used to manufacture
glue, soap, and candles.
Indeed, the great soap manufacturer Procter & Gamble got a start in Cincinnati making
soap from the leftover bones and fat that came from the packing houses.
As the old saying goes, Cincinnati businessmen sold every part of the hog but the oink.
Swift and his competitors, like Philip Armour, expanded upon this idea and developed new
products to took advantage of former waste and these included olio-margarine, processed
meat like bologna, pharmaceuticals, and even fertilizer.
Swift and Armour refined and expanded the disassembly process, breaking it down into
finer and finer steps.
Live animals were now lured to the line, snagged and hung up, waiting to be slaughtered.
By the time Upton Sinclair described the process in his 1906 exposé, The Jungle, dozens of
men performed by new tasks on each hog as its hanging carcass slid down the line between
two lines of bloodstained workers.
When I quote, one scraped the outside of the leg, another scraped the inside of the same
leg, one with a swift stroke cut the throat, another made a slit down the body, a second
opened the body wider, a third with a saw cut to the breastbone, a fourth loosened the
entrails, a fifth pulled them out, looking down this room one saw creeping slowly a line
of dangling hogs and every yard there was a man working as if a demon was after him.
All of these improvements were fed by the immense number of cattle and hogs raised on
the western plains and prairies, increasing production exponentially.
Soon Chicago meat, fresh dressed, preserved and canned, was feeding people around the
world delivered by both refrigerated railcars as well as refrigerated steamships.
Ironically, as a result of all of this, cattle production disappeared from the typical American
family farm.
Farmers who had raised cattle and hogs to be slaughtered by their local butcher found
that they no longer had an outlet for their product.
The beef and pork that came from Chicago was far too inexpensive to make it worthwhile
for farmers to raise a few cows or a few pigs for the local market.
Development of new products by the meatpacking industry had other unexpected effects because
many of these products, such as canned meats, did not require the use of refrigeration.
Farmers found that they had a lot of unutilized refrigerated railcars.
In response, Armour decided to use those railcars to ship new products.
Armour promoted the increased cultivation of perishable southern crops, Carolina berries,
Georgia peaches, Florida tomatoes, knowing he could transport them in his reefers to
northern and eastern cities while they were still fresh.
There Armour could sell them at premium prices as desirable out-of-season commodities.
While the benefits of cooling had become obvious, people still thought that freezing was more
destructive than preservative.
The ruinous effect of a killing fall frost on a vulnerable crop seemed to suggest that
it would not be a good idea to freeze food in order to preserve it.
Instead, it would be up to Clarence Birdseye to prove that under the right circumstances,
the very opposite was true, that freezing could be used to preserve food.
During the winter of 1912, Birdseye went fishing in Labrador.
And during that time, he casually tossed his catch on the ice beside him where it quickly
froze in the temperatures that were down around 20 degrees below zero.
Later, Birdseye was shocked to see that the fish that he had caught came back to life
when he dropped it into a bucket of water.
Although Birdseye didn't know it at the time, because the size of ice crystals is proportional
to the speed at which a liquid freezes.
And faster freezing means smaller crystals.
The fish's cells had been left undamaged by small ice crystals that had been produced
in it through the rapid freezing.
And that's why it was still alive when he put it in the bucket.
Birdseye also discovered that fish frozen this way tasted a lot better than fish that
had been slowly frozen.
And that's because the cell damage that comes with slow freezing releases fluids that produce
an unpleasant taste and character in the food.
And if that wasn't lucky enough, Birdseye just happened to live in the best place to
take advantage of his discovery.
Birdseye was a resident of Gloucester, Massachusetts, which turned out to be one of America's largest
commercial fishing ports.
In fact, Birdseye discovered that fish could be frozen even before they reached the port.
The fish could be minimally processed on the deck of the trawler and then tossed straight
into a freezer in the ship itself.
Nevertheless, there were difficulties to overcome.
Experimentation revealed that not all foods behave the same.
The varying cell structures of different foods require different temperatures and freezing
times in order to best preserve the quality of the food.
Existing refrigeration units depended on convection, the passage of cold air across
the surface of the object that you wanted to cool or freeze.
And Birdseye found this process to be generally too slow and also too difficult to control.
The only answer for Birdseye was to develop his own freezing equipment and entirely new
techniques.
What Birdseye came up with was freezing by conduction.
Freezing by conduction proved to be fast, effective and suitable for industrial food
processing.
Food was prepackaged in thin containers and then sandwiched between two metal plates and
then it was cooled to as much as 25 degrees below zero.
In this way, the quality of the frozen foods could be optimized because the temperature
of the plates and hence the freezing time could be precisely controlled.
Birdseye's ideas were so successful that by the time he died, most Americans thought
that his name was simply a brand name and not the name of an actual individual inventor.
Thanks in part to Swift, armor and Birdseye.
By the middle of the 20th century, the root cellar was a dim memory and had been replaced
by the refrigerator.
As we'll see in the lecture 29 on appliances, Americans began buying electric refrigerators
in the 1920s and freezers in the 1940s.
By 1973, one-third of all American homes had both a refrigerator and a deep freeze.
The availability of canned goods, fresh meat and produce and frozen foods of all types
transformed domestic food storage and preparation.
It also transformed diets.
For poor Americans, bread ceased to be the staff of life, the staple food.
The color, texture and taste of the monotonous urban diet in the 19th century began to disappear.
And in the 20th century, vegetables, fruits and meats that had been luxuries became commonplace.
The virtue of a plain diet was soon supplanted by the concept of a balanced diet in the 20th
century, a diet that now was defined as having previously inconceivable components such as
carbohydrates, proteins, vitamins and minerals.
Furthermore, because many foods became less expensive, the effect was to make food generally
more plentiful.
Now in today's world, obesity, a trait that had previously distinguished the wealthy, is
now a problem that plagues the masses.
However, food preservation has not proven to be just a revolution at the poor or the
middle class dinner table.
Even the wealthiest have experienced profound changes in their diet.
At every table, poor, middle class and wealthy alike, seasonality has faded into the background.
So too has the concept of foods that come from unique or exotic places.
People now eat spring lamb and asparagus year round.
Tomato sauce is ubiquitous, thanks to canned tomatoes.
And Hawaiian pineapples grace the tables from New York to Nashville.
Distinctive seasonal sensations, tastes and smells have faded or blended together, and
the characteristic joys and pleasures of seasonal fruit have become less notable, less appreciated
because as they have become more commonplace in a regular part of our everyday experience.
The industrialization of food has been both a blessing and a curse.
It's a blessing that we are able to produce vast quantities of food cheaply and that we
enjoy thousands of products.
The same time, it's a curse and then industrialization has standardized food to the point where it's
not always as tasty or flavorful or as healthy as we might like.
Is it any wonder then that the local food movement appeals to so many people today?
