We are surrounded today by all sorts of devices that run on electricity.
Some devices plug into the outlet on a wall while others are powered by batteries.
Yet how many of us know how either batteries or the generators delivering electricity to
our wall outlets actually produce electricity?
In this lecture, I'll talk about both these inventions, batteries and electric generators,
and explain how they work and where they came from.
As you'll see, both exemplify an important theme in the history of technology in the
19th century, that inventors and scientists were fascinated by the idea that one form
of energy could be converted into another, how chemical energy in a battery could produce
electricity, or how mechanical motion could be used to produce electricity in a generator.
In science class, this theme is often treated as the law of conservation of energy, and physicists
frequently emphasize that energy can be neither created nor destroyed.
But if you're an engineer or an inventor, you probably are much more interested in the
fact that you can convert energy from one form to another.
And that's the secret behind a whole slew of inventions.
Both the battery and the generator provided a means for producing an electric current,
and without these two inventions, we would not be able to enjoy today the extraordinary
number of electrical and electronic devices that we have.
To understand the battery and the generator, we need to talk a little bit about what electricity
is.
And a good place to start is to think about static electricity, and then move on to electric
currents, that is to say, moving electricity.
Although the ancient Greeks were aware that static electricity could be produced by rubbing
amber with silk, the development of our modern understanding of electricity dates from the
late 17th and 18th century.
Several investigators, such as Henry Cavendish, Otto von Gerk, Stephen Gray and Benjamin Franklin
systematically studied static electricity.
His natural philosophers concentrated on how different bodies could be electrically charged
and sparks given off.
Static electricity is an excess of electric charge or electrons on the surface of a body.
The excess charge is built up when two surfaces come into contact, and one of the surfaces
has a higher resistance, resulting in more of the electrons or charge moving to the other
body.
A simple example of this is when on a winter day, when it's dry, you walk across a wool
carpet.
The carpet has a high resistance, but your body does not, so more charge collects on
you.
Static electricity can be discharged when you touch a conductor, perhaps a metal doorknob,
which on the doorknob has a lower resistance, and so the electric charge flows off your
body with a spark or shock and onto the conductor, the metal doorknob.
In the early 19th century, electrical science expanded dramatically from the study of static
charge to investigating what was then called dynamic electricity, or how charge could flow
through a conductor like a copper wire.
The key to this new research was the invention of the electric battery by Alessandro Volta
in 1800.
Volta was born in Como, Italy in 1745.
Like many young noblemen of his time, Volta went to school planning to become a priest,
but he soon discovered a passion for electricity and began his own experiments.
After a few years, Volta established himself as a physics professor, first in his hometown
in Como, and then later in Pavia, where he taught at the university for 20 years.
Volta came to invent the battery by way of a major argument that he had with another
Italian scientist, Luigi Galvani.
As the story goes, in the 1780s, Galvani was slowly skinning a frog at a table where he
had been conducting experiments with static electricity by rubbing the frog's skin.
Galvani's assistant touched an exposed nerve of the frog with a metal scalpel and much
to their surprise, the frog's leg kicked as if it were still alive.
Galvani realized that there must be a relationship between electricity and animation or life.
To describe the force that activated the muscles of his specimens, Galvani coined the term
animal electricity.
Volta repeated Galvani's experiments and at first embraced animal electricity.
However, Volta started to doubt the phenomenon was caused by electricity intrinsic to the
animals.
Dead, Volta believed that the contractions depended on the metals Galvani used to connect
the nerves and muscles in his experiments.
To prove his point, Volta decided to show that electricity could be generated by using
two metals connected by a moistened disc.
The disc was a substitute for Galvani's frog leg.
Volta found that he got good results when he created a series of cups consisting of alternating
copper and zinc plates which replaced in either salt water or diluted sulfuric acid.
To make the device more compact, Volta soon replaced the cups with moist paper discs located
between the alternating copper and zinc plates.
Volta called this invention his electric pile and to this day several European languages
use the word pile to describe a battery or an electric cell.
Now let's have a look at how a Voltaic pile works and I'll actually construct one for
you.
Alrighty, so the build of Voltaic pile, you work with two different kinds of metal.
We're going to use nickels and pennies here and you're going to place between them some
salt water and the salt water is going to get between the two by dipping little pieces
of paper towel into the salt water.
And so as you can see, the pile produces just short of two volts.
In his earlier reports to the Royal Society in London in 1800, Volta emphasized how his
invention differed from the lighten jar that had been used previously by electrical researchers.
Using the lighten jar, other scientists were able to accumulate static electricity but the
jar could only be discharged to create, say, one big spark.
In contrast, Volta reported that his pile provided, in his words, a perpetual flow of
electricity or what today we would call an electric current.
Volta's invention quickly became an international sensation.
One year after his first letter to the Royal Society in London, the Institute de France
invited Volta to Paris where he was awarded with a gold medal and a monetary prize by
Napoleon.
All chemists began experimenting with the current produced by Volta's pile and found
that it could do wondrous things in terms of breaking down substances.
For instance, William Nicholson and Anthony Carlyle used an electric current to reveal
that water was actually made up of two gases, hydrogen and oxygen.
Sir Humphrey Davy at the Royal Institution undertook a public subscription to raise funds
so that he could build an enormous battery, having 2,000 elements and the current from
this battery he used in order to conduct experiments with electrolysis to discover
new chemical elements, sodium, potassium, calcium and chlorine.
Sir Humphrey also conducted his wires from the giant battery to two pieces of carbon
and when he separated the two carbons slightly, the current created an incredible bright light.
And as we'll see in lecture 20, this experiment led other inventors to develop the first
electric lights known as arc lamps.
Nearly all modern batteries follow the model set by Volta and his electric pile.
There are two different electrodes, sometimes metal, sometimes not, and they are separated
by an electrolyte.
By choosing the right mix of electrodes and electrolyte, one can cause a chemical reaction
that in turn produces an electric current that flows when the two electrodes are connected
by a wire.
Through the 19th century, inventors tried all sorts of combinations of electrodes and
electrolytes.
Several combinations were successful and could be used to power early telegraph and telephone
systems.
However, all of these early batteries used a liquid electrolyte which could spill and
hence limited the application of batteries.
So legend has it, Alexander Graham Bell was experimenting with a battery operated telephone
in 1876 when he happened to spill battery acid on his good pants, and he uttered supposedly
the first telephone message, Watson, come here, I want you, because he needed Watson's
help to save his pants.
As a first step toward a reliable battery, the chemist Robert Wilhelm Bunson, who also
invented the Bunson burner used in chemistry labs, created in 1841 a battery composed of
a zinc electrode that formed the body of the cell and a carbon rod at the center which
formed the other electrode.
For the electrolyte, Bunson used a combination of two liquids, dilute sulfuric acid separated
from a second electrolyte, chromic acid, by a porous ceramic wall.
In 1886, another German, Carl Gosner, patented a new battery known as the dry cell that replaced
the liquid electrolyte with a wet paste made of ammonium chloride and plaster of Paris.
Gosner's dry cell was more solid and it did not require maintenance and it did not spill
and it could be used in any position.
It provided a potential of 1.5 volts.
Gosner's patent was purchased by the National Carbon Company of Cleveland in 1896 and they
used it to introduce the first mass produced dry cell.
National Carbon also introduced the first D-cells in 1898 and the following year the
first flashlights were patented.
During much of the 20th century, this battery was marketed under the brand name Ever Ready
and National Carbon became known as Union Carbide.
It's also possible to have batteries in which the electrolyte is an alkaline rather than
an acid, but of course these cells use different combination of metals for the electrodes.
The first alkaline battery used a combination of nickel and cadmium and was invented in
Sweden by Waldmar's Jungner in 1899.
Nickel cadmium batteries have significantly better energy density than lead acid batteries,
but they're a lot more expensive.
Hence, they weren't used widely in the United States until the 1960s.
Another alkaline battery uses lithium for one of its electrode.
Lithium batteries date back to 1912, but they weren't practical until the 1980s when the
lithium battery was perfected.
Batteries found in cell phones today are lithium ion polymer batteries, which hold their electrolyte
in a solid polymer composite and their electrodes are laminated to each other.
This permits the battery to be placed in flexible packaging instead of a rigid metal case and
these cells can then be easily fit into the limited space found inside devices like a
cell phone.
While chemists and philosophers energetically debated what caused electricity to be produced
in Volta's pile, other scientists used it to conduct new experiments.
Among these scientists was Hans Christian Orsted, who discovered in 1820 a relationship
between electricity and magnetism.
Orsted connected a wire to a Voltaic pile and then placed a magnetic compass under the
wire.
To Orsted's amazement, the compass needle was deflected only when he connected or disconnected
the wire from the pile.
Orsted's experiments were repeated by Andrei Marie Ampere, who established that it was
a flow of charge, a current, that was interacting with the magnetism of the needle and causing
it to move.
Let me explain that by looking at this diagram right here.
As you can see in this diagram, the experimenter is holding a wire between his hands and that
wire is carrying the electric current from the Voltaic pile.
Underneath the wire is a compass needle on a little stand and every time you open or close
the switch connecting the wire to the battery, the needle will deflect.
That is to say it will swing back and forth.
The interesting question was, what was causing the electric current to interact with the
magnetic field that was in the compass?
This question puzzled all sorts of investigators and the answer finally came in 1831 from Michael
Faraday.
Using a doughnut shaped coil of wire and a bar magnet, Faraday demonstrated the laws
of electromagnetic induction.
Faraday showed that if one moved a magnet in and out of a doughnut coil, one could induce
or generate a current in that coil.
Conversely, if one sent a current through the coil, the magnet would move in and out
of the coil.
Again, let's look at a second diagram to appreciate this.
In this diagram, we see a coil of wire and we see a bar magnet.
Above it is an electric current meter.
If one moves the magnet back and forth in and out of the coil, the needle on the electric
current meter will swing back and forth showing that an electric current has been induced
in the coil.
Now to get either effect to generate current or produce motion, the configuration of the
coil and the bar magnet have to be at right angles with each other.
In fact, the current induced would be at a third right angle perpendicular to both the
coil and the magnet.
Engineers refer to this today as the right hand rule.
If my thumb is the motion and my pointer finger is the magnetic field, then my middle finger
is the direction of the current.
Faraday further realized the significant of Orsted's observation that the compass needle
was deflected only when the current was either turned on or turned off.
When the current was passing steadily through the wire, there was no deflection.
Faraday hypothesized that both the magnet and the electric coil were each surrounded
by an electromagnetic field, often depicted as a series of force lines, and that current
or motion was produced when one of these fields was changing.
When one turned the current on or off in Orsted's wire, one energized or de-energized the magnetic
field surrounding the wire, and this change interacted with the magnetic field surrounding
the compass needle, causing it to swing.
During the middle decades of the 19th century, it proved difficult for scientists to fully
appreciate the nuances of Faraday's theory.
Nevertheless, by looking at small models that Faraday used to demonstrate his ideas, experimenters
and instrument makers quickly grasped the essence of his idea and fashioned a variety
of generators and motors.
For these hands-on investigators, Faraday's laws of electromagnetic induction boiled down
to this.
If one wanted to build an electric generator, then one moved a conductor through a magnetic
field and the current was induced in the conductor.
Likewise, if one wanted to make an electric motor, then one used an electric current to
produce an electromagnetic field that would cause a magnet or a conductor to move.
In utilizing Faraday's discoveries about induction, experimenters soon added several
new features to generators.
First, to generate electricity, they wanted to rely on rotary motion, motion that came
from either a hand crank or a steam engine.
And second, investigators came to desire electrical machines that produced a current that was similar
to that which came from a battery.
They wanted to work with a current that possessed a steady voltage, or what is now called direct
current or DC.
The fascination with DC may have been fostered by the rapid development in the 1840s and
1850s of telegraph systems which sent signals by interrupting a direct current.
To secure both these features, rotary motion and direct current, electrical experimenters
utilized a commutator.
In both generators and motors, there are generally two sets of electromagnetic coils, a fixed
set that are known as the field coils, or the stator, and a rotating set that's known
as the rotor.
A commutator is simply the device by which electric current moves in or out of the rotor.
Introduced by Hippolyte Pixie in 1832 in Paris, the commutator came to be an essential feature
of DC motors and generators.
To understand how a commutator works, we need to take a look at the inner workings of a
direct current generator.
Following Faraday's laws of electromagnetic induction, a generator produces current as
the rotor spins and cuts across the magnetic field created by the field coils.
If we trace the path made by just one loop in the rotor coil, we can see that when the
loop swings down through the magnetic field, it will induce a current that flows in one
direction, as specified by the right hand rule.
Similarly, as that loop continues its rotation, it will swing up through the magnetic field,
which will induce a current that will flow in the opposite direction.
If one wishes to utilize this alternating current, or AC, then one simply connects individual
slip rings to each end of the rotor loop and conducts the current out of the generator.
But if, like many 19th century experimenters, one wants a direct current, again, like one
that's produced in a battery, then one needs to collect all of the current flowing in one
direction at one terminal of the generator, and all of the current flowing in the opposite
direction at the other terminal.
This is accomplished by placing on the rotor shaft a commutator consisting of a metal cylinder
that's divided into segments, and those segments are insulated from each other.
Stationary contacts or brushes rest on opposite sides of this cylinder and are positioned
so that when the current generated in the rotor reverses direction, the connections with
the brushes are also reversed, and the current delivered by the generator is always in the
same direction.
You can see these parts if we go take a close look at my model of an electric motor.
And in this motor, the gray part are the field coils of the stator, and the red part, which
is rotating or rotating, is called the rotor.
Now the front part of the rotor is the commutator, and if you look closely, you can see that
it consists of several copper sections that are divided by a black line, and that's the
insulation between each of the segments.
These little pieces right here on either side that are sticking up are the brushes.
And again, what happens in an electric generator as electricity is produced in the process of
the rotor spinning through the magnetic field, the brushes pick up the electricity from the
segments of the commutator and conduct it out of the generator via two wires.
Now as we've noted, Pixie's commutator allowed electric generators to produce a direct current
that was the same as that which was produced by a battery.
Realizing the generators could produce lots of electricity, it could be used in all sorts
of experiments and new applications, inventors and scientists began looking for ways to increase
the output of these new generators.
The first generators basically moved a coil of wire through a magnetic field created by
a permanent magnet.
Because it relies on permanent magnets, this type of generator is known as a magneto.
Hence the first thought towards producing more current was just to increase the number of
permanent magnets found in the generator.
First knowledge, a Belgian engineer pursued this strategy in the 1850s with his company,
the Society de Alliance, and he developed magnetos with large banks of horseshoe magnets.
One of the largest alliance magnetos was used to power an arc light in the South Forland
Lighthouse in England in 1858, and this lighthouse was the first electrically powered lighthouse
in the world.
Another strategy was to replace the permanent magnets with electromagnets, and this was
done first by an English manufacturer, Henry Wilde in 1863.
In Wilde's design, electromagnets in the main generator received their current from
a second smaller magneto, and both the main generator and the little magneto were powered
by a steam engine.
Wilde's machines were used for a variety of applications, including electroplating,
a process whereby a metal object could receive a thin coating of silver or nickel if the
object was connected to an electric circuit and then placed in a bath containing nickel
or silver ions.
Shortly after Wilde announced his machine, several inventors realized that you didn't
need a separate little magneto, but you could actually just draw a small portion of the
electricity being produced by the main generator and use that portion to excite the electromagnets
of the generator.
These new designs were called self-excited dynamic electric machines or dynamos for short.
Some scientists scoffed at this idea because it seemed like a perpetual motion motion scheme.
How could you borrow some of the electric current generated by the machine to create
the magnetic field that was generated in the current in the first place?
What they didn't understand were two things, A, that there was always a small amount of
residual magnetism in the field magnets that can be used to start the generating process
and B, as the generator gets going, the electromagnets become saturated and they draw less current
in order to sustain the magnetic field.
The idea that a generator could be self-exciting was a major breakthrough, and this discovery
was made simultaneously in 1866, 1867 by Essay Varley in England and Werner von Siemens
in Germany.
Moses Farmer in America also had some insights that were similar.
By the way, Werner and his brother Charles were the founders of the great electrical
company Siemens that continues to this day.
The final strategy that was developed in an effort to generate more current was to modify
the arrangement of the coils that were moving through the magnetic field.
From the 1830s to the 1860s, electrical inventors had used individual bobbins of wire not really
trying to maximize the amount of wire cutting through the magnetic field at any given time.
This all changed in 1867 when Zenovi T. Graham, a Belgian working in Paris, decided to come
up with a better design for the rotor that ensured that lots of wire was cutting through
the magnetic field.
Known as a ring armature, Graham's rotor was consisted of what I like to call donuts on
a donut.
The main donut or core consisted of iron wire.
On this core, Graham strung a series of smaller coils of copper wire, the ends of which were
connected to the coil right next to it.
Graham's dynamo produced more current without overheating and quickly was used in a variety
of applications, especially electric lighting, a story that will take up in lecture 20.
Not to be outdone by Graham, the Siemens brothers in Germany asked their lead designer Friedrich
von Hefner-Autnick to come up with an alternative.
In response, von Hefner-Autnick developed a drum-wound rotor.
Rather than wind wire around the circumference of the drum, he instead wound the coils around
the top, the sides, and the bottom, and then started over.
Compared to the Graham ring, the drum-wound rotor was much easier to wind than hence much
cheaper to make.
Nevertheless, the larger point here is that both the Graham ring and the drum-wound rotor
significantly increased the output of electric generators, made electricity cheaper to generate,
and thus paved the way for the application of electricity to a variety of new uses.
We'll look at several of those uses in future lectures.
Fosselda mentioned in either history or science classes, the battery in the generator are
fundamental inventions, and to me, everyone should have some idea about how these really
cool inventions work.
Without them, we would not have ready sources of electricity for many of the devices that
we enjoy today.
One important observation that we should make is that while both inventions, the battery
in the generator, were created by scientists Volta and Faraday, neither device would have
gotten very far if it wasn't taken up and modified by a whole series of practical people
who were intent on converting the original laboratory device into a practical product.
In doing this conversion, the practical people didn't rely so much on scientific theory as
to suggest what to do next, as much as a combination of close observation of how the devices worked
and a willingness to try new configurations of the basic elements, much in the way that
the electrical inventors messed with the magnets and coils in generators.
While science began to have an important role in the development of technology at the end
of the 19th century, inventions then and now continue to come about when people are willing
to pay close attention to the details of how a device looks and operates.
Invention is simply not the handmaiden of science.
