One of the hallmarks of our time is that we'd like to say that we live in an information
age that we are surrounded by technological devices, computers, cell phones, and other
gadgets that spew forth vast reams of information that we consume every day.
However, the information age of the late 20th and early 21st centuries was not the first
information age.
I'd suggest that the first information age occurred in the mid-19th century and was
built around three great inventions, the camera, the telephone, and the phonograph.
Unlike our current information age, all of these inventions were not digital, but rather
analog devices.
Digital information processing, converting a message into ones and zeros, was developed
in the 1950s, and that'll be the topic of lecture 34.
Given that digital communications are so pervasive in our lives today, it's probably
a good idea if I explain a little by what I mean by analog communications.
In analog communications, information is stored or transported from one place to another by
the creation of a representation that serves as a substitute or as an analog for the message.
In the case of the telephone, the sound waves of the voice, the message, are converted into
electric current waves, the analog, and that can be sent over a wire.
In the same way, the camera records a scene, the message, and it's sent via negative on
film the analog, which can be in turn reproduced as a photograph.
And in the case of the phonograph, sound waves from the voice or music are stored by duplicating
the ups and downs of the wave in the hills and valleys found in the groove of the record.
All three of these analog inventions, the camera, telephone, and phonograph, were the
products of several highly creative individuals, all of whom interacted with each other.
And in this lecture, I want to tell you about the interplay of these different characters.
As you'll see, photography involved Joseph Napise, Louis DeGair, and George Eastman,
while the telephone was a three-way race between Alexander Graham Bell, Elisha Gray, and Thomas
Edison.
And with the phonograph, we'll again meet Edison and Bell, but also a new character, Eldridge
Johnson.
Since the 17th century, artists frequently began a painting by using a camera obscura
to project an image onto paper or onto canvas that they would then trace.
Joseph Napise was a French gentleman and farmer who experimented with many new kinds of engines
and bicycles.
Napise also tried to use the camera obscura to trace images, but he was frustrated because
he didn't have a steady enough hand to make good tracings.
Consequently, Napise started experimenting with ways to capture an image without tracing.
In 1826, Napise coated paper with a light-sensitive chemical, silver chloride, and he placed it
in his camera obscura and produced the first photograph.
Napise called his process heliography, meaning sunriding.
To perfect heliography, Napise worked with both his older brother Claude as well as Louis
DeGair.
DeGair had studied architecture, theater design, and painting.
With Claude, Joseph had been working on an early form of an internal combustion engine
that they called the Pyrrole IV.
Unfortunately, Claude was unemotionally unstable, and at one point he ran off to London where
he squandered the family fortune trying to promote his new internal combustion engine.
To try and save his brother, Joseph dropped his photographic experiments and went to England,
but the stress of trying to help his brother out killed Joseph in 1833 before he was able
to make much progress on improving his ideas about heliography.
DeGair, however, persevered and in 1837 introduced a much improved process using a copper plate
coated with silver iodide.
DeGair types were simple to take and highly stable images.
Museums have examples that you can see that are now 150 years old.
Hoping that DeGair would freely share his invention with the world, the French government
awarded DeGair a pension for life, but DeGair nonetheless went on to patent his process
in England and elsewhere.
DeGair set off the first photograph fad.
By 1850 Americans had purchased 3 million DeGair types and there were 300 photographers
working in New York City producing DeGair type portraits for about $2.50 per person.
One of the disadvantages of DeGair types was the process created only one image and that
could not be copied.
This problem was addressed by William Henry Fox Talbot in England.
By coating transparent paper with silver salts, Talbot found that he could create a negative
image that in turn could be used to produce multiple positive prints.
Talbot patented his process and he called it the calotype and he promptly found himself
embroiled in a patent dispute with DeGair.
To get around DeGair, Talbot invented a new method for making negatives, namely by coating
glass plates with a light sensitive emulsion which could be exposed, processed and then
stabilized in the dark room.
Over the next few decades of the 19th century, photographers sought better photochemicals
so that images could be taken with shorter exposure times and under less light and they
experimented with coating metal and glass plates with different kinds of photo sensitive
emulsions.
Photography continued to be popular through the middle part of the 19th century.
In the 1860s, commercial photographers began offering cart de viste or card photographs
and would have a portrait taken and 25 cards made for as little as $2.50.
During the American Civil War, photographers set up portable studios wherever the armies
traveled and thousands of soldiers sent cart de viste home to their loved ones.
In 1874, George Eastman began coating rolls of paper and then celluloid film and placed
these rolls in a simple camera that he called the Kodak brownie.
By promising with the brownie, you push the button, we do the rest.
Eastman made photography into a product that could be enjoyed by millions.
Now photography won an easy acceptance among people in the 19th century for at least a
couple of reasons.
First, since the development of prospective painting going back to the 15th century,
people had become accustomed to viewing three-dimensional scenes in a two-dimensional painting.
Since photographs used the same kind of prospective techniques, people could easily make sense
of these new images.
Second, the inventors of photography played up the idea that they had created new machines
that produced mechanical reproductions of what was actually out there.
Already feeling that machines were more important and more objective than other human activities,
people in the Industrial Revolution were inclined to see photographs as being more real and
more credible than paintings.
And even though a photographer could use poses, lenses and darkroom techniques to manipulate
the image as much as any painter, people still believed that a photograph showed you what
was really out there.
Let's talk now about the telephone.
Telephone is an outgrowth of the development of the electric telegraph.
And the electric telegraph, though, is technically a form of digital technology, since the telegraph
converts the message into pulses, dots and dashes, in order to transmit it.
Developed by William Cook and Charles Wheatstone in England and Samuel Morse in America, the
electric telegraph quickly involved into a service that was primarily used by businessmen.
In America, it was also controlled by the first monopoly corporation, Western Union.
One of the technical limitations of the Western Union network was that it could only send
one message down a wire at a time.
Consequently, if the volume of messages was such that 10 messages needed to go from New
York to Cincinnati every minute of the day, then 10 wires would have to be erected between
these two cities.
Because stringing wires was expensive, several inventors, Thomas Edison and Elisha Gray,
started working on the problem of multiplexing, how to send multiple messages over a single
wire.
Now, while Edison and Gray were professional telegraph inventors, the multiplexing problem
attracted a novice Scottish inventor, a man by the name of Alexander Graham Bell.
Bell's father, Alexander Melville Bell, had developed an impressive system of symbols
for recording the sounds found in any human language.
And one of the applications of this system was to teach the deaf to speak.
To launch his universal speech system, Alexander Melville sent his son Alexander Graham to
Boston to introduce the system to America.
There, Alexander Graham Bell found a position as professor of allocation at Boston University.
But he also dreamed of doing something more than just advancing his father's system.
Hence Bell began experimenting with his own multiple message telegraph.
In order to help teach the deaf, Bell had studied acoustics extensively and he knew
how the human voice generated a complex sound wave that traveled through the air and that
the ear was capable of processing this wave and converting it into electric signals that
then traveled through the nervous system to the brain.
Based on his understanding of sound waves, Bell envisioned what he called a harmonic telegraph
that consisted of numerous tuned reeds positioned over an electromagnet.
Both the transmitter and the receiver were identical and they were connected by a battery
circuit.
If one spoke or sang in front of Bell's theoretical harmonic telegraph, reeds tuned to specific
frequencies that were related to the incoming sound wave would start vibrating and in turn
they would generate an electric current wave that could be sent down the wire to the receiver.
The receiving end, these electric current waves would cause the appropriate reeds to
vibrate and thus recreating the sound of the song or the voice that was sung in at the
transmitter.
While this harmonic telegraph served as a mental model in guided Bell's thinking, he
didn't think he didn't build the actual device because for a multiple telegraph he was going
to assign one message to each reed or frequency and so Bell only experimented with circuits
containing two, maybe three reed relays on each end.
In the meantime though, Bell started teaching a deaf teenage girl, her name was Mabel Hubbard,
and he promptly fell in love with her.
As it turned out, Mabel's father was Gardner Hubbard, a prominent Boston lawyer and telegraph
reformer.
Disturbed that Western Union was preventing ordinary citizens from getting the economic
and political information that they needed, Gardner Hubbard encouraged his future son-in-law,
Alexander Graham Bell, to invent an alternative form of communications, the telephone, that
might put Western Union in a bad political or economic position.
We see here that the telephone is an important example of the interplay of invention with
political and social ideas.
With Hubbard's support and Mabel's love, Bell redoubled his efforts.
In June 1875, Bell and his assistant, Thomas Watson, were experimenting with reed relays,
hoping to send several messages simultaneously.
While Watson twanged a relay at the transmitting end, Bell held a relay close to his ear, and
instead of hearing just one tone, Bell heard the fundamental tone as well as the harmonic
overtones of the fundamental signal.
Bell suddenly realized that he didn't need a whole group of reed relays to capture and
transmit complex sounds.
All he needed was one reed relay.
Bell and Watson quickly devised a prototype that demonstrated this idea in principle.
Thrilled that his future son-in-law had come up with this promising new invention, Hubbard
told him to get cracking and prepare a patent application.
But rather than quickly write up this basic idea, Bell agonized over the next six to eight
months over the details for his application, trying to figure out how to claim not just
the idea of the telephone, but all applications where one might convert sound waves into electric
current waves.
Eventually, Hubbard took the patent application away from Bell and simply mailed it off to
the patent office.
It arrived there on Valentine's Day, 14th of February 1876, just hours before Elisha
Gray dropped off his own preliminary application for a telephone-like device.
Since the patent office had never gotten two applications for the same invention on the
same day, the commissioner had to decide what to do, and he ruled in favor of Bell's completed
application as opposed to Gray's preliminary filing.
During the next two months, while the patent office was reviewing his application, Bell
rushed to figure out a way to reduce his invention to practice to make a working telephone.
In March 1876, Bell came up with a liquid transmitter that allowed him to utter the
famous message, Watson, come here, I want you.
However, because Bell was so partial to his little magnetic reeds, he soon came up with
a telephone that once again relied on those and built the transmitter and the receiver.
In the spring of 1876, Bell received a patent for his telephone, and during the summer,
he demonstrated at the Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia where it was a great hit.
Determined now to make the most of his invention, Bell and Hubbard offered the telephone to
Western Union for $100,000 in early 1877.
Since Western Union already had Thomas Edison working on an improved telephone, the company
refused to buy Bell's patents, and so Bell and Hubbard were forced to start the American
Bell telephone company, the predecessor of AT&T.
In July of 1877, Bell married Mabel, and as a wedding gift, he gave her both a miniature
silver telephone and shares in the new company, American Bell.
While Hubbard had envisioned the telephone as something that middle-class Americans
would use for social purposes and to coordinate activities in their homes and offices, the
investors who took over American Bell in the 1880s found a larger and more lucrative
market in selling telephones to businesses.
Companies that could afford the extra cost of a telephone used it to coordinate operations
between offices and factories and to improve sales operations.
As a result, fewer than 5% of American homes had a telephone in 1900, and only a third
of American homes had one in the 1920s.
To expand its residential business, AT&T started promoting the consumer use of the telephone
from the 1930s on, encouraging people to make social calls.
Further development of the telephone required a host of innovations, such as the switchboard
for connecting dozens and then thousands of users, as well as the electronic vacuum tube
for boosting signals for long-distance calls.
But while electronics allowed the telephone system to continue to grow through the 1930s
and the 1940s, the challenge of switching and connecting so many phones prompted AT&T
to look into new forms of electronics, and that led to the invention of the transistor,
a story that will take up in lecture 30.
Both the telegraph and telephone made communications nearly instantaneous, but the telephone added
another important feature.
It introduced the idea of personal communications, an expectation that has become more and more
important with laptops, the internet, and cell phones.
We'll return to this theme, the theme of personal communications, in lectures 31 and
32.
Let's turn and talk about our third invention, the phonograph.
The phonograph, as you'll see, was the outgrowth of intense research conducted by both Bell
and Edison, and it was also a result of their work on the telephone.
As we have seen, Western Union was determined not to pay Bell and Hubbard a large sum of
money for the telephone patent, and so they hired Edison and his team at Menlo Park, New
Jersey to improve and develop an improved telephone.
In doing so, Edison became interested in how to convert sound waves not only into electric
current waves, but also how a thin diaphragm converted sound into mechanical motion.
In July of 1877, while working on his telephone transmitter, Edison conceived the idea of
recording and playing back telephone messages.
After experimenting with a telephone diaphragm, having an embossing point held against paraffin
paper moving rapidly, Edison found that the sound vibrations are indented nicely, and
he concluded, and I quote, there's no doubt that I shall be able to store up and reproduce
automatically at any future time the human voice perfectly.
Confident that he could exploit this discovery and shape it into an invention, Edison wrote
a press release for the phonograph, even before he had gotten it to work, and the release
read in part, Mr. Edison the electrician has not only succeeded in producing a perfect
articulating telephone, far superior and much more ingenious than the telephone of Bell,
but has gone into an entirely unexplored field of acoustics, which is nothing less than
an attempt to record automatically the speech of a very rapid speaker upon paper, from which
he reproduces the same speech immediately or years afterwards.
Over the next few months, Edison continued to experiment, and by the end of November,
he developed a basic design.
First phonograph consisted of a grooved cylinder mounted on a long shaft with a screw pitch
of about 10 threads per inch, and it was turned by a hand crank.
Edison replaced the paraffin coated paper with a piece of tin foil that he wrapped around
the cylinder, and that became the recording surface.
The first phonograph had a separate recording and playback mechanism, but later designs merged
them into a single unit.
During the first week of December 1877, Edison asked his chief machineist, John Krusey, to
construct a phonograph.
Now although Edison explained to Krusey that the machine was going to record and playback
speech, Krusey, quote, fought it absurd, unquote.
When Krusey finished making the phonograph, Edison put the tin foil on it, and he then
recorded the nursery rhyme, Mary Had a Little Lamb.
Edison may very well have chosen the nursery rhyme, because his daughter Marian at that
time was about five years old, and his oldest son was almost two.
In his own words, Edison then, quote, adjusted the reproducer, and the machine reproduced
it perfectly, meaning the sound.
I was never so taken back in my life.
Everybody was astonished.
I was always afraid of things that worked the first time.
Another astonishment occurred the following day, when Edison exhibited this new invention
at the New York offices of the popular magazine Scientific American.
There, so many people crowded into the offices that Scientific American editors feared that
the floor would fail.
The phonograph established Edison as the inventor of the age, and it led to his most
famous nickname, the Wizard of Menlo Park.
Newspaper reporters flocked to Menlo Park to see the new invention and to interview the
great inventor.
Edison patented his phonograph in 1877, but he was unable to figure out how to market
this new invention, and he soon lost interest and turned to developing his incandescent
lighting system, a topic that we'll take up in the next lecture.
In the meantime, however, Bell took up the phonograph, jealous that he had not thought
of it first.
As Bell wrote to a friend, it is a most astonishing thing to me that I could possibly have let
this invention slip through my fingers when I consider how my thoughts have been directed
to this subject for so many years past.
Working with a skilled mechanic by the name of Charles Sumner-Tainer, Bell patented several
improvements on the phonograph, including the idea of using wax cylinders.
Irritated that Bell would try and steal a phonograph from him, Edison threw himself
into improving the phonograph during the summer of 1888, working incessantly at his
new laboratory in West Orange, New Jersey.
Edison came up with new recording materials, new motors, and new diaphragms, and between
1888 and 1890, Edison took out 75 patents on phonograph improvements.
Edison now thought the phonograph could be used in a talking doll, or perhaps as an office
dictating machine, but neither application proved profitable.
Instead, the most promising market was to create phonograph arcades where people paid
a nickel to come and listen to a song.
Through the 1890s, the Columbia Phonograph Company, a rival of the Edison Phonograph
Company, promoted the idea of recording music and selling home phonographs.
The Edison Company simply had to follow their lead.
Focusing on the production of cylinders rather than picking good music and good musicians,
Edison drove down the cost of making cylinder records, and by 1901, he could make a cylinder
record for seven cents and turn around and sell it for fifty cents.
But there were still more surprises in store for Edison and the phonograph, namely disc
records and the Victrola.
As early as 1878, Edison had experimented with using disc records instead of cylinders,
but he set discs aside because it was so difficult to design a disc where the record needle
passed over the surface at the same speed.
Since the circular path around an Edison cylinder always had the same circumference,
this meant that the speed of the needle remained constant.
However, on a disc, the path that the needle follows is a spiral, and the speed of the
needle increases as the spiral grooves get closer to the center of the disc.
Let me show you what this actually means with some of these artifacts.
Here we have an Edison cylinder, and as you can see, the circumference is the same all
the way from one end of the cylinder to the other, and that means that as the needle passes
along on that cylinder following the grooves, the record can turn at the same speed, and
the needle will pick up the music in a consistent way.
In contrast, on a disc record, you have to have the grooves fairly wide apart at the
outside of the record, so the record turns slower, and you have to have the grooves closer
together as the record gets nearer and nearer to the middle, so that from the standpoint
of the needle, the record seems to be turning at the same speed, and the music is then consistent.
Recognizing, though, that disc records would be easier to manufacture and could hold more
music, Emil Berliner, an inventor from Washington, D.C., developed a commercial disc machine
that he called a gramophone.
Disc records proved to be popular, and in 1901, one of Berliner's associates, Eldridge
Johnson, launched the Victor Talking Machine Company.
Its Victrolas were immediately recognized by the large morning glory-shaped horns that
were used to amplify the acoustic signal, and we have over here a wonderful example
of a Victrola with the morning glory horn.
Now, Edison machines, the phonographs, never had a horn like this, even though we often
associate such a horn with the Edison phonograph.
If you go to an antique store and you find a machine from the early 20th century with
a horn, you can almost bet that it's sure to be a Victrola and not an Edison phonograph.
The Victor Company came up with two important innovations.
First, under the leadership of Johnson, it produced machines that looked like fine furniture,
and it did so by folding the horn inside the case.
Status-conscious middle-class families liked these Victrolas since they didn't look like
a machine in the parlor.
Second, the Victor Company sought out great singers like Enrico Caruso and promoted them
heavily.
They became known as stars.
To emphasize the fidelity of Victrolas, the Victor Company used the slogan, His Master's
Voice, along with a picture of Nipper the Dog listening intensely to the record player.
Ironically, the original painting of Nipper featured an Edison phonograph, but when the
English subsidiary Berliner's Grammophone Company purchased the painting, told the artist
to get rid of the Edison machine and replace it with a Grammophone.
Just as Bell had aroused Edison's competitive spirit in the 1880s, so the Victor Company
got the wizard moving on a disc phonograph around 1910.
Pulling together what Edison called his insomnia squad, Edison focused on a better recording
surface and on recording music with greater fidelity.
While Edison's diamond disc records were technically superior, they were incompatible
with the Victrola machines.
In addition, Edison refused to promote star performers and insisted on recording only
those singers whose voice Edison regarded as being superior and acceptable.
As a consequence, the Edison phonograph companies were never able to get ahead of Victor and
Edison exited the phonograph business in 1929, two years before he died.
One lesson that jumps out of the story of Edison and the phonograph is that it's very
hard to hold a dominant position in entertainment technology.
My sense is that the reason for this is, starting in the late 19th century, as this industry
became a mass market industry, it also was required to take advantage of large groups
of customers who would readily shift from a new technology if it promised novel entertainment,
such as more selections, star performers, or if it was cheaper.
They weren't particularly interested in what Edison was interested in.
Edison focused on technical performance, higher fidelity, and this didn't seem to have the
long-term impact that he had hoped for.
All three inventions that we've talked about today, the camera, the telephone, and the
phonograph, played a huge role in making information and knowledge widely available to millions
of people.
Moreover, because they were all owned or operated by individuals, these inventions created the
expectation that information can and should be shaped by individuals.
As we'll see, this is a persistent theme in the history of technology over the 20th century,
and we'll talk about it again in later lectures.
But what I really like about these three inventions is that they reveal how invention is a team
sport.
All too often, we tend to see inventors operating in isolation.
We imagine them working alone in attics and garages long into the night.
We also assume that the products of inventors and their genius are right full-blown, ready
to be used and enjoyed by millions.
With all of these inventions, we've seen how it has been a race among geniuses, each vying
with each other to come up with a better product, or one that can be patented, manufactured
and sold, and that this race profoundly shaped the form that all of these great inventions
took.
Without daguerre, or Talbot, or Eastman following up on a piece's basic idea, photography would
not have evolved the way that it did.
With the telephone, Bell had a pretty good idea, but Edison perfected the carbon microphone
and made it practical.
And with the phonograph, we've seen how Edison was continually pushed by the likes of Bell
and the Victor company to keep inventing.
For me, it's the interplay of personalities that really makes the history of invention
come alive, reminding us again and again that invention is a profoundly creative act shaped
by human passion, will and genius.
