We live in a world surrounded by appliances, computers and other devices and without the
electric power system invented by Thomas Edison and Nikola Tesla, we would not have access
to the convenient power that we need to operate all of these many devices. At the same time
electric power systems have played a profound role in shaping the economy of America and
other industrial nations by making power cheaper and more widely available.
Without electric power systems, many of the inventions that we have been talking about
in these lectures would not have been possible. For instance, Henry Ford would not have been
able to introduce his mass production line for making the Model T without electric motors.
Department stores would not have grown to the size that we now know without electric
lighting and cities and suburbs would not have taken the form that they now have.
In this lecture, we'll look at the evolution of electric power and we'll see that it came
in two phases. In the first phase, Thomas Edison developed a system of incandescent
lighting and he did so in the 1880s using direct current. Second, a few years later,
Nikola Tesla invented an alternating current system with motors that allowed power to
be transmitted over longer distances. While we're often taught in elementary school that
Thomas Edison single-handedly invented electric lighting in 1879, there were actually electric
lights before Edison came along. As we saw in lecture 18, the first electric light was
the arc light and it was invented by Sir Humphrey Davy in 1807. Inspired by Volta, Davy had built
a large electric battery. In fact, it was a huge one and he used, he demonstrated it
by connecting its terminals, the terminals of the battery to two carbon rods. Now when
these rods were separated by ever so small a distance, a spark jumped between the two
rods and that spark was so bright that it could be used for a new form of illumination.
Over the next 50 years, from the 1810s to the 1860s, a variety of inventors worked to
develop arc lights with electromagnetic controls that maintain that exact gap that was needed
between the carbons in order to produce a bright light. Possibility of using arc lights
to illuminate streets and large buildings spurred other electricians to improve the generator
and as we've seen in another lecture, Zenobe T. Graham introduced a dynamo with a better
armature and he promptly used this dynamo to power an arc light. In 1876, in the United States,
with backing from the Telegraph supply company in Cleveland, Charles Brush designed his
own DC generator that could power four arc lights in a series circuit. Brush's powerful
lights were used to illuminate streets, factories and retail stores, including Wanamaker's new
department store, the store that he called the Grand Depot in Philadelphia. But because
most users could not afford to purchase a complete arc lighting system, they need to
buy a steam engine, a dynamo, wires and the lights. Entrepreneurs in different cities followed
the lead of the California Electric Light Company in San Francisco. There, California
Electric set up a central station and in 1879, instead of selling lighting systems, they
sold lighting as a service. Arc lighting was great for illuminating streets and large buildings
and indeed, it's still used today in the powerful search lights that are being skyward
to announce the opening of a new movie or a new store. Nevertheless, arc lighting was
not especially useful if one wanted a softer, smaller electric light. Recognizing that domestic
and business customers want an electric light similar in illumination to the existing gas
lights, Edison in 1878 decided to drop his work on the telephone and the phonograph and
plunge into a field that he knew nothing about, electric lighting. To create a smaller lamp,
Edison decided to take advantage of incandescence. When an object is heated, it begins to glow
and once it reaches a critical temperature, the object not only glows, but begins to throw
off light. Incandescence is when the heating element of your toaster begins to glow orange.
To take advantage of incandescence, Edison decided in 1878 to experiment with platinum
filaments. Because platinum has a high melting point, Edison assumed that he could pass a
current through a platinum filament and the heat would raise the filament to the point
of incandescence and he'd have light. However, Edison discovered that oxygen attacked and
weakened the platinum as it was heated. To overcome this problem, Edison simply got rid
of the oxygen by placing the metal filament in a vacuum tube, in a vacuum bulb. Now, while
this improved the performance of his lamps, platinum is a rare and costly metal, meaning
that lamps with platinum filaments were going to be very expensive and perhaps even too
expensive for the electric system that Edison hoped to design. Moreover, platinum has a
low electrical resistance, meaning that his distribution system would need large and expensive
copper wire conductors, what we today call mains. Fortunately, Edison realized that he
could overcome the need for large copper mains by doing two things. First, he put the lamps
in parallel circuits, and second, he increased the resistance of each lamp. Now, let's talk
about each of those steps separately. This diagram here illustrates the difference between
a parallel and a series circuit. In the top circuit, you see that there are two light
bulbs that are connected one after the other with the 3 volt electric battery. This is
the sort of circuit where if you unscrewed one bulb on a Christmas tree, a string of
Christmas tree lights, all the lights would go out, because the electricity basically
has to go through the first bulb and then it has to come back out and go to the second
bulb. So a series circuit has a lot of disadvantages. In the lower half of the diagram, we see
a parallel connection. Here, each light bulb is on a separate link in a ladder. And when
the electricity leaves the battery and it comes up to the two light bulbs, it has a choice.
You can go to the top bulb or it can go to the bottom bulb. And in that way, you could
actually unscrew one bulb or the other, and still the light would be working in the second
bulb. It was a parallel circuit that Edison wanted to use. Why? This parallel arrangement
is advantageous, because if you think of it from the perspective of the current passing
through the wire, a high resistance bulb is less of a problem, because the circuit has
several paths to use, and so the copper wires don't have to be as big in terms of cross
section. Now, the second insight that I mentioned a moment ago was that Edison decided that
he would increase the resistance of each individual lamp. This is due in part to Ohm's law, which
states that the resistance in a circuit is equal to the voltage in the circuit divided
by the current. Or in other words, as the resistance goes up, the current goes down.
If the current that each lamp needed went down, then the size, meaning the cross section
area of the copper wires or mains could be reduced. For Edison, the challenge now became
finding a high resistance filament. For several months, Edison and his team tried dozens of
materials only to find that the lamp black carbon of material that Edison had been using
in his telephone transmitters was the ideal material. As one early newspaper report describes
the Eureka moment, sitting one night in his laboratory reflecting on some of the unfinished
details, Edison began abstractly rolling between his fingers a piece of compressed lamp black
until it had become a slender thread. Happening to glance at it, the idea occurred to him
that it might give good results as a burner if made incandescent. A few minutes later,
the experiment was tried and to the inventor's gratification satisfactory, although not surprising
results were obtained. Further experiments were made with altered forms and composition
of the substance, each experiment demonstrating that the inventor was upon the right track.
On 21 and 22 October 1879, Edison and his staff conducted their first successful experiments
with a filament made from a piece of carbonized thread. By putting the carbon filament in
a vacuum, they were able to bring it to a high state of incandescence since there was
no oxygen to cause the filament to burn. By New Year's Eve, Edison was demonstrating
lamps using carbonized cardboard and he showed them to large crowd that gathered at his laboratory
in Menlo Park, New Jersey. But to commercialize his incandescent system, Edison now had to
invent an entire system, which he modeled after the gas lighting system that was already
being used in large cities. Gas systems included central stations, underground pipes, meters
and lamp fixtures. In addition to those components, Edison also had to design an electric generator
and a network that would be run by it. He further had to plan to sell power in a way
that would balance the load of his central station during the day and during the night.
During the night, they would be using electric lights, but what would they be using during
the day? Perhaps he could come up with an electric motor.
In order to do all of this, Edison had to design electric motors and he even experimented
with electric railway. In addition, Edison had to develop screw sockets to hold his lamps
and fuses to prevent electrical overloads and fires. Over the next three years, from
1879 to 1882, Edison addressed all of these problems. And in 1882, Edison installed his
first central station on Pearl Street in Lower Manhattan.
Edison chose that district because it included Wall Street and many of the New York newspapers.
Before installing the station, Edison had his men go out and survey the district, survey
the neighborhood to find out how many gas and kerosene lamps were being used, how much
machinery was there and might be able to use his electric motors.
Edison designed his direct current system so that it was most efficient for densely
populated urban centers. He also offered a few isolated plants consisting of a steam
engine and a generator for providing power to a single building. Edison's system, though,
was most efficient and most economical when it was operated in an area of service about
one square mile. Edison was further able to decrease the cost of the copper used in
his mains by introducing another innovation, the third neutral wire.
And this is the scheme that we use today so that we can have both 110-volt lights, the
ones that we typically find in our house, as well as 220-volt appliances that operate
off of the same circuits. In the case of the lights, you connect the lights to one of the
110 lines and the neutral line. For the 220 appliances, you connect the appliance to both
of the 110 lines and you get 220.
Edison was right that there was a huge market for smaller electric lights that could take
the place of gas lamps, and he enjoyed significant profits from his system through the 1880s.
Although Edison pioneered the development of incandescent lighting, he was unable to
keep rival inventors from entering this field. And Edison soon found himself competing with
Charles Brush, Elihu Thompson, Edward Weston, and others who devised their own DC lighting
systems.
However, the biggest challenge facing Edison was the fact that his system was only economical
when it was installed in towns and cities where there was a densely populated downtown.
In those situations, there were enough customers in a given area that one could offset the
cost of laying the big copper mains that were required by the Edison DC system.
Yet in America, there were numerous towns that had the money for electric lighting,
but the population was too spread out to warrant installing an Edison system. Whoever could
tap into this large market was sure to make a fortune.
Recognizing this opportunity, George Westinghouse decided to develop an alternating current,
an AC lighting system.
Thinking again about Ohm's law, Westinghouse reckoned that if he raised the voltage on
the order to 800 or 1000 volts, he could transmit the current over long distances and at the
same time reduce the size of the copper mains.
However, since Westinghouse didn't want to bring 1000 volts into people's houses and
electrocute them, Westinghouse had his engineers borrow a device that had been invented in
Europe, the transformer, and they used that to step the voltage down from 1000 volts to
110 volts.
A transformer made it possible to generate and transmit electricity at a high voltage
and at the same time you could safely step it down for the final use at 110.
So circa 1887, AC looked very promising to electrical engineers, yet they soon realized
that they had an economic problem on their hands.
Ideally, an AC system should cover an entire city, but that meant that the power plant and
the related wiring would require a huge investment and offset that big investment would be good
if the plant could deliver electricity 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Yet to do that, the engineering community realized that they would need a motor that
would consume power during the day, a motor that could be used in streetcars, factories,
elevators, all sorts of applications.
It was at this critical juncture, 1887, that a remarkable inventor turned up with just
the right invention, an AC motor, and his name was Nikola Tesla.
Tesla was born in 1856 to a Serbian family living on the frontier military district of
the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and what today is Croatian.
Tesla's father was a Serbian Orthodox priest, and he hoped that his son would follow in
his footsteps.
As a teenager, though, Nikola was stirred by a faith in science and instead studied
engineering in Graz, Austria.
While at Graz, Tesla became interested in developing a new electric motor.
While watching his professor trying to control the sparking cause by a commutator on a DC
motor, Tesla decided to design a motor without a commutator.
You'll recall that we talked about commutators back in lecture 18 when we were discussing
electric generators.
To appreciate what was bothering Tesla about commutators, let's run a motor and look at
how it operates.
Now in this motor that I have here, there are two sets of magnets.
One set of magnets are fixed or static, and those are called the stator, and they're
gray in this particular magnet.
In the middle is on the shaft are a series of coils, okay, and overall that shaft is
called the rotor.
One set of magnets is always repelling the others.
As you probably know, magnets have two kinds of poles, they have north and south poles,
and you'll also probably know that opposite poles attract while light poles push apart.
What happens in an electric motor is that just the right instance, the commutator, a
little rotating switch that you can see right there, switches the electricity so that the
rotating magnets are always in front of a light pole on the fixed magnets.
This happens twice every time the shaft turns, and so the commutator switches the direction
of the electricity each time.
Now let me show you how the electric motor actually operates.
While watching the commutator spark on his professor's demonstration motor, Tesla was
annoyed and suggested that the commutator ought to be eliminated.
His professor thought he was crazy, Tesla persisted.
Over the next few years, as Tesla pursued his studies in Graz and then in Prague, he
puzzled about how to make a spark-free motor.
Rather than build an actual motor though, Tesla preferred to picture the motor in his
mind and imagine them running.
In 1882, while living in Budapest, Tesla hit upon the perfect idea for a motor.
During a walk in a city park at sunset, he envisioned the idea of using a rotating magnetic
field in his motor.
Up to this time, inventors had designed DC motors in which the magnetic field of the
stator was kept constant and the magnetic field of the rotor was changed by means of
the commutator.
Tesla's insight was to reverse standard practice.
Rather than changing the magnetic poles in the rotor, why not change the magnetic field
in the stator?
We can see what Tesla was after by considering this small magnetic model.
On the perimeter of this model, you see that there are six strong permanent magnets and
in the middle, the pendulum has its own magnet because the bottom of the pendulum's magnet
is the same as the top pole of each surrounding magnet.
The pendulum is repulsed by the surrounding magnets and as you can see, it goes back and
forth being pushed away by the other magnets.
Now if you play your cards just right at times with these permanent magnets, you can
occasionally see that the pendulum doesn't just go back and forth, but it actually goes
around in a bit of a circle.
In his motor, Tesla got exactly the right sequence by switching the current on and off
in the individual stationary magnets, thus creating a rotating magnetic field.
Tesla saw that as the magnetic field in the stator rotated, it would induce an opposing
electric field in the rotor, thus causing the rotor to turn.
Tesla surmised that the rotating magnetic field could be created using alternating current
instead of direct current, but at the time, he didn't know how to accomplish this.
Over the next five years, Tesla struggled to acquire the practical knowledge he needed
to realize his motor.
After helping install a telephone exchange in Budapest, Tesla moved on to Paris in order
to work for the Edison Company that was then installing incandescent lights in major European
cities.
In 1884, Tesla was transferred to the Edison Machine Works in New York.
There, Tesla had little personal contact with Edison, but he was assigned the task of designing
an arc lighting system.
The Edison Company decided not to pay him a bonus for his design, Tesla quit in disgust.
Working with some new backers from Broadway, New Jersey, Tesla introduced his own arc lighting
system, but the company soon folded.
Abandoned by his patrons, Tesla was forced to work as a ditch digger.
In the midst of hardship, Tesla mustered the energy needed to file a patent application
for yet another invention, a thermomagnetic motor in 1886.
Although the idea for this motor, which involved heating and cooling magnets, proved to be
unworkable, this invention attracted the interest of Charles Peck, a man who had made a fortune
on Wall Street by organizing the Mutual Union Telegraph Company, and he used that company
as a competitive threat to Western Union.
Intrigued by Tesla's idea of a thermomagnetic motor, Peck offered to underwrite Tesla's
efforts at invention.
Because Peck was not a technical expert, he invited Alfred Brown, a superintendent from
Western Union, to join him in supporting Tesla.
To permit Tesla to work on his inventions, Peck and Brown ran at a laboratory form in
Lower Manhattan in the fall of 1886.
Peck devoted himself to perfecting that thermomagnetic motor, but it never materialized.
Peck encouraged him to take up the alternating current motor instead.
Building now on his vision in Budapest, Tesla began experimenting with using several alternating
current motors.
Doing so, Tesla was a maverick, since most electrical experimenters at the time only
used one alternating current in their systems.
In September of 1887, Tesla discovered that he could produce a rotating magnetic field
by using two separate alternating currents fed to pairs of coils on the opposing sides
of the stator.
In modern engineering parlance, we would say that the two currents are 90 degrees out
of phase with each other, and Tesla's motor would be said to be running on two-phase current.
To appreciate what Tesla discovered about alternating current, let's look at this diagram
that comes from his motor in 1887.
In the top picture, we see the motor on the left and the generator is on the right.
The motor consists of four coils wrapped around an iron donut, and in the middle of the donut
Tesla placed a shoe polish tin that would serve as the rotor.
The generator, which is on the right in the top, provided the motor with two different
alternating currents, and those currents got into the motor via four wires that are marked
X1 through X4.
Now in the middle picture, we see two alternating currents depicted as sine waves, with one
shown as a solid line and the other as a dash line.
Note that the peaks of the waves don't match up.
Now because those two peaks don't match up, that means that at any given time, only one
coil in the stator will be producing a strong electromagnetic force, with the result that
the magnetic field exerted in the stator can rotate in a clockwise fashion.
And this is shown at the bottom of the diagram in the third set of pictures where each little
motor has a north pointing arrow.
And as we look at all the little motors, we can see that the north pointing arrow begins
this way, then it turns this way, then it turns this way, then that, and back up again
like that.
Again, because the rotating magnetic field generates an electric field in the rotor,
in this case the tin can, and that field is in the opposite direction of the magnetic
field created by the stators, the tin can is repulsed by the rotating field and consequently
spins, endlessly trying to get away from the rotating field.
Alated that he was finally able to make his rotating magnetic field work, Tesla filed a
series of patents broadly covering alternating current motors using the principle of a rotating
magnetic field.
In these patents, Tesla introduced the idea that multiphase, or as he said, polyphase
AC could be used to effectively transmit power over a long distance.
As it became clear that Tesla had come up with a promising AC motor, his patrons began
to think about how to promote it.
For Peck and Brown, the name of the game was not to manufacture Tesla's motor, but rather
to sell the patents to the highest bidder.
To get the right buzz going about Tesla's motor, Peck and Brown sought endorsements from
experts and they arranged for Tesla to give a lecture in May of 1888 at the American Institute
of Electrical Engineers.
Following that lecture, engineers from the Westinghouse Company inspected Tesla's motor
and George Westinghouse purchased his patents for $200,000.
Now Westinghouse hoped that one of Tesla's motor designs could be used to run streetcars.
To adapt a motor for that purpose, Tesla moved to Pittsburgh from New York in the summer
of 1888.
Over the next year or so, Tesla and the Westinghouse engineers were frustrated by several problems
with Tesla's design.
Because Tesla's best motor required two alternating currents and four wires, it was not possible
to add a Tesla motor to any of the existing single-phase AC systems.
One would need to install new two-phase generators and a whole new set of wires.
Although Tesla had developed a number of promising two-wire motors, these designs ran best on
currents of 50 cycles or less.
And at the time, the Westinghouse single-phase systems were using 133 cycles so that consumers
would not complain about their incandescent lights flickering.
Westinghouse engineers were thus stymied as to how they could combine lights and motors
onto a single network.
Led by Charles F. Scott and Benjamin LeMay, the engineers at Westinghouse eventually solved
these problems by modifying Tesla's motors and developing a new AC system that used 60
cycles and either two or three phases.
By the late 1880s, Edison General Electric, the Westinghouse Electric Company, and the
Thompson Houston Company had emerged as key players in this industry.
Racing to install central stations in cities across America, these rivals used a variety
of tactics.
While Westinghouse pioneered the use of AC, Thompson Houston focused on helping fledgling
utilities to raise money to build new stations.
Wrong on the fortune he had made by inventing the railroad airbreak, George Westinghouse
often underbid his rivals in competing for contracts.
Frustrated, Edison and the managers at Edison GE attacked Westinghouse by claiming that
his system was unsafe.
To attract public attention to the dangers of AC, Edison's managers arranged for a Westinghouse
AC generator to be used in the first electrocution at Auburn Prison in New York in 1890.
This publicity stunt, however, did little to slow the spread of AC.
Using AC, utilities in the 1890s could distribute electricity to more customers over a wider
area and thus drive down their costs.
In 1892, the struggling Edison GE company was taken over by Thompson Houston and together
the two companies formed with its today General Electric.
While Westinghouse had held the lead in AC engineering, GE dominated in finance, incandescent
lamp manufacture and the development of efficient turbines that could be used to turn generators.
The Westinghouse company dramatically demonstrated its AC system, first by providing power to
thousands of lights at the Chicago World's Fair in 1893.
And then later, it also proved another important demonstration when Westinghouse supplied the
generators for the hydroelectric station at Niagara Falls, which began delivering power
in 1895.
Power from Niagara was able to go to factories in Buffalo over 25 miles away.
With Niagara, the basic pattern of the American electric power system was established for
much of the 20th century.
Alternating current was generated and distributed on a massive scale by investor-owned utilities
and used by a growing number of industrial and residential customers.
Because the capital costs of building new plants so high and the marginal profits in
selling power is so low, utilities have generally sought to build ever larger networks, first
across cities, then entire states, and even regions that cover multiple states.
As demonstrated first by Samuel Insull at Commonwealth Edison in Chicago, the utility
could increase its profitability by expanding its service territory and diversifying its
service load.
By providing power to urban and rural customers, large factories, and small homeowners, it
was possible for utilities to achieve economies of scale.
And Commonwealth Edison soon became sole supplier of electricity in the Illinois and
the upper Midwest, and it became a monopoly.
To preempt the government from trying to break up his monopoly, Insull persuaded the Illinois
legislature to create a commission for regulating utilities.
Those states followed Illinois, and for most of the 20th century, investor-owned utilities
avoided attack from the government by ceding power to set rates to state regulatory conditions.
Just as the rise of mass production changed American society in the early decades of the
20th century, so the development of electrical technology transformed America as well.
By producing cheap power, the electrical industry has played a significant role in the emergence
of the United States as a leading industrial nation.
Electricity has also profoundly reshaped American culture, powering the tools, the
appliances, and the communication devices that we use every day.
The story of electric power also reveals that the development of major inventions often
involves inventors who have very different approaches or styles.
With Edison, we see that it's important to have some people who start with an understanding
of existing markets and needs.
In the case of Edison, he realized that people wanted smaller electric lights, and Edison
responded to those market needs by developing inventions specific to that task.
Inventors like this performed the valuable task of connecting markets and technology.
The same time, it's also valuable to have creative people who pursue old visions that
come from the imagination or from the cutting edge of science.
Tesla is a good example of this.
Tesla imagined a radically different type of electric motor, one that used a rotating
magnetic field and four more wires, something that nobody else had ever thought of before.
Although Tesla's motor flew in the face of conventional engineering practice, for most
engineers four wires was just too many.
It was eventually adopted because over the long run, AC offered significant commercial
advantages.
As we will see, many inventions in the 20th century only come about when you get the right
combination of bold thinking and practical problem-solving.
