Production, consumption, both are ways that humans interact with inventions and technology.
In the history of invention, we focus much of our attention on production, how inventors, engineers and manufacturers came up with new machines and processes in the 19th century that allowed companies to make more products and make them more cheaply.
And we should certainly celebrate heroes of production, like Thomas Edison for the electric power system that we heard about in the last lecture, or Henry Ford in lecture 25, and Ford developed the mass production techniques that permitted the development of the Model T.
But while production is very important, it's only half the story.
Doesn't make much sense to make thousands or millions of bags of flour or millions of bicycles, if you don't have a way of distributing and selling those goods to people.
In this lecture, we'll look at the other half of the story, distribution, particularly at the invention of new ways of selling goods to people, namely the arrangements for retailing goods.
In doing so, we'll encounter how by the late 19th century, businessmen had invented three new ways to shop, the department store, the mail order catalog, and the chain store.
Along the way, we'll learn about the origins of several iconic institutions that are part of the American business and cultural landscape.
Institutions like Macy's, Sears, A&P, Woolworth's and Walmart, and we'll consider their importance in history.
But even more importantly, we'll try to glean the principles that were needed to invent in order to make all of these stores possible.
Even though we often trivialize shopping as a frivolous activity, it's nonetheless a vital component of any economy.
Shopping is the final step in a long sequence of activities that move goods from production to consumption by individuals and families.
For thousands of years, individual consumers met the actual producers of goods at markets or bazaars, often held weekly in larger towns.
These were not only markets that you would find in ancient Mesopotamia or imperial Rome, but also in medieval and early modern European cities.
In many parts of America, there's been a revitalization of farmer's markets where consumers can buy fresh produce and meet directly from producers.
However, in European cities beginning in the 14th century, some entrepreneurs began specializing in the selling of particular goods, such as clothing, books, or jewelry.
Such goods as these often commanded a high price and warranted entrepreneurs going to the trouble of specializing in finding suppliers, maintaining an inventory, and renting space where customers could come and examine the merchandise.
Retailing, which comes from the French word, retalier, means to cut off or pair or divide.
The word refers to the idea that entrepreneurs were focusing on the sale of a small quantity of goods, that they were neither manufacturers nor wholesale merchants who concentrated on moving large quantities of goods.
Retail shops came to America with the colonists and could be found in most of the major cities and larger towns.
For much of the 19th century, Americans purchased goods that they needed from two basic retailers.
They lived in a city, they visited a whole range of shops that specialized in different goods and services, say clothing, food, books, or jewelry.
And if they lived in the country, they relied on the general store, which sold a wide range of goods that were needed for farming.
However, just as some industrialists concentrated on manufacturing large quantities of products at low prices, so other businessmen created new arrangements for mass distribution.
The department store, the mail order catalog, and the retail chain store.
Together, these arrangements began to transform Europe and America into consumer societies.
So before talking about each of these three arrangements, let's examine the principles on which they're based.
All three of these arrangements function on principles that are remarkably similar to the ones that were applied to mass production by Henry Ford.
First, buy your inventory in bulk, get a good price for your supply, and pass your savings on to your customers.
Next, don't hold the inventory, sell it as quickly as you can.
And finally, make your profit on volume, not margins.
To understand these principles, let's look at a hypothetical example.
Suppose you decide to open a sock store and dream of running the greatest sock emporium in the world.
Obviously, the first thing you would do is find a good supplier of socks and you would negotiate the best possible deal with that manufacturer.
Say each pair of socks cost you a dollar.
Now what price should you charge?
That would depend on your fixed costs.
Would it cost you to rent a store, hire sales clerks, store the socks in inventory, and so on?
You'd have to add a markup to each pair of socks to cover those costs.
Now since your fixed costs stay the same, whether you sell one pair or 10,000 pairs in a year,
it's plain that you will be able to offer customers a better price if you can sell a large number of socks.
That's because you can spread your fixed costs over all those socks,
and you only have to add a little bit to the wholesale price to cover your costs.
In our hypothetical model, maybe that little bit makes your retail price a dollar 20.
But rather than just buy all the socks that fit in your store room for a year, which is say 10,000 pairs,
supposing you make up your mind to fill up your store room three or four times a year,
meaning that you will fill it up, sell all the socks, do it again a couple of times each year.
Retailers pay a great deal of attention to this process and call it stock turn.
Stock turn means that rather than spreading your fixed costs over 10,000 pairs,
you can spread the costs over 30 or 40,000 pairs so your markup per pair can be even smaller
and your retail price can be lower.
Now you can afford to sell socks not at a dollar 20 but say a dollar 10 or maybe even a dollar 5.
Finally, you need to avoid the temptation of selling at the price customers are willing to pay.
If you offer fine socks, perhaps people will be willing to pay you a dollar 15 a pair.
Now you could charge them a dollar 15 and you'd be making a nickel in every pair
since each pair only cost you hypothetically a dollar 10.
That's what small scale shopkeepers do.
Maximize their margin, namely the difference between the retail price and costs.
But if you have dreams of greatness, you'll want to maximize your volume.
Set your price at say a dollar 12 or even a dollar 11 since that will attract customers.
They think they should be paying a dollar 15 for nice socks.
Strive to sell all those socks, get in more inventory, that is to say increase stock turn,
lower your price again now to a dollar 7 and watch the customers break down the doors and the socks fly off the shelves.
Sure you're only making two cents a pair but you're selling 40,000 pairs a year.
You're making your money on volume not margin.
And congratulations, you're now king or queen of sock retailing and you've become a mass distributor.
The first new marketing arrangement for mass distribution was the department store.
Now the idea behind a department store was that it carried a wide variety of goods organized into sales departments,
making convenient for the shopper since she would only have to visit one store.
To further attract shoppers, department stores bought a large volume of goods from manufacturers
and they did so cheaply and turned around and offered those goods at lower prices.
As I said, the department store made its money not on a large markup,
but rather by selling numerous items to lots of customers with a small markup.
Not surprisingly, the first department stores appeared in England and the newly industrializing Midlands
where manufacturers were turning out a variety of new goods for the middle class.
Among the earliest department stores were Bennett's of Irongate dating from 1734 in Derby
and that was an early textile center as well as Kendall's of Manchester which began as Watts Bazaar in 1796.
Bennett started as an ironmonger, that is to say a hardware store,
but soon found customers willing to buy guns, silver and paint.
The Grand Dom of English department stores, Harrod's, was founded by Charles Henry Harrod in Southwark in 1824
and he focused first on linens and then groceries.
Anxious to capitalize on the crowds attending the Crystal Palace exhibition in Hyde Park in 1851,
Harrod opened a new store in Knightsbridge and that's the site of the current store.
There Harrod sold medicines, perfumes, stationary fruits and vegetables.
And unlike American department stores that only offer dry goods generally,
British department stores have a long tradition of selling both dry goods and groceries.
Harrod's installed the first escalator in England in 1898 which consisted of a woven leather conveyor belt
with silver and mahogany balustrades.
There was customers were offered a brandy at the top to revive them after an ordeal of riding the escalator.
In America the first retailer to practice the idea of selling a wide variety of goods in volume was Alexander T. Stewart.
An Irish immigrant, Stewart opened his first store in New York in 1823 selling Irish fabrics and domestic calicoes.
To attract customers, Stewart placed cases full of merchandise on the sidewalk in front of his store,
claiming, and I quote him, the messy clutter in front of the store and pushing crowds advertised the business.
As his business grew, Stewart included no signs anywhere in his store and for years he used no advertisements.
In 1848, Stewart opened his Marble Dry Goods Palace.
Though it was clad in white marble to look like a Renaissance palace,
the building used the new technology of cast iron construction and that permitted the installation of large glass windows.
Stewart offered European merchandise at fixed prices, an innovation that was attractive to middle and upper class women
who did not enjoy haggling over price with shopkeepers.
To further attract female customers, Stewart also offered special sales, fashion shows, full length mirrors
so that customers could see how the clothes looked on them.
Reflecting the fluidity of American society, Stewart advertised a policy of providing free entrance to any and all potential customers.
In the 1850s and 1860s, Stewart built several more stores in New York
and by 1877 his stores had come to have 30 separate departments carrying a wide variety of items.
As noted by the New York Times, quote, a man may fit up his house there down to the bedding, carpets and upholstery.
In 1858, Roland Macy imitated Stewart and opened a fancy dry good store of his own in New York.
Growing up on Nantucket Island, Macy had worked as a sailor in a whaling ship and had come home with a red star tattooed to his right hand
and that became the logo of his store.
After going bankrupt four times running stores in Haverhill, Massachusetts, Macy moved to New York and launched his fifth and ultimately successful store.
Macy offered customers a money-back guarantee and featured made-to-measure clothing for both men and women assembled in an onsite factory.
During the 1860s, Macy expanded to include drugs, china, glassware, home furnishings, books and toys at his store.
Meanwhile in Philadelphia, a men's clothing retailer, John Watermaker, was creating his own version of the department store.
In 1876, he purchased an old Pennsylvania Railroad freight building and he remodeled it as his grand depot.
There, Watermaker offered an enormous variety of goods at guaranteed low prices.
As we saw in the lecture on electric light and power, Watermaker installed arc lights in order to attract customers to his new store.
Located in downtown Philadelphia, Watermaker's store thrived because first horse cars and then electric trolleys brought shoppers in from the outlying neighborhoods.
As department stores were built in other cities, they followed Watermaker's lead and positioned themselves downtown near transportation lines.
By the start of the early 20th century, nearly every American city had its own department store that reflected the composition of that city.
Department stores not only facilitated the distribution of manufactured goods, but they also helped shape the social landscape of America.
Catering to women, department stores were one of the few places that women could safely visit on their own in the late 19th century.
Department stores were very much the arbiters of bourgeois taste in America, providing a mix of both practical items as well as goods that signaled the aspirations of the middle class.
Let's turn now and talk about mail order catalogs.
While the department store began in Europe and moved to America, a second retailing invention, the Mail Order Catalog, was a uniquely American innovation.
Just as the railroads permitted farmers to ship their crops to be processed and consumed in cities, so the expansion of railroads permitted entrepreneurs to develop another distribution organization, the Mail Order Catalog Company.
Recognizing that growth of the railroads would allow him to ship goods to farmers all over the country, Aaron Montgomery Ward founded a business in 1872.
Working as a traveling salesman, Ward observed that rural customers often wanted city goods, but their only access to them was through rural retailers who had little competition and hence could charge whatever they wanted for the fancy goods.
Ward believed that by eliminating intermediaries, he could cut costs and offer a wide variety of goods to rural customers, who would then order the goods by mail and pick them up at the nearest train station.
To take full advantage of the emerging rail network, Ward located his operations in Chicago, the major rail hub of the Midwestern states.
To entice farmers to order goods, Ward issued catalogs filled with woodcut illustrations of each and every item for sale, and he assured his customers that they could return any item for a full refund.
Knowing that rural Americans were accustomed to buying goods personally from a local shopkeeper, Ward included pictures and signatures of his managers and buyers, and he made certain that the company responded to every handwritten letter that came in.
These practices proved highly profitable and orders poured in, not only did people request clothing, farm implements and household goods, all of which were offered in the catalog, but they even asked Mr. Ward to send them wives or husbands.
The success of Montgomery Ward stimulated the development of other mail order companies, including Sears Roebuck, which was founded in 1887.
The central challenge for both Montgomery Ward and Sears Roebuck lay not in manufacturing products that were sold through their catalogs, but rather in devising ever more efficient ways of fulfilling orders.
Only by keeping their prices low and responding to a huge mass market could Ward's or Sears hope to turn a profit.
To do so, however, both firms needed to respond to as many orders as quickly as possible.
Remember our second principle of mass distribution, don't hold inventory, sell it as quickly as you can.
The key was to increase the speed by which goods ordered by customers moved from the warehouse to the mail train that delivered those orders.
To increase speed, both companies built huge warehouses and distribution centers in Chicago, filled with conveyor belts and hundreds of clerks.
Following a precise schedule, each incoming order was divided into categories and each individual department covering a category of goods was typically given 15 minutes to send to the assembly room all the articles that were required to fill that order.
If the articles didn't arrive in the assembly room by the allotted time, the order was shipped without the missing items and the delinquent department was fined the cost of the extra shipment.
This combination of precise scheduling and disincentives permitted Sears to soon be able to fill 10 million orders a day.
In filling those millions of orders, both Sears and Montgomery Ward provided ordinary citizens with the chance to enjoy a wide range of manufactured goods and thereby feel connected to the larger cultural trends shaping American society.
By providing a window onto the taste and ideas of America, people often referred to the mail order catalogs as wishbooks.
Along with the Bible, the Sears catalog was often the only other book found in American homes and children used to learn to read by it.
In one-room schoolhouses, the numerous pictures provided an encyclopedia which students could use to look things up and they learned arithmetic by practicing or adding prices on practical orders.
It's little wonder then that President Franklin D. Roosevelt is rumored to have said in the 1930s that if he could give one book about America to every citizen in Soviet Russia, it would be the Sears Robocatola.
The third arrangement for the mass distribution of goods was the chain store.
Here the underlying idea was to have a large number of stores sharing common central purchasing, advertising and accounting departments.
Buying on behalf of all the stores in the chain, the central office could negotiate favorable deals for manufacturers for large quantities of goods.
Like department stores, chain stores made their profits by turning over huge quantities of goods with a small markup on each.
The first chain stores sold groceries and served regional markets.
In 1859, George Huntington Hartford and George F. Gilman organized the Great American Tea Company.
Hartford and Gilman purchased Cargos of Tea from incoming ships and sold it directly to customers, thus eliminating middlemen.
By 1865, they were operating 26 stores all in Lower Manhattan.
In 1869, they changed the name to the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, A&P, to celebrate the completion of the Transcontinental Railroad that year.
In the 1880s, the business was taken over by Hartford's sons, who expanded from tea into selling coffee, coca, sugar, extracts and baking powder.
Unlike the traditional grocery stores that offered services such as home delivery and credit, A&P kept its costs low by emphasizing a policy of cash and carry.
A&P also launched a new series of small-scale stores similar to today's convenience stores, and these proved to be highly profitable.
By 1913, A&P had 500 stores, and by 1930, there were over 15,000.
As it built more stores, A&P integrated backwards by manufacturing some food products under their own label, and this allowed it to cut costs further.
During the 1920s, A&P opened new stores that sold not only dry and canned goods, but also meat, produce and dairy.
From 1915 through 1965, A&P was the largest retailer in the U.S.
The success of A&P was imitated not only by other grocery companies, but in other areas as well.
Once such entrepreneur was Frank Woolworth, who pioneered the idea of a dime store.
Growing up in Watertown, New York, Woolworth worked as a stock boy in a general store where there was a table filled with items that cost just 5 cents, and these items always quickly sold out.
If one table with nickel items did so well, wondered Woolworth, why not a whole store with products priced at 5 or 10 cents?
Woolworth tested his idea at a store first in Utica, New York, which failed, and then one that succeeded in Lancaster, Pennsylvania in 1879.
Within a few years, Woolworth was operating a chain of seven variety or dime stores in southeastern Pennsylvania, all of which offered low price, non-perishable goods.
To stock his stores, Woolworth followed A&P's strategy of buying merchandise direct from manufacturers in quantity and passing the savings on to his customers.
But because of his huge stock turn, Woolworth could tell manufacturers what price he would buy their product and the manufacturers had to either take or leave Woolworth's price.
Woolworth was also the first to employ self-service display cases so customers could examine what they wanted to buy without having to interact with a sales clerk.
When Woolworth died in 1919, his chain included 1,500 stores and the company was worth $65 million.
The last Woolworth store closed in America in 1997, but there are still Woolworths in Britain.
And while dime stores have disappeared, the tradition of cheap goods lives on in the form of Dollar Tree, a nationwide chain of 4,400 stores that sell every item for a dollar or less.
In 1902, J.C. Penney started with a single store in a small town in Wyoming where he sold inexpensive dry goods.
And another example of chain stores is Charles Walgreen, a Chicago pharmacist who founded a chain of drug stores in 1909.
More than the department store and the mail order catalog company, the retail chain store was able to adapt to the changing trends of the 20th century.
As the number of small and medium-sized towns proliferated in the Midwest and the Western states, the chains were able to move into towns that lacked the population needed to support a large department store.
Moreover, street cars and automobiles permitted people to move from downtown neighborhoods out to the suburbs. Chain stores also moved to these new neighborhoods.
Recognizing the trend towards suburban shopping, while seers and wards began building their own retail stores in the late 1920s.
However, having developed a network for efficiently purchasing and distributing goods nationally, retail chains came to be and remain the dominant arrangements by which Americans shop and purchase goods.
While Woolworths and wards may have disappeared from the American scene, new chains, such as Old Navy and Starbucks, employ the same basic marketing techniques.
Now that we're out in the suburbs with automobiles, we should at least talk for a moment about the invention of the shopping mall.
Like chain stores, shopping malls ideally reduce overhead costs because those costs can be spread over a number of shops.
No small store can afford a parking lot for 5,000 cars, but they can afford to contribute a portion of the cost for that lot.
Put enough stores together and a mall becomes a destination for shoppers, and voila, you have mass distribution.
The notion of constructing a special complex to house retail shops dates back to at least 1818 with the opening of the Burlington Arcade in London.
Insisting of 72 storefronts on either side of a covered walkway, this arcade was an upscale shopping destination from the start, patrolled by its own Beatles, a sort of usher or guard who wore traditional uniforms including top hats and frock coats.
In 1890, a similar arcade was opened in Cleveland.
Probably the first suburban shopping center was the Grandview Avenue shopping center in Grandview Heights outside of Columbus, Ohio.
Opened in 1928 was the first shopping center that had parking integrated into its design.
And the most likely contender for the first all-in-close shopping mall that is now found in America is the Northgate Mall just outside of Seattle, which started in 1950 anchored by a von Marsch apartment store.
The first glance might be easy to conclude that Walmart, the largest retailer, the largest employer with 2 million employees and the third largest corporation in the world, must have done something remarkably different than the stores like A&P or Woolworths that have fallen by the wayside.
In reality, the secret of Walmart is to follow the same formula of earlier chain stores, only more aggressively and on a global scale.
Walmart has succeeded by being a major distributor of products that in turn allow it to press manufacturers to sell them at lower cost and passes a portion of those savings on to customers.
Add to that a willingness to operate at a lower profit margin in its formative years, which founder Sam Walton could do since he owned the business, as well as an extraordinarily efficient warehouse and logistics systems, and you have a juggernaut of contemporary retailing.
Walmart simply takes our three principles of mass distribution to their logical conclusion.
Walmart was founded by Arkansas businessman Sam Walton, who got his start working at a JC Penney store in Des Moines, Iowa in 1940.
In 1945, Walton signed on with the Dime Store chain Ben Franklin Stores and opened a store in Newport, Arkansas.
Within a few years, he opened a new Ben Franklin franchise in Bentonville, Arkansas, but he renamed it Walton's Five in Dime.
There, Walton began looking for less expensive suppliers than the ones normally used by the Ben Franklin chain.
Having found less expensive suppliers, Walton did not sell his products at the prevailing prices, but instead he discounted his merchandise, passing the savings he achieved onto the consumer, and he made his profit on volume rather than margin.
In 1962, having watched the success of other discount department stores, Walton decided to apply what he had learned about cost cutting and competitive pricing to a new chain of stores that an associate of his named Walmart.
Walton opened his first Walmart discount city in Rogers, Arkansas, and within five years he had 24 stores across Arkansas.
In 1968, Walton expanded again into neighboring Missouri and Oklahoma.
Today, Walmart has 8,500 stores worldwide operating under 55 different names.
We sure shopping is an intensely personal experience.
We are, after all, buying the goods that we and our family both need to sustain ourselves as well as those goods that allow us to express who we are socially.
For example, clothes do make the man or woman signaling to people not only how we feel about ourselves, but our social station in life.
Middle class people wear clothes that tell you that they're not just workers, and at the same time may suggest that they are just as nice as upper class people, or at least they dress that way.
Because we tend to see shopping as personal and social, you may have found it surprising that behind the most familiar stores in America lie the hard-nosed principles of mass distribution.
That retailers have grown to be as big and powerful as they have, not just by playing to psychological or social needs, but by skillfully aggregating those needs and catering to thousands and millions of shoppers.
For me, it took just as much genius and talent to invent the principles of mass distribution and to put them into practice in the form of department stores, catalog companies, and chain stores.
So the next time you shop, don't just look for the bargains, but marvel at what Roland Macy, Frank Woolworth, and Sam Walton have wrought.
It's sure to make you a better shopper.
