Historians can talk endlessly about different eras, colonial times, the Victorian era,
the 20th century, and we often assume that our audiences readily know why we should treat
each of these time periods differently.
For the last several lectures, I hope I've given you some clues about what happened in
one of those eras, an era that we call the Industrial Revolution from 1750 to about 1850.
And in this lecture, I want to start asking, what made the 20th century a distinct period
in history?
From the standpoint of inventions, what made the 20th century so special?
For starters, I would suggest that we think about the 20th century as a mass century.
Mass in the sense of mass production, mass markets, even weapons of mass destruction
was the mass century in that ongoing dramatic improvements in industrial production and
new sources of energy made it possible to manufacture huge quantities of goods, grow
huge quantities of food, and deploy weapons that could kill thousands, even millions of
people.
In lecture 25, we'll look at mass production, using the case of the Model T as an example.
In lecture 29, we'll consider the original weapon of mass destruction, the atomic bomb.
But here I want to talk about another form of mass technology, namely mass entertainment.
One of the hallmarks of the 20th century has been the rise of a slew of inventions that
provide information and entertainment to millions of people.
As urban populations grew at the end of the 19th century, ordinary people demanded new
forms of entertainment, and entrepreneurs responded with a host of new machines to serve
that need.
Curiously, each of these new inventions for mass entertainment involved some very similar
challenges.
Were the motion pictures all the way to popular entertainment today, whether we're talking
about iPad or we're talking about Facebook, inventors have had to face and tackle three
interrelated problems.
How do you build a device that captures and stores information?
How do you devise new ways of distributing that content?
And third, how do you create new forms of content?
To explore these three challenges, this lecture will look at Thomas Edison and his experience
at inventing and promoting motion pictures.
In 1888, when Edison began work on the motion pictures, he was already at the height of
his career.
Over the past 15 years, he had produced one technological marvel after another, improved
stock tickers, multiple message telegraph, the carbon telephone, the phonograph, and
of course his system of incandescent lighting.
Now, using the income from his electric lighting enterprises, Edison built a new laboratory
in West Orange.
And that was in New Jersey, which was probably the best research and development facility
for its time.
At this new laboratory, Edison was assisted by a large staff of scientists, talented experimenters,
skilled craftsmen.
Working with this team, Edison devoted much of his energy to improving his electric lighting
system, also the phonograph, and a new electromagnetic separation process for low grade iron ore.
But as Edison pursued all of those major inventions, he also followed up on a number
of smaller or minor inventions.
These included the cotton picker, a pyrromagnetic generator, and a snow compactor.
Motion pictures began as one of these smaller projects.
For Edison, motion pictures began as an analogy with the phonograph.
If one could use a machine to record sound, Edison reasoned it should also be possible
to record motion using photographs in some way.
And as he stated in the opening lines of his first patent caveat for the motion pictures,
I am experimenting upon an instrument which does for the eye what the phonograph does
for the ear, which is the recording and reproduction of things in motion, and in such a form as
to be both cheap, practical, and convenient, this apparatus I call a kinetoscope.
Edison referred to this invention as a kinetoscope by combining words that he got from Greek,
particularly the word kinesis, which is the Greek word for motion.
Now the analogy that Edison had between the phonograph and some sort of new machine like
the kinetoscope had several antecedents.
When the phonograph was first introduced in 1877, the editors of Scientific American linked
it with photography commenting that it is already possible to throw stereoscopic photographs
of people on screens in full view of an audience.
Edison had the talking phonograph to counterfeit the voices, and it would not be difficult
to carry the illusion much further.
Although Edison did not recall a specific prediction, his thinking about the potential
for motion pictures was stimulated by a meeting with the famous photographer Edward Moybridge
in February 1888.
Moybridge was famous for his stop-action photographs showing animals in motion, and Moybridge gave
a lecture at the New England Society in Orange, New Jersey, which Edison attended.
After the lecture, Edison invited Moybridge to visit the laboratory, and during that meeting
Moybridge may have told Edison about how he had mounted some of his photographs on a
zootrope in order to demonstrate the illusion of motion.
And I have a zootrope here to show you.
Inside, you can see that we've taken a series of pictures of horses.
These are the images that come from Moybridge.
And as I twirl this around in the set of mirrors that are in the inside, I can see the horses
as if they're galloping as long as I'm twirling the whole zootrope around.
So the motion creates a sense, the motion of the zootrope creates a sense that I'm watching
moving pictures.
Intrigued, Edison ordered a set of Moybridge's photographs.
These images arrived the following fall, and Edison displayed them in his laboratory library
so he could enjoy and study them.
For Moybridge, Edison learned that motion could be recorded in a sequence of photographs.
Edison first outlined his mental model, his idea for kinetoscope, in his October 1888 patent
caveat.
Using by analogy from the phonograph, Edison proposed to replace the sound grooves, the
record cylinder, with a continuous spiral of tiny photographs.
Just as the phonograph at that time was capable of both recording and reproducing sound,
so Edison planned to use the same machine to photograph and display moving pictures.
To record the images, he assumed that he would have to cover the phonograph cylinder with
a highly sensitive photographic commulsion and then expose it.
A combination of high-resolution lens would be used along with a special shutter so you
could create a series of individual images with each image taken at an interval of eight
seconds or more.
To view these images, Edison intended to replace the camera with a microscope objective, which
the viewer could then watch the cylinder as it moved rapidly.
Clearly, he chose to design the kinetoscope with a cylinder and a spiral of photographs
because these were similar to the elements in his recording machine in the phonograph.
Now if we look at this sketch right here that was produced by William K.L. Dixon in 1887,
we see how it summarizes Edison's analogy between the phonograph and the kinetoscope.
On the left-hand side, we see a phonograph cylinder and we see the little needle and
the vibrating diaphragm that was used to both record and play back the sound.
On the right-hand side, we see a bigger cylinder and we see that it has little tiny micro-photographs
all around, again in a spiral, and we see the eye and we see the microscope objective
so the people are peering in looking at these little images.
I like this sketch because it summarizes nicely what Edison was thinking when he said,
I'm making the kinetoscope in an analogous way to the phonograph.
Now having conceptualized the kinetoscope, Edison turned to developing it as a physical
artifact and to do so he assigned the project to someone I just mentioned, William K.L.
Dixon.
Dixon was a young Scotsman who was knowledgeable about photography and one of Edison's experimenters
or, as Edison liked to call him, muckers.
For the first machine, Dixon took a series of miniature daguerreotypes on tiny silver
plates.
These were then glued to the surface of a blank phonograph cylinder.
Fortunately, the images in these daguerreotypes were indistinct when they were viewed through
the microscope objective.
Bothered by the quality of these little tiny daguerreotypes, Dixon decided to experiment
with a tachyscope, which he may have read about in Scientific American in 1889.
Invented by a German named Audemars Anschutz, the tachyscope consisted of a large wheel on
which animal motion pictures were mounted along the periphery.
Like the zootrope, this wheel was rotated rapidly and when a picture passed by an aperture,
it was momentarily illuminated by an electric light.
With copies of the Moybridge photographs that Edison had purchased, Dixon constructed
his own tachyscope in December of 1889 and soon obtained positive results.
As Dixon later recalled, the succession of pictures was so rapid and the whole mechanism
so nearly perfect that the goal seemed almost reached.
However, not satisfied with merely recording motion, Dixon went back and made a few more
changes.
Instead of having the viewer peer at moving images through an aperture, Dixon magnified
and projected them onto a small screen.
Dixon also connected the tachyscope with a phonograph so that his projections could
speak, just like that prediction from 1877 and Scientific American.
In all likelihood, Dixon demonstrated his projecting tachyscope to Edison in March of
1890.
Edison had been away looking at iron mines in the southern United States and upon his
return, Dixon ushered him into the photographic building.
There, Edison saw an image of Dixon step out of the screen, raise his hat and smile while
saying, Good morning Mr. Edison, glad to see you back.
I hope you are satisfied with the Canetto phonograph.
To demonstrate the synchronization of sound and motion, Dixon's image then raised both
hands and counted to ten on his fingers.
This projected image had its limitations.
Years later, Edison complained that it flickered badly.
Even Dixon himself admitted that the projected image from the tachyscope was small, perhaps
four by six images, six inches, and limited by the power of the arc lamp used in the projector.
Yet Dixon did demonstrate that motion pictures could be projected.
With the projecting tachyscope finished, Dixon made his most important contribution to the
development of Edison's motion pictures.
Drawing in accounts of this early device, Edison's lawyers were able to challenge and
harass the inventors of rival motion picture machines during the early 1900s.
But in the spring of 1890, Edison was not impressed with the projected motion pictures
and ordered Dixon to drop this line of work.
You might wonder why Edison made that approach.
Edison was not able to appreciate the technical and commercial potential of projection because
he was unable to fit it into his mental model of a kinetoscope.
Remember, he thought he was making a machine that was going to be the phonograph for the
eyes.
But this time, Edison had not developed the familiar horn for his phonograph, which we
can see behind me, and that horn was important for amplifying the sound.
Instead, Edison had his listeners use individual ear tubes, which you can see in this illustration
over here.
And we see that he is listening by way of some white ear tubes that go into either ear,
much like what you'd find on a modern iPod.
In Edison's mind, the phonograph had to be connected to each user.
Consequently, he may have assumed that the same had to be done with the kinetoscope by
means of an individual eyepiece.
Significantly, this individual user arrangement with the phonograph had already led to one
marketing scheme.
In some cases, Edison had sold phonographs to small businessmen who then set up phonograph
parlors, where patrons paid a nickel to listen to a song or two.
As we shall see, Edison marketed the kinetoscope for use in similar parlors, perhaps as early
as 1890s, as he was already considering this arrangement.
Using Dickson's tachyscope, Edison now told his assistant to develop a kinetoscope using
a strip of celluloid film.
Edison came to the idea of using celluloid film, a new type of plastic, in the summer
of 1889.
During that summer, Edison had gone to France and had visited the Paris Exposition, where
he had met the famous French scientist and photographic pioneer, Etienne J. Marie.
Marie had undertaken his own experiments with recording animal motion and had developed
a cinematographic revolver for photographing birds in flight.
While Marie's revolver used flat discs, he also experimented with recording images on
rolls of paper-based photographic film.
Upon his return to West Orange and to his laboratory, Edison drafted a new patent application
describing a version of the kinetoscope using strip film, but he didn't take time to work
out any of the details.
Instead, in the fall of 1890, Edison assigned Dickson the task of building a new motion
picture machine.
In this case, Edison decided that Dickson should work on two different machines, a motion
picture camera for recording the images and a playback machine, which then became known
as the kinetoscope.
To get started on the motion picture camera, Dickson began in early 1891 by taking a large
sheet of celluloid film and cutting it into narrow strips, which he then glued together.
It was about this point that Dickson decided to cut the strips so that they were about
35 millimeters wide, thus establishing what became known as the standard for movie and
still photography.
Now on his film strip, Dickson initially cut a series of notches along one edge that engaged
a gear wheel.
And this gear wheel advanced the film behind the lens and the camera, and the gear train
was driven intermittently by a clock escapement.
Now as this slide shows here, this arrangement proved to be unsatisfactory because as you
might expect, the gear rapidly chewed up the film.
In response, either Dickson or Edison found a solution in an old telegraph instrument.
In an automatic telegraph device designed by Charles Wheatstone, Morse code messages
were fed into the transmitter by a punched paper tape.
To advance the tape, Wheatstone had used perforations along one edge that engaged the teeth of a
small sprocket wheel.
With the help of one of the lab's machinists, Dickson adopted this idea and a new camera
was constructed in the spring of 1891.
After using perforations along the bottom of the film, Dickson soon discovered that the
wider films required perforations on both edges in order for the film to advance smoothly.
Compliment their new camera, Dickson and Edison fashioned a new viewing machine, which as
I said was called now the Kinetoscope.
Following Edison's phonograph mental model, the new machine was a peep show affair in
which a single viewer watched images through a lens mounted on the top of a large wooden
box.
Inside the box, the film was arranged in a continuous loop and mounted on a series of
rollers.
Although Edison claimed that hundreds or even thousands of feet of film might be placed
in his Kinetoscope, the first machines only had about 40 feet and the shows lasted only
about 15 seconds.
A cake for a golden occasion.
Universal Pictures marks its 50th birthday with a worldwide celebration.
Universal was started when Thomas Edison's invention was in its swaddling clothes.
Edison's Kinetoscope revolutionized entertainment as he took the theory of rapidly shifting pictures
and put them on film.
The first film studio was Edison's Black Mariah and he produced short films that were
shown in mutascopes or peep shows.
The public quickly had their favorite film stars and among the brightest was Strong,
Silent, of course, William S. Hart.
He always bested the villain and rode off victorious into the sunset.
In analyzing the Kinetoscope as a peephole device, one may speculate that Edison was
guided by a couple of things.
First was an awareness of the proscenium effect that's used in theater.
The second is traveling magic shows that were about and around in the 18th and 19th century.
As is well known in theater studies, audiences more likely to be engaged by a dramatic performance
if the performance occurs in a clearly defined space.
For this reason, theaters in Western culture often have an arch or a proscenium that separates
the stage from the auditorium.
The proscenium effect was put to good use by wandering entertainers in Europe and America
who combined magic projecting lanterns with a darkened box similar to that which was used
for puppet shows.
By projecting images in the back interior of the box and having the audience peer through
the holes in the front, the entertainer rendered the performance more credible and more visually
intense for the audience.
Now although there's no evidence that Edison ever saw such a magic lantern show, his assumption
that the Kinetoscope should be viewed through a peephole suggests that he was aware of the
proscenium effect.
In particular, the early moving images were dim and hard to see.
Edison realized that the proscenium effect would help prepare the viewer's mind to see
the images move.
Once these versions of the camera and the Kinetoscope were complete, Edison began to
market them.
The Kinetoscope was first demonstrated in May 1891 to delegates from the National Federation
of Women's Club.
After enjoying an elaborate lunch with Mrs. Edison up at the Edison estate, the women
came down and visited the laboratory to see the latest wonder.
When they peered into the Kinetoscope, they were astonished to see a short film depicting
Dixon bowing, waving, taking off his hat.
From 1891 to 1896, Edison manufactured and promoted this basic Kinetoscope.
Edison continued to use his phonographic analogy as a mental model to develop the business.
Kinetoscopes were assembled in the Edison phonographic works, pulling the same in and
machines that were used to produce phonographs.
Provide for national distribution to Kinetoscopes, he copied his marketing scheme that he used
for the phonograph and organized a sales network in which entrepreneurs purchased a franchise
in order to sell Kinetoscopes in a particular state or country.
These entrepreneurs purchased Kinetoscopes for medicine and in turn, they sold them to
another group of small businessmen who established Kinetoscope parlors patterned after the phonograph
arcades.
In these parlors, patrons paid to watch a short film through a peephole and to accommodate
his practice, Edison had one of his experimenters adapt the coin mechanism from the phonograph
to the Kinetoscope.
So the first motion pictures caused a whole nickel to watch 15 seconds.
The films shown on these machines were produced by Dixon at the lab and they included such
subjects as dancing girls, cowboys, twirling lassoes, knife throwers and my all time personal
favorite, the boxing cats.
But while it's one thing to perfect the machinery, it's another matter to entirely to figure
out how to make money from that machinery, from that invention.
In the mid 1890s, the Edison Kinetoscopes did well for a few years as the latest fad
in entertainment, but business soon slowed as the public grew accustomed to the short
films.
In response, other inventors in both Europe and America took up Edison's motion pictures
and improved upon them.
In particular, several inventors including Auguste and Louis Lumiere in France developed
a machine for throwing images up onto a screen so they could be enjoyed simultaneously by
a large number of people.
The Lumiere brothers offered the first public showing of 10 films to a paying audience in
Paris in December of 1895.
But despite their technical success, the Lumiere brothers decided that in their own words the
cinema is an invention without any future.
And they declined to sell their camera projector to other filmmakers, and instead they devoted
themselves to developing color photography.
After being pressured by his own Kinetoscope agents who were losing money, Edison finally
introduced a projector, which he called his vitoscope, and he introduced it in 1896.
Significantly, Edison did not develop this device on his own and work it out in his laboratory,
but instead he purchased patent rights from another inventor, a man named Thomas Armand.
In the meantime, Dixon left the Edison laboratory and promoted his own version of a projector,
which he called the mutoscope.
Now, initially, projected films were incorporated into vaudeville performances and they were
shown between acts.
So you'd see a magician and then you might see a juggler and in between you might have
a short film that was offered on the vitoscope.
However, before long, another set of entrepreneurs recognized the value of opening up small theaters
dedicated just to movies.
Harry Davis and John P. Harris are generally credited with this invention, which began
in a small storefront theater that they had in Pittsburgh in 1905.
They called this new theater the Nickelodeon, joining the word nickel, the price of admission,
the Greek word for enclosed theater, odion.
Odion was also the name of a very famous theater in 18th century Paris.
Despite the reference to the Grand Odion Theater, there was nothing grand about most Nickelodeons.
Patrons often sat on hard wooden chairs, the screen was just a sheet hung on the back wall,
and a piano would be placed over to the side in order to provide some musical accompaniment.
Although they attracted both middle and working class people, Nickelodeons were regarded as
many by many as disreputable places, frequented all too often by immigrants and the poor.
Nevertheless, Nickelodeons sprang out quickly up all through America.
And between 1907 and 1908, the number of Nickelodeons doubled, reaching the total of about 8,000.
Indeed, by 1910, it was estimated that as many as 26 million Americans patronized the
Nickelodeons every week.
For Nickel, patron might see one or more single real films lasting between 10 and 15 minutes.
This varied from early documentaries to boxing matches to westerns to romances.
Edison's companies did well in the Nickelodeon era.
Under the leadership of a patent attorney, Frank L. Dyer, Edison set up the Motion Pictures
Patent Company, or the MPPC, that used Edison's patents to try and require that everyone using
a motion picture camera or a projector had to secure a license from them.
In addition, the Edison organization produced films, and in 1909, the company built a large
studio in the Bronx where it employed nine film directors, including the famous movie
pioneers Edwin S. Porter and D. W. Griffith.
Since Nickelodeon showed several films every day and changed their offerings frequently,
they created a huge demand for films and stimulated the growth of the movie industry with hundreds
of companies springing up.
By the 1910s, Americans had become accustomed to going out to the movies, and film directors
and Nickelodeon owners began to experiment with new ways to keep the audience coming
back.
While directors wanted to make longer movies since they could tell more elaborate stories,
Nickelodeon owners wanted longer movies so they could collect more revenue by raising
ticket prices from a nickel to a dime.
These two forces came together and prompted the development in 1915 or before 1915 of what
we now call multi-real feature films.
As the revenues increased, Nickelodeon owners scaled up the size of movie houses, making
them into elaborate movie palaces.
Because feature films were more expensive to make, film companies were always on the
lookout for ways to save costs, and one way that they thought they could save some money
was to avoid paying those license fees to Edison's Motion Picture Patents Company.
Figuring that it would be hard for a New Jersey-based company, the MPPC, to track them down in California,
many of the early film companies relocated in the early teens to the Hollywood District
of Los Angeles.
There they were able to film year-round, take advantage of the natural light.
In 1911, Hollywood is second only to New York in motion picture production.
But by 1915, the majority of American films were being produced in the Los Angeles area.
Development of motion pictures illustrates, well, I think, that entertainment inventions
involve integrating three critical elements that I mentioned early on.
First, you have to get the hardware right, and as we've seen, Edison and Dixon did a
great job with Kinetoscope and the early motion picture devices.
Next, one has to figure out how to make money from the hardware.
On the one hand, you can sell the hardware, the Kinetoscope, to whoever wants to buy it.
That market is limited.
On the other hand, to really make money from an entertainment invention, you have to get
involved with how businesses are set up to use your hardware.
You have to understand the business of your customers.
Here we see that Edison was slow to appreciate the potential of projecting films or working
with the Nickelodeons.
And finally, one has to be willing to shape the programming that is going to be used with
the hardware.
Now here, Edison really missed the boat.
While his company's briefly employed some of the best directors in this new industry,
Edison and his managers never really figured out what kind of movies audiences wanted to
watch.
As a result, after the courts ruled that the motion picture patent company was in violation
of antitrust laws, Edison was forced to exit the business in 1918.
As we'll see in the lectures on radio, television, and the personal computer, all topics that
we're going to take up shortly.
The three challenges that I've been discussing in this talk loomed large in the successful
development of all entertainment technologies.
