With many new communications technologies, the story could be told of how hard it was
to figure out how to make money from these new inventions.
As we saw in lecture 19, Bell and his father-in-law Gardner Hubbard wondered whether they should
sell the telephone to Western Union, promote it as a scientific toy, or develop it via
local telephone exchanges.
Similarly, in the lecture on motion pictures, we talked about how Edison thought the most
profitable portion of the movie business was manufacturing cameras and projectors.
Little did Edison realize that many people would get rich making movies and running movie
theaters.
But perhaps the most remarkable story of inventors and companies puzzling over how to develop
a new communications technology is the story of radio and television broadcasting.
Broadcasting suddenly took form in 1921 and 1922, and it was not something that anyone
knowledgeable about radio had anticipated.
Indeed, the rise of broadcasting is a great example of how new inventions often lead to
a disruption of existing business arrangements.
Broadcasting involved the integration of new technology with new forms of content and
new ways of distribution.
This integration was a complex process that frequently involved the clash of lively personalities.
In this lecture, we'll learn about Tesla versus Marconi, DeForest versus Armstrong,
Sarnoff versus Farnsworth.
Like other developments in electricity, radio began with discoveries in Europe.
In Britain, while developing a theoretical understanding of Faraday's ideas about electromagnetic
induction, James Clerk Maxwell suggested that there must exist a range of electromagnetic
waves of which visible light is only one form.
Seeking evidence of these invisible waves, Heinrich Hertz in Germany showed in 1887 that
these waves could be generated by an electric spark and could be detected 20 meters away
from the source.
One of the first people to pounce on Hertz's discovery and to try to develop it into a
new technology was Nikola Tesla, the inventor of the alternating current motor.
While attending the 1889 Paris Exposition, Tesla learned about Hertz's experiments from
a graduate student who was studying with Hertz.
Excited, Tesla returned to New York where he not only duplicated Hertz's work but created
an even more powerful device, a high-frequency, high-voltage transformer that today we call
a Tesla coil.
Using this new coil, Tesla found that he could create a powerful electric field that would
illuminate lamps or power motors without any wires.
Tesla also learned how radio signals could be tuned to a particular frequency, which
he demonstrated by using differently tuned signals to operate a remote-controlled boat
in 1898.
However, a concern that radio waves would just fly off into space and that only a tiny
fraction of the energy produced by his transmitter would ever reach a receiver, Tesla decided
to concentrate on sending oscillating currents through the Earth's crust rather than beaming
radio waves through the atmosphere.
Tesla was able to detect power up to 30 miles away when his transmitter was running and
he took a detector on board a Hudson River steamer and he received signals all the way
up the river to West Point.
These results convinced Tesla that he should build a large-scale system, which he did first
in Colorado in 1899 and then at Wardenclyffe on Long Island from 1901 to 1905.
However, before Tesla got any positive results, he ran out of money and he was overtaken by
a young Italian inventor, Guglielmo Marconi.
In the early 1890s, Marconi had read about Hertz's experiments and decided Hertz's waves
could be used to create a system for sending telegraph messages in Morse code dots and
dashes without any wires.
Unlike Tesla, who concentrated on using radio waves to transmit power, Marconi believed
that the future of radio lay in communications.
In particular, Marconi focused on the lucrative ship-to-shore communications business where
he would not be competing with anyone else.
Marconi found that when his transmitter and receiver were grounded, that is, connected
to the earth, and when he increased the height of his antenna, he could greatly extend the
signal's range.
In 1901, Marconi succeeded in transmitting the Morse code letter S across the Atlantic
from England to Newfoundland.
Shortly afterward, ships used Marconi's equipment to communicate with each other and with the
shore over distances up to 2,000 miles.
Along with Tesla, another early rival of Marconi was the Canadian-born inventor Reginald
Fessadin.
While Marconi was concentrating on sending telegraph signals in Morse code, Fessadin
experimented with sending voice messages.
Fessadin understood the secret of Bell's telephone, that Bell had converted sound waves of the
voice into electric current waves that traveled along a wire.
Fessadin reasoned, if you could do this with some electric current over wire, why not convert
the sound waves into radio waves?
To do so, Fessadin invented in 1901 the heterodyne receiver, which converted high-frequency waves
into low-frequency waves, and which could be heard in the headphones.
Next, building on the work of Tesla and Ernest Alexandersen of General Electric, Fessadin
designed in 1902 his own high-speed AC generator, which could produce powerful high-frequency
radio waves.
To track shipping companies and the US Navy as customers, Fessadin's company, the National
Electric Signal Company, built a coastal station at Brant Rock in Massachusetts.
And on Christmas Eve 1906, wireless operators on ships hundreds of miles out to sea were
amazed to hear a woman singing, a violin being played, and passages being read from the Bible,
all transmitted by Fessadin from Brant Rock.
Although his system was technically impressive, Fessadin was not able to attract enough customers.
Shipping companies in the Navy were satisfied with the Marconi equipment, and they were
not inclined to invest in a new system.
Meanwhile, Marconi's fame grew when his wireless equipment helped rescue people from the sinking
ocean liners such as the Titanic in 1912.
This accident led Congress to pass legislation that required all large passenger ships to
have wireless equipment, and that the Navy should control radio in the case of war.
As late as 1912, while Marconi had made many improvements in his equipment, he was still
using a crude receiver to detect incoming signals, a coherer which consisted of iron
filings in a tube.
Incoming radio signals made the filings line up in the tube, and they conducted an electric
current to a sounder which produced either a short or long click, a dot or a dash, in
the listener's headphones.
After each incoming signal, the coherer would have to be cleared by gently tapping it with
a hammer.
To replace this complicated detector, several inventors, including John Ambrose Fleming with
British Marconi and an American, lead to forest experimented with modified incandescent lamps.
Several decades earlier, Edison had inserted a metal plate inside one of his incandescent
bulbs, and Edison noticed that when a current was run through the bulb's filament, another
current was induced in the metal plate.
Fleming followed up on Edison's work and further investigated the combination of filament
and plate, calling his tube a diode.
Fleming found that a diode vacuum tube could not only rectify currents, that is to say,
switch them from alternating to direct current, but it could also detect radio waves.
Following up on Fleming's work, de Forest added a third element to his bulb, a small
wire grid that could carry its own current.
And Fleming found that his bulb could operate not only as a wave detector, but also as an
amplifier.
De Forest called his bulb the Audeon, and it was the ancestor to all vacuum tubes on
which radio broadcasting would be based in the 1920s.
Now many of us have seen integrated circuits, and we've seen transistors, but I thought
I'd show you at least one vacuum tube, since those are not as familiar, yet they are ever
so important in the history of electronics.
And the particular one that I'm holding here is from the de Forest company, and it was
marketed under the brand named Audeon.
It's much later than the first triode that de Forest came up with in 1907, but it represents
the typical vacuum tube used in the 1920s.
Several companies and inventors lost no time in applying de Forest's Audeon to their needs.
For some time, AT&T had been trying to expand its long-distance service, and it had been
frustrated by the lack of a good signal amplifier.
AT&T promptly licensed de Forest's Audeon and used it in the first coast-to-coast long-distance
telephone call made in 1914.
Meanwhile, an engineering student at Columbia University, Edwin H. Armstrong, discovered
that the current coming off the plate of an Audeon was fed back to its grid, creating
what was called a regenerative circuit.
Signals were further amplified, making it possible to use a loudspeaker instead of headphones.
A few months later, Armstrong figured out how a regenerative circuit can be used to generate
radio waves, thus doing away with the cumbersome alternators that Marconi, Fessadin, and others
were using.
When World War I broke out in 1914, it was immediately clear that radio would play an
important role in coordinating troop movements on land and providing communications between
warships at sea.
In the United States, the Navy immediately seized control of many wireless transmitters
that had been set up by amateurs, and the Navy declared that all companies should share
whatever radio patents they owned in order to produce the best possible equipment.
The Navy, however, was frustrated in having to deal with the subsidiaries of two large
foreign-owned wireless companies, British Marconi and the German firm Telefunken.
After the war, determined that the United States should never have to deal with foreign
control of radio again, the Navy arranged with the major companies in the American radio
industry, American Marconi, AT&T, and General Electric, to create, in 1919, a new company,
the Radio Corporation of America.
Following the success of American Marconi, RCA assumed that its business would largely
be in providing radio systems for military and global communications.
Unbeknownst to RCA, though, a communications revolution broadcasting was in the making.
While serving as an Army radio officer, Armstrong had patented in 1918 what he called his Super
Heterodyne Circuit.
Using eight vacuum tubes, the circuit could detect, tune, and amplify radio signals.
Able to be easily tuned and possessing a loudspeaker, again, no more headphones, Armstrong had produced
what we would today call a radio.
Armstrong sold the patent for his Super Heterodyne Circuit to the Westinghouse Company.
Westinghouse had been left out of the RCA deal, and the company was determined to use
Armstrong's patent to break into the radio business.
Hoping to sell lots of receivers based on Armstrong's patent, Westinghouse managers
realized they would need to give something to people to listen to on their new radio
sets.
Consequently, Westinghouse asked one of its engineers, Frank Conrad, who was a wireless
enthusiast himself, if he could build a 100-watt transmitter to broadcast election results
in other news.
Just with the call letters KDKA, this Westinghouse station broadcast in November 1920 that Warren
G. Harding had defeated James M. Cox in the presidential election.
A few weeks later, Westinghouse installed another station to top its plant in Newark,
New Jersey, and there began broadcasting baseball games.
Seeing that radio broadcasting was popular and likely to grow, RCA quickly agreed in
1921 to bring Westinghouse into the consortium.
The first Westinghouse stations were followed by dozens of others, started by department
stores, newspapers, universities, and entrepreneurs.
By 1922, there were 600 stations in operation.
With so many stations to tune in, individual Americans began buying radios and sales of
radio receivers and radio parts jumped from $60 million in 1922 to $136 million in 1923.
As broadcasting stations proliferated, the managers at the major companies began to wonder
how to pay for the programs being broadcast.
How were they going to pay performers and news announcers?
How would they pay for covering a sports event or for royalties for the music that they played
on the air?
Westinghouse executives assumed that they would simply absorb programming as a cost
of marketing radio to consumers.
David Sarnoff, the president of RCA, thought that a small tax should be added to the price
of each vacuum tube sold and that this money should be put in a common pool for funding
programming.
In Britain, a variation of this model was followed where citizens have to buy a license
to use their radio or television and the money raised goes to support the BBC.
AT&T, however, discovered another alternative at its WEAF station in New York City.
Just as AT&T had charged users to talk over its telephone lines, so AT&T began in 1922
to charge companies for airtime, in effect creating the first radio commercials.
As radio advertising took off in the early 20s, AT&T executives began to question the
benefits of participating in the RCA consortium.
Under the rules of the consortium, AT&T's manufacturing subsidiary, Western Electric,
was limited to making transmission equipment that could not enter the lucrative market
for home radios.
AT&T was also supplying telephone links to radio stations so the stations could broadcast
from remote locations, such as a baseball game or political convention.
Given how fast the radio industry was changing, AT&T managers started to consider exiting
the RCA consortium and striking out on their own.
To placate AT&T, RCA's president Sarnoff proposed in 1926 that AT&T, GE, and Westinghouse
create another new company.
This company would be built around all the broadcast stations that were owned by the
consortium, and the company would lease AT&T lines, as needed, for either live broadcasts
or to do link-ups between stations in the network.
Following the AT&T model, this new company would make money by selling airtime to advertisers.
This new company was called the National Broadcasting Company, or NBC, and was the first media network.
NBC was soon followed by a second network, the Columbia Broadcasting System, CVS, which
was created by several entrepreneurs and then purchased by William S. Paley.
RCA and NBC had to tolerate CVS and other rivals, in part because of federal legislation.
In 1927, Congress passed a radio act that insisted that radio companies operate in the
public interest and they prohibited any single company from dominating the airwaves.
Americans often have nostalgic views about radio from the 1930s, recalling how families
often gathered around the radio in the living room to listen to FDR's fireside chats or
their favorite programs.
Broadcasting the same shows from coast to coast, radio did much to create a shared culture
for Americans.
The same time, though, radio broadcasting helped shape America as a consumer society.
Like the automobile and the washing machine, the radio became one more mass-produced object
that Americans felt they needed to consume.
Corporations used radio advertising to tell Americans about still more mass-produced goods
that they might consume.
Early radio advertisers include the producers of cigarettes, toothpaste, and breakfast cereals.
Procter & Gamble, major manufacturer of soap products, found it was especially effective
to sponsor ongoing radio dramas, which soon became known as soap operas.
No sooner had Bell invented the telephone when people began imagining that along with
voices, pictures might be sent by wire from place to place.
In 1879, the English humor magazine Punch depicted what they called Edison's telephonoscope,
in which the patriarch of a family monitored the doings of his children in far-off salon.
When I look at this picture of this particular invention, I often wonder, could this be a
19th-century version of Skype?
While many people ridiculed the idea of seeing at a distance, inventors were soon at work
trying to make it a reality.
In 1880, a French engineer, Maurice Leblanc, suggested that as a first step, the scene would
have to be broken down into a series of elements that could be transmitted sequentially over
a telegraph wire.
Leblanc suggested scanning the image from left to right, row by row, but he was unable
to come up with a way or a device to dissect the image.
Instead, a German engineer, Paul Nipkow, invented an ingenious scanning disk.
In 1884, Nipkow patented an electric telescope, which consisted of a rotating disk with an
inward spiraling sequence of holes.
As the disk rotated, the outermost hole would move across the scene, letting light from
the first line of the picture.
The next hole would do the same, only slightly lower, and so on, with the holes on the disk.
One complete revolution of the disk would provide a picture or scan of the entire scene.
Nipkow's disk served as the basis for television systems developed by the Scottish inventor
John Logie Baird and the American C. Francis Jenkins in the 1920s.
As the varying amounts of light came through the holes of the Nipkow's disk, they fell
on a selenium photocell that converted the light into electric pulses, and these pulses
could then be sent over a wire or transmitted using radio waves.
At the receiving end, the signals were amplified using vacuum tubes and then sent to a pulsing
neon tube.
Finally, the images were projected onto another rotating disk.
For best results, you had to not only adjust the speed of the receiving disk so that it
exactly matched the speed of the transmitting disk, but you also had to peer at the moving
image through a magnifying glass.
Although crude, the BBC used Baird's system to broadcast images from 1929 to 1937, and
some 2,000 mechanical TV sets were sold in the UK.
At the same time, Jenkins broadcast images from a radio station in Washington, D.C.
The important thing about mechanical television is that it convinced people that TV was possible,
now if they could only get a decent picture.
The decent picture came about as a result of electronic television.
Just as Nipkow showed a mechanical way of scanning images, so A. Campbell Swinton, an
electrical inventor in Scotland, suggested a way of electronically scanning the image.
In 1908, Swinton proposed the basic idea for a picture tube.
Swinton envisioned using two magnets to control electron beams, then known as cathode rays,
inside a large vacuum tube.
By manipulating the magnets, the beams could be used to build up a picture line by line
on a phosphorescent screen at one into the tube.
Again, like other early investigators, Swinton sketched this idea but left it to others to
build the first picture tube.
To appreciate what Swinton had in mind, let's have a look at this diagram.
This diagram shows the electron gun in the back or in the left hand side of the diagram
generated the cathode rays or the stream of electrons.
Just in front of the electron gun were several magnets that controlled where the stream of
electrons went, where it showed up on the phosphorescent screen in the very front of
the cathode ray tube, or what we call a picture tube today.
And through the magnets, it was possible to begin at the top upper left hand corner and
basically send an array of signals line by line from the top to the bottom of the screen.
In particular, while it was easy to see how to build a receiver with Swinton's picture
tube, it was much harder to figure out how to come up with the camera that would scan
light coming in from a scene and convert it into a series of signals that could be sent
by radio waves.
As it turned out, two inventors, Philo T. Farnsworth and Vladimir Zvorkin, raced to
be the first to perfect the electronic television camera.
Farnsworth grew up on a farm in rural Idaho and became fascinated with electrical devices
as a young man.
After talking to a relative in another state by telephone, Farnsworth started dreaming
of sending pictures wirelessly to lots of people.
While plowing a field one day on the family farm, Farnsworth rediscovered Laplac's idea
of scanning, and Farnsworth began planning how to scan images electronically.
After studying briefly at the Naval Academy in Brigham Young University, Farnsworth set
up a small laboratory in San Francisco in 1927 where he hoped to develop electronic television.
Farnsworth raised $5,000 from several investors, promising them that they would have a practical
system ready in six months.
In reality, it didn't take $5,000 but rather $50 million to perfect electronic television.
By 1928, Farnsworth had perfected his television camera or what he called image disector so
he could hold a demonstration for the press.
Since his backers had demanded when they would see dollars from their invention, Farnsworth's
first image on the television set was a dollar sign.
In the meantime, Vladimir Zvorkin was working on his own version of electronic television.
Born in Tsarist Russia and educated at the St. Petersburg Institute of Technology, Zvorkin
had escaped to the United States during the Russian Revolution and found work as a researcher
at Westinghouse.
During the early 1920s, Zvorkin conducted experiments on his own system based on using cathode ray
tubes.
In 1930, Zvorkin was recruited by David Sarnoff to come work at RCA.
Zvorkin sent Zvorkin to San Francisco to talk with Farnsworth and to find out what
he had accomplished.
Shortly thereafter, Zvorkin offered Farnsworth $100,000 for his television patents but Farnsworth
turned Sarnoff down, preferring instead to go to work for Philco in Philadelphia.
Since they couldn't work out a deal with Farnsworth, Zvorkin and RCA brought out their
own iconoscope camera in 1931.
RCA then soon Farnsworth for infringement, which led to several years of litigation.
In 1939, anxious to demonstrate television at the upcoming New York World's Fair, RCA
reluctantly agreed to settle and pay patent royalties to Farnsworth.
As a result, RCA was able to broadcast President Roosevelt speaking at the opening ceremonies
of the fair, and the company went on to insist that Zvorkin was the true inventor of television.
In reality, I would argue that television was actually a product of both a heroic inventor,
Farnsworth, and Farnsworth had a brilliant idea, but at the same time, the invention
also required RCA and Zvorkin, corporate interests, were able to do the engineering
work needed to convert the idea into a commercially practical system.
Both were essential for the invention of television.
Although further development of television was delayed by World War II, television took
off like a rocket in the years immediately after the war.
In 1946, only 8,000 homes in America had TVs, but by 1949 there were 1 million, and by 1951
there were over 10 million.
In 1951, there were 100 TV stations across the country, and this number grew to 500 by
1960.
In terms of programming, television was quickly dominated by the three existing networks,
NBC, CBS, and ABC.
ABC, by the way, had come about during World War II when the federal government asked NBC
to divest itself of one of the two nationwide networks that had set up.
It was a step to promote competition.
While much of the programming of early television duplicated radio.
There were news shows, sports programs, soap operas, comedies, and westerns, the new medium
also stimulated the creation of new programs such as TV plays and game shows.
Because television was highly dependent on advertising revenue from the manufacturers
of national brands, the network sought shows that they thought would reach the largest
possible audience, an audience of white middle class consumers.
Not surprisingly, critics soon complained that the network catered to a bland middle
of the road audience.
Despite their middle of the road programming, the three major networks dominated television
broadcasting from the 1950s to the 1970s, thanks in part to favorable regulation by
the Federal Communications Commission.
Regulation that protected their position and minimized competition.
However, unbeknownst to network executives, a technological challenge was taking form
out in rural America.
Once again, invention would shift the balance of power in the broadcasting industry and
that invention was cable television.
Now, to understand where cable television came from, you need to know two facts about
electromagnetic waves that carry radio and TV signals.
First, these waves travel in straight lines and second, these waves grow weaker as they
travel further and further away from the transmitter.
Consequently, there are lots of places in rural America.
Some of which were up in the mountains, others that were simply hundreds of miles away from
any TV station that were out of range for broadcast television.
Yet, because television was so popular, entrepreneurs in Arkansas, Oregon, and Pennsylvania began
as early as 1948 to investigate ways to use cable lines to bring distant, over-the-air
television signals to their region.
Cable, however, got a major boost in the 1970s when the federal government deregulated the
TV industry, allowing new companies with new practices to enter the field.
In this environment, cable TV expanded into bigger cities.
The first pay-for-TV network, the home box office, was launched and entrepreneurs like
Ted Turner developed the first super station, WTBS, as well as the cable news network, CNN.
Between 1980 and 1989, the number of cable networks jumped from 28 to 79.
The cable industry also utilized several new inventions to increase their competitive
advantage over the old networks.
In the 1990s, cable providers introduced the cable modem, which permitted them to provide
not only television but also internet and telephone service.
In the early 2000, the cable companies installed high-capacity fiber-optic cables, which allowed
them to deliver digital and HD video, high-speed internet, and on-demand movies.
As of 2013, there are now 800 cable networks, and together they reach over 93 percent of
all Americans.
Through cable television, the inventions of Tesla, Marconi, Armstrong, and Farnsworth
now reach an audience that those inventors would scarcely have dreamed of.
For me, the major lesson of the history of radio and television is to expect the unexpected.
As we have seen, inventors such as Tesla or Farnsworth pursued new communications technologies
largely because they were fascinated by the challenge of getting these new systems to
work.
But their inventions were taken up and perfected by businessmen such as Sarnoff, who hoped
that the technology would give their companies what economists call a barrier to entry.
By taking up the latest technology, business people in the communications industry hoped
that they would gain an advantage over their competitors, even a monopoly position, that
they would be able to repent some profits.
Time and time again, though, the competitive advantage conferred by technology and radio
and television has been short-lived, undermined by either new technical innovations or changes
in government policy, or even both.
The story of radio and television brings to mind, for me, a line from the great Scottish
poet Robert Burns.
I, the best-laid schemes of mice and men, most off go awry.
No matter what plans inventors and entrepreneurs make for exploiting new communications technologies,
the unexpected happens.
All we can do is marvel at their vision and their willingness to try new things and hope
that the lessons from the history of these great inventions can be used to shape the
future of communications.
