In 1959, the Cold War, that tense standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union,
was at its height.
Using different ideologies, capitalism and communism, the Americans and Soviets feared
that one side or the other might attack with nuclear weapons, a topic we discussed in the
last lecture.
That fear was exacerbated when the Soviets launched the first satellite, Sputnik, in
1957.
The Soviets could put a satellite into orbit, then they had the missiles that were capable
of carrying nuclear warheads to the United States.
And in the summer of 1959, American and Soviet leaders, Vice President Richard M. Nixon and
Premier Nikita Khrushchev held a debate in Moscow.
The debate took place in a kitchen of a model American home, and the debate revolved around
not missiles, but washing machines, washing machines for clothes.
As part of the cultural exchange program, the Americans and Soviets had both built exhibits
celebrating the virtues of their societies.
While the Soviet exhibit was displayed in New York, the American exhibit was installed
in Moscow.
At the opening of the American exhibit, Nixon and Khrushchev toured the model house, and
Khrushchev asked how long America had existed.
When Nixon replied that America was 150 years old, Khrushchev gestured to all the things
in the house and said, 150 years?
Well then, we will say America has been in existence for 150 years, and this is the level
she has reached.
We Soviets have not quite existed for 42 years, and in yet another 7 years, we will be on
the same level as America.
When we catch you up, we will pass you by and wave to you.
Angered by this threat, Nixon pointed to the new automatic washing machine in the kitchen.
This is the newest model, Nixon informed Khrushchev, the kind which is built in thousands of units
for direct installation in houses.
Nixon emphasized that Americans believe in making housewives' lives much easier.
In response, Khrushchev criticized Americans for making products that lasted only 20 years.
You think the Russian people will be dumbfounded to see these things, Khrushchev retorted?
But the fact is that newly built Russian houses have all this equipment right now.
In defense, Nixon explained what the washing machine symbolized about capitalism and freedom.
Nixon said, we have many different manufacturers and many different kinds of washing machines
so that housewives have a choice.
We do not claim to astonish the Russian people.
We hope to show our diversity and our right to choose.
We do not wish to have decisions made at the top by government officials who say that all
homes should be built in the same way.
Would it not be better to compete in the relative merits of washing machines than in the strength
of rockets?
To a very real extent, Khrushchev would have preferred that the Soviets and the Americans
compete in terms of washing machines.
Throughout the debate, Khrushchev made it clear that he personally had no desire to continue
the nuclear arms race with the United States.
What is significant about the kitchen debate of 1959 is that both sides believed in washing
machines.
Both the Soviets and the Americans claim that the goal of their economic system, whether
it be communism or capitalism, was to produce washing machines for use by individual consumers
at home.
This debate reveals the pervasive nature of consumer society, and by that, I mean one
in which the technological capacity of the state is devoted to producing goods to be
enjoyed by old individuals.
While many elements of the consumer society appeared first in the United States, mass
production, new ways of marketing goods, new products such as appliances and radios, modern
consumer society was desired not only by Americans, but by Europeans, Japanese, and
even the Soviets.
Indeed, by the middle of the 20th century, variations on consumer society could be found
throughout the world, and we see today how China is trying to become a consumer society.
So in this lecture, we will look at the central artifacts of a consumer society, household
appliances.
We'll talk about how they were invented, and we'll see how they are the confluence of
several themes that we have discussed in previous lectures.
Appliances came about as the result of widespread availability of electric power in the early
20th century, topic we covered in lecture 20.
They were also the result of the capacity of American companies to mass produce complex
products, not only the Model T, which we talked about in lecture 25, but lots of other goods.
And moreover, appliances were distributed to consumers via department stores and other
retail outlets.
That's something we talked about in lecture 21.
Many American families purchased a range of consumer products, radios, phonographs, washing
machines, refrigerators, stoves, and vacuum cleaners.
These products allowed Americans to enjoy a new level of personal comfort.
Middle class Americans came to see them as proof of the quality of their way of life.
Now, we tend to rationalize appliances because they seem to require less work.
That's why we say we're always buying a new washer or a new dryer or a new refrigerator.
Yet some historians and sociologists would argue that the real function of appliances
is to serve as a form of a social or cultural marker, signaling who belongs to the middle
class in America, and more broadly proving, as suggested by Vice President Nixon, the
virtues of our capitalist system.
Indeed, the significance of household appliances in American middle class culture is perhaps
best revealed by the fact that during the 1960s, there were two popular cartoon shows
on television, both of which I enjoyed as a kid, the Flintstones and the Jetsons.
Both of these shows were built largely around the idea and the humor of converting appliances
and automobiles into either stone age devices built out of stone and powered by dinosaurs,
or the future where the Jetsons had everything that was made out of plastic, was powered
by computers, and run by nuclear generators.
So, the Jetsons and the Flintstones reveal how important appliances are in the popular
American imagination, but when did they first show up?
Now, though we tend to see them symbolically loaded with meanings, at their essential, household
appliances are simply electrical or mechanical devices that perform domestic chores.
It began to turn up in European and American households in the 19th century, who as a result
of the Industrial Revolution, had seen more acceptable to have machines come inside the
home.
Now, the home was traditionally viewed as a female space, and prior to this, the machines
were regarded as only appropriate for non-domestic activities, things that took place outside
the home where they could be controlled mostly by men.
One of the first appliances to turn up was the vacuum cleaner, and it came to the home
literally through the window, so that one might say that it maintained an appropriate
distance between the male machinery and the female domestic space.
As families installed carpets in their home through the middle decades of the 19th century,
came to be a need to clean these carpets periodically.
In some cases, the carpets were rolled up, taken outside, to be hung up and beaten by
servants or children.
Soon, some enterprising inventors began developing mechanical sweepers.
They did so in about the 1860s, as well as machines for blowing dust out of the carpets.
Most historians regard Hubert Cecil Booth from England as the inventor of the motorized
vacuum cleaner, and he did it in 1901.
After seeing a demonstration of an American machine which blew the dust out of carpets
and blew the dust off of furniture, Booth could not help to think it would be better
to reverse the process and suck up the dust.
So Booth undertook an experiment.
He took a handkerchief out, laid it on the seat of a restaurant chair, put his mouth
on the handkerchief, and tried to suck as much dust as he could into the handkerchief.
Now, please don't try this at home, it's way too disgusting.
Booth, however, realized that upon seeing the dust and the dirt collected on the underside
of his handkerchief, he realized he had an invention that could work.
Booth designed a large machine powered first by an internal combustion engine, like you'd
find in an automobile, and then later, by an electric motor, it was mounted on the back
of a horse-drawn wagon.
Nicknamed the Puffing Billy, Booth's horse-drawn vacuum cleaner relied upon air drawn through
a piston pump, and the air went through a cloth filter and clothed the dust.
Booth's machine didn't contain any brushes, all the cleaning was done by suction by using
long tubes that had nozzles on their end.
Now rather than sell this great big machine, Booth instead decided to sell the service
of cleaning, and he sent wagons throughout towns and cities in England.
And the vans of the British vacuum cleaning company were bright red, and they had uniformed
attendants who would haul the hose off the van, root it through the windows of a building,
and then they could reach all the rooms inside the house.
Although people complained about the noisy machine, it frightened the horses.
Booth's invention gave widespread approval when he used it to clean the carpets of Westminster
Abbey prior to the coronation of Edward VII in 1901.
Soon, similar companies appeared in American cities, but for vacuum cleaners to actually
become used in the home by housewives, it was necessary to scale the equipment down
and to figure out how to power it by electricity.
This became possible as electric power and electric motors became more widely available
in the late 19th and early 20th century.
And in fact, in order to promote the consumption of electricity by homeowners, power companies
often gave away all sorts of free things.
They often gave to housewives electric irons because they consumed a great deal of power.
Power companies also gave people free light bulbs, something that we might find surprising,
but again, the more light bulbs people had, the more electric power they would consume.
In the United States, the need to generate and sell more electric power came about as
a result of World War I.
During the war, the electric power industry developed and installed larger and larger
power plants in order to run all the factories needed for the war.
After the 1920s, in the 1920s, the power companies realized that they had excess generating capacity
and they needed to convince people to buy and consume more power, hence the free appliances.
At the same time in the 1920s, popular writers promoted electricity by talking about how
appliances would ease the burdens of the middle class housewife and create a more hygienic
and healthy environment.
Now the first portable vacuum cleaner was invented in 1907 by James Murray Spangler,
a janitor who came from Canton, Ohio.
In addition to having suction that was produced by an electric fan, Spangler borrowed one
of his wife's pillowcases in order to catch the dust.
Spangler also incorporated a rotating brush in the hopes that that would loosen the debris
in the carpet.
Now Spangler was not a rich man.
Again, he was a janitor and because he could not afford to build a prototype, Spangler
sold the patent to the husband of one of his cousins.
That man's name was William Henry Hoover.
In 1908, when Hoover acquired the patent for the vacuum cleaner, he was a manufacturer
of horse harnesses and he realized that the automobile was quickly making his product
horse harnesses obsolete and he needed to move into a new business.
Hoover took Spangler's design, reworked it, had it manufactured using steel casings, casters
and attachments.
Hoover sold his first vacuum cleaner in 1908, a Model O, for $60.
Subsequent innovations included disposable filter bags in the 1920s and the first upright
vacuum cleaner in 1926.
That first upright vacuum cleaner, I remember well.
My grandmother had one from the 1930s that we used well into the 1970s and as a kid,
I got pretty good at replacing the rubber belts on it for my mom.
Now before we can go any further and talking about appliances, you might reasonably ask,
how did these machines get power?
How did you plug them in?
When was the electric plug invented?
As we saw in lecture 20, electricity was initially used for lighting and not power.
Consequently, all early appliances such as vacuum cleaners or electric fans or hair dryers
were connected to a light bulb socket.
This practice continued in America at least until the 1920s and as a kid, I remember that
my grandparents still had some electrical devices that screwed into a light socket.
Never could quite figure that out when I was seven or eight years old, but now I can see
where they came from.
Now as AC power became more widely available and utility companies wanted to promote the
use of energy consuming appliances, a safer and more convenient means of connecting devices
was needed.
The first plug in socket appeared in England in 1883 and dozens of alternate designs were
patented over the next 50 years.
The modern design that we use today, a plug with two parallel blades and a round pin for
grounding was invented by Philip F. Labre while he was a student at the Milwaukee School
of Engineering.
Legend has it that his landlady had a cat who would knock over the electric fan when
it came to the window.
When the landlady plugged the fan back in, she would get an electric shock.
Labre deduced that if the fan was grounded, the electricity would go to the earth rather
than through the plug and not harm the person that was holding it.
Labre was issued a U.S. patent for the grounded socket and plug in 1928 and indeed this is
the one that we use all the time today and you're probably very familiar with it.
And we use it in order to have extra safety of all sorts of equipment.
Initially we only used it on heavy goods such as air conditioners or vacuum cleaners, but
now almost everything, our computers, our home appliances rely on that three-way plug.
Nevertheless, despite the importance of safety for plugs, there are at least 18 different
kinds of plugs around the world.
And the reason for that is, this many countries have all sorts of different ways of generating
and distributing electricity and the plugs have to deal with the variations in those
different power systems.
However, as interesting as the history of plugs may be, we need to get back to our main
topic, appliances themselves.
There, the real story is not so much how appliances were invented, but rather how engineers designed
them so they could be manufactured more cheaply and easily.
To tell this story, it's best to focus on another appliance, the washing machine for
clothes, that machine that was made famous by the Nixon-Cruz Jeff debate.
Starting with the vacuum cleaner, another early appliance to find its way into the American
home was the washing machine.
Of all the many mundane tasks of daily life, laundering clothes was for centuries one of
the most labor-intensive and unpleasant jobs.
Primarily women's work, clothes were washed by hand by scrubbing them against a hard surface
for a sorok and then a ribbed washboard, which by the way was invented in 1797.
In the owner's nature of the work, inventors as early as the 1690s in England contemplated
how to make a machine that might wash clothes.
And typical of other efforts to mechanize a task, these early inventors tried to make
a machine that imitated the human hand washing clothes against a washboard.
In 1846, for an example, an American inventor patented a hand crank device in which the
clothes were scrubbed between two curved surfaces.
Although the crude washing machines were available in the mid-19th century, few American homes
acquired one.
The reason for this was this laundry was still either done by hand at home, often by servants,
or increasingly at commercial steam laundries.
Beginning in the 1840s, perhaps as a result of gold miners needing someone to wash their
clothes in San Francisco during the Great Gold Rush, or perhaps because the growing
number of hotels in various cities needed lots and lots of linen and towels, entrepreneurs
set up commercial laundries.
In response, inventors developed large-scale washing machines powered by steam engines,
hence that's why they were called commercial steam laundries.
And by 1900, there were commercial laundries in almost all the towns and cities of America,
and many families took advantage of this service.
They did not send all of their laundry out for washing, families at the very least sent
out the men's shirts, bed sheets, and table linen, the jobs that were really labor-intensive.
Hence, when manufacturers began to think about selling washing machines in the 1920s, they
weren't a curious position.
They were going to have to convince American housewives to take a service that was done
outside the home in commercial laundries and bring it back inside.
So why would American women choose to resume doing laundry at home?
The answer, at first, seems to have been convenience.
With a washing machine in the house, the wife could do all the laundry whenever she wanted,
and she was no longer at the mercy of a commercial service.
But to sell convenience, manufacturers realized that they would need to automate the entire
laundry process.
All of the steps that are involved in washing clothes from filling the tub with soapy water,
to agitating the clothes, to rinsing them clean, and wringing them out needed to be simplified
and mechanized.
Just as they had done in developing industrial systems, engineers had to break washing clothes
down into its component steps and analyze how each step could be done by a machine.
In pursuit of automation, washing machine manufacturers first eliminated the hand cranks
and replaced them instead with electric motors.
The earliest electric washing machines, one motor, did two jobs.
First it agitated the clothes in the wash tub, and then the housewife switched it and
used it to turn the ringer on top of the machine.
Now to see this, let's take a look here.
This is an early washing machine, and the motor is housed down on the bottom in the center
of all of the legs.
Above it is the wash tub, and over on the left hand side you see the ringer.
Now the electric motor first agitated the clothes that were in the wash tub.
I've seen a lot of different variations for what was going on inside the wash tub.
Sometimes it was large brass balls, and the balls pushed the clothes up against the curved
surfaces and rubbed them much like you would with a traditional washing board.
The ringer, as I said, is up on the top, and when the time came to dry the clothes or at
least squeezed most of the water out, the housewife would have to switch the power supply
from the motor to the power drive that went up to the ringer, and then the clothes would
go between the two rollers that you see up there and the water would be squeezed out.
Ringers were very dangerous.
I remember well as a kid going to see my great aunts, and during the summer they would warn
me as they were washing clothes to be very careful around the ringer because people lost
fingers from them all the time.
In the 1920s, Howard Snyder, a talented mechanic at Maytag, a company you probably have heard
of, designed the vane agitator that's mounted on the bottom of the wash tub.
If you peek in your washing machine now, you'll see exactly what Maytag came up with at that
time.
The idea of the vane agitator was rather than slapping the clothes all around, the agitator
now forced the soapy water through the clothes.
In the meantime, American housewives eagerly purchased these first semi-automated machines.
In 1926, Americans bought 900,000 clothes washing machines, and by 1935, they were buying 1.4
million a year.
As demand grew, manufacturers employed mass production techniques, and like Ford, they
were able to drive down costs and retail prices.
Curiously, General Motors got involved in the 1920s in manufacturing appliances.
At that time, Billy Durant, the founder of the company, believed that the same mass production
techniques that were used to make automobiles could be used to shape the metal and make
the parts that were needed for washing machines and refrigerators.
For many years until the 1970s, General Motors actually owned Frigidaire, an appliance manufacturer.
The average machine cost $150, and I'm talking about the average washing machine.
The price for these devices had dropped to $60 by 1935, and not only did Sears and Montgomery
wards sell washing machines to consumers, but department stores began selling them as well.
In addition, new retail chains appeared in a number of regions, specializing in selling
domestic appliances.
Although better, these washing machines still required the housewife to remove the rinsed
clothes from the tub and pass them through the ringer.
In the late 1930s, to capture more customers, engineers eliminated the ringer by introducing
a two-speed motor and a perforated basket inside the wash tub.
Again, you can see the perforated basket in most washing machines today.
The low speed of the motor was used for washing, and the high speed was used to spin the perforated
basket and eliminate the excess water from the clothes by centrifugal forces.
Finally, engineers added a timer and an electromagnetic control, which opened and closed the water supply
and adjusted the motor's speed.
All of these innovations took time, and it took a while to work them out, and this work
was delayed by World War II.
Maytag, for example, during the war produced no washing machines and instead manufactured
parts for airplanes.
It was not until 1947 that the Whirlpool Corporation introduced the first fully automated washer,
and it was at this point that washing machines assumed their modern, boxy shape.
Through the 50s, washing machines were followed by other laundry-related improvements, the
clothes dryer, better detergents, wash and wear clothing that required no ironing.
But one should note that while all these improvements were touted as being more convenient, in a
sense that the housewife had control over the laundry process, these changes did not
translate into saving time for the housewife.
Surveys revealed that while the housewife spent five hours a week on laundry in 1925,
by 1964, when houses had available washing machines and dryers and all sorts of other
convenient devices, women were still spending six hours a week on this chore.
In all likelihood, this increase in time was a result of Americans having more changes
of clothing as well as higher expectations of cleanliness.
Thus, instead of making life easier for the housewife, the combination of the washing
machine and the rising expectations actually created, in the words of Ruth Schwartz-Cowin,
a historian, quote, more work for mother.
In other words, washing machines were not necessarily as convenient as both appliance
manufacturers and housewives necessarily believed.
Instead of being labor-saving and convenient then, I would remind you that washing machines
like other appliances were purchased because they served as cultural markers for the middle
class.
If you had a washing machine, your family could wear clean clothes and you'd be perceived
as being neat and orderly, and your kids wouldn't be anything like those filthy immigrants
or those poor people.
Moreover, you didn't have to deal with the lower class in the sense of having servants
that were doing your washing or have the people who were running a commercial laundry handling
your family's clothes.
Most obviously, if you had a washing machine, then you were making a reasonable income and
that clearly signaled that you had the economic status that made you belong to the middle
class.
Overall, the washing machine reflects several key trends in 20th century American history.
It was the product of mass production produced by the same techniques that were used to make
automobiles.
Its price, the price of appliances rapidly declined as manufacturers took advantage of
large-scale manufacture.
The design of washing machines required the same close engineering scrutiny used to mechanize
other industrial processes.
Appliances were marketed to consumers by mail order catalogs, department stores and retail
chains.
And most of all, appliances like the washing machine served as a clear marker of middle
class status, one of those objects that families used to indicate that they were clean, self-sufficient
and relatively affluent.
For all these reasons, I like to quote another historian, Ziegfried Gideon, and he wrote,
The mechanized washing machine is as typical and natural a product of America as the precision
watch is of Switzerland.
And hence we should not be surprised that in 1959 Nixon and Khrushchev used the humble
washing machine as the focal point of their debate.
