We hear a great deal today about STEM education, meaning that many people feel we should be
expanding instruction at all levels in science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
There is strong evidence that Americans are falling behind other countries in terms of
what they know about science and mathematics, and in fact we can be becoming illiterate
in these areas.
And then as that happens, America may be at risk for losing its technological competitive
advantage.
These are serious worries, and part of my interest in teaching great inventions has been to help
you increase your own technological literacy.
But what does technological literacy actually mean?
Does it mean that you should be able to make a call on a cell phone, or that you should
be able to tell what happens inside that phone, or that you can say something about the technical
network, how the standards, the cells and the microwave towers all fit together, or that
you can talk about how cell phones deliver individual convenience because users agree
to cooperate with a large centralized bureaucracy.
Now I can't help you necessarily with the first kind of technological literacy.
I'm hopeless at using all the functions on my own cell phone, and my daughters complain
all the time that I'm always accidentally pocket dialing them.
Nevertheless, I can help you in this lecture with the other four kinds of technological
literacy.
To do so, we'll look at two great inventions, communication satellites and cellular telephones,
and see how they've been combined with digital information to make it possible by today to
communicate with nearly every part of the planet.
So let's talk first about satellites.
Prior to satellites, international telephone service was provided by undersea cable or
shortwave radio transmission, both of which were expensive and offered little bandwidth.
And by bandwidth, I mean the capacity to carry multiple single signals simultaneously.
According to the 1950s, AT&T was worried that laying another undersea cable between the
U.S. and Europe would only provide 36 additional telephone calls, and it might not be worth
the heavy investment.
During the 1960s, communication satellites changed all of this.
Communication satellites provide television, telephone, and data services between two
widely distant locations.
They operate within a system in which signals are transmitted using microwaves from an earth-based
station up to the satellite, and that's known as the uplink.
The satellite then amplifies the signals and retransmits them to a receiving station located
at another point down on earth, and that's called the downlink.
Most communication satellites are in geostationary orbit at an altitude of about 22,000 miles.
At that height, the satellite's period of rotation is the same as the earth's period
of rotation, so the satellite stays over the same spot on the globe.
However, there are some satellites that operate in low earth orbit, and those are typically
about 250 miles above the earth's surface, and they circle the planet every 90 minutes.
Low earth orbiting satellites are less expensive to launch into orbit than geostationary satellites,
and due to the proximity to the ground, low earth orbit satellites don't require as high
a signal strength.
Recall that the signal strength falls off as the square of the distance of the source,
so when you're talking about satellites, this effect can be very dramatic.
Because of their low altitude, these satellites are visible only from a portion of the earth,
and so as to perform tasks requiring uninterrupted connectivity, you need lots of satellites,
known as a satellite constellation, orbiting all at the same time.
A familiar example of a satellite constellation is the global positioning system that relies
on 24 to 32 satellites, and to get real technical, global positioning uses satellites that are
in medium orbits, not low earth orbits.
GPS has so many satellites though, because one's position on earth is reckoned by taking
four signals from four different satellites.
The idea of using satellites to relay radio signals around the world was first proposed
by the science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke in 1945.
Clarke thought that satellites in geostationary orbit could be used to transmit messages from
station to station, and to hence expand radio broadcasting.
As we all know, the space age began in 1957, when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, a
base basketball-sized satellite that orbited the earth for three months.
Before Americans could even catch their breath, the Soviets launched a second satellite, Sputnik
2, which carried a dog named Leica into space, in which the American press renamed Sputnik.
The United States responded by launching several of its own satellites, including ECHO-1.
Designed by Bell Labs, ECHO-1 consisted of a large miler balloon coated with a thin layer
of aluminum so that radio signals bounced off its surface.
ECHO was a passive satellite, meaning that it did not possess any onboard electronics.
For Bell Lab engineers, this was satisfactory as they wanted to make sure they understood
how to develop the stations needed on earth to provide the uplink and the downlink.
Once they acquired this knowledge, Bell engineers went on to design Telstar, the first satellite
that could receive and retransmit television and telephone signals, and Telstar was launched
in 1962.
Telstar combined a number of technologies previously developed at Bell Labs, including transistorized
circuits and photovoltaic panels that provided power for the satellite.
Telstar was succeeded by several generations of satellites launched by the International
Telecommunications Satellite Organization, quite a large name, and so it's often called
Intelsat.
While Intelsat-1, launched in 1965, could handle 2,400 voice channels, Intelsat's ninth-generation
satellites, which were launched in the early 2000s, carried 600,000 telephone calls or
600 television channels.
By the 1990s, Intelsat was operating 15 satellites, which could be in television programs and
provide telephone service anywhere in the world.
In 1970, the Soviets launched their first communication satellite, Molnaya, and since
then other stations have launched their own satellites into orbit, including Canada, Indonesia,
China, Japan, the European Union, France, the Arab League, Australia, Mexico, and Britain.
By the end of the 1970s, satellites were transmitting television programs to all parts
of the globe, and they were carrying over two-thirds of all telephone calls.
Beginning in the 1980s, however, the introduction of high-capacity fiber optic cable has meant
that undersea lines are once again proving and providing more telephone service.
Today, there are thousands of satellites circling the Earth, used not only for communications,
but also for weather, earth imaging, military communications, and as I said a moment ago,
global positioning.
There are, in fact, enough dead satellites up there now that engineers need to worry
about as new satellites are launched, making sure that the new satellites don't crash into
the space junk.
Let's turn now to talk about cell phones.
Along with satellites, global communications have been greatly affected by the development
of cellular telephones.
Cellular telephones use microwaves to communicate with a base station that in turn routes the
calls from the sender to the recipient.
As we saw in lecture 27, while Marconi and his companies concentrated on sending Morse
code messages, his rival, Reginald Fessinen, experimented as early as 1906 with transmitting
speech via radio waves.
In the 1920s, RCA provided a variety of radio telephone services, and by 1930, telephone
customers in the United States could be connected by radio to a passenger on an ocean liner
in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
During World War II, the Army contracted with the Galvin Manufacturing Company of Chicago,
soon to become Motorola, to manufacture radio telephones for use by troops in the field.
They'll produce two models, a walkie-talkie, which consisted of a radio and a backpack,
and a handy talkie that could be held in one hand.
Both of these devices relied on vacuum tube technology and high-voltage dry cells.
After the war, AT&T was looking for new markets and introduced mobile telephone service for
use in automobiles.
Beginning with the service in 1946 in St. Louis, AT&T expanded its mobile telephone service
eventually to 100 towns and highway quarters, and they did so by 1948.
Mobile telephone service was a rarity, with only about 5,000 customers placing perhaps
30,000 calls each week.
The required equipment required about 80 pounds and took up a fair amount of trunk space.
Now subscriber growth was limited by the technology, because there were only three radio channels
that were available, only three customers in any given city could make a mobile call
at the same time.
Even though AT&T's mobile telephone service was the only service available until the 1970s,
engineers at Bell Labs were quick to recognize the limitations of the system.
As early as 1947, they proposed laying out a network of hexagonal cells for mobile phones
in vehicles.
Rather than have the cell towers at the center of each cell, another Bell Labs researcher
suggested that the towers be at the corners of the hexagons, and that the towers have
directional antennas that would transmit and receive in three directions in three different
hexagonal cells at the same time.
As promising as these ideas were, though, AT&T could neither secure the radio frequencies
needed from the Federal Communications Commission, nor could it develop the electronics needed
to manage the switching system.
In the mid-1950s, AT&T hoped that the FCC would allow them to use ultra-high-frequency
UHF, which is a portion of the radio spectrum for mobile telephony, but the Commission chose
to award UHF to television stations, hoping that it would stimulate the proliferation of
local channels that could compete with the three dominant networks that were on the VHF
channels.
However, the UHF stations did not appear to absorb all of the bandwidth, and so in the
60s, the FCC let it be known that it would entertain new proposals for creating mobile
telephony.
Both AT&T and Motorola submitted plans to the FCC in 1971 to enter this business.
Because Motorola was worried that it would lose a significant portion of the two-ray
car radio business that it had built up, Motorola suggested that if AT&T got in the business,
it would crush the competition and create a monopoly.
As a concession to these fears put forward by Motorola, AT&T agreed to concentrate on
building and running the cellular network and not to get into the business of manufacturing
handsets.
As a result, Motorola was left in a position where it could concentrate on the handset
business.
Once the regulatory hurdles had been cleared, Richard H. Frankel and Joel Engel, both at
Bell Labs, turned to developing the electronics needed for the system.
In doing so, they were helped by the significant fact that microprocessors, chips, were becoming
more and more powerful and were dropping in price.
Microprocessors are essential for cell phone technology because so much of the running
of the system is information processing.
For a caller to reach somebody in the network, computers are needed not only in the central
office but also at each cell tower and in each phone and all of those microprocessors
are needed in order to locate and track the user wherever they are in the honeycomb cell
network and they are needed to monitor the signal strength of the call.
As Frankel pointed out, cellular is a computer technology, it's not a radio technology.
The electronics also had to overcome another challenge, namely that with the existing system,
a car with a mobile phone had to stay within the coverage area serviced by one base station
during the duration of the entire call.
In other words, there was no way to hand off the call as the car moved from one cell into
another.
In response, Amos Joel at Bell Labs perfected an automatic call handoff system that allowed
mobile phones to move through several cell centers during a single conversation without
an eruption.
But while engineers had now come up with a way that mobile phones could roam, they still
hadn't solved the problem of how to increase the number of users and that more users were
going to be needed if it was going to become economically feasible to build a regional
or national cell phone network.
After all, who's going to pay for all those cell towers and all the computers needed to
process the calls?
How could a cell phone network ever have the millions of users needed to offset the tens
of millions of dollars that it would cost to build the network?
And how could they all communicate at the same time?
The answer was to rethink how a cell phone network might allocate bandwidth.
Since there isn't enough space on the radio spectrum for each cell phone to have its own
frequency, engineers decided that they would reuse frequencies.
Rather than assigning a single frequency to each phone, the engineers would assign a group
of frequencies that then would be used by the entire system.
When a call is placed, the phone system picks an open frequency for that call and makes the
connection.
With the cellular system, frequency reuse made a great deal of sense since for any given
call, the system could assign it not only the frequencies available in one cell, but
also hand the call off to other open frequencies as the caller moved from cell to cell.
Consequently, when one makes a call on a cell phone while driving in a car, the call can
use several frequencies with several handoffs occurring every time the car moves between
cells.
Remarkably, computers monitor the cell strength of the call every few seconds, looking to
see if it would be better for the call to switch to a different frequency.
And the computers as a result came to handle these changes so smoothly that most of us
seldom notice that these frequency switches are ever happening.
In researching these problems, AT&T spent on the order of $100 million to perfect cell
phone technology.
Now all that remained was to create a portable phone that could operate outside of an automobile.
Both Motorola and Bell raced to be the first to produce a handheld mobile phone.
Drawing on its experiences with walkie-talkies and pagers, Motorola won that race and on
April 1973, Martin Cooper, a Motorola researcher, used the first portable cell phone to call
his counterpart Joel Engel at Bell Labs.
The first handheld phone used by Dr. Cooper weighed 2.5 pounds and it measured 9 inches
by 5 inches by 1.75 inches and that's a real brick.
It offered a talk time of just 30 minutes and it took 10 hours to recharge.
The first cellular telephone network was established in Japan in 1979 and a second
early system was deployed in Scandinavia in Denmark, Finland, Sweden and Norway in 1981.
These Scandinavian countries, particularly Finland, have a low population density.
That means there's lots of people in a few cities like Helsinki but few people that live
in the northern parts like the Lapland regions.
And the government there saw cell phones as a way to connect the Finnish people together.
Equally, the Japanese and Scandinavian governments could invest in this technology early on because
unlike the U.S., the telecommunications in those countries is state controlled.
The first network in the U.S. was set up by AT&T and Motorola in 1983 to serve the Chicago
area.
This network grew from 200,000 subscribers in the first year to 2 million users five
years later.
The first cell networks relied on analog signal processing using separate frequencies or channels
for each conversation.
They therefore required considerable bandwidth for a large number of users.
These systems were also unencrypted, meaning that not only could people eavesdrop on cell
phone calls using a police scanner but they could also hack into the system and make free
calls and that was a practice that's known as cloning.
In response, telecommunications engineers developed a second generation, 2G, a new protocol
that utilized digital signal processing.
After using several different techniques, American cell phone networks settled on a
combination of digital voice compression and digital modulation, a technique known in the
industry as co-division multiple access or CDMA.
By increasing the capacity of the existing cell phone network 10 to 20 times and hence
reducing the cost of individual calls, CDMA has had an important impact on the development
of the cell industry.
Other multiplexing techniques were developed in other countries, including the digital
global system for mobile communications, which is known as GSM, and that was introduced
in 1988 by the European community.
Since then, most of the world has adopted GSM, but the US has continued to use CDMA with
the result that American cell phones are not able to connect with foreign networks.
By 2005, GSM networks accounted for more than 75 percent of the worldwide cellular market
and they were serving 1.5 billion subscribers.
With 2G came new features like text messaging, which was first introduced in the United Kingdom
in 1992, as well as SIM cards, which could be used to transfer the identity of a user
and his or her account from one phone to another.
Coinciding with the introduction of 2G systems was the trend away from those large brick
phones that I mentioned a moment ago towards smaller phones weighing only a few ounces.
These new phones took advantage of both advanced lithium ion batteries and more efficient electronics.
However, they were also feasible because of the increasing density of the cellular network
meant that the average distance for transmission from phone to base was getting shorter, leading
to have to use less battery power to transmit up to the base station.
As 2G phones became more commonplace, cell phone manufacturers began to explore how they
could provide not only telephone but data services as well.
This was desirable for cell phone companies because it would attract more customers as
well as to allow the companies to more efficiently use the networks they had built.
In particular, the companies realized that people could get their email delivered to
their phones, but to do so would require greater data speeds than could be provided by the
existing 2G service.
In response, the industry developed the next generation of technology known as 3G.
The main difference between 2G and 3G is that 3G uses packet switching for data transmission,
and that's something that we'll discuss in lecture 34 on the Internet.
Because this technology was launched first in Japan and Europe in 2001 and the following
year in 2002.
And by the end of 2007, there were 295 million 3G subscribers worldwide, which reflected
about 9% of the subscriber base.
While 3G networks offered the possibility of streaming videos such as TV shows or YouTube
videos, telecommunication companies have assumed that the market will only grow by increasing
data transmission speeds.
Hence, starting in 2006, the industry began developing optimized fourth generation technologies
with the promise of speed improvements up to tenfold over the existing 3G technologies.
Just as American automobile manufacturers in the 1930s discovered that it was cheaper
to add accessories like radios, white wall tires, or different interiors, and that was
cheaper to do that than to modify the basic design of the cars, so cell manufacturers
began to notice the same.
While phone service companies have concentrated on increasing data transmission speeds, the
manufacturers of phones have focused their efforts on adding features such as cameras,
GPS units, clocks, and scheduling tools.
Such features are possible as computer chips have become more powerful and cheaper, topic
that we took up in lecture 30.
The recent entry in the accessory race for our smartphones, generally speaking smartphones
which include iPhones, Blackberries, and Android devices are those phones on which users can
download special applications.
As it did with personal computers, Apple has been reluctant to openly share the details
of the operating system for its iPhones with any and all developers, leading to a practice
of jailbreaking whereby hackers try to figure out how to crack the security codes and introduce
their own non-authorized apps onto iPhones.
According to a 2012 survey, about half of the US mobile customers own smartphones now
and could account for around 70% of all cell phone mobile devices by 2013.
While cell phones are seen as a convenience in affluent industrial countries, this technology
has had significant social impacts in other societies.
In Finland, the government recognized in the 1980s that cell phones could be used to increase
social ties in a population that as we said was widely dispersed across the countryside.
As a result, for many years, the Finnish people have had the highest number of cell phones
per capita in the world and the Finnish cell phone company Nokia is regarded as a major
player in this global industry.
Similarly, many African nations see cell phones as a major way to connect people in
small rural villages with the rest of society without having to build expensive landlines
for telephones.
Cell phones have proven to be enormously popular in Africa and the number of cell phones connected
between 1997 and 2002 was greater than all traditional phones that have been placed in
service on the continent in the previous century.
Africa now has about 1 billion people, but in 2012 there were an estimated 700 million
SIM cards in use.
This means that while not everyone has a phone, a huge number of people have accounts represented
by the SIM cards and they simply borrow a phone when they need one.
As cell phone networks have grown in Africa, both entrepreneurs and consumers have come
up with many remarkable ways to use their phones.
For example, Africa's farmers use cell phones to share weather information, market prices
and micro-insurance schemes.
Farmers are now able to send a text message to find out the crop prices in places thousands
of miles away and then they are able to decide whether they should send their crops there
in order to get the best possible price.
Many Africans now use mobile phones to pay their bills and airtime to buy goods and make
payments to individuals.
Indeed, remittances from relatives living abroad are often received via mobile banking.
Within refugee camps, mobile phones are essential for finding displaced persons and allowing
those persons to reconnect with family and loved ones.
And mobile phones are used to provide entertainment.
Africa now teams with online platforms like Hula Happy, a popular online Kenyan entertainment
channel that works especially on a small mobile screen, or Afronali, which builds itself
as African movies in your pocket.
Equally, cell phones have in other countries come to play an important part in bringing
about political change.
In 2001, for instance, protesters in the Philippines use text messaging and cell phones to mobilize
hundreds of thousands of people to oppose the newly reelected President Joseph Estrada.
A huge crowd gathered at the EDSA Shrine in Central Manila, and in response to that
huge crowd, Estrada resigned and Gloria Arroyo was sworn in in front of the crowd at the
EDSA.
As I said in the beginning, it's important that we all develop our sense of technological
literacy.
For me, that means that we know how to use a cell phone, but that's not enough.
Political literacy should embrace not so much about understanding how the electrons whizz
about in the circuits inside the phone, that's the physics.
But more importantly, that we come to know how the calls actually get made using the
hexagonal cell structure, microwave towers, and frequency reusing.
It also helps to know how the state regulates and promotes technologies like cell phones,
and we've seen how the FCC opened the way to cell phone innovation in 1971 by taking
proposals from AT&T and Motorola, and we've also seen how Finland has invested in this
technology in order to develop a stronger society.
And you should be aware of the business strategy of cell phone providers and cell phone manufacturers,
how they make their money, and how that informs what they're trying to sell you.
Talking a little bit about all of these things may be a tall order, but this is the literacy
that citizens are going to need to make decisions in the future about this and the great inventions
that are coming ahead.
