We've all seen it on police dramas on television.
At the scene of the crime, the detective slips on a pair of rubber gloves, gently picks
up a single hair with a pair of tweezers.
The hair goes into a plastic bag and off to the crime lab, and a few scenes later, the
lab technician reveals to the detective that based on DNA analysis, the hair reveals the
identity of the criminal.
We now take this analysis for granted.
What actually happens in the lab where this analytical technique is performed?
In this lecture, we'll look at the basic technique underlying this analysis, polymerase chain
reaction or PCR, and use it as an introduction to the innovations that have taken place in
the last 30 years in genetic engineering and biotechnology.
Genetic engineering is the direct manipulation of an organism's heredity or genome by introducing
foreign DNA or synthetic genes into the organism under study.
Although humans have been modifying animals and plants for thousands of years, through
selective breeding, genetic engineering makes it possible to customize or create organisms
with specific characteristics.
Genetic engineering techniques have been applied in agriculture, medicine, and criminal forensics.
Through genetic engineering, it's been possible to produce food crops that are insect resistant
and more tolerant to herbicides.
Genetic engineering plants and animals are frequently capable of producing drugs more
cheaply than current methods.
For instance, insulin and human growth hormone are now produced in bacteria.
And it's genetic engineering that allows crime investigators to use a single strand
of hair to find that specific criminal.
But perhaps the most dramatic application of genetic engineering has been the cloning
of new animals.
And in the second half of this lecture, we'll look at the cloning of special mice that knock
out mice and the onka mouse that have revolutionized medical research.
Talk about genetic engineering, we need to start by talking about genes.
Genes are how living organisms transmit features from one generation to the next.
For example, children usually look like their parents because they have inherited their
parents' genes.
In pursuing his ideas about natural selection and evolution, Charles Darwin became quite
interested in how species pass favorable traits from one generation to the next, where Darwin
was unable to come up with a satisfying explanation of the mechanism by which this occurred.
In breeding experiments conducted between 1856 and 1865, an Austrian monk, Gregor Mendel,
first traced inheritance patterns of certain traits in pea plants and showed that they
obey simple statistical rules.
Mendel's work was published in a relatively obscure scientific journal, and so it did
not receive much attention until the early 20th century when the British biologist William
Bateson rediscovered Mendel's work and helped merge it with Darwin's evolutionary theory.
Bateson was the first to coin the term genetics in 1905.
By that time, Hugo de Vries had postulated that the inheritance of specific traits in
organisms comes in particles, and he had named those particles genes.
And in 1910, using fruit flies, Thomas Hunt Morgan showed that genes reside in chromosomes,
which are structures found in the nucleus of the cell.
Genes in turn are made of a long molecule called DNA, which is copied and inherited
across generations.
DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid and can be found in the nucleus of every cell in
an organism.
As many of you know, its molecular shape is the form of a double helix.
Think of this double helix as a twisted ladder, with key parts being the rungs of the ladder.
Each rung consists of nucleotides, guanine, adenine, thymine, and cytosine, which pair
up in very particular ways.
Different pairs of these nucleotides and each rung of the ladder encode the information
that the cell uses to make proteins, which in turn cause other things to happen in the
organism, like how the cell processes other chemicals, or at the level of the whole organism
produces traits like the color of your hair.
DNA was first isolated in 1869 by a Swiss physician, Friedrich Meischer, who was studying
the microscopic substances he found in the pus on discarded surgical bandages.
Since the substances came from the nuclei of cells, Meischer called them nucleon.
In 1919, Phoebus Levine, the Rockefeller Institute, identified the base sugar and phosphate nucleotide
unit that made up DNA.
Levine suggested that DNA consisted of a string of nucleotide units linked together through
the phosphate groups, but neither he nor other biologists could quite determine the structure
of DNA or how it worked.
In 1927, Nikolai Koltsov speculated that inherited traits could be inherited via a giant hereditary
molecule made up of two mirror strands that would replicate in a semi-conservative fashion
using each strand as a template.
Finally in 1953, working from an X-ray diffraction image of the DNA molecule, James Watson and
Francis Crick identified the structure as a double helix.
Once they knew that DNA took this form, Crick was able to explain how DNA passed instructions
and hence genetic information to the cell.
Watson and Crick's discovery revolutionized biology, shifting interest away from whole
organisms to an intense focus on the molecular mechanisms that operated within the cell.
From the 1950s to the 1980s, molecular biology and genetics grew rapidly as fields, contributing
to our understanding of how many diseases function and also led to the new development
of drug treatments.
For instance, by the late 80s, it was possible to perform genetic testing to determine whether
either fetuses or adults were at risk for Huntington's disease, a condition which attacks
the brain and nervous system in adults between ages of 30 and 45.
These new tests allowed for families to plan much more effectively for how to cope with
the disorder.
In addition, molecular biologists perfected techniques for isolating specific pieces of
DNA that could either be inserted into the cells of organisms to change how these organisms
function and that's what's known as recombinant DNA or scientists could create new plants
and animals without having to use natural reproduction processes and that's what we
call cloning.
We'll talk more about cloning when we get to genetically modified mice in a few moments.
Both of these techniques, recombinant DNA and cloning, set the stage for the creation
of an entirely new industry, biotechnology, which was hoped could create better plants,
animals and drugs for use in agriculture, industry and medicine.
One of the first companies in biotechnology was CEDIS Corporation located in Emoryville,
near Berkeley in Northern California.
Founded in 1971, CEDIS sought to create automated methods for selecting industrial organisms
that could be used to produce greater amounts of chemical feed, stocks, antibiotics or vaccine
components.
However, as the company became proficient in genetic manipulation, it turned to creating
new drugs for treating cancer.
In order to do this research though, it was critical to have enough DNA to analyze and
that's where PCR comes in.
Sometimes referred to as molecular photocopying, PCR can characterize, analyze and synthesize
any piece of DNA or RNA.
It works on extremely complicated mixtures, seeking out, identifying and duplicating a
particular bit of genetic material from blood, hair or tissue specimens.
Those specimens can come from microbes, animals or plants.
And the specimens can be just recent or even millions of years old.
As a technique, PCR was invented by a biochemist, Kerry B. Mullis, in the 1980s and he was awarded
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for it in 1993.
Mullis grew up in South Carolina and studied at the Georgia Institute of Technology and
at the University of California, Berkeley.
Shortly after getting his PhD, Mullis dropped off the usual career path for scientists first
to write fiction and then for two years to manage a bakery.
In the early 80s, thanks to a friend, Thomas White, who was already working at CEDIS, Mullis
was hired by the company to make short chains of DNA for other scientists to use in their
experiments.
When machines came available for the job, Mullis had time on his hands for other pursuits.
In his Nobel lecture, Mullis described how the idea for PCR came to him during a night
drive with his girlfriend, who also worked at CEDIS, to do his weekend cabin in the Anderson
Valley of Northern California.
Mullis was playing in his mind with a new way of analyzing mutations in DNA when he
suddenly realized that he had thought up instead a method of duplicating any portion of the
DNA strand he might want.
Before the weekend was over, Mullis was already dreaming of the Nobel Prize.
Mullis assented that on occasion he took LSD and it might have contributed to that Eureka
moment.
With or without LSD, Mullis came up with the following procedure.
PCR requires a template for the molecule, the DNA you want to copy, and two primer molecules
to get the process started.
The primers are short chains of four nucleotides that can make up any strand of DNA.
Unlike DNA that has two strands that twist around each other, primers are single-stranded.
They consist of a string of nucleotides in a specific order that will, under the right
conditions, bind to a specific complementary sequence of nucleotides in another piece of
single-stranded DNA.
For PCR, the primers must be duplicates of nucleotide-sensed sequences on either side
of the piece of DNA of interest, which means that the exact order of the primers nucleotides
must already be known.
These flanking sequences can be constructed in the lab or purchased from commercial suppliers.
As this graphic shows, there are three basic steps to PCR.
First, the target DNA must be unwound and separated.
This step is called denaturing, and it's done by heating the DNA in a solution up to
90 or 96 degrees centigrade.
The second step is annealing, in which the primers bind to their complementary bases
on the now single-stranded DNA.
The third step is DNA synthesis by polymerase.
PCR exploits the remarkable natural function of enzymes known as polymerases.
These enzymes are present in all living things, and their job is to copy genetic material
and also proofread and correct the copies.
Starting from the primer, the polymerase can read a template strand and match it with the
complementary nucleotides very quickly.
The result is two new helixes in place of the first, each composed of one of the original
strands plus its newly assembled complementary strand.
All PCR requires, really, is in terms of equipment, is a test tube, reagents, and a heat source.
But different temperatures are optimal for each of the three steps, so machines now control
the temperature variations automatically.
To get more of the DNA you want, just repeat the process, beginning by denaturing the DNA
you've already made.
The amount will double every time.
The cycle of rapid heating and cooling controlled automatically, nature, aided by scientists
supplied chemicals, simply does the rest.
Each cycle takes only one to three minutes, so repeating the process for just 45 minutes
can generate millions of copies of a specific DNA strand.
Once the primers have been characterized and obtained, PCR can do in a week the work that
used to take a scientist a year.
While the basic idea for PCR may have come to Mullis as a Eureka moment, the reduction
of Mullis' idea to practice was done largely by others.
According to White, who supervised Mullis while he was working at CEDIS, Mullis was
an experimentalist to sort of hit or miss.
He got a lot of data, but he was having personal problems and tended to do uncontrolled experiments,
so it wasn't very convincing when he did get a result.
Over a year, when Mullis had not developed any definitive proof of his concept, White
asked another scientist to take over and work on PCR.
Within a few months, Randall Psyche, a rigorous experimentalist, produced data that convinced
everyone at CEDIS to process work.
Not surprisingly, Mullis' complaint that his colleagues tried to steal credit for PCR
away from him.
White denies this, saying that there was a plan to have Mullis publish the first paper
describing PCR, but the plan went awry because Mullis wasted an entire summer creating fractal
pictures on the company's computers instead of doing experiments.
Nevertheless, Mullis continued to contribute to PCR and introduced the use of TAC polymerase,
an enzyme made by bacteria that live in high temperatures, TAC bacteria live in geysers
and hot springs, and they're able to function at near boiling temperatures required in PCR.
The TAC polymerase was heat resistant and would only need to be added once to the process,
thus making the technique dramatically more affordable and subject to automation.
Mullis received a $10,000 bonus from CEDIS for inventing PCR, but he quit soon thereafter
as the result of an argument with management over another project.
A few years later, CEDIS was purchased by the pharmaceutical giant Huffman La Roche for
$300 million, in part because the patent's CEDIS held for PCR.
Another indication of the significance of PCR is that it's been subjected to a series
of patent suits involving not only Huffman La Roche, but DuPont and Kodak as well.
Medical research is profiting from PCR mainly in two areas.
First, it's used for the detection of infectious disease organisms, and second, PCR can detect
variations in mutations in genes, especially human genes.
Because PCR can amplify unimaginably tiny amounts of DNA, even that from one cell, physicians
and researchers can examine a single sperm or track down the elusive source of a puzzling
infection.
These PCR-based analyses are proving to be just as reliable as previous methods and sometimes
even better, and they're often much faster and much cheaper.
PCR, for example, can detect the AIDS virus sooner during the first few weeks after infection
than other standard tests.
PCR looks directly for the virus's unique DNA instead of the method employed by the
standard test, which looks for indirect evidence that the virus is present by searching for
antibodies that the body has made against it.
Time disease, a painful joint inflammation caused by bacteria transmitted through tick
bites, is usually diagnosed on the basis of symptom patterns.
But PCR can zero in on the disease organism's DNA that's contained in joint fluid and can
permit speedy treatment and avoid serious complications.
PCR's ability to identify and copy the tiniest amounts of even old and damaged DNA has proven
exceptionally valuable in the law, especially criminal law.
PCR is indispensable for forensic DNA typing, commonly called DNA fingerprinting.
For instance, using DNA extracted from blood found on a murder suspect's clothes, scientists
can study a handful of sites on the DNA where variation among individuals is typical.
This helps them determine the likelihood that the sample matches the DNA of a specific person,
for example, a stabbing victim.
Although in its early days DNA fingerprinting was controversial, laboratory procedures have
now been standardized and carefully done DNA typing has now accepted a strong evidence
in courts throughout the world.
Archaeologists have also seized on PCR and are applying it in an amazing variety of ways.
It's helping, for example, to launch a new chapter in the study of the 2,000-year-old
Dead Sea Scrolls, which are written on parchment made out of the skins of goats and gazelles.
Researchers are analyzing the parchment fragments to identify which individual animal's parchment
fragments came from.
The hope is that the genetic information will guide researchers as they piece together the
10,000 remaining particles of the scrolls.
But along with the DNA fingerprinting used in criminal investigations, the other way
with which most of us are familiar with genetic engineering is through the cloning of new
animals.
We've all heard of Dolly the sheep, who is identical to her mother and who was created
by Scottish researchers in 1998 through cloning.
As impressive as Dolly was, the first important animal that was cloned and patented were the
mice that are now used for medical research.
While biomedical scientists do use sophisticated computer models to predict the behavior of
new drugs, it is still necessary to study how these drugs function in a live animal.
And only by doing so can scientists fully understand how the drug operates and what
possible side effects there might be.
Hence, to develop new drugs, you want a laboratory animal with several characteristics.
It's good if the animals that you're studying are small.
It's also good if they have a relatively short life cycle.
That is to say that they breed, are born, mature, and die in a relatively short period
of time.
It's for these two reasons that early genetics researchers work with fruit flies.
Fruit flies are also valuable because they manifest their genetic mutations in highly
visible ways.
However, most importantly, in doing medical research, you want an animal that is well
defined and whose characteristics don't change from generation to generation.
In other words, you want a stable animal model for your research.
The first genetically modified mouse was invented in 1974 when Rudolf Geniech and Beatrice
Mintz at MIT inserted a DNA virus into early stage mice embryos and showed that the inserted
genes were present in every cell when the mice were born.
However, these mice did not pass the inserted genes onto their offspring.
In 1981, Frank Rudle at Yale and Frank Constitani and Elizabeth Lacey at Oxford injected purified
DNA into a single cell mouse embryo and demonstrated that the genetic material was transmitted
to subsequent generations.
Through the 1980s, these techniques were standardized, so it became possible to produce
mice with characteristics that were needed to conduct experiments related to cancer and
other diseases.
Genetic modified mice today typically come in two forms.
First, there are knockout mice in which the activity of one or more genes has been turned
off.
These mice are used to study obesity, heart disease, diabetes, arthritis, substance abuse,
and Parkinson's disease.
Second, there are transgenic mice, which carry cancer-causing genes, or oncogenes.
Hundreds of different transgenic mice have been developed in order to study the cancers
affecting most organs in the human body.
The illustration shows knockout mice are created by first removing embryonic stem cells from
a very early form of a mouse embryo, which is known as the blastocyst.
These cells are then cultured in the lab where researchers watch for mutated cells that carry
the targeted gene.
The cells with the targeted gene are cultured separately.
Once researchers have enough cells, they are then injected into the blastocysts and are
implanted into their foster mothers.
These foster mothers give birth to chimeric mice who have the requisite trait on the offspring
of the chimeric mice carry forward the targeted gene.
Perhaps the most famous cancer-fighting mouse is the Oncamouse that was designed by Philip
Lieder and Timothy Stewart at Harvard.
Lieder and Stewart sought to have this mouse patented in the U.S., Canada, and the European
Union.
The case has prompted much legal discussion about whether or not a life form can or should
be patented.
Dupont currently owns the rights to Oncamouse.
Although there are many critics of genetic engineering, genetic-modified mice are a key
tool used by scientists to study disease and develop new drugs and new therapies.
Along with bringing changes in fighting crime and studying disease, genetic engineering
has played a dramatic role in agriculture through the development of modified crops.
Because genetically modified food is controversial, let's talk about this invention for a few
moments.
Genetically modified crops are plants in which the DNA has been modified so that they're
better able to resist pests and disease.
Genetic engineering has also been able to improve crop yields as well as the nutritional
value of food.
Genetically modified livestock have also been developed experimentally, but none have
been approved for use in the United States.
Much of the effort to develop genetically engineered crops has focused on commodity
crops like corn, soybeans, and canola that are used to manufacture numerous food products.
Over the last 30 years, Monsanto, a major chemical company, has moved from providing
herbicides and fertilizers to farmers to pioneering genetically modified crops.
The first actually genetically modified food offered for sale to consumers was Calgene's
Flavor Saver Tomato back in 1994.
Through genetic modification, Calgene hoped to slow the ripening process of the tomato
and thus prevent it from softening while still allowing the tomato to retain its natural
color and flavor.
Although it was approved by the FDA for human consumption, the Flavor Saver was rejected
by tomato farmers because it did not yield as much fruit per acre as existing tomato
plants.
It was also damaged by the machines that are used to harvest and store tomato crops.
Needless to say, consumers were also deeply suspicious about eating a genetically modified
tomato.
To me, the Flavor Saver reveals, again, that a new invention has to work with all the groups
involved, not just the scientists and the biotech companies, but everyone in the production
chain, growers, packers, manufacturers, and ultimately consumers.
To be sure, many scientists and biotech companies see a bright future for genetic engineering.
At the same time, there are genuine concerns that need to be addressed as research goes
forward using these techniques to modify plants and animals.
Let me cite a couple of these concerns.
First, in the endless cycle of natural selection, weeds that were previously destroyed by herbicides
have now developed a resistance to the herbicides, and so farmers are faced with new superweeds
in their fields.
Second, there is concern about increasing allergens in the food supply.
In particular, what happens if a person who is lactose intolerant has given a food, say
carrots, in which genetic material from milk has been introduced?
How will a person that is lactose intolerant know that they should avoid the genetically
modified carrots?
Third, agricultural engineers have developed new food crops that can be fertilized using
sewage sludge, even if that sludge has concentrations of heavy metals like mercury.
And that's possible because the new plants are engineered to absorb the contaminants
in the roots and other parts of the plant that humans don't eat, such as the roots
of a tomato plant or the leaves on a potato plant.
All of this is accomplished by turning off the relevant genes in specific tissues.
However, if the on-off switches are not completely turned off in the edible tissues, then there's
a risk that people will ingest more of these heavy metals.
Overall, these concerns underline the importance for people to understand not only the science
behind genetic engineering, but to have an appreciation of the complex ways in which
business and ecological factors influence these inventions.
It's on the business, regulatory and social side that the real innovations are needed
to manage genetic engineering and to ensure that it makes optimal contributions to human
well-being.
