Thank you.
History invention, the history of invention.
I hope you've enjoyed this course
about the history of invention.
If you're like me, you may have found
the juxtaposition of these two words,
history and invention, puzzling.
I still remember when I was a college student,
one of my professors told me about the history of science.
How on earth I wondered, would science have a history?
Science is about the here and now.
It's about the future.
And what's more, it's supposed to be
about timeless, objective truths.
How could science have a history
when history is so human, so subjective?
And certainly the same could be said about inventions.
Inventions are about the future.
They're the means by which humans have frequently hoped
that we're gonna get to the future.
Inventions are revolutionary.
They are a break with the past.
So how could their history be all that important?
So sure there might be old inventions,
but should we really take an interest in their history?
What could the history of invention teach us?
As you can see, I've taken an interest
in the history of invention.
I went to graduate school to study it,
and I made it my career.
And I sincerely believe that the history of invention
teach us a lot.
In the last 35 lectures, I've suggested a number of ideas
about what we can learn from the history of invention.
And in this lecture, I wanna pull all those ideas together.
And think first about what we've learned from inventions,
and then what we've learned about history.
So let's talk about invention first.
Talk about what we've learned about inventions.
I'm gonna use an old trick from journalism class
and organize what we've covered in this course
by using those classic questions,
who, what, when, where, how, and why.
But I'm gonna switch the first two, who and what,
and cover the topic, what, first.
So what do we mean by invention?
Well, we've looked at a whole range of inventions,
from prime movers like steam engines,
to architectural elements like the arched materials,
like plastic, to everyday items like canned food and beer.
The basic definition that has been guiding us all along
is that an invention is a new combination of ideas
and objects that satisfy some human need, want, or wish.
One of the most obvious examples of invention
is a new combination, is gunpowder.
Charcoal, sulfur, and saltpeter all existed
beforehand in China, but Chinese alchemists
brought them together in the search for the elixir of life.
A more elaborate example would be the atomic bomb,
where we talked about how General Leslie Groves
had to integrate the theoretical work of physicists
with experiments from the reactor piles,
with the engineering expertise of Dupont
in order to design, test, and build the first bomb.
Now an important corollary of this notion
of invention as a combination,
is that sometimes the combinations are a mix
of nearby things, and other times it's a blending of ideas
from two radically different domains of human knowledge.
For example, consider how relatively easy it was
for Edison and Dixon working on motion pictures
to borrow the idea of a strip of film
from a familiar automatic telegraph device
that they had sitting right there
on the shelf in the laboratory.
By contrast, I think how unusual it was for the Wright brothers
to apply what they understood about the stability of bicycles
to developing an airplane
that was an inherently unstable craft.
Even more significantly, a major theme of this course
has been that it's not always obvious
what need or wish a new invention should serve.
Sometimes the real creative act is identifying
or connecting a new piece of technology
with a significant need.
One story that speaks to this
is the case of Corning Glass and Pyrex.
Corning initially developed this glass
for use in railroad lanterns,
and the glass proved to be so durable
that Corning lost business
since railroads didn't have to buy replacement lantern globes.
In response, Corning scientists reworked
the formulation of Pyrex so it could be used
to make pie plates and all kinds of kitchenware.
In other words, the creative act here
was as much about identifying a new use or need
as it was about developing a new kind of glass.
In Venice, as I've said, need to have one foot
in the technical world and one foot in the social world.
Next, we should ask who comes up with new inventions?
Who are inventors?
We've seen that some inventions
are the work of extraordinary individuals.
Individuals like Leonardo da Vinci, Galileo, Edison,
Tesla, or Claude Shannon.
Other inventions came from people
who were deeply involved in the technology,
Johannes Gutenberg and the printing press,
Henry Bessemer and Steele,
Henry Ford and the Model T,
or Grace Hopper and computer programming
are pretty obvious suspects
and should turn up on any list of prominent inventors.
We've also seen that a fair number of inventions
can't really be ascribed to any one person.
They result of numerous small improvements
made over a long time
by dozens of anonymous individuals.
We refer to these as vernacular inventions,
and some key examples were the potter's wheel,
the water wheel, or the clock.
But I point out that there's a third category of inventors
that we shouldn't overlook.
Some inventions are radically altered by their users.
The changes are so significant
that we should consider users as inventors.
For instance, Edison may have perfected motion pictures,
but his invention would never have had much impact
if it wasn't for hundreds of entrepreneurs
who went out and invented the Nickelodeon Theater.
Sure, Facebook belongs to Mark Zuckerberg,
but I think that the current power
and significance of social media
has been shaped by thousands of users in the Arab world,
users like Lena Ben-Mahini in Tunisia.
Indeed, I would suggest that as we employ devices
in our own lives, we are all inventors in our own way,
shaping the technology and its meaning
to suit our goals and our desires.
Our next question is, where does invention take place?
Although we could talk about inventions,
how inventions are developed in specific locations,
such as workshops and laboratories, garages and attics,
these are, there are two more interesting answers
to the question, where?
The first is to consider the mix of nations
and cultures east and west.
Throughout the course I've tried to show
the great inventions don't just emanate from one country,
the people all over the world
have dreamed up important devices.
For example, you have to admire
how Japanese craftsmen invented the shinbashira
to permit wooden pagodas to survive earthquakes.
Moreover, we have seen that several key inventions
came from the east, from China, paper, gunpowder,
and the compass, all of which helped Europe move
from the Middle Ages into the modern era.
And while we've celebrated a number of important inventions
created by Americans in the 19th and 20th centuries,
inventions such as the telephone,
the airplane, or the chip, should by no means assume
that America has a unique or natural advantage
in terms of innovation.
Time and again, Europeans have been just as creative,
even beating America to the punch
in terms of being the first to introduce
civilian nuclear power or cell phones.
We should certainly not forget
how the Soviets were first into space with Sputnik.
Instead, and this leads to a second point about where,
is that America has been innovative
because of special combination of circumstances.
First, America was a continental nation state,
spanning the continent by the end of the 19th century
from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
Compared to the size of Britain and Germany,
the other economic powerhouses of the 19th century,
America was simply gigantic.
Sheer size, in terms of geography and population,
meant that America represented huge markets,
and inventors and entrepreneurs responded
with a host of inventions.
Look at how the railroad evolved
as it jumped from Europe to America.
How Westinghouse and Tesla got ahead of Edison
by introducing AC in order to serve
the growing cities of the Midwest and West
that lacked the population density
to support Edison's DC system.
Or how Ford recognized the huge markets
for his Model T among farmers.
At the same time,
America's democratic political institutions
have created an unusual situation
where there was a combination of promotion and regulation
that favored invention.
Time and again, both the states and the federal government
invested in new technologies,
whether it be the Uri Canal,
the Fairmount Water Works in Philadelphia,
the Transcontinental Railroad,
aviation, or the internet.
The same time,
regulation was put in place to manage competition,
and one potent illustration of this decision
was that to deregulate the internet in the early 90s.
My point here about where
is that favorable market conditions
and government policies go a long way
to explaining America's accomplishment
in terms of invention.
And I think that those are far better
as an explanation than mere Yankee ingenuity.
How does invention take place?
All the questions we're covering here,
this has gotta be my favorite,
as I've spent a great deal of time
studying what inventors do
when they get up in the morning, go to the lab,
have a cup of coffee, and then start working.
Now some of you may just shrug your shoulders
and say, look, it's pretty easy to invent.
You take the theory that scientists create,
you just apply it.
Build something that's based on science.
Science is the truth, after all,
and inventions based on science are bound to be valuable.
We sure are there are cases where scientific inquiry
results in a new invention,
say the battery, the transistor, or genetic engineering.
But in other cases,
the distance between theory and practice is significant,
and there's a great deal of hard engineering
that needs to be done to go from the laboratory bench top
to a product that people use every day.
Think for a moment, what it took
to go from Heinrich Hertz's discovery of radio waves
to broadcasting, or the role of DuPont engineers
in converting atomic theory into atomic bombs.
Instead, I would argue that many inventions
grow out of craft knowledge and experience,
the sort of know-how that inventors accumulate
as they think about and they manipulate ideas and objects.
Edison, for example, clearly got ahead of Alexander Graham Bell
on the telephone because Edison had years of experience
messing with electrical circuits,
and because he knew how to shape a material
like carbon lamp black into a better microphone transmitter.
This hands-on approach to invention summed up well
in a quote from Robert Fulton,
one of the inventors of the steamboat.
For Fulton, an inventor, and I quote,
should sit down among levers, screws, wedges, wheels, etc.,
like a poet among the letters of the alphabet,
considering them as the exhibition of his thoughts
in which a new arrangement transmits a new idea to the world.
Fulton's point was that inventions come from working
with basic mechanical devices and composing inventions from them,
much as a poet composes from words.
One of my challenges claimed that invention
is more about hands-on knowledge than scientific theory,
but pointing out that companies in the 20th century
hired lots of scientists and created R&D labs for them.
Certainly Bell Labs is a great example
of such an organization, producing the transistor
and much of the technology underlying cell phones.
Nevertheless, I would counter and suggest
that scientists are creative in the R&D environment
because they possess a high level of experimental skill,
that they can handle test tubes, instruments,
and highly complex apparatus in ways
that allow them to manipulate phenomena
better than other people.
My favorite illustration of this comes with the transistor,
and the transistor came about
because one of the three physicists working on it
at Bell Labs, Walter Breton, was a seasoned experimentalist,
and he got the first transistor to work
by carefully forming a contact by folding
and slitting a piece of gold foil.
Breton knew that the gold foil would create an edge
that was just wide enough to make the necessary contact.
It's the experimental skill, more than theory,
that brings home the technological bacon.
More than just hands-on skill, though,
inventors also employ several strategies
in their creative pursuits.
First and foremost, inventors often work by analogy.
Something works in one situation.
What happens if I borrow that idea
and apply it to a new circumstance?
Early on, we saw an example of thinking by analogy
in pottery, where we guessed that early potters
learned to make coiled pots by looking at how people
were fashioning baskets and spinning fiber
by rubbing it between their hands.
Later on, we saw how Edison developed motion pictures
by thinking about a machine that does for the eye
what the phonograph does for the ear.
Another powerful approach to invention
is to closely observe phenomenon.
This is well illustrated by how James Watt
carefully analyzed Thomas Newcomen's steam engine
and realized that he could make the engine more efficient
by creating a vacuum and a small separate condenser
rather than in the large main cylinder.
Or consider all the inventors who studied
Volta's battery and Faraday's experiments
in electromagnetic induction and followed up
with a slew of practical devices.
Other inventors get ahead by thinking about
how to create and modify a system
in response to the challenge confronting them.
Consider here how Prince Henry the Navigator
integrated better ships, navigation techniques,
and information about wind and currents
in order to successfully sail around Africa and reach India.
Or consider how Edison succeeded with his incandescent light
because he was willing to create an entire system
of generators, wires, meters, and accessories,
all that were needed to complement his new lamp.
In looking at all these examples,
to show, I want to show that great inventions
are not the result of miracles,
but rather strategies that we too can apply.
We can dream up improvements
or at least understand the technologies around us
by doing certain things.
Considering things in terms of analogy or substitution.
Something doesn't seem to work.
What could we substitute?
As Edison used to tell people,
make a list of all the solutions
that you can possibly think of
and then add five more that seem implausible.
It was his way of thinking outside the box.
We can also pay attention to the details.
How does the device you're looking at actually work?
How does it get power?
And what does it do with that energy?
What are the steps involved in performing that function?
What steps are working well?
Which ones are messing up?
You can also think in terms of systems.
How do the parts work together?
Are there bottlenecks as energy or information
flows from one part to another?
How much do you eliminate those bottlenecks?
And finally, why do people invent?
Ah, the age old question,
what makes people do what they do?
You probably have often heard the saying,
necessity is the mother of invention.
Behind this quote is a notion
that inventions come about largely as a result
of some pre-existing economic need.
That people just need or want more energy
or faster transportation.
Or more TV shows to watch.
Vice President Thomas Riley Marshall
said in the early 20th century when many people smoked,
what this country needs is a good five-cent cigar.
What he meant by that is in a nation of smokers,
there's always a need for a better and cheaper smoke.
But what we've seen in many of these lectures
is that it can be very hard to connect a new invention
with pre-existing needs.
Inventors often come up with something
that initially nobody really wants.
So the true creative act
can be connecting the invention
with some use, be it pre-existing or new.
What a great example
is that the U.S. Navy didn't really need
nuclear propulsion after World War II,
but Admiral Hyman Rickover pushed it through.
Another example is that Ted Hoff
could see the great potential for a microprocessing ship.
But it took him two, three years
to convince his bosses at Intel
that they ought to start manufacturing them.
In economic parlance,
I would suggest that the biggest,
the most disruptive inventions
are often not demand-pull, but supply-push.
Meaning that those inventions come about
not because people are necessarily clamoring for them,
but because they grow out of the evolving knowledge
and motivations possessed by invention.
Along the way, we've noticed that some supply-push inventions
come about to take advantage of excess capacity.
The power companies promoted electric appliances in the 1920s
in order to utilize the extra capacity
of the generating stations that they had built
to meet the needs of World War I production.
Equally, the Internet got off to a start in the 1970s
when universities purchased
too many mainframe computers
and they had to develop ways to coordinate
the transfer of programs and files.
This is not to say that there aren't any demand-pull inventions.
Certainly the construction of the London sewer system
and the invention of anesthesia
to reduce pain and surgery
came about in response to genuine preexisting human needs.
I'd simply suggest that we should assume
that inventions are always, or even generally,
a response to the future.
That for that makes inventions seem obvious or inevitable,
and it overlooks the hard, creative work
of linking new devices with needs and wishes.
Another important theme in the course
is that inventions get invented not just for economic reasons,
but also in response to social, political, and cultural needs.
We've seen in several compelling cases
where inventions get invented
not just for economic reasons,
we've seen in several compelling cases
where invention and political ideas were intertwined.
Consider how the crossbow in ancient China
upset the balance of power between warlords and peasants,
leading confusion scholars
to articulate a new political philosophy
calling on the emperor to be wise and restrained.
Or how the Romans built monumental structures
such as the aqueducts of the Coliseum
in order to demonstrate their idea of Commonwealth.
Other inventions take off
because they perform a valuable social function.
The Greeks, for instance, took up wine
to differentiate themselves from those barbarous people
in the Near East who drank that lower-class beverage beer.
Or 19th-century department stores
that catered to the needs and desires of middle-class women.
But perhaps the most memorable example
of non-economic inventions
are those created in response to cultural needs.
Both Buddhists and Christians innovated
as they created pagodas and cathedrals
in order that these structures
would manifest key spiritual values.
That pagodas could calmly withstand earthquakes
and that cathedrals were soaring illustrations
of the beauty and harmony of God's universe.
In another lecture, we noted that the printing press
was developed both east and west
in order to get important religious texts
into the hands of the faithful.
In sum, people create inventions for a whole host of reasons,
not just in response to necessity or economic opportunity,
but to address all of the needs and wishes
that we have as humans.
Along with enlarging your appreciation
of inventors and the invention process,
I hope that I've also enriched your understanding of history
by adding a material dimension.
Now, you might be surprised that I agree
with Henry Ford's famous comment
that history is bunk,
but that's because I understand where he was coming from.
In the early decades of the 20th century,
history was written largely about politicians and generals,
and Henry was put out that history and history books
did not include stories about people who actually did things
like invent, build factories, or run companies.
To address this problem,
Ford set out to build a new sort of museum in Dearborn,
Greenfield Village,
where he recreated Edison's Menlo Park Laboratory,
as well as the Wright Brothers Bicycle Shop,
and where he put on display thousands upon thousands
of tools and machines.
What I've tried to do in this course
is build upon Ford's vision of material history
by telling you the human stories behind great inventions,
and rather than just tell you one story after another,
I've tried to use several themes
to structure the sequence of these lectures.
First and foremost, I broke the course into thirds,
ancient and medieval,
the Industrial Revolution of the 20th century,
because I figured that you would have already
heard about those categories.
At the same time, though,
I saw those categories as an opportunity to puzzle over,
puzzle over what makes each of those years different,
and I suggested that the medieval world in the west
gave way to the modern
with the availability of a new power source,
the water wheel, and a new mechanical device, the clock.
Later in the course,
I proposed that what made the 20th century different
was that it was a century of mass technologies,
the form of mass production,
products like the Model T and appliances,
mass distribution, like department stores,
and mass entertainment,
think motion pictures, radio and TV.
In telling all these stories,
I was careful not to claim that inventions
automatically or inevitably change history,
that technology determines the course of history.
Instead, I wanted to suggest that inventions
are the material means,
the tools that individuals and groups
use to pursue their wishes
and to create meaning in their lives.
As we talked about Prince Henry,
major breakthroughs often involve
combining disparate technologies,
ships, navigation instruments,
and information about wind and currents,
and it takes individuals
to intentionally bring these elements together.
There was nothing inevitable
or deterministic about what Henry did.
Now, this leads me to say a few words about progress.
Many of us feel that life has gotten better over the centuries,
that much of the improvement
can be attributed to inventions or science.
I wholeheartedly agree that thanks to improvements
in medicine and health,
life expectancy for most Westerners
has advanced dramatically.
We also enjoy a variety of products today,
computers, cell phones, genetic engineering,
that would have astonished our grandparents.
If we wish,
we can certainly line up our great inventions
in chronological order
and show how they have moved
from what we consider simple, pottery,
to complex computers.
And in most cases, that's what people mean
by technological progress.
In so doing,
I'd offer two notes of caution about progress.
First, I'm not so sure
that I would label many of those early great inventions
as simple or primitive.
Did you have come up with the potter's wheel on your own
to say nothing of the intense scrutiny of rocks
that it took to find out how to combine copper and tin
to make bronze?
My sense is that humans have been making
complex inventions for centuries
and that we should be careful about judging one invention
to be more sophisticated than another.
My second concern
stems from the notion of the price of progress.
Yes, many people in the West
in industrializing countries
enjoy a high standard of living
that we expect will continue to rise.
But at the same time,
there are tens of millions of people
at a distance, teetering on the edge of famine and disease.
How well, we might ask,
have we done in distributing globally
the rising abundance that has come from industrialization?
Should progress accrue only to one group of people in the world?
Westerners? What about the rest?
Equally, we need to look
who is consuming scarce natural resources,
like oil and coal.
By one estimate, Americans constitute
5% of the world's population,
but consume 24% of the world's energy.
At the same time,
India and China are racing to build hundreds
of huge coal-fired power plants
to deliver cheap electricity
to support their growing industrial and consumer economies.
What kind of progress is this?
Shouldn't we be doing something about both
depleting these natural resources
and curbing pollution?
But not real progress,
be when inventions are used to improve the condition
of the majority of people living on the planet,
allowing them to enjoy a rising standard of living.
For me, inventions can lead to this sort of genuine progress,
and one way to get there
is to learn from inventions in history.
In looking at the many inventions covered in this course,
I hope I have increased your technological literacy,
that you now look at the devices in your life with fresh eyes,
asking new questions about where they came from
and how they work both technically and socially,
that you can see how the history of invention
can help us move into the future.
It's for this reason that I have the tagline
at the bottom of all my email messages,
using yesterday's technology
to solve tomorrow's problems today.
For the past,
especially when it comes to inventions,
is prologue to the future.
