Greetings! Finance again on the front pages. When I see what's happening this
week with Silicon Valley Bank and Credit Suisse, the first thing that comes to
mind is that scene from the movie Jaws where Chief Brody sees the size of the
shark for the first time and tells the boat's captain, we're gonna need a bigger
boat. I'm gonna unpack this on this week's Frankly.
Greetings! Oh boy! So last week I did a frankly called loss aversion. I record
these on Tuesday or Wednesday for broadcast on Friday because Leslie and
Lizzie put in some graphics and music and such, but with the way the world is
going I had no idea about Silicon Valley Bank or Credit Suisse or what was going
on. So loss aversion was perhaps relevant to many people and depositors
paying attention. So here's the deal with this podcast and my work. This will
never be a urgent commentary on what's going on now. So if you are an investor
or a speculator, this information is probably not helpful. What I'm trying to
do is look at the intermediate and long-term trends of society. I'm very
confident of my worldview for the next five to seven years. I really have very
little idea what's going to happen the next five to seven months, let alone the
next five to seven days, but I think this biophysical phase shift where our
society is starting to lose confidence in the money and technology are going to
solve all our problems and start to look a little bit closer, a little bit deeper
as to what's really going on and I will continue to comment on that. So I want to
talk a little bit today about the banking situation, but let's take a big
step back. So in the New Testament in the Bible there was something called the
Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. They were conquests, war, famine, and death. Then
in the Old Testament they were also Four Horsemen. They were sword, famine, wild
beasts, and pestilence. I would argue, and this is why as much as I talk, as much
as I care about climate change, biodiversity, and the natural world, that is
what speaks loudest to my heart and my ethos, my intellect and my integrated
assessment of our world suggests that those aren't going to be the things
that drive our decisions. So I would argue that the Four Horsemen of 2023 or
the 2020s of human society are finance in the financial system, geopolitics and
potentially war, complexity of the six-continent overnight supply chain, and
the social contract, the social cohesion of our society. I think finance is what
I'm going to talk about here and this is complicated for a lot of people. So let's
start with banks. Banks really are leveraged bond funds. For the longest
time we had a positive sloped yield curve, which meant that long duration
bonds like 7 years, 10 years, 30 years had higher interest rates than short-term
bonds or bills. That's because people pay more for uncertainty and risk. Now what
happened with COVID and what happened to our entire world the last 20 years is
every time we have an economic problem we respond by throwing central bank
created money and guarantees at it while keeping the same, the rest of the
economic system the same. So at one point in Europe, in the world in 2020, there
were 18 trillion dollars worth of bonds in the world that had negative interest
rates. And that's because when someone buys a bond, there's two things they
care about, three things. One is the credit worthiness of the entity of the
bond, like a vacuum cleaner or a US government have different credit
things. Two is the interest rate risk, like what's going on in the economy. If
the economy is going to slow, people will buy bonds because they expect interest
rates to go down. And then the third component is the credit worthiness, like
do I believe that this entity can pay off this bond? For the longest time, no one
is ever worried about the US government being able to pay its debt. And it's
still like 1% credit default swaps or something on the US government. I
don't think that'll ever happen. But what does happen is banks get deposits and
they pay very little money on those deposits and then they invest the money
sometimes with leverage, often with leverage, and they buy longer term
assets like mortgages or corporate bonds or other things. And they make money on
the spread. They are getting 5% and they're only paying out 1%. But what
happened with Silicon Valley Bank was as the Fed started to raise rates, the
short rates went up and up and up. And the securities they owned that they had
bought three years ago at low rates went down in value. And the depositors
wanted more money, more interest because two year rates are 4% or they
were before yesterday. So a lot of people started demanding more money on
their cash, their checking account. And they moved their money out to other
assets that would pay them more. Now when they moved the money out, these
banks no longer had the deposits in order to maintain the size balance sheet
that they had. And so they had to sell securities to raise cash. And so I
don't think this was a solvency issue like we had in 2008, 2009. It was a
liquidity issue. And I think the powers that be came in and bailed out the
depositors, which to be honest, I actually think that is moral hazard. If we
bail out, if wherever you deposit your money, you don't have to worry about it
because someone will bail it out. That's an element of moral hazard. So I
think they stemmed the bleeding for the short term. But what's going to happen
is as interest rates fluctuate, and right now we've had 100 basis point drop
in what the federal funds rate ending point on this tightening cycle will be,
is that more and more investors may move their money out of small and medium
sized banks towards banks that are JPMorgan, Citibank, and others because
they're totally guaranteed. I think another thing that's going to happen is
that the 250,000 FDIC guaranteed number is probably going to have to increase. So
I think this crisis will probably be contained. But now here's the interesting
part of this, this frankly. First of all, I don't think Europe is remotely out of
the woods on this. We've seen credit default swaps of one of Europe's largest
bank credit Swiss go to around 30%, meaning there's a 30% chance that they
default. What happened in Europe is they had a lot of the world's negative
yielding debt. So there are a lot of European banks that still own securities
that they bought at par or at 100 when rates were 1% or 0%. And now rates are
much higher. So they're underwater on those positions. And meanwhile, they've
had to tighten financial conditions because of inflation, because of the
biophysical shot across the bow from Putin, Ukraine, NATO situation, which, by
the way, Europe dodged a huge biophysical bullet because we had a warm
winter in Europe this year. And I don't think the Nord Stream or things like
that are going to be repaired, if ever, certainly not this year. So next winter
is going to be a big deal. Already, I think Germany had to create $2 trillion
of deficit to offset what happened this winter. So the bottom line is the
European banks now have, in my opinion, probably a larger systemic problem than
even these banks like Silicon Valley Bank, etc. But what this all means is that
eventually, every time we hit a financial crisis, and I would argue the time
interval between these financial crises will become smaller and smaller. The
choice is to let things fail, let things implode, or to backstop them. And I
think we've entered the financial big brother era, where governments, if they
can, will continue to backstop depositors, investors, assets. And this creates
a eventually this will create a too big to save moment. So Lehman Brothers back
14 years ago now was said to be a too big to fail security. It did fail. And what
happened was the the dominoes of deleverging in the financial system. At
some point in the not too distant future, we will have to bail out France or
Japan, or the aggregate of JP Morgan and other banks or something like that. Those
entities will be so large that the Fed, the Bank of England, the ECB together
couldn't bail them out. And then that's what kicks off the great
simplification for more people. I think there eventually will be bank failures,
because what we're doing is we're papering over our financial claims that we
can't meet with more financial claims. So, you know, I think it too big to save
moment is not here now. But in the same way that Russia and Ukraine situation was
a little bit of a dress rehearsal, a wake up call for people who are energy
blind and didn't understand the vital importance that not only energy has to
our economies, but cheap energy available at scale. I think this Silicon Valley
Bank is starting to wake people up a little bit to what is money? How safe is
it? Why? What are banks? And how do I earn interest? And people are starting to
ask those questions. And I think we've entered the biophysical vortex of
every crisis will be met by a larger and larger government response until
something breaks. And so listeners of this program just think about this that I
think this crisis will be contained, but the next one or the next one after
that might not be. And so I have to, I think we have to really think about the
safety of money. I care about how society is going to respond to this
snapping back of a rubber band one day. And also, you know, personally reflect
on is financial capital the best metric for one's self worth natural human
built and social capital are probably a better proxy and use your financial
capital now wisely to better set up your circumstances, your family, your
community for that time in the future when when this rubber band might might
snap back larger and faster in a way that governments may not have immediate
answers for. That's my two cents on this topic. By the time this is out, the world
may have changed, but this is kind of the biophysical backdrop of how I see the
banking situation. Have a good weekend. I will try to do this probability
identity and certainty, frankly, next week. Thanks.
