Lecture 9, Dynamics of Social Communication
Welcome back. Let's start now the first of two lectures that will concern the question of social communication and language in anthropoid primates.
We know by now that the roots of social learning, tool use and culture do occur in the behavior of other non-human anthropoids.
But what about the roots of language? Are they to be found in the patterns of social communication of monkeys and apes?
Or is it the case that we have finally found a unique behavior for humans?
Is language unique only to humans without any significant roots in monkeys and apes?
Humans, I think, hold language with special reverence, considering the whole list of behaviors that we engage in.
Language is special to us, to our self-conception and our self-definition.
Language, after all, is what has allowed a Shakespeare or a Milton to move humans emotionally.
But more than that, it allows us, just regular everyday people, to talk to each other, express our ideas, tell stories and be creative,
think back to the distant past and discuss the very distant past, as I have been doing in this lecture series,
plan way ahead and have a vision for the future.
Countless theories have been devised and countless volumes written about the fact or the idea that language is a Rubicon,
a dividing line that sets apart humans from all other animals.
And there have been many twists or plays on this notion.
The idea of animals talking, animal language is always popular, is a kind of theme,
whether it might be in children's cartoons, doctor do little movies or whatever.
Our goal in this lecture is to consider the range of natural, spontaneous, communicative behaviors in monkeys and apes,
and ask, well, how are these behaviors related to human language, if indeed they are related at all?
Let's start with the view that held sway to describe animal communication clear through the early 1980s.
This long held view was that monkeys and apes, like all other non-humans in the world, communicate to each other only their emotions or arousal states.
For example, if you have a group of monkeys crossing the plane and a predator is sighted by them, they may scream.
That scream, according to this view, would only indicate their fear, pure and simple.
If a group of apes had been making a long journey through the forest and sighted a tree that was rich with figs, they too might vocalize,
but that would be an indication of their excitement at the end of their hunger coming soon.
So this view was very limited to the transmitting of emotions.
Emotional communication was seen to preclude anything more complex, such as message sending about specific aspects of the environment.
This was held to be impossible for monkeys and apes.
By aspects of the environment, I mean things like specific information that might be given about predators, or foods,
or even identities of social companions, sex, age, rank, that type of thing.
Emotional communication, in addition, was considered to be outside the control of the vocalizer or communicator.
It was a reflex. In the very first seminar that I took in graduate school, the primatologist told the class that he was familiar with an ape that had been raised in a human home.
And this ape, when fairly young, would try to raid the cookie jar in the kitchen, like many other anthropoid youngsters that I have been acquainted with.
This ape would lift the lid of the cookie jar, reach in, see the cookies, and then clamp a hand over its mouth because it was vocalizing.
The point of the story was that the ape could not help an arousal sort of coming out of its mouth, and it tried to control that, which is an interesting thing cognitively.
But the point of the anecdote was that it could barely succeed in doing so.
Of course, it was trying to get away with stealing the cookies without being found out by the human caretaker, who might try to reduce its sweet intake for the day.
Now, this view also made a very clear claim that human language is so much more than emotional communication that human language is definitely unique.
Monkeys and apes may do interesting things emotionally, but it's of a different order.
We now have an updated view since the early 1980s, and this view shows that under certain circumstances, at least quite a few species of monkeys and apes may go beyond emotional communication to what we call referential communication.
Referential communication involves the ability to communicate specific information about precise aspects of the environment.
And again, we're talking about predators, food, and social variables.
Referential communication may occur along with emotional communication.
Surely, we're not replacing the ability to get across emotions and arousal states, but they go together, and furthermore, in some cases, it might be possible to control communication.
It is not, in this view, just a reflex.
Thirdly, then, what follows on from these two points is that we had a different opening up of ways to think about the relationship between monkey and ape communication and human language.
If we're starting to see a picture that's more complicated about monkey and ape referential communication, well, maybe there are roots of human language in what anthropoids are doing.
It wasn't the case that the idea of this rubicon was discarded, but rather that it was brought again into the light and opened up for questioning.
The first compelling case to be made for referential communication in the wild under a natural circumstance came about from a study of verbit monkeys in Kenya.
The situation was that researchers noticed there were multiple predators on verbit monkeys.
They live in relatively short grass savanna.
The study was carried out in Amboseli National Park, very same place where I did my research with baboons, so baboons and verbit co-occur in the same area.
This experimental work was done by Robert Safarth and Dorothy Cheney, and it was extremely important.
It showed that the monkeys make specific vocal calls, alarm calls, for specific predators, not just one fearful scream, but rather specific calls.
There are at least three major predators on verbit monkeys, and maybe more, depending on how you define a major predator.
Eagles, birds that fly down out of the sky, leopards that walk, of course, along the ground, and snakes.
So we're going to use these three predators as our examples.
If you as a researcher go to this population and you listen just with your ear to alarm calls made naturally when verbit monkeys cite these predators,
you can hear differences between what happens when they call for a leopard versus what happens when they call for an eagle.
Researchers before Safarth and Cheney had noted this, but these researchers went a step further and did an experiment in the field.
They combined field work and experimentation in a very interesting way to back up the idea that these were very specific, referential calls.
How did they do this? They used something called the playback technique.
So imagine researchers driving out in a jeep to find a verbit group and unloading behind them a very big tape recorder and concealing it in the shrubs and in the bushes.
They would then wait for a predator to appear, this might take some days, and when the monkeys were vocalizing, giving alarm calls naturally in the presence of a predator,
they would turn on the tape recorder and record the vocalizations.
They would then go on about their research, do other things, and some days later return and first of all assure themselves by looking around that no predators were present.
Then they would do what was called a playback, turn on the tape recorder and playback for the monkeys, screams they had made earlier under natural predator conditions.
I imagine this is surprising to the monkeys, but the important thing is what they did.
The key to this experiment is the verbit monkey response.
Let's say the researchers were playing back a call that had been made in the presence of a leopard.
Now you're having no leopard around, remember, but yet the verbit monkeys would run up into the trees, the correct appropriate response to avoid a leopard.
Conversely, if they were played back the screams they had made with an eagle, they would do the opposite, get themselves out of the trees where the eagle would come.
The response showed us, in other words, that information was encoded in those calls, because if only their emotion had been encoded we would not see differential response according to the type of vocalization played.
One of the most interesting features of this whole communication system of verbits to me is the fact that the calling emerges gradually during infant development, indicating to us some type of learning.
That is, we think that this is not an instinctual or innate response, but one that develops gradually, and we can tell that it's largely because of the presence of errors, mistakes that infant verbits make.
This should remind you of the nutcracking chimpanzees of Thai National Park that make errors when they're learning to coordinate hammers, nuts, and angles, telling us that that behavior was not instinctual.
Verbit monkeys, when they're little, make some interesting choices about when to alarm call.
Picture a verbit group sitting beneath an acacia tree having a relaxed grooming session.
Suddenly from the tree a leaf detaches and sort of falls, flows through the air.
Adults, of course, don't pay attention, infant verbits may alarm call to this.
The interesting thing, though, is that they give the same alarm call that adults give to eagles.
If infants look around and see a warthog approaching, a big, harmless, pig-like creature, they may give an alarm call to the harmless pig, but they do not give the eagle type of call, they give the leopard type of call.
This indicates to researchers that there's a process akin to overgeneralization going on.
You may know that when human infants are first learning language, if they learn the word for, let's say, dog, they may start overgeneralizing.
They see a goat, they may call it a dog.
They might even call a cat a dog in the beginning, and soon then they start to tease apart the concept and use it appropriately.
The same thing or something similar appears to be happening with infant verbit monkeys.
Gradually, their errors drop out and they begin to conform to adult usage patterns.
It seems to be an open question whether adults are actually guiding this process of conformity.
There's some evidence to indicate that adult calls may reinforce infant calls.
In other words, that adults may call also when infants make the right choice and call correctly, but not join in to the leaf call or the warthog call.
But the data aren't entirely clear on this.
We can say, though, that it's a process of learning involved and not hard wired in any way.
Since the verbit work was carried out and published, other examples of referential communication have been found as well.
Remember the macaques of Caio Santiago, the island off of Puerto Rico.
We've talked about them before.
It is the case that during fighting, juvenile rhesus macaques will scream, and through a similar process of experimentation and playback technique,
it has been discovered that those screams are examples of referential communication.
That is, those screams are not emotional, at least not purely emotional, but instead they convey or encode information about the opponent that the juvenile is facing during the fight.
They convey information about whether or not the opponent is a relative of the juvenile and what rank the opponent might hold,
not, of course, something like a number, first or second, but high rank or low rank.
We get a picture then, by looking at a variety of species, that there are other examples of referential communication.
It's not as if verbits are some kind of little geniuses in Africa doing something that no other primate does, no other non-human primate.
Yet we find the pattern suggests that referential communication, in the way I've been describing vocally, characterizes monkey communication, perhaps more than grade eight vocal communication.
At least that's what the data tell us right now.
We need more investigation.
This is a little bit puzzling.
We expected, given what we know of grade eight cognition, to find more referential communication than we have.
Now, this isn't to say that chimpanzees, for example, don't use vocal behavior in complicated ways.
When chimps are traveling, remember that they're organized not only into communities, but also into parties.
You may have parties going apart and coming together, so you can be fairly well apart, a good distance apart, from a close associate in a chimpanzee community.
It is the case that the hooting vocalizations that chimps make seem to tell each other who is traveling where.
In other words, they use voice recognition to identify individuals.
So that is interesting, whether you want to call that referential communication or not, maybe an open question.
So we were left with this new data overturning the emotional communication idea as the sole way that monkeys and apes communicate.
But we're not entirely sure, at least not yet, about the degree of referential communication in grade apes.
When body movements and gestures are studied, however, in addition to vocalizations, we begin to get a fuller picture of communication patterns in anthropoids.
Now, it seems to me that studying postures, body movements, gestures, non-vocal communication generally is a natural avenue to follow up when studying monkeys and apes.
But somewhat oddly, this has not been a particularly popular subject of study for primatologists.
The early field workers in the 1960s, whether they were studying chimps, gorillas or orangutans, certainly noted different head movements, arm extensions, any kind of whole body movement.
That might indicate that there was communication going on.
Lists were constructed of these different behaviors and associated with different species, and possible functions were discussed.
But the rich social context of these gestures and body movements were not studied, and for the most part today, they're still not studied.
This is a neglected topic within primatology.
We know a little bit more from studying captive apes, but little is really the right word.
Not too many people are investigating this topic.
Basic arm and head gestures may be used, we know, in various contexts to request food sharing, like a request for food begging, to request grooming, to indicate a desire for mating, to indicate a desire to start up or resume a play interaction.
A few lectures ago, I gave the example of the bonobo eliquia, giving three arm extension gestures to her mother in what I interpret as a request to return to her mother.
There are many examples like this.
I film these examples in the apes that I work with and try to analyze what they might mean.
The bonobo work is completed, the gorilla work is ongoing.
Iconic gestures also may occur in great apes.
Now, iconic gestures are a particular subcategory of gesture in which the gesture represents the emotion that is desired by a social partner.
It's a tracing in space of what somebody wants to happen.
Let me give you an example from humans.
Let's say you want to indicate to someone a small distance away from you who, for the sake of our example, is wearing headphones and can't hear you, that he should come towards you.
You might extend your arm towards this person and then trace a path in space back towards yourself, indicating come towards me, where you literally make a path that represents what you want him to do.
That is an iconic gesture.
Joanne Tanner, a primatologist, has good data to show that captive gorillas engage in iconic gesture.
A male may indicate by the way he moves his head and arms that he would like to mate with a particular female.
Again, we have a gap here in the existing data.
It is not clear whether wild apes use a lot of iconic gestures.
This is something that should be investigated.
One reason that may have slowed down the exploration of body movement and gesture in the wild is that it's only relatively recently that we've been able to really film with videotape, with sophisticated technology.
It's very, very clearly in some of these trying conditions in the forest where great apes live.
And it really is, if not absolutely necessary, extremely helpful to analyze these movements on videotape, which again is what I do.
I have to say that I'm teased a lot at home by my husband and sometimes my daughter for my great enthusiasm for what may appear to other people to be very minor.
I might even add trivial motions that to me have a lot of meaning because they may be gestures.
I'm thinking back to a time when the same infant Bonobo, Alikia, wanted to approach her half-brother.
They were in an outdoor enclosure.
The half-brother was in an elevated tire reclining in it on his back.
Alikia climbed up the cage mesh to quite near him, but instead of just jumping on him or clambering on him, she paused and extended her leg, then opened her foot.
Now apes can do this because apes have a big toe that's apart from the rest of the other toes, something like what our thumb can do.
And she spread apart her toes and held her leg out in that particular posture for just a minute.
When he indicated with his own body movement and expression that it was all right for her to proceed, she did so.
She climbed upon her brother and he gave her a hug.
Now I must have watched that sequence 20 times on this day because it indicated something to me that body movement and gesture is important in great apes.
But this is why I was teased.
I mean, how many times can you watch a Bonobo infant extend its leg and still care?
Well, I think it's exciting.
Analysis of gestural communication shows, of course, clearly, we expect this by now, that social communication is a dynamic process that unfolds between jointly acting partners.
This is a conclusion that you should expect me to make, judging by what I have already said about the way that tool using and particularly social learning and teaching occur and how we analyze and understand those behaviors.
The example I just gave you of the extended leg and the response is a good one to highlight the fact that you have mutually co-acting partners.
This is so clear with gestural communication because it's easy to see one animal moves, the other one responds.
The first one then changes what the second one does and so on in this sort of feedback loop.
It may not be so clear, studying vocal behavior, that there is this so-called dance of mutually constructed interaction, but I believe it is worthy of investigation.
Because, of course, gestures are visible to us, we can see these dynamic patterns easily, but the process I think should be studied in vocal communication as well.
Let's take, as an example, gibbons and siamangs.
Where they live in monogamous pairs through this enforced mate guarding that we have talked about in the past, in the forest, there's a phenomenon of great interest to those of us who study communication.
It is called vocal duetting.
And as the name indicates, these mated pairs sing together.
The male will sing part of a song, the female will then sing in turn taking sequence.
It is very much a duet, there's not overlap of the parts, there's clear turn taking.
In the forests of Asia, where there may be different families of gibbons or siamangs scattered around an area, there may even be competition for the airwaves, if you will.
Families have to take turns.
It's very interesting if one lives near or visits a zoo containing gibbons or siamangs.
If you can arrange to arrive early in the morning, 6, 7 or 8 o'clock in the morning, this vocal duetting can often be heard quite loudly and prominently.
It tends to be not confined only to the mornings, but a dawn type of chorus.
And it is the case that there can be what we might call vocal accommodation between the partners that is one changing its song in response to what the other is doing.
This is another example that brings us into the realm of non-visible, non-gestural communication.
I'm very interested to know if there's a phenomenon equivalent to what we call in human language, motherese.
Especially across cultures, linguists have found that when caretakers, mothers particularly, talk to their infants, they do so with particular vocal patterns and particular intonation.
Of course, this is a sort of common sense observation.
How many of us have walked up to a 3 or 6 or 9 month old infant and said, good morning, how are you finding the day?
You don't speak that way to infants.
You exaggerate your voice.
The vocal patterns and the pitch and the intonation are specifically aimed at talking to an infant.
And I won't try to replicate that for you here, but it is universal.
What you get in response is a response by the baby.
We talked about this a little bit before.
Before the age of words, it might be smiling, cooing, that type of thing.
Is there such a process in any way going on in monkeys and apes?
Not very clearly that we have found, but if we look not only vocally but gesturally, maybe there is some type of maternal accommodation to infants.
It's a question worthy of investigation.
The conclusion that I reach and many biological anthropologists also reach is that human language is unique in its complexity.
This is something that I'll delve into a little more deeply in the next lecture.
I want to make clear that my claim is not that human language is just like what monkeys and apes do.
That would be impossible to defend.
But I go on to say that, yes, roots of human language may be found in the dynamic social communication of other anthropoids.
I think it is much easier to see this if we free ourselves from focus on the units of communication.
And by units, I mean things like words, the words that I'm conveying information with today, or gestures.
Naturally, humans use words and we put them together in sentences.
I've been using gestures over the course of these lectures, but they're different gestures than monkeys and apes might make.
And if we just compare the units, well, we get off track, I think, and we start to see a lot of differences.
Perhaps better would be to compare the active patterns, the mutually dynamic patterns, and what they're meant to accomplish.
Many, many examples that I have given you in this lecture on social communication relate to social cohesion, social coordination.
Again, we're right back to the fundamental concept of sociality.
How do animals communicate in order to keep themselves on track with each other, keep groups or subgroups together, inform each other about important events, important dangers, and so forth.
Here is a definite area of continuity, commonality, the function of the communication that is going on socially with monkeys, apes, and humans.
My conclusion about continuity of communication across all anthropoids is not uncommon within biological anthropology.
I'm here, of course, to represent the subdiscipline to you, but I should say that it is not the dominant view in the world of social sciences and the world of linguistics and the world of philosophy.
Despite these data that I have talked about that we've amassed in the last 20 years, the dominant view still harks back to the concept of a Rubicon, the idea that we're a part, said a part as humans because of our language.
And it's actually a lot of fun to be engaged in this debate because it is correctly characterized as such between those who embrace continuity and those who embrace the Rubicon.
The best example of a book that I can recommend to you to read from the opposing side is by Stephen Pinker, who has become quite popular and well-known through his writings and his media appearances.
The book I'm recommending is called The Language Instinct, and its title tells you that it considers human language a biologically innately ingrained characteristic, not the sort of emergent social phenomenon that I have been talking about.
So I urge you to read not only the examples of the biological anthropology view that I've included in suggested readings, but the opposite side as well, because that's enjoyable to do.
We have one more big piece of the communication and language puzzle to examine, and we'll do that next. We will talk about a very special group of great apes that can shed new light on the question of the evolution of human language.
Let's launch now into the second part of social communication and language.
Having learned that monkeys and apes living under natural conditions do use various types of communication to bring together the members of their social groups and do so through both emotional and referential communication, we're going to turn our gaze to a very different type of non-human anthropoid.
A fascinating window into the minds of other anthropoids is available through research with what we call enculturated great apes.
Now, enculturated great apes are those that live in some type of an enriched captive environment. This might be a human home, or more likely some type of a home like a trailer that has been specifically refurbished to allow an ape to live there.
More often, it's a type of research laboratory that is set up to house great apes.
Now, these great apes have been all different species, gorillas, bonobos, chimpanzees, and orangutans. What unites these types of approaches that tend to focus on linguistic abilities is that the great apes have very extensive, emotionally-based interactions with human caretakers.
Of course, there has to be a team of caretakers. No one person could, around the clock, care for such a great ape, but there tends to be between a given single great ape and a single human being, a particular bond, and then other people around as well.
Now, I'll give you examples of who these great apes are and what they're telling us in just a few minutes, but I want to flush out for you what this environment is really like.
It's so different than the forests of Africa or Asia or even a standard zoo. An enculturated great ape may be fed for its lunch, fruits, and vegetables, but then may request, using the language abilities available to it, a strawberry milkshake and be brought a strawberry milkshake for dessert.
After lunch, the ape and the human may take a short walk, get into a car, and take a drive around the campus or the research zoo. Alternatively, if it's a nice day, they may go on a hike with the ape wearing a small backpack and have a picnic or a cookout in the woods together.
After such an expedition, the ape could come back to where it's living and look through some picture books, possibly even request to watch television or a videotape.
As you can see from some of these examples, toys, tools, human material culture tends to surround these great apes in their lives. Other examples might be more in diverse types of toys, using scissors to cut something. This is the ape using the scissors.
One of these enculturated great apes had a pet, kitten. These apes may look forward to celebrating holidays or birthdays with parties. I know of two such enculturated great apes who quite recently have begun playing a piano in at least an ape way of playing the piano.
The whole point of doing this, of bringing apes into this enriched environment, is to remember that communication is a social phenomenon, something we talked about in the last lecture, and to make the educated guess that the best abilities would be brought out by placing the ape into an enriched environment and making sure that it has an exciting, interesting life, a lot to talk about, perhaps.
So how are these language abilities or the potential abilities of such great apes explored? Enculturated great apes are usually exposed to human speech, human gestures in some way, or human devised symbol systems.
This is, after all, a project or a series of projects that are driven by human research, and it tends to be the case that interstitial communication is focused upon. Human to ape, ape to human. Some of these projects bring in aspects that show us the ability of ape, ape communication as well, but pretty much it's a human ape interchange that is getting the attention.
The symbol systems used may involve, for one thing, a version of American sign language, the language of the deaf in this country. Alternatively, in other cases, symbolic languages have been devised, created, or invented specifically for work with these apes.
The key is always the symbol. Iconic gestures we talked about last time are a good example of something that's not a symbol. Iconic gestures represent faithfully in reality, what they're meant to refer to, and symbols, of course, are abstract with that link broken between anything that they refer to.
I can say bread in English, pan in French, means the same thing. There's nothing about B-R-E-A-D that indicates bread. Same thing for any type of symbol. Three research projects illustrate what can happen when a version of American sign language is taught to great apes.
Now, American sign language is abbreviated ASL, so I may use that abbreviation in this lecture. It's very important for me to say a version of ASL is taught to apes. It's important because ASL is not finger spelling or some motion of the hands that, in a simplified way, get somebody else to understand while I'm pointing over here I must mean this.
No, it's a full, complete human language with full grammar syntax allows for reference to the past, reference to the future, complex storytelling with rich details.
It is only fair to note that ASL is just as rich a language as English, Italian, Spanish, Chinese, any other language, and therefore it would be wrong of me to suggest that any ape could learn ASL.
If you read that claim in textbooks or hear it on television, it's a shorthand and I believe in an accurate one, a wrong one, because of course no ape, no ape that we know of can learn all of English, French, Spanish, or Chinese and by the same token could not learn ASL.
What they can do is learn specific signs used in ASL or a modified version of ASL. The three projects that I've mentioned each focus on a different type of great ape.
Washoe is a female chimpanzee that has been reared for decades now having been taught a version of ASL. She may be the most famous of these great apes I'll be talking about today.
However, she may be eclipsed, she hasn't already in the future, by Coco, a female gorilla who's been raised in the same method being taught ASL. Have you heard of Coco? She recently appeared on America Online and was available to chat with internet customers back and forth.
She is experiencing now her 30th anniversary of using ASL. Thirdly, an orangutan in this case, unlike the other two cases, a male named Chantek, has been tutored in ASL in a similar manner.
All three of these great apes have achieved a good size vocabulary of ASL signs that they use proficiently and with ease. So I'm talking about hundreds of signs. Now you might imagine that most of these signs are food signs.
I mentioned that these animals are taught and tutored and this is quite true. They do in fact respond. If you hold up an apple, they will sign apple. If you hold up a banana, they'll sign banana. But it is not the extent of their capabilities. They go much beyond that.
They can use verbs, for example. When Washo, the chimpanzee, was an infant and was being taught, one of the first signs that she used reliably was open. She would stand in front of a door between one room and another and ask for it to be open for her.
The words good and bad are used by ASL apes to describe in some cases their own behavior if they've misbehaved or if they're trying not to misbehave.
At the very first lecture, the very beginning, I referred to an ape that when asked what it might want for its birthday, responded champagne. That refers to Coco, the gorilla.
I can vouch for the fact that the only time I've ever brought and distributed into my classes the transcript of a Playboy article was when Playboy sent a journalist out to interview Coco.
And one of the questions he asked was, what would you like for your birthday? The interview really brought home for me the fact that Coco doesn't just use ASL to get food or any kind of reward.
She comments. She will start conversations. The same is true as well for Washo and Chantek.
So in addition to a vocabulary size of some impressive significance, these ape pupils are able to use signs in creative and innovative ways, innovative ways.
Coco will provide us with another good example. Someone brought her a ring. She did not have the word for a ring in her vocabulary. She looked at it and signed finger bracelet.
She made up that phrase to describe very well, I think, what a ring looks like. Washo, the chimpanzee, was out for a walk with a human caretaker. They came to a pond and on it sat some kind of a bird, an egret or a swan.
Washo did not have those words in her vocabulary, but signed water bird. So there's something going on in the minds of these apes that allows them to conceptually create new phrases. They do walk up to people and start conversations.
So this is a creative process that goes on in their minds.
The focus of study, as I hinted, has been ape to human language abilities, but the Washo project in particular has shown that great apes will use ASL in communicating with each other.
I can mention two ways in which the project has demonstrated this.
Washo lives with a small group of chimpanzees in a research lab. She is studied by Roger Fouts and his team of researchers. Occasionally, the researchers will leave, of course, and turn on videotapes and be able to capture the behaviors and actions and linguistic abilities of these chimps in the absence of humans.
And as they interact and play and sometimes fight, these chimps occasionally will use ASL signs to each other. It is most clearly not the case that the chimps are in some way just humoring the researchers and that the language has become important to them too when they use it, even though quite obviously they wouldn't do such a thing in the wild.
The second example occurred when Washo adopted an infant chimpanzee called Lulis.
The researchers realized that here was a fantastic opportunity to see if a mother chimp would in some way guide or teach the acquisition of ASL signs working with her offspring.
And in fact this did happen. The researchers decided that they themselves, the humans, would refrain from using ASL around Lulis so that the little baby could not pick up ASL from humans.
Washo sometimes, not a lot, but sometimes would literally mold the hands of Lulis, her offspring, into the correct configuration for a sign, much as had happened with her when she was tutored.
So this is a good example harking back to our discussion of teaching, of clear teaching in a captive great ape.
You will not be surprised to learn that conflict exists about the meaning of the data from these three projects.
Part of the conflict rests with the question of the role that human teaching has played in the success of the great apes.
It's undeniable after all that this whole project, all three of the projects, but the whole enterprise is human engineered, dependent upon humans and human intervention and human teaching these chimps what to do.
Critics claim furthermore that the researchers read far too much into what the apes do, that they exaggerate or inflate the abilities of the apes.
This is a difficult area because I mentioned that these projects tend to revolve around a single individual who may decide to raise an ape from infancy and these apes we know are long lived.
All three of these projects now have been going on for decades so that there's been strong emotional bonds between the humans and the apes.
So the question is what danger might there be of anthropomorphic interpretation of the apes utterances.
Let's consider Washoe's utterance, water bird, using her hand to make the sign.
The project researchers say, as I did, well this is creative, bringing together two words to make up a phrase.
Critics say, but how do you know that? Couldn't Washoe simply have been commenting water and commenting bird, but not meaning to create something new by putting them together?
It's indeed quite hard to tell. The researchers of course are not silent, they respond.
They respond that these critics hold a double standard for evaluating linguistic abilities of enculturated apes on one hand and linguistic abilities of human children on the other.
The researchers say, look you're just taken in by this idea, this assumption of a rubicon between humans and everybody else.
So you make it impossible for the apes to convince you, whereas when little children make mistakes or are ambiguous in their utterances, everybody's ready to jump in and to credit them with linguistic ability.
Let's think of a human baby, 12 months, 18 months, who is uttering a lot of two word utterances.
Mommy sock, let's say. You have an infant walk up to you, you're the mom, and say mommy sock.
Well the mother is likely to say on Monday, I understand my child and I know the context in which my child was speaking.
On that day we had lost the child's sock and all of a sudden he found it by searching through the couch.
So he came up to me and said mommy sock and it meant, and I knew it meant, mommy I found a sock.
A few days later the child comes up and says it again, mommy sock.
But this time the mother says, ah today I was wearing brightly colored socks with cat faces on them.
And I know my child and I know the context and there had been no lost sock today.
And today my child meant, mommy I like your sock.
Would anybody really argue with this interpretation by the mother?
This is an expansion and an analysis that is accepted.
But when apes say water bird, we really parse it apart and say we must have proof and how do we know?
So as with other areas that we have previously explored, we have an open question and we have academic conflict with the data.
Let's move to a fourth type of project with enculturated great apes.
This project tells us what happens when a very different symbol system is used with a different kind of great ape, a bonobo.
We're going to travel together in this discussion to a research center in Georgia that is run by Dwayne Rumbau and Sue Savage Rumbau.
It is the place where I studied gestures with the infant Alikia.
So remember my having talked about.
The major research project that is ongoing at this research center is the work with bonobos and what are called lexograms.
Lexograms are symbols and they are arrayed on computer keyboards and portable keyboards.
Computers of course tend to be set up in labs and fairly tethered to a desk.
And when these apes are worked with they may go out in the forest and in the woods and in the cars and for walks and drives.
So there are portable replicas of these keyboards that have lexograms on them.
So what's a lexogram?
Well the fact that it's a symbol will tell you a lot.
I'm just going to make up some examples for you.
If an apple is to be represented a lexogram might just be a spiral shape.
No representation of an apple.
It's not red, it's not round, there's no stem.
If a particular location in the research lab is represented in a lexogram let's say Matata's room.
The name of an ape where Matata stays her bedroom.
It might be a blue triangle and her room is neither blue nor a triangle.
There are lexograms in the hundreds.
But let's start at the beginning and in the beginning this female ape Matata was being taught.
This is important.
It was being taught by the researchers how to use lexograms in relatively similar ways as to what had been going on in the ASL projects.
But the key is tutoring, rewards, so forth.
Unfortunately Matata was not an apt pupil in this particular task.
She was failing.
She did not produce and comprehend lexograms very well by producing, I mean pressing them in some sensible manner.
Well, at the time that she was undergoing this training she had her adopted infant with her.
His name is Kanzi.
Kanzi was scampering around playing, not particularly paying what researchers thought was very clear attention, occasionally watching.
But this was not part of the research project.
He was not a subject.
He was not tutored.
However, much to the surprise of Savage Rumboud and the researcher here, it became quickly clear that Kanzi could excel at both the production of utterances using lexograms and the comprehension of symbols in complicated ways.
I want to talk with you a bit about Kanzi's accomplishments.
He is able to use a lexogram keyboard to make requests, to request to go places to get certain foods.
He will do this quite aptly and stringing together one, two, I don't know, maybe three lexograms.
My first encounter with Kanzi occurred in 1997.
I had read about him.
I had seen TV documentaries about him.
I was very excited.
I was going to start my research on gestures with the other bonobos.
And I wanted to meet Kanzi, the star of the eighth inculturated world.
And I wanted to bring him a present.
Savage Rumboud said that he really liked balls.
So I went and bought a small one and carried it on the plane with me.
And I got there and I met him.
And the first thing he requested of me, using a lexogram board, of course this is not vocal, visitor chase.
He did not know my name.
He wanted me to play with him and I did run back and forth with him.
I then informed him, vocally, using English, I have a surprise for you, a gift for you.
He excitedly went to the lexogram board.
He looked me over and there was a little bulge in my side jeans pocket where the ball was.
He looked at it and he touched the lexogram for egg.
Question mark?
Interesting choice, isn't it?
It looked a bit like an egg.
It wasn't an egg.
There I felt, you know, deflated.
Oh, he wants an egg.
I don't have an egg.
He then went on to make some other questions of me.
But I thought that was very, very interesting.
He didn't know me and he was able to engage in this very interesting exchange with me.
He did like the ball, by the way.
Conzie, we also know in addition to having facility with lexograms,
comprehends novel requests and spoken English.
Savage Rumbaugh did a very detailed scientific study of this where she would ask him to do things
that he would not have heard before in English and would hide her face so that he couldn't cue from her face.
He couldn't get unintentional cues.
She would say things, unusual things, like take the pine needles and put them in the refrigerator
or other things like take the hot dog out of the microwave and put it in the bathroom.
These are realistic examples that they're not precisely the sentences.
And he would do them at a very high rate of success.
Work with Conzie is widely considered the most convincing demonstration of language abilities
in any non-human anthropoid, not just in culture-rated apes, but anybody.
The Conzie project shows that training is not necessary for linguistic skills to emerge.
This is terrifically important and the critical point.
What happened was that Conzie absorbed all of this because of his social ties
and his interest in the enriched social environment.
The project suggests that the rearing environment is critically important for fostering linguistic skills,
not only in humans, we've known that for a long time, but in great apes and who knows what other animals.
It was very surprising to anthropologists that this happened with Conzie.
However, is there a consensus about the Conzie data? Of course not.
Results of this research are hotly debated.
What do the critics say? Critics charge that, all right, Conzie has not been trained or tutored,
not like Washoe, Chante and Coco the Gorilla, but it's wrong to say, according to the critics,
that there are no rewards involved. Conzie's rewards may be different.
They may not be giving a banana or an apple, but may be social.
After all, the critics say, this whole system again is driven by humans.
We can't apply any of this work to human evolution.
There were no human rewarders or human social companions, much less human tutors,
than the human evolutionary context.
Again, the defenders come back. Defenders point out that human caretakers surround children
learning language and help them and guide them.
We don't tend to say to our children, well, the future tense of this verb is such and such,
the subjunctive is this, be sure you get that right, except when they're older and grammar classes,
but when they're growing up, when my daughter, Sarah, was younger, she would say,
as many children will, I go to the store. I go to school instead of I went.
I didn't say, take her aside and say, now until, you know, you say this correctly,
you can't have dinner, you have to say I went, but I did model for her the right thing.
Right after she would say that, I'd say, oh, you went to the store?
Well, today I went to the office. And yet, if someone does that in relationship to an ape,
of course, the critics say, well, this, you know, makes the data not as important.
Defenders further note that the Kanzi project is critical for pointing to the importance of the rearing environment.
It's not just that the human species can mold and change abilities of children coming up in learning language,
but rather can mold and change the abilities of great apes.
There's something about the great ape mind.
In other words, it has the capacity for all of this previously undiscovered stuff,
not only abstract symbols on computers, but to really work with and comprehend human speech.
I should add at this point that great apes cannot produce human speech.
They are physiologically constrained from doing so by the form of their vocal tract.
So they cannot talk. You know, the question, of course, that cons many of us is,
what if they had a different vocal tract? But that's the stuff of another lecture.
Taken together then, the abilities of monkeys and apes in the wild and in these enculturated environments
do shed light on the roots of human language.
We really can pull out some patterns, looking back over the course of the last two lectures.
The enculturated ape data is very significant, but it should not be seen in isolation.
It needs to be taken together with the first piece of the puzzle, the field research with monkeys and apes,
and the captive research that's still relatively spontaneously done without human intervention.
I'd like to suggest six points in conclusion that discuss together the roots of human language.
First, just as with other behaviors that we've been considering all along,
language does not, to me, seem to be present in humans, but absent in other anthropoids.
The data, to me, suggests instead a continuum.
More elaborated language abilities, certainly in humans, less elaborated at the other end.
I titled my first book, The Information Continuum, and I still think that that is a useful concept.
I don't think that language is a special marker of humanity,
in that it is so different than anything else.
Secondly, human language and social communication of monkeys and apes seem to have, broadly speaking,
a similar function, the coordination of social behavior.
Here, I think, is real continuity, whether we're talking about monkey vocalizations, ape gestures,
enculturated ape utterances, or what we humans do.
Third, human language and social communication of monkeys and apes may involve specific environmental reference,
in addition to emotional communication.
We know this from the data offered in the previous lecture, specifically referring to monkeys in the wild.
Fourth, human language and monkey and ape social communication arise via social interaction,
and emerge during social interaction.
That occurs with development, with infancy, and being a juvenile.
It's a process, in other words.
As you've heard me say so many times by now, a mutual dynamic process.
Next, human language is, of course, species specific and unique.
There's no question about that, but what we really want to say is,
what are we really meaning by that?
Is it unique in a significant way?
Here's a way in which it's unique.
We put together our symbols in sentences.
Okay, no other species does that, so our sentences are unique.
But is it enough to really talk about sentences, syntax, the way the parts are arranged in the sentence?
Or is it better to go further, and I think it is better to go further?
Of course, human language allows us to do more things than social communication of other species.
We've talked about this before, and this is the point number six.
We can talk in much more detail, more vividly, more complexly, with our rich grammar available to us about the past and the present.
We can construct highly complex narratives, and I do think that these grammatical arrangements are important,
but to stop there and to stop with the human uniqueness, I think,
misses a tremendously fascinating view into what monkeys and apes do.
So lastly, my take on the matter is that our language differs from monkey and ape communication quantitatively by degree,
not qualitatively, not by kind or by nature.
We are at the point now where it would be helpful to consider the time period of human evolution
and to begin to look at those species of anthropoids that are our direct human ancestors.
And it is to these ancestors that we will turn in the next lecture.
Lecture 11, Highlights of Human Evolution.
Okay, let's set for ourselves the task in this lecture of exploring the highlights of the period of human evolution
and highlights they really will be.
It can't be otherwise because we have a good four million years to cover in 30 minutes.
Of course, in universities, discussing four million years on this topic would take at least a semester.
Yet I'm convinced that it is important to include a lecture such as this.
We have been saying that great apes and to a lesser extent monkeys are humans closest living relatives.
That is true. It is only true because the human ancestors that lived millions of years ago in the past are extinct.
But we want to understand who they were, what behavior they engaged in.
In other words, we want to fill in that gap in time that we have not yet considered at all.
The grouping called anthropoids then includes a type of primate we haven't discussed in any depth, the hominids.
The hominids include all living humans, us.
We, of course, are classified as homo sapiens and also includes all the extinct human ancestors.
We're talking here then about, in addition to living people, all of the forms on that lineage that is entirely belonging to the human evolution time period,
the direct lineage that split off from the common ancestor and led to ourselves.
Hominids first appear in the fossil record between about four, five, five and a half million years ago in Africa.
Very recent information may push this date of initial appearance of hominids back to six million years ago.
But the closer we get to five and a half and six million years ago, the more fragmentary is the evidence, the bones that we find in the fossil record.
So it is safe to say four, five million years ago for this onset of the human evolutionary period.
Now, biological anthropologists work together in research teams with geologists, archaeologists and others to uncover not only bones,
but also material cultures, stone tools, whatever we can find to explain the anatomy, behavior and culture of these hominids.
This is very much then an anthropological enterprise joined in with other disciplines as well.
We know that the first hominids evolved from a common ancestor with great apes that is clear to us.
Early hominids, the very first forms, are noted especially for one anatomical suite of features that sets them apart from the great apes.
And this is bipedalism. Bipedalism, of course, is walking a wreck.
Hominids, as far as we are able to tell, could do that from the very beginning.
And of course, great apes can't. Let me clarify about great apes and bipedalism.
Let's say you bring a lot of bananas into a chimpanzee community and the individual chimps are happy about this and greedy and they want to scoop up a lot of bananas
and they want to use both hands to carry the bananas away.
So they put the bananas in their arms and then they're forced to try to walk upright because they can't use their arms to locomote.
They can, in a fashion, in a sense, walk for short distances in a kind of modified bipedality.
But their knees are bent. Their center of gravity is very different than ours.
And the walk that results because they cannot straighten their knee is shuffling side to side.
It doesn't really look a whole lot like the way that we walk and they tire quickly.
The bipedalism we're talking about in early hominids appears to be full bipedalism.
We'll talk about a debate, of course, about this, but I'm talking about,
Skeletally, the ability to bear weight through the lower limbs is there in hominids as far as we can tell.
So yes, there has been a redesign of the skeleton in these earliest hominids away from the type of body that great apes have.
Of course, we know that great apes are adapted to hang beneath branches.
This is a very different skeleton and muscle plan than is required for bipedalism.
With our modern human bipedalism, we have legs that are longer than our arms.
We have weight bearing knee and hip extending our weight through our body and being able to walk forward.
We have a certain center of gravity.
Now, the early humans, early hominids, may be a kind of mix of ape and fully modern characteristics,
but they are bipedal and this is the key thing to know about them right in the beginning.
Various types of hominids coexisted throughout this whole time period that we're talking about.
If we take four or five million years as our starting point and we continue our study up through 30,000 years ago,
multiple hominids coexisted at every point through this period.
We understand now the process of human evolution resembles a bush rather than a ladder.
A ladder indicates that you would have one form replaced in the future by another, replaced by another in a linear way.
This is not what we now understand to have happened.
The bush indicates that multiple coexisting forms were the rule throughout human evolution.
By the way, I mentioned 30,000 years ago as an end point.
This, of course, does not mean to imply that evolution stopped at 30,000 years ago.
In fact, we're evolving today, but that academically we more or less arbitrarily bound the discipline of human evolution in that way.
And we find that at that point, 30,000 years ago, we modern humans become the sole existing hominid.
The others die out and disappear.
Let's consider the first two million years of hominid evolution, by which I mean between four and two million years ago.
We know more about the anatomy of hominids alive at that time than we do about behavior or their sociality.
Two anatomically different types of early hominids have been so far discovered.
All of this is in Africa.
No early hominids in the time period that we're talking about have been found outside of Africa to date.
So these two different forms had things in common.
You already know by definition, essentially, these early hominids are bipedal.
The second thing that unites them is that they had relatively small brains.
In fact, their brains had not expanded in size beyond that of what we find in great apes.
This itself surprised anthropologists.
We, along with almost everybody else, expected the revolution in this early human lineage to occur in the brain.
We thought that we'd be big-brained from the beginning compared to great apes.
Well, we weren't bipedal from the beginning, yes.
The so-called grassal forms of hominids were the first type in my discussion.
Grassal is a term that simply means light slender in build.
The skeleton of grassal hominids was relatively generalized as opposed to specialized, and we'll see what that means in a minute.
The so-called robust hominids, by contrast, were robust, heavy in build, not so slender.
But specializations of the head and the face.
I'm talking here about actual bony crests and ridges, at least in the males, for the attachment of big, powerful muscles
to move the jaws, big teeth, altogether a kind of crushing and grinding complex that very clearly indicates to us
that the robust hominids ate things that were tough to grind up, tough to crush.
Nuts, hard fruits, that kind of thing.
So, in essence, we know that grassal and robust forms had different diets.
Dietary divergence appears to explain their different anatomies.
The generalized face for softer foods, maybe meat, maybe fruits.
We know this, by the way, not just from looking at the skeletal material and the degree of specialization versus generalization,
but also through wear patterns on the teeth.
These prehistoric teeth can be looked at under special microscopes,
and the pitting and the gouging in their wear patterns can be matched against the teeth wear of current living mammals.
So there's an interesting integration of technology here.
By the way, there is another difference between the grassal and the robust hominids.
As far as we know, and we're pretty sure of this, the robust forms went extinct.
They lived a long time, but the robust forms did not seem to, in any way, generate later forms.
There doesn't seem to be any evolutionary relationship between the robust forms and what came later.
This may well be because they were so specialized and so dieterrally constrained
that they could not adapt to changing environmental conditions.
They were simply not flexible.
Let's talk then about the grassal hominids.
One of the grassal forms in this early time period is most likely known to you, nicknamed Lucy.
Lucy and her kind lived in Africa between four and three million years ago.
Let's talk about Lucy more correctly with a scientific name, a name in Latin.
Her name and the name of her kind is Australopithecus afarensis.
This name means southern ape man of Afar region of Ethiopia.
Australopithecus is a word that's easily glossed.
Australo means south, like Australia.
Pythicus refers to ape man.
Afar is a region of Ethiopia, which is a country, of course, in East Africa.
We know a great deal about Lucy's anatomy.
When I speak about Lucy now, I mean the single fossil that was discovered in the 1970s
that was nicknamed Lucy after the playing of a famous Beatles song at the research site.
And we are going to use the name Lucy when we mean the single fossil
and Australopithecus afarensis when we mean others of this type of hominid.
Lucy herself was small.
She may have been about three and a half feet tall, possibly four feet tall.
She weighed approximately 65 pounds and was likely around 20 years of age when she died.
Experts can read the bones and tell these statistics, or at least within a reasonable approximation.
By the way, the determination was made quite early that she was female.
Hence the name Lucy was appropriate.
There is a minority of anthropologists, though, who refuse to believe that she's female
and go around calling this Luke.
We don't hear about this too often, but they're a small contingent who don't think it's so clear
that Lucy is a female.
Most do accept this, however.
One of the raging questions about Lucy's adaptation is, yes, she was bipedal,
but how did she really walk?
What did that bipedalism look like?
Some anthropologists think that Lucy walked in a fully modern way
and her discoverer, Donald Johansson, is among this group.
They say that her gait, her way of walking, is modern.
Others, however, other anthropologists believe that she was more of a mosaic type of form
in that her anatomy, being so early on, reflects a kind of mix of human-like traits and ape-like traits
and that, in fact, judging from where she lived in East Africa,
she's likely to have been able to climb and use trees as well as walk along the ground.
These anthropologists say that her gait was not modern.
Again, the bipedalism itself is not what's being questioned.
One of the anthropologists who holds this dissenting view said that if you look at Lucy's pelvis, her hips,
yeah, she looks bipedal, but look also at toes and fingers, length of toes, length of arms.
There are various features that look as if Lucy might have been adapted to use the trees
more than just walking in a modern way.
Another source of data that is relevant here is a set of fossilized footprints that have been found
associated with Australopithecus afarensis, not Lucy herself, dated to 3.6 million years ago
at a site in Tanzania.
So we have Lucy discovered in Ethiopia fossilized footprints from a similar time period,
a little bit south in Tanzania.
By the way, the story of the discovery of these footprints, it's a trail of footprints
that was fossilized because those who made the footprints apparently walked across a plane
in between two volcanic eruptions.
So we have volcanic eruption one, soft ash is laid down.
Sometime after this, hominids walked across a plane and lots of other animals did too.
Secondly, and a pretty interesting coincidence, I guess another volcano and seals this layer.
Seals it so that it's preserved for millions of years.
So this discovery in Tanzania came about when two researchers were visiting Mary Leakey's archaeology camp.
They were excavating in this area.
And the headlines, of course, say prominent researchers discover footprints.
What actually happened is that two of the researchers were, if not bored, looking for entertainment
in the middle of remote Africa and picked up a ball of elephant dung
and started playing catch with it and throwing it around.
And one accidentally knocked down the other with this ball of dung
and the other fell into a fossilized footprint and voila, the discovery was made.
You don't read this in the newspapers necessarily.
The fossilized footprints are interesting.
They show what appears to be pretty much a bipedal foot
that indicates that maybe there could have been a modern gate by Lucy and her associates.
I have purchased a set of replica, obviously, of these footprints
and they come in the mail and I can take them around portably to my students.
And what you see is a clear human foot in that the big toe is in line with the others.
I mentioned before that great apes have big toes that stand apart that can grasp and cling.
These footprints indicate that the big toe of Australopithecus afarensis was human-like.
There's a human-like arch and a human-like heel strike in evidence as well.
We know little, however, about the behavior of Lucy or of any Australopithecus afarensis.
There are no fossilized stone tools associated with Lucy.
Organic tools, of course, would not fossilize.
If Lucy had been termite fishing with grass stems, grass wands,
we would not know because these tools would not stay in a fossil record.
They would disintegrate.
Most anthropologists conclude that this is how many likely used tools
in ways that modern chimps do with organic tools.
But this is a speculation.
It's based on similar brain size, that type of thing.
If I wanted to play devil's advocate, I could say,
well, look at the bonobo.
The bonobo doesn't use tools in foraging similar brain size.
An open question.
We have no way of knowing what types of social groups this hominy lived in.
We can only speculate.
All right, let's move along a little bit in this human evolutionary timeline.
A turning point occurred in human evolution at about two and a half million years ago.
At about this time, hominids that were more like modern humans
than the ones we've been talking about appeared.
And they are classified now as homo in our own genus.
The grouping homo is referred to as a genus,
and the sapiens that we are called is the species designation.
When homo first appeared, this is homo habilis, not homo sapiens.
There were some anatomical changes to mark them off from Lucy and her kind.
The brain is bigger, expanded now.
The teeth are smaller.
There are some other changes.
But the real action, the evolutionary action, is really in the behavioral realm
because now we have the advent of stone tool technology.
The modification of stone tools, for example, big change.
Remember that chimps did not modify stone tools.
And you have now a simple type of stone tool industry
where rocks like, let's say, quartz or church would be taken
and flakes struck off them by another rock
so that you would have flakes that were sharp,
and then the core tool as well.
Not a very diverse tool kit, but still the beginnings of a stone tool technology.
Surely these stone tools indicate a heightened ability
to alter the physical environment in which these hominids live.
But this very early homo, just before 2 million years ago,
you begin to see a change.
You begin to get animal bones and stone tools together in the fossil record.
We don't mean to indicate that hunting was occurring
by this bringing together of bones and stones,
but we do think that the hominids were processing carcasses,
perhaps scavenging, coming upon the dead animals,
giraffe, antelope, elephant, whatever,
and using the stone tools to process the carcasses, eat the meat.
So this is a new level of adaptation, behavioral adaptation.
Yet another turning point occurred later after 2 million years ago,
not much after, with a hominid called Homo erectus.
This is a very interesting hominid.
Many things happened at this time period.
I will highlight only a few for you.
Homo erectus left Africa.
It dispersed to other continents.
Of course, some populations stayed in Africa,
but there was this sort of budding off process
where there was long distance travel.
Some populations stayed behind, others moved.
Certainly, the continent of Asia was well colonized by Homo erectus.
We have good sites, some in caves in central parts of Asia.
Some people believe that Europe was colonized by Homo erectus
at the later time period of its reign.
Certainly, at 500,000 years ago,
we're still in Homo erectus time period now.
There are some suggestions, although people differ on this point,
about the colonization of Europe.
Well, major developments with technology occurred with Homo erectus,
a more sophisticated toolkit.
One of the major tools that African Homo erectus manufactured
and used is called the hand axe.
This is a teardrop shaped stone tool
that fits comfortably into the hand,
can be used in various ways for processing carcasses,
processing vegetables.
Many anthropologists believe that the origins of big game hunting,
coordinated hunting of animals,
and the origins of control of fire occurred with Homo erectus
in the later period, not so much close to 2 million years ago,
perhaps closer to 500,000 years ago.
So again, the theme continues,
the ability to use your brain and your anatomy
together to master aspects of the environment.
Think of what the control of fire could mean
in addition to lengthening the amount of daylight available.
This would allow hominids to cook.
This would be a tremendous adaptation in defense against predators,
possibly in hunting other animals.
We know that chimpanzees do hunt.
They hunt, we haven't had a chance to talk about this,
they hunt for prey like small monkeys,
but they don't do so in a very big scale.
These are small animals and males may cooperate to hunt,
but we're talking about a whole different scale now,
where big organized groups will go after large scale game,
big animals repeatedly over and over,
and it seems that this should be related to Homo erectus.
Now, once we get around 500,000 years ago, 200,000 years ago,
this time period is a real challenge for biological anthropologists.
I tell my students when they start a class with me
that involves this topic,
all right, I've gotten for you the best and latest textbook I could find,
but I guarantee that by the end of this class
and quite possibly by the end of this month,
it will be outdated in some major ways.
And that is not untrue for the earlier stages of Hominid evolution,
but it is especially true for the later stages.
There's constant reanalysis going on.
So what I tell you throughout the lecture
will certainly be outdated, and that's just to be expected.
And here in the later stages,
we are going to just make some suggestions
with the understanding that this is tremendously
a conflicted area of inquiry.
One of the major questions
is about the role of the Neanderthals in our evolutionary history.
Neanderthals did not occur in Africa,
but are found in a fairly widespread way
throughout Asia and parts of Europe.
Now, popularly, Neanderthals are probably the best known Hominid.
They tend to be depicted as cavemen.
They may even be depicted as cavemen
in these strange animal skins dragging women around by the hair.
This is unfair, especially in election years.
I read letters to the editor,
and somebody is always calling somebody else a politician,
a candidate, a Neanderthal, to indicate some dim-witted creature.
Well, the facts of the matter are, in fact, different than this.
Neanderthals have sophisticated stone tools, toolkits.
They hunt.
Most anthropologists believe
that Neanderthals deliberately buried their dead,
and if so, this is in advance over Homo erectus
and anybody else we've talked about,
any other Hominid that we've talked about,
or any other anthropoid earlier, for that matter.
There are cases in which bodies appear to have been
intentionally placed in graves,
along with grave goods with Neanderthals.
There is a debate about whether Neanderthals
are part of our ancestry, and right now,
the bulk of the evidence suggests
that they probably are a side branch,
did not lead directly to Homo sapiens, in other words.
One reason why people are concluding this,
in addition to a lot of DNA analysis,
is the simple fact that there's overlap in the time period
during which Neanderthals lived and modern humans appeared.
A great deal of overlap.
Our own species, Homo sapiens, appears first,
as far as we know, in Africa.
Now, we have had Hominids living elsewhere,
but the roots of our anatomy
and the modern human skeletal form that we're talking about
with Homo sapiens does appear to be back in Africa
approximately 125,000 years ago.
That means we're really a very young species.
Neanderthals were around at that time.
It does not seem to be a successive relationship
of replacement.
Anthropologists further argue
about whether certain forms of culture
appeared slowly, or alternatively, gradually.
When I was in graduate school,
the party line, so to speak,
was that at 30, 35,000 years ago,
there was a radical revolution,
and human behavior accelerated and changed.
One reason why that was thought to be the case
is we know that the famous cave paintings of Europe
are dated to that time period.
This is so, right around 35,000 years ago,
if you go to places like Lascaux in France,
Altamira in Spain,
you walk through caves, or researchers can,
and you can see the films,
of these wonderful depictions of animals
fully sophisticated artistically.
These are not primitive.
These are not children's drawings.
They are ochre-colored, realistic depictions,
and they seem to appear quite suddenly in Western Europe.
There are other indications that around 30,000 years ago,
new, decorative, subtly incised tools appear.
However, we are also beginning to see
that if you look elsewhere in the world,
not just Western Europe,
and really look at 60,000, 90,000,
and 50,000 years ago,
there is more continuity than we first thought.
Not in cave art specifically,
but in things like decorations and sophisticated tools.
It seems to be now perhaps more true
that the 30,000 year ago revolution
doesn't seem to be such a revolution.
So, I urge you to pick up a textbook on human evolution.
Of course, I have recommended some for you.
And, too, it's fun to keep up with the changes
and the conflicts and the debates.
I think that from this later time period
of human evolution, one fairly firm,
at least as of the moment, fact
that is worthwhile remembering
is that we are African in our origin,
Homo sapiens, and recent in our origin.
And then at 30,000 years ago,
as Homo sapiens was dispersing
all over the world from Africa,
there was a process by which other species,
for whatever reason, the other Homo species,
were gradually out-competed and died out.
So 30,000 years ago, you have one Hominid left,
and that, of course, is us.
Anthropologists, as you know,
work to understand which aspects of behavior
found in Hominids arose only during
the time period of human evolution
and which were present beforehand
before the split that set the human lineage
away on its own course.
A major conclusion that we have come to
is that almost every behavior
that we have considered seriously
from the Hominid lineage is found
with its roots in other anthropoids,
the monkeys and apes.
Let's think back about some things
that are exceptions.
Bipedalism is new in the human lineage.
Modified stone tools are new as far as we know.
Also things like control of fire,
big game organized, cooperative hunting,
and the type of art that I have described for you.
So anthropology, again,
wants to strike that balance of understanding
the new in Hominids
and the continuity from monkeys and apes to Hominids.
Understanding the period of human evolution
as I have outlined it for you
gives us perspective on what it means
to be Homo sapiens.
And by the same token, the premise of the course is
that by only seeing the whole broad comparative perspective
Hominids as against other anthropoids
can we gain real perspective on the Hominid.
Of course, just on the Hominids itself
is going to miss the anthropoid framework
in larger sense.
From here, then, we have a task left in the final lecture
to sum up, and I want to do that
not just by revisiting old material
but by presenting some new material
and leaving you with some questions to think about
as we contemplate the bio-cultural species.
APPLAUSE
MUSIC
Lecture 12, Exploring Enkin's Legacy
APPLAUSE
All right, here we find ourselves at the last lecture,
and I would like to do some pulling together
in this last lecture, some review,
but a review in a way that I intend to be interesting and fun
to bring in some new material and new case studies
instead of just going over old material
so that we can look at ways in which our anthropoid cousins
may help us illuminate not only our evolutionary past
but our lives today in the 21st century.
Of course, one of the claims that we've been reviewing
is that our evolutionary past is critical to understanding
our present, that they shouldn't be separated.
Studying humans as anthropoids helps us in this endeavor.
One thing we can see is that there is no strict division
between monkeys and apes as being biological
and humans as being cultural.
This is something that the material of this course
has worked to reject.
Secondly, monkeys and apes show in their behaviors
the roots of quite complex social behaviors and social bonds,
culture, language, and technology,
all these big major areas of our evolutionary lives.
Many human behaviors, I have claimed,
differ more in degree than in kind
from the behavior of other anthropoid.
This is the quantitative, not qualitative, different approach.
Modern humans share a legacy of the past
with our anthropoid cousins,
and we have built upon that
in constructing our own biocultural lives.
But let's move more concretely and specifically
to talking about application of all these data to the present.
After all, skeptics could very easily ask,
really take a look at modern life,
look how different it is from any context in which we've evolved.
For example, 45 million people a day in this world
are served food by McDonald's.
People communicate in new ways all the time.
Think of the use now of email, text messages, instant messaging,
not just by adults in offices,
but by elementary and middle school children quite routinely and comfortably.
Look at the currency of the world in the air,
flying currency, frequent flyer miles.
All these things now characterize our lives in this country
in some other western industrialized countries.
What can the lives of monkeys and apes possibly have to tell us about how we live?
One way we can approach this and try to answer such a skeptical question
is to choose some areas, by example, and build up case studies.
And I'm going to do this by looking again at anthropoid infancy.
I believe that our long evolutionary history as anthropoids
can help us understand and even shape our behavior in the modern world.
It can even make us see and recognize things
that may make us change what we do as well as think about what we do.
So let's revisit some aspects of anthropoid infancy
by pulling together some things that we have talked about
but scattered over different lectures.
We know that anthropoid infants are relatively helpless at birth.
Their brains and their central nervous systems are not particularly well developed.
They're primed to allow the young to develop in social interaction.
But learning occurs in a social way through dependency,
emotional as well as physiological, on caretaker, the mother in most cases.
We know that the anthropoid infants are extremely attached
for months, years possibly, to the mother.
Now in human societies we might want to substitute primary caretaker
for the term mother, but we know that in most cases
across the board for anthropoid, the primary attachment is the maternal infant one.
We know that great apes are attached to their mothers beyond the period of infancy
and are affected by maternal upbringing much, much longer,
but even the period of infancy strictly defined can last as long as four or five years.
In all cases the infant's social world then starts out as being delimited
by the world of its primary caretaker and broadens out from there
in what I think of as concentric circles, a process of expansion.
The rearing environment furthermore for anthropoid infants helps determine
what skills emerge during infant development.
And of course this is a basic theme we've seen across so many areas.
Rearing environment affects what happens over and over.
And I would submit that this is the crucial fulcrum around which this whole package works
and it is anthropoid infancy that is a solid package of features.
It does not change because we've invented email
or because we live in a world where there's fast food infrequent flyer miles.
This is part of our lives, it's a meaningful way to look at ourselves.
Let's get even more concrete and even more specific.
The take home lesson from understanding anthropoid infancy may be a practical one,
it may be applied, and I'm thinking here of applying it to the issue of family sleeping patterns.
Now the typical situation I would predict that you and I are used to in this country
is for an infant when it is born into a family or adopted into a family
to be given its own room to sleep in or to share with one other sibling, possibly to, as soon as possible.
The point being that it's taken away from the parental sleeping area
and given a place to sleep, that's its own or half of a room to itself.
This is a very typical goal and in fact for adoption agencies in this country
it may be a very criteria question, in other words a kind of litmus test.
Can you give the infant perspective parents are asked a place to sleep on its own?
I mean it's not going to be with you, is it?
When Dr. Spock wrote advice books for parents in years past,
an early edition of his book is very very specific on this point, he moderated a little bit later
but in the beginning this might have been in the 1940s and 1950s particularly,
he wrote that it was not only a good idea but absolutely necessary to let an infant cry it out in his or her own room.
Heartbreaking whales were to be tolerated and ignored.
If, he wrote, the neighbors become concerned by all this screeching and crying
you might call them and inform them that everything's alright, the infant is fine.
He further cautioned parents not to be manipulated by infants who might get so upset that they might vomit.
This is just psychological manipulation.
Muffle the windows if need be, put blankets over the door, do not walk into that room, let the infant cry it out.
Well evolutionarily, infants who sleep alone, anthropoid infants are an anomaly.
Anthropoid infants are adapted to co-sleep right up against the body of the mother or their primary caretaker.
Monkeys and apes would be at great risk to their survival if they didn't do this.
A monkey or ape infant left alone from young age would be at risk of all kinds of problems,
predators falling out of a tree, any number of things,
and in fact they should be adapted to protest when they're left alone.
So in fact when babies cry, this may be sort of through the eons of time you're hearing an evolutionarily adapted signal.
They're not supposed to be all by themselves in evolutionary terms.
Now we've talked about the human situation in the United States and like countries,
but in fact an anthropological view tells us something quite different.
Co-sleeping is the dominant pattern in societies around the world today as well as in the past.
Co-sleeping now needs to be defined clearly.
The most extreme example of co-sleeping is infant and mother or infant and parents sharing the same bed,
and quite a few societies do have that practice,
but co-sleeping also can be defined as sharing the same room where the infant is near the parents,
not across a big room, but near the bed of the parents,
and that one way or the other is the dominant pattern.
And this is one of those times when cultural anthropology is extremely helpful to us
for providing those data about such a pattern.
So you have then an evolutionary situation that is borne out or mimicked by most human societies, but not by ours.
Now the anthropologist James McKenna has developed a research program around this question of infant co-sleeping,
and he has made the suggestion that co-sleeping may have health benefits for human infants.
We know that human infants are born with physiologically immature central nervous systems.
It may be quite difficult in the initial weeks and maybe even the first few months
for human infants to regulate their breathing during the night.
They may fall asleep, they may stop breathing, and they may find it hard to get started again.
This is a fact of the immature nervous system in our species,
the fact that we are born in a certain condition very, very helpless.
Co-sleeping in humans may, this is very important to stress them may,
may in fact get rid of some of this problem that the infant has in self-regulating.
The idea is that the infant will be aroused when the mother turns over,
may match the mother's breathing patterns.
There is more of a chance for the infant to basically get itself in track or in rhythm with an adult
who does have a physiologically mature, self-regulated nervous system.
If McKenna is right and he himself would like more data on this question,
co-sleeping may be related to SIDS, Sudden Infant Death Syndrome,
or more specifically, the relationship would be that the more infants co-sleep,
the less likely they would be to suffer a death from SIDS.
If this is the case, this is a question that should be investigated,
and it's something that we could then take data from our anthropology courses
and really inject it into the lives of people living today
with advice about babies at risk, let's say,
who've been identified by physicians to be at risk of breathing interruption.
It's again one of the situations where we need to play this out with enough data,
but it's very, very interesting.
Let's go from there to a different type of question for the 21st century
that reflects on some of the data that we have been discussing about monkey and ape behavior.
This is a little bit of a different type of issue or case study,
but it is equally relevant to our lives today.
We've been learning about the complex behavior of our closest living relatives,
and to me, a natural emergent question that comes about
involves how human societies treat monkeys and apes in the 21st century.
We've been talking about emotional ties, intelligence, communication, culture,
emotionality, and building this image of creatures that are terrifically complicated.
When I look at a gorilla, a chimp, a bonobo, orangutan, monkeys,
I see creatures that may think about the past and the future that strategize,
that problem solve, that express emotional bonds in sometimes moving ways.
But the fact of the matter is that many, many monkeys and apes,
these very same creatures in the wild, are severely endangered,
threats to their survival that they may not survive.
Conservation is an enormously important issue in the study of anthropoid behavior today.
One estimate suggests that one-fifth of all primates excluding humans alive today
are in danger of immediate extinction, and we mean years, just a few, a handful of years.
We know that most monkeys and apes are forest adapted,
and this means that they inherit all the dangers associated with living in a forest that we find today.
Logging and other forms of habitat destruction are increasingly impacting monkey and apes' environment.
And what is the result?
Should we be surprised to see that there are these estimates of imminent extinction
of our closest living relatives?
And in some cases, one case so far, it's not just imminent.
Recently, for the first documented time since the year 1700, a monkey went extinct,
a small red monkey living in West Africa, and this has essentially just happened.
And unfortunately, we think it is the tip of the iceberg with much more to come.
The single most increasing and deadly threat to monkeys and particularly great apes
is what's called the bush meat trade.
Bush meat is what it sounds like.
The bush is the African wilderness, the Asian remote area.
Meat is meat.
Bush meat means animals are killed and eaten for food.
So the chimp that I look at and see a tremendously complex emotional cognitive creature
is in the bush meat trade nothing more than beef.
That's harsh.
It's hard to say.
It's hard to hear.
Gorillas, the nobos, orangutans, monkeys are being killed and eaten locally
by people who need food in some cases, much more often to feed logging camp workers,
to export animal food to cities so that people can sit in restaurants
and eat gorilla meat or monkey meat.
Those of you who have read Diane Fosse's work or know of it may remember that she talked
about gorillas being poached in Rwanda and that gorillas were killed,
their hands were chopped off and were bronzed and made into ashtrays.
It is shocking for those of us who know and work with these creatures
to realize how they are ending up.
So the bush meat trade in Africa and Asia must be understood as intimately linked
to issues of habitat destruction and logging.
As the forests are increasingly opened to logging companies
and roads are being pushed back into these formerly remote areas,
the bush meat trade can also follow the roads and go in and kill these animals.
Let me get to one greater level of specificity for you.
Conservation experts, as I've indicated, predict that some animals will go extinct soon.
Well, this includes great apes.
The Jane Goodall Institute, the foundation that of course is associated
with the famous chimpanzee watcher, estimates that in the year 1900
there were 2 million chimpanzees alive in Africa.
The current estimate is 150,000.
It's worse for orangutans in Asia.
The best estimate that I have heard, I mean the most reliable that I have heard
is that there may be as few as 20,000 orangutans.
The numbers are not much better for gorillas and for bonobos.
I read constantly about the numbers of gorillas, the animals that I currently study,
that are killed in West Africa yearly to be eaten, to be beefed for somebody.
There's an organization called the Bush Meat Crisis Task Force
that met in May 2001 with 150 representatives from 20 countries
to try to begin, begin isn't a fair word, other people have been working on this,
but to try to really tackle this issue on a global scale.
This is a question that involves multinational corporations,
those involved in logging, let's say, involves huge numbers of countries
in which people are poor and people may legitimately need sources of food.
The Bush Meat Crisis Task Force is a very useful organization
that is attempting to deal with this program on a global scale.
The Jane Goodall Institute is another, and I urge you,
if you're interested at all in helping or finding out more information,
to consult your booklet.
I will include information about how to contact these organizations.
Now let's move from the wild where these horrific problems are happening to captivity.
The question of whether highly intelligent and emotional animals,
especially the great apes, should be kept in captivity
and under what conditions is a highly debated one.
There's no agreement as to whether monkeys and apes should be used in biomedical research.
Let's say, for example, AIDS research.
The idea, of course, is a good one, a worthy goal, to reduce human suffering.
Anyone who's had a loved one die of AIDS or be sick of malaria or hepatitis or anything else
would welcome such a goal.
The question that has to be factored in is what about the suffering of, let's say, chimpanzees
who are used in AIDS research?
Jane Goodall suggests that in the future,
the biomedical community will work towards alternative, non-animal models.
For, let's say, AIDS, we use that as an example.
Computer models, perhaps.
She also is a realist and she says that right now we are using chimps in this way.
So let's make sure that we use them as humanely as possible.
Never cage them singly, for example.
It should be so clear to you why that I won't even belabor the point.
We should make sure that they have their psychological as well as physical needs met
when they are used in these types of situations.
There are so many other examples besides chimps and AIDS research that I could give you.
There was a question raised recently about baboons.
Should baboons be raised on so-called monkey farms so that the baboons could be healed
and their organs harvested to donate to people who need organ transplants?
Again, you've got a situation with a crying need for people to have a source of organs for organ transplants.
But the ethical question of, is it okay to take these monkeys and raise them simply for human medical needs?
Some scientists and legal experts are working towards rights for great apes in particular.
The claim is that great apes are so smart, so cognitive, so emotional,
that we need to give them rights that are equivalent to, in some ways, our own rights.
Certainly that they have the right not to be used in biomedical testing.
They have the right not to be put in captivity.
The legal expert Stephen Wise has written a fascinating book called Rattling the Cage,
a good William and Mary alumnus, by the way.
If you're interested in this question, his book is the place to go.
Other scientists and legal experts believe instead that yes, surely we should protect these great apes,
but not necessarily bestow rights upon them, that we have a responsibility to great apes and to other anthropoids,
but that rights is a different issue and great apes would not begin to understand what that meant,
and that that is a wrong application of a concept.
Even though everybody agrees great apes need protection, there's not agreement about how to go about this.
My point in raising these issues is to bring home the idea that we have to confront
to the survival and well-being of monkeys and apes, and we need to do so for multiple reasons.
Of course, it's important for biological anthropology.
If we want to continue to learn about the roots of human behavior,
we quite obviously need to make sure that we have monkeys and apes into the future.
The numbers that I gave you before for very likely orangutan extinction in the near future
would mean that my own grandchildren, let's say, should I have any in the future,
would not be able to experience or know orangutans in the wild.
We would be reduced to keeping them in captivity.
We want to look at these issues head-on to realize that they're complicated,
that there are real human needs involved, that there are real human needs for food, for medical care,
but not to turn away from this problem and not to give up on this type of problem.
And it's not only just out there in Africa and Asia where this type of thing is happening.
I've mentioned captivity and medical research that may certainly involve our research centers
here in the United States, medical practices that impact us in our daily lives,
but it extends even beyond that.
We enjoy going to zoos, and many zoos in this country are well-respected research zoos
where the apes are extremely well cared for.
They have enrichment in the form of social companions of their own species,
areas to roam around indoors and outdoors, good bonds with humans.
But we also know that not every zoo is so ethical.
There are some small roadside zoos where great apes are kept in very small cages and quite alone.
We know that it's possible to go to state fairs, as I did not so long ago,
and find people carrying around juvenile chimps.
You could have your picture taken with one, and of course the question arises,
what happens when they're older and they're not so cute anymore?
All of these questions, I believe, are our responsibility as, if you will,
part of our evolutionary legacy, not to turn our back, on these very, very difficult issues.
Of course, the biomedical community and others will have answers to the points that I have raised,
and as with anything else, it's an ongoing debate.
I'm asking that we think critically about these issues.
Now, in coming to the very end of these 12 lectures,
we do want to take a step back and begin to look at what I'd like to leave you with.
I would like you to take away from a course of this nature.
Our primary thesis all along has been that biological anthropology provides a unique perspective on humanity.
Unlike any other discipline, biological anthropology teaches us about our link with other species,
as well as with other cultures and other time periods.
So, five linked points could be said to form a framework of conclusion.
A declarative sentence to sum things up.
Yes, the roots of human behavior are seen in monkeys and apes.
Secondly, the behavior of monkeys and apes is quite complex.
It varies not only across species, which we've known for many years and is predictable,
but also across populations.
Think back to group specific patterns of behavior, as with chimpanzee tool using,
and also across contexts and individuals.
And perhaps this is the most important variable.
Some females act a certain way, others a different way.
Some males will do one thing, others another thing.
Not an invariant nature that is male and female,
or that is even monkey versus that type of monkey,
or this type of ape versus that type of ape.
Lots and lots of overlap.
To say that the roots of human behavior means that humans have inherited aggressive tendencies,
let's say, from monkeys and apes, is a misunderstanding.
It's a misunderstanding of the concept.
We didn't inherit aggression or culture or language as a package directly from other anthropoids.
As we know now, it is not a linear handing down over the years of something in a direct way.
Instead, at point number four, I would phrase it this way.
Humans haven't inherited from other anthropoids both anatomical traits and behavioral capacities
that allow for our own unique biocultural profile to emerge.
At anatomically, the grasping hand, the forward-facing eyes with depth perception,
and the complex brain are critical.
Behaviorally, well, there's too much to sum up comfortably,
but I will say that we humans are predisposed to an emotionally-based type of back and forth social communication.
We are social, we are cognitive, and those things go together in an infrastructure
that is at once social and at once cognitive.
They are just inextricably entwined.
Finally, the most critical trait we have inherited from monkeys and apes
is behavioral flexibility, the ability to change our behaviors according to context and circumstance in so many ways.
As I reflect upon these five points, I find myself hoping very much that you'll use them
and all the data we have covered as a kind of platform or stepping stone
to reading books or keeping up with newspaper articles, magazine articles, new TV documentaries.
Because this is such a new, relatively new field and a rapidly growing vital field,
as I have indicated to you, all the time there's going to be new discoveries, new information, new data.
Whether it be a new type of monkey social organization or perhaps a new population of great apes is discovered
that uses Toulton in a new way, certainly discoveries about new hominids I can promise you
will be on the front page of newspapers relatively frequently.
The data and perspectives in this course, I hope, have primed you and informed you
to be able to read some of these reports, knowledgeably, and fit in the new information
to the existing framework that we have established.
Think in conclusion that we humans, millions of years of evolution behind us as biocultural being
and that seeing ourselves as anthropoids gives us a very exciting and critical lens
through which to view ourselves. Thank you so much.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or you may call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-TEACH-12. Thank you very much.
