Hi, good evening everyone. Thanks for joining this session. So tonight we're going to talk about
introduction to data jobs. So we will be discussing a few different data roles, such as data analytics,
data engineering, as well as data science. We'll briefly touch on generative AI and how AI
and ML engineering works. So yeah, I expect you to ask a lot of questions and that's why I didn't use
a formal presentation. I'm mainly going to use Notion to walk you through. I think I'm going to
ask you a lot of questions and let's have a discussion and hopefully along the way I can
convey my message and hopefully that's useful for everyone if you're in the process of
sort of career switching or trying to get into data science or data engineering.
Okay, let's get started. So first of all, a quick introduction to WeCloud data. I think many of
you have attended past events. So you know that we are a training academy and we primarily focus on
training data scientists, data engineers, as well as AI engineers. If you're interested in
watching past event recordings, you can go to youtube.com slash at WeCloud data. I think we
upload most of the recordings to our YouTube channel so you can find those. We also have
some career guides such as data scientist, BI, data engineering. It covers a lot of details
from what is data science, the type of data science jobs, data science roles,
and then how do you get started at job market and things like that.
So yeah, I think you know where to find us if you have questions or you are interested in
attending one of our data courses. Let's start from the definition. What is data science or the
type of data jobs? And when it comes to data jobs, I think there are three main categories,
data engineering, data analytics, and data science. And of course, there are other data
related jobs such as AI with a focus on machine learning or maybe generative AI, but data is
an important part of it. So I guess my first question to everyone is that how familiar are
you with data engineering, data analytics, and data science? Do you have any questions?
So for example, do you know what a data engineer do? Some of you may come from data fields already,
so feel free to chime in and I'm happy to discuss and share my experience and insight.
You can type your message into Zoom chat or feel free to unmute yourself as well.
Anybody coming from the data industry already, you know, maybe you work as a data engineer
or you work as a business analyst? Actually, I'm enrolled in a course of data analytics right now.
Oh, hey Nishant, how are you doing? Good, how are you? I'm good, I'm good. All right,
so you want to tell us your understanding of data engineering? Not the engineering,
I'm enrolled in a course, diploma course in data analytics right now.
Welcome to this event. Anything you would like to share? Have you started the training yet?
Yeah, I started the training, I did Excel Power BI and we're going to start data handling
and we're going to start like SAS soon. Okay. Yeah, we did three of the modules like Power BI,
Excel and data handling. Okay, so you mentioned a couple of tools, right? Excel, Power BI,
and then I think you mentioned SAS as well. These are the tools I think a business analyst,
this data analyst would typically use for data analytics jobs and sometimes data scientists
use these tools as well. Have you learned Python as well? Sorry, what? Did you learn Python in your
training? No, we're going to learn in future Python or SAS, yeah, we're going to learn in future.
Oh, that's great. Yeah. Anybody else would like to introduce yourself or maybe tell us a bit
about your understanding of the data industry?
So, Chetan is saying that data engineering is about making sure the data is collected and stored
in the right way. Yeah, I think that's correct, partially. First of all, actually the reason why
I put data engineering on the top, I would like to introduce that first, it's because without data
engineering, I think data scientists and data analysts wouldn't even have the right data to work
with. So, you're absolutely correct. I think data engineers need to make sure that data is not only
collected and stored in the right system, but they also need to be stored in the right way.
That sort of includes data cleaning, right, data ingestion, understanding the business rules,
because in a typical business, there are data coming from many different sources and different
systems. You might be dealing with like, you know, 50 different data sources and even more.
So, in that case, you know, if a data analyst needs to build dashboard, you need a decent data model.
And the data model has, you know, tables and schema, and the data may come from many different
systems, and someone needs to do the job and do the pipeline to prepare the data for this kind of
tasks. And that is very important, because in any kind of data system, it's garbage and garbage out,
right. So, when data engineers help companies ingest data into, you know, data warehouse or
databases, it's very important for them to, they're playing a very essential role, because they do
need to understand how data is generated by different systems. There are a lot of business
logics they need to apply to get the data into the right format. So, the downstream analytics tasks
can become a lot easier. And that is so important. If you have ever worked in a startup environment
where that the company doesn't have a proper, you know, data warehouse or a data lake yet,
and then whoever's doing the data analytics work, it's such a painful process, because
they'll have to write a lot of scripts and a lot of code to manipulate data. But with the help of
data engineers, I think you can not only produce high quality analytics work, but also you can do,
you know, you can do that with even, you know, real-time data sometimes. So, that is very important.
But if you dive deeper into, you know, the data engineering field, it's actually
pretty complex. There are a lot of things, a lot of tools you need to learn. So, I'll give you a very
high-level introduction to data engineer or at least the kind of tools you need to know in
order to become a data engineer. Okay. So, let's say tools, data engineer needs to, you know,
and the landscape here for, you know, the tools landscape for data engineering is very,
very overwhelming. There's so many different things you can learn. I'm going to list a few
important things, but it doesn't mean that you need to know everything in order to get a job.
And usually you just need to be very good at, you know, some of these tools, and then I think
you'll be able to find a job. And then, of course, there are different types of data engineering
jobs depending on the kind of tools you work with, right? So, on the data ingestion side,
that's where usually, you know, the beginning of the funnel, you need to collect data from
different sources. That's the starting point. So, you need basically data ingestion, right?
These could be, you know, ETL developers or, you know, big data engineers, and even sometimes,
you know, software engineers that work with different kinds of, you know,
data ingestion tools and, you know, working with or even building connectors, right? Some of the
traditional tools people use for ingestion are enterprise tools. But, you know, in the community
right now, if you would like to build tools quickly to get a job, I think you need to know
a few data ingestion tools such, you know, as Apache Airbyte, for example. Airbyte is basically
a data ingestion tool and it's low code. And it has, you know, connectors or integration with many
different data sources. Now, let's think of a fictitious company that, you know, that sells
some kind of product, right? So, that means they need to do marketing to sell their product. They
have to do promotions. And once they have the customers, they have to manage the customer
relationship. So, they need CRM tools as well. So, typically, companies will be working with,
you know, marketing tools such as MailChimp, right? They might, you know, use Google Sheet
for some sort of simple data, you know, collection and manipulation.
For CRM, they may work, you know, HubSpot and they may work with some sort of, you know, text
messaging tools, but a list of like 15, 20 essential tools that need to manage, you know,
the product and sales and marketing. And the problem with this is that data you need, right?
It's siloed and it's stored in many different, you know, platforms. So, the job of a data engineer
is to actually ingest these data from MailChimp HubSpot, different systems, into a centralized
location, right? That could be a data lake. It could be a modern data warehouse, which are basically
just databases that store data. So, you need to collect data from these different data sources.
And sometimes data just come from the web, right? Especially when companies want to build their
large language models or do fine tunings. And you need to collect a lot of data. For example,
chat GPT, who was pretty much trained on the entire, like the data collected from the web.
And so they did a lot of web scraping. And now they get into all kinds of legal issues.
But that's probably what most of the company do. And some companies, you know, such as UAE's,
you know, Falcon models are built on some open data. Meta's Lama model was trained on
some open data. But if you read those, you know, articles and paper, you realize that they typically
work with 15, 20 different major data sources. That requires a lot of data engineering as well.
So data ingestion is the first part, right? You need to get the data into the warehouse.
And then there's the part of analytics engineering. So, you know, it's good that you have data
engineers or developers who collect data and store them in a centralized place. But who's
going to sort of prepare those data, right? If you get hired as a data scientist at work in a
product team, a marketing team, you are typically not involved in those data ingestion process,
which happens on IT side. And you don't really understand those sophisticated business rules
that a lot of data scrubbing, a lot of, you know, things that need to be sort of figured out.
So this is where analytics engineers come in. These are the engineers who understand business
logics and they know how to prepare data and sort of do ETL or ELT.
ETL stands for like data extraction, transformation and loading. Load means loading data into a
warehouse. There's also some other process, you know, which is called ELT, which basically means
that after data extraction, we're going to load the data into the warehouse first and then do
auto transformation in the warehouse. And the modern data analytics engineer
usually prefer to work with the ELT stack. And ETL has been around for so many years
and it's pretty traditional approach, but it's still very powerful.
Things analytics engineers need to need to know include, you know, database, you know,
systems and data warehouse tools such as, you know, let's say Google BigQuery,
Snowflake, you must have heard about Snowflake, data warehouse, you know, in Amazon then
Redshift. So there are different kinds of, you know, data warehouse tools.
If you would like to build workflow, a lot of SQL based, you know, transformations,
look into DBT, which is the data build tool. It's very popular right now. If you would like
to work as an analytics engineer, I strongly recommend you learn DBT.
And then, of course, there are other tools that you can use such as, you know, Python, Spark,
and Airflow. But DBT works pretty well in a modern data stack and it has really good
integration with some of these tools. And of course, you need to understand data modeling and
the fundamentals of data warehouse. So a lot of SQL, but that's very important.
So data, you know, there are data engineers that purely focus on data ingestion. That's a big job,
right? You may, you know, in terms of the path, you may actually just switch from project to
project because there are new data sources that a company will build, you know, all the time.
And you need to understand systems and integrating with many different data sources and working with
APIs. And sometimes you might need to write like, you know, APIs yourself as well. What if there's one,
you know, data source, which is not very popular and you don't really have a connector provided by
Airbyte. So you might need to sort of roll up your sleeves and just write the connector yourself in
Python. So coding skill is very important as well. When it comes to analytics engineering,
of course, the most popular job title is just Analyst Engineer. And basically working on data
warehouse stuff, which is also very important. And there are also BI engineers. This role is
somewhere in between BI data analytics and data engineering. And these are the BI developers
who are very good with data modeling. And then they, you know, they build business intelligence
solution. And some other tools they work with include Power BI, right? And maybe writing DACs
and things like that. But this can fall into under the data analytics or BI career path. But
there are also BI developers who are like sort of very strong in data modeling. So they know how
to build efficient data models so that the queries can run, you know, quick, very fast. And then
that really serves the dashboard in purpose well. Okay. There are also big data engineers. These are
the folks who work with data lakes. Data warehouse has been very popular. But there are also, you
know, different schools of thought when it comes to, you know, manipulating big data.
For most of the companies, I think analysts engineering data warehouse will work really,
really well. But for tech companies that has, you know, millions of customers that they deal,
if they deal with hundreds of terabytes of data, I think the cost of data warehouse might be a bit
high. And then very soon, you're going to hit some sort of limitation, especially, you know,
a lot of the data you work with, if, you know, our unstructured data, right, that doesn't fit into
the SQL paradigm very well. And that's where you need to use tools like Python and Apache Spark
to manipulate big data. And first of all, the data will need to be stored efficiently
in a data lake. So we're talking about, you know, Hadoop HDFS, which is sort of like legacy systems
already. But if you use Amazon, then it's simple storage service, right, S3. And data lake is just
the, you know, the sort of the data architecture storage layer on top of, right, S3 or, you know,
blob storage. And Google has its own storage system as well. And then once the data is stored in the
data lake, data engineers will, or big data engineer developers will need to know how to use
tools such as, you know, Apache Spark, Apache Flink to access the big data. And we're talking about,
you know, terabytes of data and even petabyte scale data. And these jobs are typically quite
expensive if you're going to do that in data warehouse. So we're going to leverage, distribute
the system. Big data engineer jobs require definitely stronger coding skills, right. So if
you're sort of transitioning from data analytics to data engineering, analytics engineering is
relatively easy for you to, easier for you to get started with. And if you come from IT, you know,
software background, big data engineer might be something you want to look into. But you can
always, you know, sort of start from analytics engineering and then, you know, eventually become
a big data engineer. And in some companies, probably need to do a bit of everything.
But just so you know, that when you learn data engineering, you need to find a focus as well.
It's kind of hard to sort of master all of these right away. It takes years of experience.
And then there are a lot of legacy tools. And sometimes people get confused. So they don't
know what tool they need to focus on. But I would recommend probably just focus on a modern,
you know, tech stack, because the industries of data engineering is moving pretty fast.
And a lot of the projects you will be working on is probably migrating from the old system to the
new system. So you'll definitely get trained on those legacy tools, but you need to be really good
at the new tools. So I think that's one of the exciting part about data engineering.
There are also some new trend, you know, things like, you know, lake house. But that's just the
next version or next iteration of, I guess, big data or data lake. But we're talking more about
streaming data, real time data. So a lot of software engineers actually work in this category.
But definitely, if you are passionate about real time systems and big data systems,
that's definitely the direction to go. And so, yeah, this is just a very quick,
high level summary of, you know, some different types of data engineering jobs. But when you
look at this, it's, you know, it's just the end to end pipeline of a data engineering system.
It always starts from data ingestion that involves, you know, distributed messaging
systems as well. There will be batch data ingestion. And of course, if you dive deeper,
there's the real time data ingestion. And once you ingest the data into the system,
you either need to work with a data warehouse or a data lake. And on top of it, we're going to add,
you know, ETL data transformations. And of course, data analytics, data science as well.
So as you can see, data engineering is serving many other purposes. And their job is to make
everyone else's life easier. So I really admire data engineers who can build large scale systems.
A lot of times it's not just about using the tools, you know, in many big tech companies,
data engineers are involved in building new tools and systems. And that's quite,
quite, quite exciting. Okay.
Data modeling is better. A topic for data science or MREs, I don't think so. I don't think
machine learning engineers need to do a lot of data modeling.
A orchestration tool. Yeah. Thanks for the reminder. I think data engineers, because you're
building, you know, data pipelines. And imagine you're dealing with like 50 different source data
and or the data systems. It's hard to do all of these manually. Definitely, you will need to
know how to do automation. So N2M workflow orchestration using, you know, tools like
Apache airbite. These are, sorry, airflow function or data pipeline automation. So I would
recommend tools like, you know, Apache airflow that has been around for, for many years. It's,
it has really large community, something a data engineer would definitely look into.
Let's check in on some of these comments here.
Is it worth pursuing a career in data with the rise of AI in 2024?
Especially data analyst? That's a good question. Well, first of all, my answer is definitely
worth pursuing a career in data. I think generative AI or the rise of AI, it depends on how you look
at it. But a lot of people who's pursuing PhD sort of, you know, start to become a little bit worried
that, you know, AI is sort of progressing at a much faster pace. They spend four or five years,
but they still can't, you know, when chat GPT or GPT-4 came out, you can't even beat it, right?
Even Google is having trouble to sort of building a better model. So this is indeed evolving very
fast. But the way I look at it, based on my limited view and experience, is that I think it's really,
you know, making data analytics professional becoming more efficient. I don't think AI tools
at the current stage is able to replace an experienced data analyst and data scientist.
You will see a lot of useful demos or maybe exciting demos where you can just, you know,
write some prompts and then they will generate SQL queries and generate visualizations.
I think that really, that's really cool. And I use that as well. But it sort of just replaces
the very low-level coding part. And if you know Python and Pandas, generating a pie chart,
really just two lines of code. So I think that's what chat GPT, for example, is really capable
of doing right now. But data analytics is really not just about writing the queries.
Even though, unfortunately, a lot of data professionals, they spend quite a bit time
writing queries and manipulating data. And the time they spend on these is actually not because
writing code is hard. If you look at SQL, there are only a few SQL patterns. It's very easy to
learn. But it's the business logic that's really complex. And that's why, you know, even if you
work as a data analyst in the same role with different companies, your SQL query patterns
might be very different. Because in some companies, the business logic is quite complex or the data
is simply too messy. And then there's a lot of data cleaning to me to do. Today's generative AI,
especially large language models, most of the times when we interact with LLM, we do that through
prompting. And prompting has a limitation on the context window, right, even though the new GPT
fall for or anthropic models, they have really large long windows. But it doesn't mean that you
can dump everything as in a context window, and it's just going to work perfectly because it's
still going to suffer the memory issues. So yeah, so if you have seriously tried to use
chat GPT to do your data analyst project, you realize that sometimes you'd rather just write
the query yourself. It's just not there yet. So I'm definitely not worried about the data jobs
being replaced. However, I think AI is indeed going to threaten a lot of jobs. But maybe the
impact is much bigger in other categories as creative jobs like writers and even
design, right? So yeah, I'm less worried about data jobs being replaced. But however, I think
when you, if you're just getting started with data, you should definitely not, you know, your
job is not just learning how to write SQL code. That's not enough. You need to understand different
use cases. You need to have the experience of working with many different types of data,
and that helps you build the experience. Because when you write the queries, it's not
the syntax that matters. It's the business logic that matters, right? It's just like software
engineering. If you really rely on chat GPT to do your job, you're going to be very frustrated
because the reasoning part of these AI tools is just not there yet. But maybe someday it's going
to become a crazy group, but at least not in the near future. That's just my two cents on this.
Yeah, I'm not really worried because I tried to use chat GPT to do my job. It's just impossible,
okay?
Yeah, so Thomas said regarding someone needs to teach the model, but we teach the model through
prompting, but there's still limitation. So all of these pre-trained models, it really depends on
the data used for learning. So that's why there's a fine-tuning category and also the retriever
augmented generation. So it doesn't have a knowledge base. So you feed the data into the
pre-training process, and it starts to have memories. It can only memory so much,
memorize so much, unless you feed the entire world's data, but that's impossible. The biggest models
are probably still just trained on terabytes of data, but they're like way more data generated on
a daily basis. So we can't possibly feed one year worth of internet data into chat GPT or GPT-4.
That's simply too expensive to train. So that's why we need to do prompting and teach chat GPT
or large language models. Panda's AI is pretty cool. I definitely recommend everyone look into it.
That's something I played with it, and it's pretty helpful.
Cool. I'm going to get back to some of these questions later. Let's move on at this point.
So we talked about data engineering. Next, I would like to talk about data analytics,
and I mainly want to help everyone understand what data analysts do, because sometimes
there's some confusion about data analytics and data science.
From my perspective, data analytics, sometimes they need to know data science and machine
learning as well. Eventually, I think data analytics and data science are the two
disciplines that are going to probably merge because of generative AI. It's because
building dashboard and producing plots and visualizations nowadays become super easy.
So a data analyst's value is definitely not just creating the dashboard itself. Again, as I said,
business rules, business understanding is very important. Another important aspect of it is just
data prep processing or data preprocessing for visualization. The large language models are
mainly trained on the Internet data, but we haven't feed a lot of the business data into it.
I'm not sure when this is going to happen, but the reason why it's capable of writing code is,
for example, you just dump all of StackOverflow's data. The way people answer questions through
coding and copying and pasting Python scripts or snippets into those answers, and you can train
a next token prediction model based on that. I shouldn't say no one, but not many companies
are willing to dump their customer data in their transaction systems. Maybe that's going to happen.
For example, you can fine tune that, but imagine you have terabytes of data. It's just, again,
too expensive. So I don't know when this is going to happen. It would be cool, but
at current state, I don't think it's possible. And that basically means that anything that's
related to your business's proprietary data and other business rules, it's not capable of learning
that yet. So I think data analysts and data scientists still have tremendous amount of value
because your job is definitely not to create a pie chart for the company. This should be automated,
and that's why you never know what kind of questions your business team is going to throw
at you because they don't ask the same question because the business scenarios always change.
If there are some common questions they would like to address, that's where data analysts
is going to build a dashboard, standardize things. But as a data analyst, actually a lot of times,
you're working on ad hoc requests. Business teams will have a lot of questions about
about the product, about sales, and about their customers. That's when you're going to run a lot
of queries to help them understand the business better, whether it's helping the company to make
better decision or just understanding the customers. So that's typically what a data
analyst do. So expect to sort of address a lot of ad hoc requests, answering a lot of questions
through data analytics, and you're mainly writing data queries. As a data analyst, you need to
join a lot of business meetings as well. Be comfortable with preparing a PowerPoint presentation
as sort of overlaps with business analytics, but that's what data analysts do normally.
There are data analysts that focus more on just writing queries and producing dashboards,
but there are also data analysts that are pretty integrated into the business process. So you work
with a business team very closely. And you definitely need to be a very good communicator and know how
to manage relationship as well. And also just be ready to say no, because people are going to line
up and ask you all kinds of questions, and they expect things fast. And you can easily get overwhelmed.
So you sort of need to get well organized and know how to prioritize things. So that's the
data analyst from my view. And depending on the type of questions from the business,
it's not always just about writing queries, margin tables, and doing some sort of aggregation.
I think data analysts need to understand the statistics as well. And because you need to
tell stories as well, right, help the business understand the distribution of the data.
And sometimes you need to understand statistical sampling and statistical inference.
And do A.B. testing, for example, and sometimes it's data scientist's job. And data analytics,
you know, professionals will do A.B. testing as well on marketing campaign results. So understanding
the basics of statistics and the basics of predictive modeling will be helpful as well.
The line is a little bit blurred between data analysts and data scientists, because
when it comes to predictive modeling, sometimes it's explaining things,
explaining a decision tree. But sometimes data scientist is probably working on models that
can be deployed in the production system. But data analysts need to understand predictive
modeling as well. Maybe you're trained and proficient with SQL, but it doesn't stop you from
leveraging low-code and no-code AI tools. So there are no-code tools such as H2O
that allows you to build machine learning models without writing Python code.
And so a lot of data analysts, I think one of you guys mentioned you work with SAS.
But SAS has a UI called GUI-based tool called Enterprise Guide. And there's Enterprise Miner
as well. So basically, you know, you don't need to write a lot of code, but you can still build
predictive models. So I think data analysts will need to be comfortable with that as well.
Okay. People traditionally talk about data analytics. It's more about reporting and dashboard,
but I think understanding predictive analytics and advanced analytics will be helpful as well.
And compared to data science, I think data scientists will definitely focus more on
building machine learning models, right? If the data scientists only build dashboard and
do ad hoc analysis, actually a lot of them do. Then that's basically data analyst jobs.
That's why I think data science and data analytics is going to merge as profession because, you know,
in the future, maybe you can just use no-code tools as long as you understand how the process data
and then the ML part can actually be automated. And then you get the insight, you need to be able
to interpret those and work with the business to make better decisions. So that's, I think,
what some of the data scientists would need to do. But of course, I think the exciting part
about data science is that this field is evolving really fast. You know, some of the traditional
machine learning techniques we learned, it's already becoming outdated. So I think as a data
science professional, SQL and Python, these are data manipulation skills that you need to be very
good at. But once you start to learn more advanced analytics, data science and machine learning,
I think in the future, you'll definitely need to focus a little bit more on the
you know, the generative AI side. So data scientists will definitely, you know, become more
specialized in machine learning, deep learning, as well as generative AI. And data scientists also
need to have very strong data manipulation capability because they're probably going to deal
with a lot of big data as well. Okay. All right. So we talked about data analytics, data science,
and also, you know, I'm sure some of you are, you know, interested in machine learning engineering
and AI engineering. These are typical engineering related jobs. I would say if you're taught as
MA engineer or AI engineer, engineering skills probably more important. And it is a little bit
confusing because in some companies, MA engineers basically work as a data scientist. But in some
other companies, MA engineers actually work as a ML ops, which is like dev ops, who knows machine
learning. And there, of course, there are AI engineers that somewhere in between. So expect to
sort of know different tools and understand system design as well. Because if you work as an AI
engineer, most likely the work you produce is expected to be put in production. So you work
with the software team more closely. And for example, if you're building, you know, a rack
system, right, leveraging a large language model to build a QA, like build a chat box, for example,
for your company that you can feed your companies, let's say, legal documents or whatever HR, you
know, data into a large language model. And you would like people to be able to sort of just
use prompting to talk to the chatbot and get answers they need. So that means you need to
understand how to build a rack system from end to end, that involves, you know, different kind of
vector databases, model deployment, because now you'll need to decide whether you're going to
work with chat, your PT open AI, or you're going to work with an open source large language model.
If you decide to go down the open source route, they need to know how to deploy these open source
models. You can't always just use a hugging phase, you have to deploy that in your own industry,
other infrastructure. That requires engineering skill, MLOP skills as well. And, you know, working
with large language models in production, you need to understand how to work with different types of
GPUs. So a lot of software engineering skills involved as well. I think I put that on the
data related jobs, because data is so essential for the successful any kind of AI projects.
That's actually what I would like to talk about next, data and generative AI. I think a lot of
people sort of get scared a little bit, because they think generative AI is going to replace their
job. But I think they're complementary to each other. First of all, there are a lot of benefits
of generative AI for the data professionals. I do notice myself, my work pattern changed a
little bit. I tend to use chat GPT more frequently. A lot of the small problems I'm trying to solve.
Now I'm getting into the habit of just asking questions. I think that's actually really good.
But when you actually want to work on something more seriously, you need to rely on your own
capability. But chat GPT is going to actually help you do research and answer a lot of questions.
I sort of use that to replace stack overflow. Even though I noticed that sometimes I still
need to go back to Google and stack overflow, but that still saves me a lot of time and makes
me become more efficient. And even just writing formulas for teaching sometimes. I take a screenshot
of something. I would like to convert that to latex. All of these are very helpful in preparing
tables. So that's really good. Or maybe just like generating some sort of starter code.
But sometimes you realize that you're actually wasting more time. You'd better just write your
own code. But I'll leave this to you to decide. And however, when you want to become an AI engineer,
definitely don't just focus on the models and algorithms. And I think you should focus on
engineering skills, as well as the data skills. Because if you look at the landscape of large
language models, a lot of the innovation nowadays, everything is based on transformer,
like the similar architecture. What's really different are some of the innovation come from
data. So data preparation becomes so important even for generative AI. Because
there are lots of issues with the benchmarks. When some company come out and say our model beats
chat GPT-4 or GPT-4 or GPT-3.5, you can't just trust those. Because people always have bias.
They always want to say their model is the best. And it really depends on the kind of data set
and benchmark they use for evaluating the models. And it's a very confusing place because
there are all kinds of evaluation, the methodologies, there are all kinds of evaluation
data set and different kind of leaderboard and dashboards are like benchmarks out there.
It's very confusing. So that's why I think this field is evolving really fast. So
evaluation is always related to data. I see papers or large language models out there
that basically just cheat a little bit. Because the data they use for
evaluation is actually sort of used as part of the training process. So that's cheating.
And of course, the model performance is going to be good. But when you use that in real life,
most of the real business scenarios, the way you evaluate the models has nothing to do with
those benchmark metrics. So that's something you have to think about as well. And what kind of data
we feed into the pre-training or whatever fine tuning process, data is actually way more important.
A lot of companies, they struggle to have labeled data set. And cleaning all of those
web data is also very important. Because if you don't do data filtering and cleaning,
then your model might be very biased. Bias in AI is also a serious problem. So again,
I think as a data professional, your work sometimes can overlap with generative AI.
And data is very essential for the success of generative AI. So I guess my suggestion here is
that whether you want to become a data engineer, data analyst, data scientist, or even work in AI,
data skills is very important. And then the business experience of business knowledge and
business logic is also very important. And don't be scared by chat GBT being able to produce plots
and visualizations. Because that's something you always want to automate. Because we wasted so
much time just writing code to visualize data. Now it can be automated. It's great. You can actually
do a lot more deep dive analysis. But you still need to be the human who is actually
interpreting the chart. I don't think the AI tools are able to do that very, very well at this point.
So yeah, hopefully I make my points clear. And I would love to exchange ideas. I see there's
some comments here. So I'll go back to some of these comments and
