Today we will start talking about, so this week, so let me show you this slide, there
you go, one slide, life is critical, okay, so what do we mean by this?
So we talked about the laws of order, right?
Laws of disorder and laws of order, okay, do you remember?
Now, I will speculate, and many people did speculate, that life is between order and
disorder, okay, but how?
So life is at that critical place, life appears at that critical place, because life needs
order to sustain its processes, but life needs disorder to be adaptable to changes, okay?
So today we will look at what physicists mean when they talk about a critical system, disorder
order and the transition between them, phase transition.
So I want to start with a method called Monte Carlo method, have you heard of it, yes?
You have heard of it, you never tried it, just heard, right?
Have you heard of the casino, Monte Carlo?
Yes, so the method takes its name from the casino, okay, which is basically a place where
you throw dice, right, random number, so let's, usually this simple problem is stated for
understanding of Monte Carlo, so if I take random numbers between zero and one, okay,
random numbers, and then if I count the ones that are inside the unit circle divided by
the total number, what do you expect to get?
So pi times one over two squared divided by one squared, pi over four, right?
So let's actually do this, and if you throw enough dice, then let's call this set S1,
the number of S1 divided by total number will converge to pi over four, right?
So you can actually take this four to the other side and get an approximation of pi
as the run continues, right?
So we will not do it smoothly, we will just, okay, how many numbers do you want to, one
million, maybe, let me quickly change the font, okay?
So random numbers, two rows of random, no, columns, this one is column, right, two columns
of random numbers, right?
So how do you find the ones that are inside a unit circle?
We can do sum of r1 squared plus r2 squared, right, smaller than one, okay?
And divide it by n, multiply it with four, we should get pi, are you ready?
I haven't tried it before, there you go, we get pi to sum, okay, if I do it ten million
times, I get a better pi, not that better, yes, there you go, much better pi, right?
Are you with me?
Yes, so today we will talk about, so what Monte Carlo did is you throw some dice, you
have, you look at the system and you take an average over many trials and you get some
physical property, okay, today we will look at a particular case called, I think it's
called Ising model, not Ising, so Ising model models magnetization, have you heard of magnetization?
You know what the magnet is, yes, have you heard of Curie temperature, yes, what is Curie
temperature, again you have heard of it, yes, exactly, so if we have a magnet, let's say
this is T, okay, and this is magnetization, magnetization, like the total strength of
the magnet, if you are at zero temperature, okay, then all the tiny magnets are aligned,
so atomic magnets are aligned, so you have maximum magnetization, and as you increase
the temperature, those tiny magnets fluctuate, right, and when you reach at the Curie temperature,
you lose all magnetization, so zero magnet, so this is the phase transition, so you go
from order to disorder, okay, here magnets are aligned, so you have a net magnetization,
here they are disordered, do you have any questions so far, no, so we talked about order
laws, but we mainly focused on biological kind of order, like pattern formation or something,
there is one law of order that sits right in front of us, which is energy minimization,
okay, so if you are at zero temperature, things go to their minimum energy, right,
and for example atoms reach their minimum energy by making bonds with other atoms,
and why do we have order, because the atoms are very similar to each other, right, so their
environment eventually becomes similar, that's why you make, you form crystals, depending on
the bonding of the atoms, are you following my argument, so if you have carbon atoms,
10 to the 23 of them, each one interacting with the other one in the same fashion, so you expect
to get something ordered, because they are all the same, right, but if you increase the temperature,
and if those bonds are not strong enough, like in silicon, you get an amorphous material,
do you have any questions so far, okay, so what about magnets, this easing model is very simple,
but very rich, so it describes, do you remember this u equals to minus mu dot b,
you remember from physics 102, magnetic moments get lower energy when they are aligned with
magnetic field, why are you smiling, okay, so now we will look at the case when two magnets interact,
in fact we will even simplify it further and we'll assume that these tiny magnets can either have
upstate or downstate, do you have any questions so far, so let's call these states S1 and S2 as a vector,
okay, and the energy, the interaction energy between them, if I write it this, in this way,
where J is positive, what kind of interaction do they have, do they want to be aligned or
not aligned, do they want to stay opposite to each other or to stay in the same direction,
so let's derive, so if both of them is one, okay, like if both of them are aligned, what is the energy
minus J, right, if they are opposite one and minus one, what is the energy
plus J, which one is lower energy, minus J, so they want to be aligned, okay, do you have any
questions so far, did you miss anything so far, so when this is positive you have a ferromagnetic
interaction, ferromagnetic, okay, when J is negative what do you have,
no, no, anti-ferromagnetic, thank you all, so you have anti-ferromagnetic state where all
spins want to be opposite, all neighbors want to be opposite to each other, did I draw it
properly, no, so you will have something like this, do you have any questions so far, yes,
this is one big question, how do you know if an object is anti-ferromagnetic, not
nothing else, very good question, that's a very good question,
so in the calculation that I do, for example, if I am allowed to switch off the magnetic interaction,
then I see that non-magnetic state has higher energy than anti-ferromagnetic state, did you follow,
so I can do calculations using dense function theory, for example, right, so I take a material,
I do a non-magnetic calculation, I get an energy value E1, then I do a magnetic calculation,
magnetic interaction is on, okay, but I see zero magnetization
at the end of the calculation, but I see that E2 is smaller than E1,
but how about experiments, right, what would you see in experiments,
I don't know, okay, but did you get a gist of an answer here,
yes, I hope so,
that's a very good approach,
so you can see the dynamics of the system with respect to applied magnetic field,
you are not happy,
I think so, like, first of all, this one will not get magnetized at all, I guess,
so this one, the non-magnetic material would not interact with magnetic field,
because its spins are all fulfilled, they are dream, they have all found their peers,
well we are at the edge of my knowledge, so let's,
this is embarrassing, but I don't know, I don't have a good answer, so let's move on,
so we will look at ferromagnetic case,
where you expect all spins to be aligned eventually at zero Kelvin, right, so let's look at,
I'm sorry, can I ask you a question,
about the alignment of course,
so is it like something one dimension, could they all be facing the same way,
I mean like are we defining how it is like, they are either facing the same direction,
or they are not, but not specific like this, or could there be something like this,
okay, so is it one dimension,
in our model, there are only two states, like on and off, okay, but normally there are these things
called magnons, like phonons, photons, electrons, they are magnons, that corresponds to
this kind of
oscillation, like let's say they are all aligned, but you introduce
just like in the atoms, when they are at their equilibrium,
if you, what, yes, precession, yes, very good, so if you just disturb this atom,
it will create a wave, right, and we call them phonons, okay, in the similar fashion,
if you have like perfectly aligned magnetic moments, and then you process one of them,
and that interacts with the other, processes the other, and you create a wave that acts
as a particle called magnon, yes, yes, and
this is again, I don't want to go into too much discussion, but have you heard of quantum mechanics?
Yes, so there weird things happen, like if you are measuring spin of an electron
in a certain direction, you either get plus one over two or minus one over two,
although they could have been, I mean, quantum mechanically, when you operate on something,
it just goes to one of its eigenvalues, so it's not far away from the truth,
this interaction, thank you, so let's think of four spins, okay, just four spins,
so how much energy do we have here in total?
Go ahead, don't be scared, minus 4j, just four spins,
yes, like this interaction, this interaction, this and this, we don't have this interaction,
okay, do you have any questions so far? No, so let's look at another state where this
is present, so what is the total energy here?
Minus 2j, very good, right, so what about
is it?
Zero, I trust you, so minus minus plus plus, you're right, so what about this one?
What is the check plus 4j? Plus 4j, okay, so remember Boltzmann distribution,
do you remember it? This is the probability of a certain state, KBT, do you remember this?
So, if you are at a certain temperature, let's say you are at a certain temperature,
the probability of having this state is e to the minus 4j over KBT, I mean,
if you want to find the probability, you need to sum all other probabilities, right,
plus for example, this one is e to the zero KBT
and e to the 4j over KBT, do you understand what I'm doing?
So, let's say this is the total probabilities, this is the probability of this one happening,
so it's very small, right, compared to others, this is more probable and this is the most probable,
actually, in fact, if you go to zero temperature, this will be infinitely more probable than the
other, so it will be the only possibility and it will go there, did you follow so far the discussion,
yes? So, what we are going to do is we are going to simulate
any configuration of spins at a certain temperature, okay, at a certain temperature.
So, how do we do this? How will we do this and how it will connect to Monte Carlo method?
Well, there we have Nicholas Metropolis, okay, from Los Alamos, by the way, I want to point out Los Alamos guys,
okay, they built the A-bomb, that's a different story, but Los Alamos brought so many brilliant
people, right, let's just name them Feynman von Neumann, right, Metropolis, Fermi, who else?
Ulam, definitely, and many others, right, and Feigenbaum, by the way, Los Alamos, so some,
and generally numerically interesting thing came out of there, because that was the place
where computers were used massively for the first time, I guess, right, to calculate the effect of
the explosion, you agree? So, let's just look at Metropolis's Magnum Opus,
the greatest work of Metropolis, where is it? Just if we type Nicholas Metropolis
and maybe Metropolis Monte Carlo,
it's not, no?
I wanted to show you the citations, it's more than, it's around 7,000,
but I will show you the paper, never mind, so this is the paper,
equation of state calculation by fast computing machines, like iPhones,
okay, so, this is, is this the part where the sublime part, yes,
we then calculate the change in energy of the system, delta E, which is caused by the move,
if delta E is smaller than zero, if the move would bring the system to a lower state energy,
we allow the move and put the particle in its new position, I will explain this, but
let's read it first from the original, if delta E is bigger than zero, we allow the move with the
probability of this one, E to the minus delta E KBT, so here,
I will tell you something more from this,
let me find that word, those words,
it will be worth it, just let me find,
okay, never mind, so,
I had some point here, let me make that point, and everything will be clear, I promise you, okay,
so how would you calculate magnetization in this system?
Let's say you put four spins into a temperature of some T, and you want to
find the total magnetization, how would you calculate it?
Well, I'm talking about this simple system that has, so what you are going to do is,
for all possibilities, you have the energies, right, and those energies will give you the
probabilities, do you agree? So, what is this total magnetization in this system?
Four, right, if it's one plus one plus one, it's four, so can I do the following? I integrate
over all possible states the probability of being at that energy times the magnetization
at that energy, yes, yes, it's the expectation of magnetization, did you follow this? Yes,
so what we did is, we look at, we sampled the whole system, then we took the possibilities,
and we multiplied them to find the average. Metropolis Monte Carlo approaches it a different
way, okay, it samples with that probability, then it takes the average. So, let me restate this,
in this case, we take all possibilities, multiply them with their probabilities,
then sum them up, right, then average them out. In the metropolis case, you choose,
you already choose the systems with the relevant probabilities, and then you average them out.
Maybe, who can explain what I just told you?
Yes, that's the bad version, yes, so what is the good version?
The good version, they just take the, not the all the probability, but just take some of those,
and at the end of the day, you can get all the probabilities, right?
You take the states according to their probability already, you sample them according to their
probability, then you take those samples and you take the average. If I could find that sentence,
it's much better put in Metropolis's paper, please go ahead and read it and find that sentence.
So, let me restate it one final time. Instead of taking all possible states and averaging them
according to their probabilities, we take the states according to their probabilities and
average them out. The number of states in the first case is, the number of states, I think,
no, that's the whole point. The number in the first case, I have to take all numbers,
everything, everything that is possible.
Let me tell you what what I take. So, Metropolis algorithm tells you that you should take them
in the following way. So, let's say you pick one single spin and you calculate what happens if you
flip it, okay? That's how you calculate delta E. So, let's say you are here
and I choose this one. What is the change in the energy if I flip it? Be careful
when you calculate this.
Yes?
So, 8j. Do you agree? Yes. So, Metropolis says that we should accept this flip with this probability
minus 8j over kBT, okay? And what if you have something like this?
Something like this. What if you flip this one?
What is the delta E?
Minus 8j. Everybody agrees? It's 4j before, then it's minus 4j. Did you follow?
And according to Metropolis algorithm, if the energy decreases, you accept it.
Okay? So, by doing this, energy decreases accept, energy increases accept with this probability.
If you continue doing this, then you are sampling according to Boltzmann distribution eventually.
Okay? I didn't, I was expecting that this part will take like 10 minutes, but it took 30.
So, I will not explain many details of this code. I hope you can figure it out.
So, by the way, the only possible, by the flips, the only possible energy chains are
minus 8j minus 4j, 0 plus 4j and plus 8j. So, if the energy change is minus 8j,
then there is one probability of switching. If it's minus 4j, one probability. What is, what if
the energy change is 0? Again, one probability because e to the 0 over kBT, right? But the others
will switch with this probability. Okay? Did you follow all this? So, I will start with random
spins, up and downs. And this part, you can see that this is the flip, the spin.
That's all. And just these parts are making sure that you are choosing a random spin,
and according to the probability, you flip it. Did you follow? So, let's run it and see what
we get. We get this interesting structure. I have to point out here that this is not the
real dynamics. Okay? This is not like molecular dynamics. It's just we are sampling the system.
Are you following? Do you agree?
200 by 200.
No, that's a very good point. So, each time this picture changes, we actually flip
200 squared spins. Not at the same time. That's very good. All of those are very good points,
but I have very short time, unfortunately. Can you give me five more minutes after 10.30? Yes?
Okay. So, you are flipping each spin. I mean, you are each time looking at one spin.
And here, I actually do that n squared times, but not necessarily with the same order.
Randomly, I pick n squared times. I pick one spin. Should I flip it or not?
With certain probability, I flip it or not? Did you follow all this?
Sometimes, one spin doesn't get picked at this n squared runs, but that's okay.
Okay. So, let's see. So, right now, KBT is 2. What if I change temperature?
So, let's go to this code. So, here, I will start with 1.5. T minimum is 1.5. I will go to
maximum temperature of 3. Then, I will go back to 1.5. Then, I will go back to 3.
So, I want you to see what happens when the temperature is changed. Okay? Ready?
So, this is low temperature, which means that you have aligned magnets. Do you agree?
Okay? The blue parts are minus spins. So, they are all aligned. You have big magnetization.
Now, we are approaching this critical temperature where you have transition
to from order. This is order and you are going towards disorder. Okay? Where your magnetization
will go down to zero. So, you can see that we have almost equal amount of plus ones and minus ones.
Are you following all this?
Let's... Now, did we reach the maximum temperature? We have reached it
now. Now, we go back. So, what will happen when we go back? Any ideas?
Yes?
Yes?
Once you go below critical temperature, you should see the order reappear.
Right? Domains. Very good. So, you will see domains appear and those domains, one of them will dominate.
We don't know which one. So, I think right now my bet is on yellow one.
Right? One of them will dominate and flip the others. No? Blue one?
So, I am taking the bets.
Blue? Yellow. Yellow? Okay.
No one else?
Yes. Yes, yes. There is a hysteresis and again let me restate.
This is not an actual simulation of a magnet. We are just sampling the system. Are you confused?
No? So, this easy model is not easy to solve at all. Okay? Although the name suggests that way.
So, it was solved by this genius, Lars Onsager. Have you heard of him? Not many people have heard of him.
Yes, critical systems and far from equilibrium systems, right? He got the Nobel Prize in 1968
for this stuff and he actually solved the easing model
analytically. Can you believe it? Genius. So, let's look at that paper.
Two-dimensional model with an older disorder transition. Let's just skip through this
paper and you will see like different mathematics introduced to solve this quaternion algebra.
So, 33 pages of pure beauty. Do you see it?
Well, there's only his name here but let's go to acknowledgments
which is before this long appendix.
Is this still the appendix?
No acknowledgment.
Yes, what is the year? 1943. Right in the middle of the war. He solved this problem.
So, he gave us a very nice formula. Okay? Let's find that formula for critical temperature.
Where the critical temperature occurs? Let's go ahead and find that formula.
Yes, there it is.
So, if you rearrange it, ktc over j should be this weird number 2 over ln 1 plus square root 2.
Okay? And we also have the formula for magnetization. Where is that formula?
So, we have analytical solution.
Never mind. I have this formula in my code.
Let me show you. This is that formula. 1 minus sin hyperbolic 2 times j over kbt
to the power of minus 4 in the brackets to the power of 1 over 8. Never mind.
So, what I will do here, are you following? Yes? What I will do here is I will go from,
so I will define tc to be this number 2 over logarithm 1 plus something. And I will go from
half of the critical temperature to the 1.5 of the critical temperature. Okay? And each time
we will start, we will do how many runs? Let's see. We will do 1000 different runs.
Okay? Each one flipping the spins 200 square times. So,
200 square times 1000 gives you 40 million. Right? So, we will sample 40 million pictures
from the system. Do you agree? And, well, let's run this code. And while it runs, I will talk about it.
So, we have run the first one of this temperature. So, let me...
What we are doing is, this one is t critical. So, we start from 0.5 t critical. And we take the system,
we run the system 1000 times and each time we flip 200 squared spins. But we only take the
last 100 steps and average the magnetization from those pictures. Did you follow? Yes?
What do we expect to get? So, magnetization versus temperature. What would you expect?
Let's say all spins pointing at the same direction is 1.
So, when the temperature is low, it should be very close to 1. Right? Then at this point,
it has to go sharply to 0. Right? And remain at 0 forever. Right? Let's see the result.
There you go. And what is this line? The red line? Yes, analytical solution of metropolis. Do you see
that our numerical calculation using metropolis algorithm is matching it almost perfectly?
Do you have any questions? So, this particular point where it switches will be critical for life.
So, this is where life wants to be, at the criticality. And at least now you have a sense
of order and disorder. Next time we will explore those concepts even further. Do you have any
questions? No? Thank you all. Take care.
