Welcome to the Bayesian Conspiracy. I'm Eniash Brotsky. I'm Steven Zuber. I'm Jess Dickey.
I'm Phoenix Elliot.
And today we have Phoenix Elliot with us as you just heard.
This stuff is my special interest when I learned some more about y'all's podcast which Jess is doing. Also Jess is one of my partners.
I was like, oh man, this thing is too high value. You can't not do it.
That's why I'm here. Why this is happening. It's just got to do replacing guilt.
I also feel a little bit like that about the courage to be disliked.
You feel that it would make your community better if everyone in your community was familiar with this stuff.
Right. This is the kind of thing that I think literally everyone should read.
And no one can see the arm pumping unless you could hear it. That was a serious physical emotion behind that too.
Alrighty. Well then, let's get into it.
Actually this is a really good week for me and Steven because we didn't have to do reading and preparing or anything.
We were promised that we would be taught things today. So no pressure or anything guys.
Not only are we going to teach you things, we're going to replace an emotion of yours.
Wait a minute.
With a better emotion.
It sounds like a hack.
It is kind of a hack.
I mean, it's a hack that takes like a lot of work over a long time.
Sounds more like learning something.
Am I going to want to have this emotion replaced? Because I'm kind of attached to most of mine.
There's a section about that.
Okay.
Yes. But yes, the emotion is guilt and tends not to be a pleasant emotion.
This is the web series called Replacing Guilt.
It's a series of blog posts by Nate Soares, who's the executive director of MIRI, which is the Machine Intelligence Research Institute.
How long ago was this written?
That's a good question. Is there a date on it?
The first post was in 2015.
Okay. It's a few years old, but relatively new.
The whole series can be found at Nate's website, which is mindingourway.com forward slash guilt.
That's why that name was familiar.
Yeah. He's got some other stuff on there too, but the series is self-contained.
The objective is to help people who are driven primarily with guilt-based motivation.
It contains some helpful reframes and techniques for, quote,
building and maintaining a powerful intrinsic drive without the need to spur yourself with guilt.
As someone who personally has been driven hugely by guilt in the past, and this is also something I currently struggle with a lot,
I think a lot of people in the rationalist and EA communities could get a lot of value out of this series of posts.
It's not just addressing guilt, but I found that reading it also strengthened my resolve, helped make me more effective,
and it did a lot of work towards alleviating some of my depression and anxiety around specifically productivity.
So that's my recommendation for why you should read it.
It also makes some really cool moral arguments that kind of hide in the beginning of it.
I kind of skimmed past that part in the beginning, but when I re-read it, I was really impressed by some of the parts about just philosophy and moral questions.
Yes?
Yeah, so I guess I was going to say it sounds like you're about to get into the large chunks of the series of posts,
and what I'm excited about and kind of wanted to subprime the audience for was that since I didn't want to...
Well, not that I didn't want to. I wanted to read it. I just didn't want to find time to read it.
It is long.
No, no. It's a little long, but the benefit of doing it this way is that you two have read it at least once each,
and it's going to be more of a learning experience for me and Yin-Yosh,
and thus we can kind of proxy the audience and ask questions and do the learning at the same time.
So I'm excited about it.
Yeah, I like that format.
How long is long?
Well, it's about book length if you go by word count.
And we won't be able to cover all of the specific ideas.
Like there's about 30 blog posts in it, but there's like...
Can like cover the themes and like some of the ideas.
Yeah, there's five chapters each or sections, or I'm not sure what to call them,
but they're made up of a bunch of blog posts and there's kind of an overarching idea.
It's still worth going and reading the individual ones,
but yeah, there's generally like here's the overarching theme that we're going to do for like these five blog posts,
and then these are the little sub themes.
I bet by the end you can sell me on this.
The one thing I will say is that this is like, for something that is book length,
this is very skimmable because he tends to repeat his points because it's actually a blog.
So he'll like repeat things from previous posts so that people have context.
So if you're good at speed reading, you could read this pretty quickly.
I'm not, but I kind of like how the Yudkowsky sequences are kind of skimmable
because they link to old stuff and he might have a whole post devoted to making,
say the idea of making beliefs pay rent,
but then later he'll just use that one sentence and like it a hyperlink because it's like,
all right, if you need context, click this.
So you're saying it's that sort of format too?
And he'll re-explain concepts sometimes.
Cool.
So you can usually just like skip ahead.
It also, yeah, it connects to some other posts and less wrong and to some other blog posts.
So if you did want to get deeper, it has the little clickable links like less wrong.
I feel like a good way to read this.
I mean, unless you just face the whole thing like me would be a maybe reading one post per day.
If you're going to try to make it into kind of a meditative habit,
I could see that being a cool way to try to absorb the material.
And then it's also not so daunting of a big old chunk of words.
And that'd be a really good month.
That'd be a good month.
All right.
So I'm going to attempt to summarize some of the key points and feel free to ask questions as we go.
Chapter one is, or section one, whatever the first series of blog posts are,
are about distinguishing between two different types of guilt.
The first section addresses the restless guilt, or I think he said listless guilt as well,
that people feel when some part of them thinks they're not doing what's important.
So if you're someone who struggles with morality and spends a lot of time
wondering what the right thing or the best thing is to do with your life,
I recommend not skipping this part or like skimming through it,
kind of waiting to get to the better stuff later on.
Because this part was, it actually contains some really powerful arguments.
And this was the part that I kind of overlooked during my first read through.
This sounds like really interesting. What are some of these arguments?
Mainly it addresses common arguments about whether anything really matters,
or do people really do anything because they care about stuff or because of morality,
or are people just selfish and doing everything for signaling?
And what are the answers?
The answers are, well, it gets a lot deeper in depth,
but the TLDR version is that, A, it is possible to care about things outside yourself,
and B, that things larger than yourself are important,
and you're allowed to care about doing something about them.
So I think this was a question you asked earlier of like,
but I like guilt. It's useful.
Yeah, maybe not. I like it.
Well, yeah, but like I need it.
Yeah.
And the idea across all of these is to replace guilt with intrinsic motivation,
and that like having things that you care about that drive you towards those,
instead of like driving yourself with like self-punishment.
Okay.
Yeah, so I think like this was, first of all, it's called replacing guilt,
not eliminating guilt.
Something's going in its place, but so when you first,
when we first talked about it, I don't know, a couple months ago,
and I got the 92nd version,
the first thing that came to my mind was like physical pain,
and it's like you touch a stove top or something hot or get poked,
and you're like, ow, that hurts.
That serves a very important evolutionary purpose.
Like you don't want to eliminate that,
but it would sure be cool if you could replace it with something else.
Like in, probably was the God delusion, I think.
Richard Dawkins talks about like the evolutionary origins of pain briefly,
and how it's like physically imaginable that you could have like,
just kind of like an alarm in your head rather than like this fucking hurts,
and it would sure be nice if like you could,
I mean, for me, it's the kind of thing where,
I don't know, you hit your toe on something,
and you're like, okay, ow, yeah, that hurt.
Like I noticed I hit that, I won't do it again, brain, you bet.
And then it hurts for like 10 more minutes.
It would sure be nice if you could just tell the part of your brain
that's screaming at you that this hurts,
that hey, I'm aware of it, we're good now.
Do you think you'd be as motivated if the pain went away quickly?
Like as motivated in the future, I mean.
Maybe it wouldn't be just like an on-off flag,
it could be like an internal siren with different volumes, I don't know.
This is a quick side tangent.
You can totally train yourself to do that,
and to like to react to pain this way.
It's, you then have to like do some of it on manual,
where you have to like make sure that you don't actually die
from things that might are hurting you.
But like, this is like how Wim Hof stuff works,
or you just like, you learn to interpret stuff as signals,
instead of like automatically convulsing.
How what stuff works?
Wim Hof, he's the guy with the ice powers.
The ice man.
Oh, okay, after him, yes.
It applies equally well to pain.
Okay, yeah.
No, I mean, I, yeah, I know there's levels of doing this
that go way above what I can do,
but I mean, I'm at the point now where,
if I do wang my foot on something,
I tend to just to like, I notice it,
I don't even react before I feel my face like grimacing in it,
I just, I can catch it at that point most times.
But then there are people, you know,
that I've seen on whatever videos of,
I guess back when cable was a thing,
like the martial arts experts who could stand there
and like just take a full kick to the nuts,
or like a slap to the face and not flinch.
That sounds like, yeah,
that sounds like a human attainable skill then.
That's pretty cool.
So if you can do that with pain,
it sounds like we could do this with guilt maybe too.
Yeah, there's a few posts that I think I'll comment on
after we get through the initial summaries
Update from the sucker punch has something to do with that
and don't steer with guilt.
We'll talk about those later.
Yeah, those are two good ones to pull out.
Neat.
You mentioned briefly also the,
the idea that does anything matter,
I think you said, or something like that.
Did I hear that wrong?
That was what it is,
that's what like the first chapter is addressing.
Is that something that can be addressed in like a single chapter?
Because I think human,
I personally have been struggling with existential angst
for a long time.
Yeah, no, I'd suggest reading it.
Nate solved it, bro.
You waited this long to tell me?
It's over.
Next chapter is, or arc,
Sory is convincing the readers
that they should drop their obligations
and get rid of the word should entirely from their vocabulary.
He asks, if there's nothing that you felt like you should be doing,
then what would you really be wanting to do with your life?
The point being that should is,
this word that people use to kind of beat themselves up
or a false like motivator,
I need to do this thing because I should do it,
because Lil, who's saying that you should,
is it like your mom's voice from when you were a child,
or is it your boss,
but like you don't actually care about, you know,
like trying to figure out what your
in the first chapter, what do you actually care about,
and then calibrate towards,
is this thing that I feel like I should do,
actually pushing me towards that?
I really like that,
and I can't reflect an articulate thought on that in real time,
but that sounds actually really powerfully resonating.
I think it's common in the rationalist community, too,
to look at something like traditions of,
I don't know, surrounding funerals,
or solstices, or weddings,
and say, okay, well, that's what people are supposed to do,
or what, you know, the script says,
and then not reading from the script.
This sounds like a more generalized version of that.
I'm going to, I cannot,
this, I guess, meta note,
this is part of the reason I think I was disliked so much
by my teachers through like primary school,
up until about high school,
because I would do the same thing I'd ask,
and get all these clarifying questions,
and suck up a lot of class time.
It wasn't until high school where I got teachers that appreciated that.
That I can do basic algebra.
Like, why do I have to do this whole worksheet?
Yeah, it was more just like,
oh, that's really interesting.
Can we talk about that for 10 minutes?
Like, not really letting them get away from it,
but the good ones would say, you know what,
we got to get through the lesson plan,
but soon after class, or after school,
let's talk about it as much as you want.
Those are the teachers I got in high school.
Cool.
I will cease interrupting,
but no, I won't, let's be honest.
But I'm enjoying this, that's really cool.
You'll cease feeling guilty about interrupting.
I am occasionally an etymology nerd,
and I really enjoyed the etymology of the word should,
in that it's actually just the past tense of shall,
which kind of helps me think about this,
because it feels like, when I say, like,
I should do this thing, it's like saying,
like, I am declaring that at some point in the past,
I already decided that I, like, should do this thing.
I have pre-committed to do this thing.
But a lot of the times, like,
you didn't do that before, you're doing it right now.
Like, you're pretending that you already pre-committed,
and like, acting like you already have the weight
of that pre-commitment on you.
And you...
That is, that's an interesting thing to learn.
Yeah, I personally have had a tap,
even before I read this, of if I say,
I have to do this, or I need to do that,
trying to just always reframe that as,
I want to do this.
And part of the reason is,
if you say, I have to, or I should, or I need to,
it kind of feels negative, like some outside pressure's making you do it,
and that sucks, whereas if you make it seem like your own choice,
then it feels better.
And then also, you can gut-check it.
Because if it doesn't, if you say,
I want to pay this bill today,
I don't know, maybe that's a bad example.
Well, when I was, like, renovating this place,
I never thought of things that, like, I should be doing right now.
It was always like, this needs to get done,
and I want to get the place done so I can move in,
so gonna go to it, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, or even for me, like,
so I have a lot of anxiety about explaining things to audiences.
And I was, like, going back and forth a lot about
whether to even be here on this podcast today.
And when I, like, looked at, like,
okay, do I want to do this?
Like, if I say, like, I want to do this thing,
the next thing, the next thought is, like,
okay, why do I want to do this thing?
And there are actually reasons that I want to do it.
There's reasons that I don't want to do it,
but it turns out, like, the reasons that I wanted to do it
outweighed those of, like,
I want to be the kind of person that can do this thing.
And actually examining, like, why you're deciding to do a thing
can go a long way in feeling intrinsic motivation about it
instead of guilt.
All right.
Yeah.
The third arc,
Sorz introduces techniques for building intrinsic drive
without the need for a guilt as a motivator.
He points out in these chapters,
working yourself ragged is not a virtue.
That's actually the name of one of the posts.
And that the work too hard and then rest a long time narrative
is a dangerous narrative.
Oh, what's that?
Working too hard, you bring yourself out.
And then when you're resting a long time,
then you're not being productive
and then you're feeling shitty about it.
You can also lose a lot of momentum.
Yeah.
There's also,
this is also where he talks about the resting in motion thing.
That a lot of people think of rest as, like,
just sitting doing nothing, like recuperating.
But he makes the argument that, like, really restorative rest is
more like, actually, you're just doing whatever you want
and not being constrained by other people
or systems or whatever.
And that, like, if you really feel like just getting up
and going on a hike, that can be really restful,
even though you're, like, doing active stuff.
Yeah.
I absolutely find that true.
There's definitely a different feeling between,
I still have energy to go for a hike
and I'm kind of recuperating from this versus,
I've burnt myself out at work
and all I have the energy for is to scroll Facebook
and drink a beer and be kind of low grade,
like, dissociating or kind of miserable.
That's not a rest.
That reminds me on, there's a subreddit that I like,
that isn't as, like, pejorative or mocking as it sounds
called White People Twitter.
For example, Julia Gaeliff was on,
I saw, not on, like, the front page of it,
but it was the, this was,
I probably saw this on Facebook like three years ago
before I stopped being on there,
like a picture of her tweet that was, like,
she went and saw a dog or, like,
she went to go try and pet a dog that, like,
then didn't want to pet her or didn't want to be pet
and then as she was leaving, the person said,
you always do this, you never make friends
or something to their dog.
And so there was one that I saw on the yesterday
that was, quote,
tired of explaining that I don't have time,
doesn't mean literally every second on my schedule
is accounted for, but rather,
I'm giving as much of myself as I'm currently able to give.
And I like that a lot.
I spend a lot of my time, and I'm not,
that sounds like I'm more, like,
stretched out than I am,
but, like, most of my time at home is just, like,
relaxing and doing nothing productive,
which I like to be productive during
a several hour chunk of the day,
and then I like to go home and, like,
watch reruns or, you know...
Yeah, like, wind down.
Yeah, yeah.
Exactly.
And I do a lot of that, so...
Anyway, I, that was
somehow relevant, I've forgotten how,
but then, I guess, nicely reframing things, and...
Tied into their whole resting and relaxing.
Yes, thank you.
I knew it was, I knew it wasn't out of nowhere.
Yeah, somewhere in here,
I forget which section there's, um,
a concept to sort of managing
different streams of work
or things you have to do,
and, like, there's job work.
Man, I should stop cracking my knuckles.
Like, there's job work,
like interpersonal relationship work,
and, like, one of the things that you have to do
is, like, take time to
recover and, like, rest,
and, like, if you don't do any of that,
you'll have bad results.
Yeah.
You have to, like, balance all of these things
and, like, taking time to
do something not productive
is actually important.
I think that's why I've only had,
I've only worked at two different tech companies,
and the one I have, the one I met now,
doesn't actually have a ping-pong table available to us,
but their main office does, and I don't play ping-pong.
But the point is, like,
I think at a good workplace,
if they have things to do, like, that aren't work-related,
no one should get upset at you for, you know,
if you use it for 15 minutes a day.
Like, a couple weeks ago,
me and my three co-workers went out into the alley
between the buildings via our office
and, like, threw a football around,
and, like, that was actually really got, like, just moving
and, like, the acts of, like, having to coordinate
and, you know, throw stuff.
Like, that was actually good to get the juices flowing again, so...
That's, like, team-bunding.
That, too. Yeah.
Like, actual team-bunding,
as opposed to the forced company event.
Right. But I guess, like, 15 minutes of, like,
completely not doing anything for the boss time
actually leads to more productive last four hours of the day, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, they've actually shown that in workplaces
where they do expect you to be at your desk every minute
that you're on the clock and, like, my last job
where you can't go on Facebook for two seconds,
you're only allowed to be doing work stuff on your computer,
you can't use your phone, you can't take breaks,
unless it's, like, your half-hour mandated lunch break.
Uh, even brains don't work like that.
Yeah.
No matter how hard we try to domesticate them with, you know,
15 years of schooling, that's just not how it shakes out.
Oh, boy. Yeah.
Yeah.
Like, people will get much more work done if they,
I guess the Pomodoro method is kind of
work for 25 minutes, take a five-minute break.
There's a reason that they have you do that.
You can't just keep working in these uninterrupted blocks.
Not four-hour uninterrupted blocks.
Yeah.
Anyway, back to the third arc.
Instead of giving it to society's urge to work
unrealistically hard or long, or giving up
and believing that it's not even worth trying,
SORs instead suggest that we can change our behavior
by approaching obstacles from a mindset of experimentation
and creativity, instead of attempting to berate
and guilt ourselves into submission.
And I really like that approach.
I found that this is especially good
when you're doing something boring or repetitive
and you can't get up the motivation for that reason.
You can kind of like make it a game and be like,
well, how could I actually make this harder?
Or like, how fast can I finish doing this thing
and then like time myself or, I don't know,
can I do this backwards or something?
And he also argues there's no such thing
as a bad person in the third arc
and includes some helpful reframes for self-compassion.
So there's a lot going on in this middle part.
Is that no such thing as a bad person in like the
Mr. Rogers slash, I don't know,
or is it just like the unconditional acceptance
like psychologist's point of view?
I'm not sure. I don't remember what Mr. Rogers says.
I think it's more of a, you are like, I don't know.
There are bad actions and not bad people.
Do you remember Phoenix?
The way I remember it is basically like,
the concept of a bad person is not helpful
and it's just a way to apply guilt.
And that like, you can just like go
with the concept of people being bad.
Basically everyone is trying to do
whatever they're trying to do and like,
just like how like the concept of evil
is kind of silly and unrealistic.
Right. No, I love it. That's perfect.
And that ties into last week's less wrong post
about all your enemies innately evil.
And it's like, no, they're just like, you know,
yeah, people, I love it.
That's basically what you said,
but that's a phrase that I like a lot
that people are just trying their best.
You know, even if they're being a dick,
even if they're, so that's the thing,
is they're being a jerk. They're doing mean things.
They're not jerks. They're not mean people.
They're just, they're people doing those things, you know.
Yeah. And this focus is more on your self-concept.
The idea of, so we're just kind of bringing up
in the first three sections, objections people might have.
Like, well, how do I know what matters?
And this one, it's kind of, what if I am just a bad person?
So this seems not so much to be looking at the outside world
and trying to judge other people,
but the tendency people have to be like,
I didn't do this essay on time. I'm a bad person.
You can just be like, I didn't do this essay on time.
And that sucks, but I'll try harder next time.
There's no reason to yell at yourself, especially after the fact.
It sounds a lot harder to do if you are always reminded
that you have hurt a person.
If you've hurt someone? I don't know if that applies
because this is more of like kind of failing to live up to your own expectations.
I could see maybe if you failed to live up to, say, your mom's expectations
and it feels like you're hurting her.
So this is for like a very specific type of guilt.
I feel like now's a good time to talk about Update from the Sucker Punch, though.
I'll go for it.
So this post is one of like ten posts in this section,
which is in particular about like if you've done something
that's harmed someone else and like the...
There's one path that people often take where it's like
you realize that you've hurt someone else and then you spend the next like week
just sort of like punching yourself in the brain about it
and just like applying guilt to yourself over and over.
And it makes the argument that instead of guilt,
you can do a thing that like one might describe using similar words,
but as long as like if you say you just have like sort of a pretend like agent
that like doesn't have emotions and just tries to do things well,
like it's easy to imagine this thing would like just learn what it did wrong
and then like try to do the right thing in the future and then be done with it.
And it makes the suggestion that you can just, you can do that.
You can allow yourself to not like punish yourself with guilt
and just try to figure out what went wrong, what the mistake was,
and how to change one's future behavior to not make that mistake again.
And then once you've done that, that's actually like the only like duty you really have
in this kind of situation is to try to be better.
And self-flagellating is really just a social signaling kind of thing
to show people that you cared.
But like other people probably don't want you to be self-flagellating
if they like care about your well-being.
And so like if you and other people are on the same page about this,
you can just both agree to not self-flagellate about these kinds of things
and just try to update instead.
I think it's very hard to wrangle emotions like that.
All of this is very difficult, but it works if you like practice it.
Yeah, the update from the sucker punch.
I remember distinctly after reading this like the next day,
I think I ended up using it and I caught myself in the pattern of
I fucked this thing up.
Wait a minute.
Okay, what did I do wrong?
That was this thing.
What did I learn from this?
That in the future you should do it this way.
Okay, now I get to stop feeling bad.
It's like I've committed to not doing this in the future.
And it actually worked.
It didn't completely get rid of the guilt or the bad feelings about having messed up,
but I kept remembering like every time I would catch myself starting to feel bad.
I would be like, oh yeah, no, we already went through this.
I know what I learned from that and then like it would alleviate it pretty considerably.
Yeah, basically like you're allowed to not get stuck in a negative self-talk loop about it.
Yes.
Which is like whatever a therapist would tell you.
The fourth arc has more techniques for building intrinsic drive.
So I suggest drawing on the ways the world around you is broken
and figuring out if there's anything that you can do to make it less so.
That's a good one.
Yeah, well what I liked about this is that
he specifies your intrinsic drive doesn't have to necessarily be save the world.
Or like build a galaxy spanning human civilization, but it could be
I want to help this one specific person.
Or like I want to help dogs.
I don't know.
You just look for a way that the world's broken.
Man, there's lots of stray dogs.
What could I do to fix it?
And then you have a goal.
Go ahead.
And like the really important qualifier here is that it has to be something
that you personally actually care about.
Not something that you've been convinced by other people is like a good thing to care about.
Yeah, or not doing it for signaling purposes or whatever.
Unless like, I don't know.
I guess I could see a scenario where I'm trying to be a politician
so I'm going to do stuff for signaling reasons because it leads to this main goal that I have of power.
Like alright, whatever.
Generally, you probably don't want to do stuff for signaling purposes though.
Speaking of signaling purposes, I'm still kind of hung on the last,
it was from the last chapter, but the like that self-legulation is largely like social signaling.
But I've had periods in my life where I like would wake up and have like a few seconds
where I like immediately felt like shit before.
Like I remember the thing I was feeling bad about the day before.
And like nobody knew like that was just me like having this problem, right?
So that's not, I wasn't signaling like anybody but myself.
Yeah.
In my case, when I do it, it seems like I'm self-signaling.
I think that this, and this might just be like pop psychology,
but like my impression is that this is a habit that you learn from your parents or from other authority figures
that when you mess up, you have to apologize and maybe grovel.
Like basically be like, I messed up, I messed up, I'm so sorry.
I'm really proving that I know, you know, I understand that I made this mistake and you do it to yourself.
So you're like internally signaling to yourself that you were a good person.
I kind of wish we had Matt Freeman here.
We can interrogate him on whether that is the various aspects of your sub-agent signaling to each other.
Oh, well, I think I can speak to the fact that it probably is, right?
I don't know.
I don't know what he would say, but that's how I picture it.
The way that I kind of bifurcate in my head, like if I'm having something like this,
this wasn't a technique I had back when I was having this guilt issue that I'm thinking of.
But I mean, you can have the part of you that's like really beating yourself up
and you can just kind of talk to it as a separate person and be like, look, it's okay.
We can get through this and I know why I feel this way, but we can do this instead.
And sort of like treating your sub-agents as if they're different people in your mind.
I think that's maybe not what Matt would say, but that's how I would do it.
But I'm interested to hear what you would say as well.
There are a couple of models about this.
One is that growing up people tend to know other people who apply guilt at them,
like often it's one's parents or teachers or whoever.
And the way we internalize this is that we sort of build up a model of those people,
maybe sort of glom them all into one sort of pseudo person in our mind.
And then we just sort of run that in the background as just like part of us.
And so I think the sort of parts thing of like one part is sort of guilting the rest is pretty accurate.
And that this is, I think the reason that it works this way is so that like,
if you do this preemptively to yourself, you actually,
assuming that it's accurately modeling the way the world is going to interact with
and like possibly punish you, preempting that sort of reduces the external harm.
Where like, if you can self-flagellate before getting actually flagellated by someone else,
this is protective in a way.
I think that makes sense though.
If you remember it by all means, just shoot it out.
But I was thinking, I think you help me resolve the distinction.
Like, it's not social signaling necessarily because I just imagined as, you know,
the hypothetical audience that I might draw attention with that.
Like, I'm not signaling to anybody.
Fuck that.
This must all be wrong.
But self signaling makes sense.
This all reminds me a lot of like the best way to lie to other people is to convincingly lie to yourself first.
Speak with George Costanza.
It's not a lie if you believe it.
And that like, maybe the best way to like really signal to other people that like,
you're sufficiently punishing yourself is to actually punish yourself.
So speak with Robin Hansen.
I think that's perfect.
Yeah.
No, that's a good point.
I like it.
All right.
Thanks for letting me dig into that a little bit.
No, that was good.
So one of the posts that we, from section three that I want to talk about earlier,
don't steer with guilt is, um, so if you imagine like,
if you have like a graph of like, you're in this current state and you have like actions that you could do,
and there's like this whole big branching graph of like paths you could take,
and it argues that the correct way to use guilt is to set up guilt on like some of these states where like,
you really want to avoid these where like, you don't like,
you really want to avoid accidentally like killing someone with your car.
And so you like place on like the path where like,
you get really drunk and then drive your car, like a big pile of guilt like waiting there.
Like you aren't there yet, but it's like there and you can see it waiting for you.
A problem that a lot of people have is they just put it in way too many places.
And that if you're hitting like the guilt branches very often at all,
then you're wasting a lot of energy on hitting these like self punishment outcomes
to try to like, to try to steer where you go.
And this is really inefficient.
And that he makes the argument that instead of like steering through these paths with guilt,
you steer with intrinsic motivation instead.
And you save guilt for like the really negative outcomes that you like really strongly want to avoid
and that are like worth punishing yourself for like if you hit those
and like leaving the threat of self punishment there as a way to like avoid them,
but not just using that all the time.
Makes it much more potent when it's used to.
Yeah, like I feel like the example of driving drunk and hitting a child
probably is one of those times where guilt would be appropriate
and you don't want to use the same amount of guilt to steer yourself away from the cookie jar.
Really hitting any person, not just a child.
Yeah.
What if it's Hitler?
What if it's baby Hitler?
Okay, in that case, he'd be proud.
Yeah, we solved WASP 101.
I think there's something to be said too about like,
if you just feel guilty all the time, it's not even doing anything anymore.
It's not effective.
It's not even steering at that point.
Yeah, then it's just driving with the parking brake on.
The analogy to pain there still fits.
Like if your foot hurt all the time, whether or not you just banged it on furniture,
then it's not giving you a useful signal.
Yeah, that's a good analogy actually.
I'm really glad that you thought of that.
I'll see how many more times I can shoehorn it in.
So the thing you just said about driving with the parking brake on,
that's one thing that people find if they're driven by guilt is that it can be paralyzing.
Where like no options look good.
And you just like, you just can't do anything because everything looks bad.
And I think this happens for a lot of people.
Yeah.
God damn.
My brother just borrowed the Neon Genesis Evangelion series from me.
And I think that's basically one of the primary emotional themes of that series.
Is that you hear people that feel terrible about everything they do and there's no good options.
Have guilt, friend.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The end of the fourth arc talks about that when you're given the choice between bad and worse,
you can feel good about choosing bad.
That sometimes there are a lot of bad choices, but you're still allowed to make value judgments.
It also talks about coming to terms with the fact that you might fail and discusses how in this process you can turn guilt into resolve.
And you can feel fulfilled with struggling to make the future as bright as you can make it without beating yourself up about it or taking on more than you can realistically handle.
So it's kind of the techniques of not needing to do the absolute best thing all the time, just doing a better thing.
Yeah, basically beating yourself up about something is inefficient if you want to actually achieve something.
Another thing that applying guilt to certain paths, another effect that that has is you can make certain paths unthinkable because,
well, I can't do this path because then I would be a bad person.
And if a path is unthinkable, then you can't actually work with it and try to find the optimal outcome.
If actually all of the options are somewhere between bad and worse, you need to be able to think about them.
And if you just write all of them off immediately as like, this makes me a bad person so I can't do it, then you can't do like...
Literally anything.
Yeah, you can't do math about which one is actually better.
Yeah, I'm reminded of a conversation that I had with a co-worker who makes an effort to not just eat a suffering friendly diet but an environmentally friendly diet.
He tries to buy ethically sourced clothes and all that stuff.
It's not a rebuttal to the vegan to point out that they kill mice when they harvest the grain, right?
Yes, that sucks, but that's like a reality of it, right?
Unless you're finding some safe way to grow this all yourself and carefully hand or move each bug or something before you harvest it, some suffering is going to be involved.
But that doesn't mean that you're not doing a good thing.
It might not be the perfect thing because the perfect options aren't on the table, so you choose the last bad one.
Yeah, exactly.
I feel like this sounds like a Scott Alexander style nuance.
Was he the one that talked about maybe eating vegetarian one day a week being a lot better than eating meat all the time or something?
He's definitely said something like that.
I think he personally has some kind of role where he doesn't eat meat unless he's going out to eat, if I remember correctly, and then he almost never goes out to eat.
I'm pretty sure it's not original to him, but I think he's mentioned that, yeah.
Yeah, at least I heard it from, I think it was late star codex, the idea that you can make an improvement and if you're not ready to make the commitment to doing something all the way, you can still do a bit.
You know, it's like giving 5% to charity and it's like, look, could you afford to give 30%?
Probably if you pinch depending on who you are, but like, yes, maybe you could theoretically afford to give 30%.
But like, that's not a sacrifice you're willing to give a 5% sounds totally manageable and it's way more than most people you're still doing a really good thing.
So, all right, I like it.
And then in the last dark source introduces some mental stances that make guilt seem like an alien concept.
A particularly good article here is one called confidence all the way up that I wanted to particularly pull out.
I highly recommend reading this one. If you don't have the time to read the whole series, I think we can link to that one and the other two that we mentioned.
Confidence all the way up teaches the skill of being confident in your ability to make a difference and be effective while not being overly sure of anything.
He also discusses the concept of desperate reckless defiance, each of which is a link, which is a kind of reframe of the general less wrong methods of rationality kind of ethos of doing the impossible
or having the heroic mindset. And it's very inspiring.
Well, I've actually had a quote pulled out from confidence all the way up, which was,
Insofar as I'm uncertain of my content, I'm confident in my analysis, except I'm not fully confident in my analysis.
But insofar as I'm uncertain of my analysis, I'm confident in my reasoning procedures, except I don't put faith there either.
But insofar as I'm uncertain of my reasoning procedures, I'm confident in my friends and failsafe mechanisms that will eventually force me to take notice and update.
Except that's not quite right either. It's more like every lack of confidence is covered by confidence one metal level higher in the cognitive chain.
The result is something that reads socially as confidence, regardless of how much empirical uncertainty I'm under.
And that I remember that one also really helping me where I was kind of trying to figure out what confidence is, or maybe more specifically assertiveness that's something I struggle with a lot.
And I was coming at it from totally the wrong angle of like, this is a way that you pretend.
Like, it's a way that you do tone of voice and body posture and facial expressions to convey that nothing upsets you.
And I like this take much better, which is kind of a much calmer idea of confidence.
Yeah, instead of trying to fake it, there's actually a way to get there.
Yeah, and that's to actually be confident in, well, I'm pretty good at what I do.
And if I screw up, there's my co-worker who can help me.
And if he screws up, we could go to the boss and then like, if no, but none of us can figure it out.
Like, there's always ways to cover your ass.
There's a thing that comes up a lot when people are talking about confidence of like, on some level, you know that like, no matter how bad you are at this thing, you're going to do like, you're probably not going to die because of it.
And that like, even if you fail at doing the thing, even if like, you fail at the mental processes that would like, let you maybe try to figure out how to do it.
Like, there's still other layers of being able to handle existing that is always sort of fallbacks that if you can notice all the layers of fallbacks there, you can feel confident that on some level it will work out, even if not necessarily completely on like the immediate level.
Alright.
Yep.
And is that the entirety of the thing?
That's what I got.
Cool.
And so how has, I guess, I'm going to start with how has this helped you overall?
The parts that helped me were the replacing guilt thing, the recognizing it when I'm, let me back up a little bit.
I went through a couple periods of, you know, having like, lost my house in a fire, being unemployed, and one of the things that I was struggling with was a lot of depression and feeling bad about not working full time during the periods where I was in school or when I was unemployed.
And it led to having just whole days where I just felt bad about myself the entire day and reading this helped me to kind of look at that feeling and be like, well, what, is there any purpose for me to feel bad right now?
Is this actually helping me in any way?
And mostly, no.
Like I was still motivated to finish my classes and then go apply for a bunch of jobs and then like do all that stuff and in between it's like, that's what I'm doing right now.
It's, it seems so obvious and it's a bit frustrating to talk about because coming from where I was before it was the least obvious thing in the world.
Having been raised in an environment where it's like, yeah, you need to feel guilty all the time.
I mean, I was raised Catholic.
For what it's worth, I think everyone can relate to a time in their life where they felt that way.
Most people probably.
Yeah, at least most.
I mean, I can certainly think of times where I started doing around or sat around doing very little other than just like, again, feeling guilty or feeling like I fucked up or something.
And sure, now I can look back and say, man, you could have just not wished all the energy.
But at the time, you don't really see an option.
But what you're saying is that if you had been armed with these techniques beforehand, you might have seen that option almost immediately or at least sooner.
Yeah, you can catch yourself.
And then there was something that I forgot to actually clarify or follow up on.
The first chapter talked about the listless guilt and that was the idea of being guilty about not doing anything in particular.
And then the second type of guilt was the pointed guilt, which was the guilt about not doing one particular thing that you feel like you should be doing.
Yeah, I was going to say what I've gotten out of this, especially, is there's a lot of little mental habits that once you start seeing these patterns and seeing the good and bad versions of them,
even if you're generally pretty good at this, there's still a lot of little ways that these can sneak in.
And this has gotten me a lot better at noticing when I'm doing that and being able to consciously intervene.
And eventually it sort of, like, percolates down and becomes a little bit more automatic.
Another thing that I got out of is, especially just like being in the rationalist, the AA community, especially in Berkeley,
a lot of people are trying to save the world.
And I learned that literal world saving is not actually that intrinsically motivating for me.
And I kept trying to use it in this way and kept failing and kept just not really doing anything with it because of that.
And this is really helpful for letting me reorient around the things that actually drive me.
Honestly, I'm still working on some, but I don't constantly feel guilty about feeling like there's this thing that should be motivating that just isn't.
We're feeling bad that you're not personally trying to save the world single-handed.
Yeah. I was just going to say, I feel like I'd be much more personally motivated to save the world if I felt like I had any reasonable avenue to doing so.
Like if I was Superman, and instead of being out there saving people or whatever, producing infinite energy for the planet,
I was just sitting here recording a podcast and holding a day job or something, then I think Superman should feel guilty for having a day job, right?
But the fan fiction metropolitan man covers all of that.
But yeah, I went through something like that too. I think shortly after I discovered the rationalist community, I'm like, oh my god, there's all this stuff out there,
but I'm just not smart enough to do it. I don't know how to even get started. What could I even possibly contribute?
And I guess years ago, I finally was just like, you know what? Nothing. I'll try and have fun, make some money, and maybe throw some money at the people who are doing this.
I also like to focus on smaller things that I can help with, local things, people near me that I care about, that kind of thing.
One of the best candidates of a thing I really care about looks more like helping people be more emotionally and internally healthy,
which is why things like this are my special interest in not solving AI.
You need psychologists and you need people working on the community level.
If the entire population of the earth were all trying to save the world, focused on the bigger goals and not focused on helping your neighbor who just fell down the stairs,
then your neighbor would be laying there on the floor. It's important to cover all your bases.
If the entire population of the earth was focused on saving the world, some of them would have to be allocated to these other things,
like keeping the community running and helping the old lady down the stairs.
Then they would be really upset that they're working on that instead of saving the world, so it's good to have a diversity of interests.
There was a really good post, I think. Gosh, I'm trying to remember the name and I'll say who wrote it.
I think Graham and Arnold wrote it and it was about the village and the mission that had a really good analysis of the ways in which this kind of balance is important,
and that if everyone is laser focused on the mission, then no one has friends.
No one's cooking the meals or cleaning the bathroom. It's important.
How long did absorbing this and implementing it in your life take?
How much effort? What's the process like?
I'd say it's ongoing.
I'm still doing that. Every now and then I go back and look at it and then remind it of some things.
It's like, yeah, I haven't done that in a while.
I would like to describe or to compare stuff like this to CBT, where it's an ongoing therapeutic process where you're constantly catching the bad train of thought and then reframing it.
Over time, you get faster at catching it, better at preempting it, better at quickly coming up with a reason and then believing it.
Wait, quickly coming up with a reason and then reframing it?
Like a reframe. I'm trying to think of an example.
One that I had a lot was my friends don't really like me. They all think I'm annoying and they're just tolerating me to be polite.
And then I would be like, no, I'm going to get a less wrong meetup and have a good time.
And then update in favor of the last two times I went to less wrong, I had a good time.
The last three times I went to less wrong, I had a good time.
And then finally it's been like, I've been going to these less wrong meetups for three months.
And now when my brain tries to tell me nobody actually likes me there and I won't have a good time, it's going to suck.
And I'm like, no, all of my data shows the opposite and you feel much more confident in it.
And for some data you didn't have the last one that you missed, many people asked me where you were.
So I think this seems like analogous to like, you know, how long did it take you to absorb and implement the sequences and the methods of rationality and benefit from them?
Right, still happening.
Exactly. It's like, well, I don't know, seven years ish and on, you know, plus.
And you can still get stuff out of rereading them.
I'm like, as we're doing the sequences on this podcast, I'm like, oh, yeah, that was a good one.
Yeah, like going back and rereading this was really helpful for me because I had totally missed that beginning part about like the part where it was saying, here's how you can care about something,
find something to care about and then believe that it's worth caring about.
It's actually like a really important step that I'm really surprised that I kind of just like breezed past the first time.
I guess I already felt that way or like didn't think I had anything to learn, but I was wrong.
Yeah.
And when I first read this, that was like back when like I was constantly feeling kind of aimless because of like being surrounded by people trying to see the world and not quite knowing what thing I actually wanted instead.
And sections four and five were like kind of hard to internalize back then, but I've gotten more to a place where like I can actually do anything with this.
So if a listener, if you're going to live a listener one takeaway now that they could implement before they dive into this and start reading, what would be a thing they should take just to make immediate cool life improvement?
Oh man, I have to choose.
I kind of think that like the one I said earlier about replacing the word should try to if you catch yourself saying I should do this or I ought to be doing this or I need to do this.
Try I want to do this because and if you have a reason.
Good, then it probably feel much more aligned and much less like someone's trying to bully you into doing something that you would have done anyway.
If you don't have a reason, then maybe you don't really need to do it.
I'm thinking there was like some mundane ways to like practice that habit that, you know, you don't have to start on hard mode with, you know, resolving conflicts of guilt.
This afternoon, I had the thought I should eat something for lunch because I'm not hungry, but I know it will be later.
And so I can, I think I'll try and set a flag in my head for whenever the word should comes up in my stream of consciousness and just say, Stephen, you want to eat lunch now because if you don't, you're going to be really pissed and hungry at two.
Right?
Yeah.
Okay.
I can definitely see that that that particular post should considered harmful is by far the one of these that I've seen passed around the most independently of the whole series.
Yeah, it's a good one.
What was the couple is that should is quote should considered harmful.
Gotcha.
Yeah, I think we've named four specifically at this point and we'll link to those ones.
And you can read the whole thing if you want, or you can kind of just read the best of.
I'm looking through these and trying to find anything that I'd recommend more, but I think that one is it's very is very nicely encapsulated or a lot of the other things sort of require some context around them to use more.
But I think that one's like a nice easy tap to implement.
Like, notice you're saying shit about something and then think about why and whether you actually want it.
Now I'm just trying to think of, you know, someone's listening to this and they're the sounds all very appealing and, you know, that sounds great.
I'd love to feel that way.
But in somewhere in their head, they're like, no, I really should feel like crap about this because I've just fucked up.
Like, is there a way that you would respond to that if someone came to you right now and was like, said that?
Um, I would say that if they said I really deserve to feel like crap about this, I would say why?
Like, how is it helping you to continue to mentally beat yourself up about it?
How is it helping the situation?
Like, does this make you more effective?
I think a lot of people have an internalized sense of justice, though, that perhaps would be violated if they didn't continue feeling guilty for whatever they think their appropriate period of time is.
I would tell them to do the exercise of update with the sucker punch.
Notice that this thing hurt and then what did it teach you?
And then what will you do in the future?
And I think that you can absolve yourself of guilt if you've, in good faith, gone through each of those steps and, like, committed to trying to fix the thing that you did wrong or to do it better next time.
And I think you and I, you know, I start talking about two different kinds of examples.
Like, you're talking about somebody who hurt somebody and feels bad about it or, you know, their fuck up caused actual harm or something.
Whereas I'm talking about the person who might just feel like, you know, I don't know, I...
I'm doing nothing with my life. What's even the point?
Yeah, or, you know, I, um, I can't think of a good example.
Like, I should have tried harder in school or something.
Yeah, like, I got an asthma test or...
Or I should have gone, you know, to get a master's degree or, you know, I should have, I should have gone to higher education and like, you know...
I should have spent more time working out over the past year.
Yeah. And so, you know, the, the waiter, I couldn't, that's, that's an easy one for me to solve having just learned what I've learned in the last hour, which is like, all right, cool.
Instead of saying, yeah, sure, you should have, you can move past that line of thinking and just think, all right, cool, we'll start now.
You know, like, I've got a friend who is, I think he's going to have his last, or his last, he's stopping smoking.
And he's like, yeah, I'm going to quit when I'm 30. And I think that's like the middle of September.
And so, like, he's, this is like looking for another way, but this is a way that I like to think of, of that kind of, like, retrospective, I should have done this.
I can just say, all right, cool. In five years, what will I be thinking that I should have done?
And like, there are boring answers, or there are boring ways to frame that question, but then you can look at like a thing you're doing.
And it's like, yeah, I start every day with, you know, two donuts or something, and I don't walk more than I need to to get to work or something.
It's like, all right, well, where are the odds that in five years I regret doing that? If you feel like they're pretty high, you can just stop that now, right?
I know that I'm, I'm on the tip of like being able to put that in a more interesting way.
But yeah, I think Harry puts it best in chapter 10, maybe, or nine of methods of rationality, where he realizes that, that 10 years from now, he's going to just go back looking at this moment thinking,
if only I had done this differently, my friends would still be alive and the world wouldn't be burning and oh God and like, oh yeah, it's, it's, it's, this is that moment from, for that I'll be regretting in 10 years, wish granted.
Oh, right after he got sorted.
And he was like, I should have told them.
Yeah.
Wasn't that the, or maybe this came up a few times.
I remember he was trying to get McGonagall, like let him buy a first aid kit, like a really intense one that had like blood coagulant and.
Right.
No, that was, that was a few chapters before what I'm talking about, because in that one, he was like preparing for, for things going bad.
Whereas this one, he was, he was realizing that he had a chance to go back in time and stop himself at the path of divergence into evil.
Except instead of going back in time, it was this time right now.
Like your wish is granted.
You are at that period.
I like that.
And that's, I remember like Sam Harris does this section on some of his podcasts that's like the least interesting where it's like a grab bag of like generic interview questions.
And one of them is, you know, what are you doing now that you suspect in 10 or 20 years you'll regret not doing or like, you'll regret doing either like not spending enough time on or doing too much time doing this.
And Robin Hansen had the best answer.
And he's like, if I was aware I was doing something like that, I wouldn't be doing it.
Right.
I would.
I think Robin Hansen is one of the few people who have that answer to give though.
It's true, which is weird, because that's also my answer.
Like, I mean, yes and no, like maybe I would have wished that I read more in 10 years or something, you know, but like I'm currently not like kicking myself for not reading enough books.
It's not like I never read, but I should probably read more.
But like, I don't know.
You just used that should word.
Oh, shit.
I shouldn't use that word as much.
It's funny.
Two years ago, I was in that exact same position where I was really happy with everything I was doing, you know, and now less so.
Now I could answer that question with something.
That's worrisome because I thought I was on the upper track that was going to stay up.
Well, you know, I mean, nothing goes up forever, right?
Everyone has their dips and valleys and then it comes back again.
I have just sort of a tangent about using the word should and that I think I think like once you understand like what the problems are with the word should, you can just start using it in a way that means the right thing to you.
And then he sort of gets to that in the later sections of like, I like here's here's like what should there for you can use it to mean like, Oh, that's the thing I want to update on.
And they're like, Oh, I made a mistake there.
Or like, maybe it's a good idea to do this thing.
And like as long as you like mean it mean that to yourself internally, like it is actually very difficult to stop using the word.
Yeah, there's a I get like you're using it in the spirit of the like the intended way that frames it well for you to say that you shouldn't use the word should like that's a tongue in cheek thing.
That's not like that's not a knock down anything.
That's that's that's missing that that's missing the spirit of what it's getting at.
You could also not use the word should and presumably keep making the same mental mistakes.
Right.
So yeah, yeah, like the point isn't don't use the word should the point is notice when you use it and find out what's driving that.
Right, exactly.
Like notice that you use the word should and then like check if you're using it wrong internally.
All right.
All right.
I don't know that I have very much more to add.
I mean, I'm sold.
I'm going to start reading this.
Yeah.
Like immediately.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
This this this I got exactly what I wanted out of this which is a a crash course.
Yeah, I guess just one one one thing a crash course to prove to me that this is worth reading in whole.
So yeah, I guess my my last thing that I'd say is that like, we probably covered like less than half of the concepts in it.
And they're explained in much more detail in it.
There's a lot of stuff in here.
Like, I don't know, I was going to say probably like better than going to the library and reading like the most popular five self help books.
Yeah.
I would, I think I can confidently with fairly high confidence say that like you'll probably get more out of reading these blog posts.
We live in a weird time man, where people just like go on the internet and spend a lot of effort and time into making these helpful things for people, as opposed to putting them in books.
And the books they'll help books are usually crap too, because people are doing it for money, I guess.
Whereas this is like something he wanted to do.
Yeah.
Well, I'm really tempted now to name drop like the last three books I found really valuable.
Go ahead.
The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem, which ties together a bunch of different things I've been studying in this area, like really well into one framework.
And the courage to be disliked, which how do I even characterize that?
I would say it almost like it kind of is in the title, but it's also not because it sounds like a way to not feel bad about like or to not give a shit about what other people think of you.
But like it's a lot more about kind of the idea of the intrinsic confidence, I think.
Yeah.
And it relates a lot to the guilt thing, I think we're like the courage to be disliked is about how to interact with the world effectively without self-flagellating in like a lot of various ways.
And he's got a lot of things going on, but like how to not self-flagellate unnecessarily and also why you should.
Also what you should.
Or why you should not self-flagellate.
Oh, okay.
All right.
Has anyone here read the book, The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck?
I have.
Is this like that?
I, this might be an unpopular opinion.
I didn't really like The Subtle Art of Not Giving a Fuck.
I mean, I haven't read it, but I've had people recommend it to me, but I feel like maybe something got to get out of it, but I feel like I already don't.
Yeah.
And so maybe they just not like you would like this because maybe it jams with how you're already acting or something.
I think I didn't like it because it doesn't really tell you why you, or like it didn't make a convincing argument to me for why I shouldn't give a fuck.
The Courage to be Disliked has this idea of vertical and horizontal relationships, which was a useful model that I could use to realize when either you're engaging with someone in a way that kind of makes them your superior or that you're talking down to them.
That, in combination with one of the other major ideas from that book of task interference, where like some tasks are your tasks, some tasks are other people's tasks.
One of the somewhat harder to internalize things is that other people's emotions and dealing with them are their task.
And that like it is actually, you actually just get worse outcomes if you take other people's emotions as your own responsibility and other people's tasks as your own responsibility.
And that like it is actually better and more effective for everyone in like in the long run to leave some things up to other people and just choose not to worry about it yourself.
I like the books like this that are just really packed full of ideas and concepts and tools that you can use, subtle art not giving a fuck.
Probably I don't want to like shit on it or anything. It wasn't a terrible book. I think that for a person who's never really thought about any of this kind of thing before it could be really illuminating.
If you already have though, like Steven you were saying I already kind of don't give a fuck, then like it's probably not the book for you.
Good. I'll save myself all the time. The only self-help book I read was during a hard few years.
Geez, probably, I don't know, seven to ten years ago. My autobiographical memory is all over the place.
And I can't remember the name of it, but I bet it's the only self-help book that Richard Weisman wrote.
And he's a psychologist who he came to like, like skeptic meetups and stuff.
And he was, I think he still is a big figure.
It was kind of like influence, science and practice in that it was like, here's the things that like science has done to actually help.
And I tried that and I don't know if it helped or not. I guess I don't know how much. That's the thing that sucks about all of these.
Like I don't know how much worse off how to benefit and do these things.
But things like a gratitude journal or, you know, just spending, you know, a few minutes a day like meditating on gratitude things that you're happy about even if you're not writing them down, but to write them down if you can.
I'm trying to get some other techniques. Oh, I guess like the, the wag the dog's tail thing. And it's like, if you, if you're, if you're slouching your, if you're slouching your posture and kind of dragging your feet,
you know, like just try and like stand up straight, walk more confidently and like project positive body language that actually does turn inward.
I hate to tell you this, but that's the first chapter of 12 rules for life.
Except with lobsters.
That's where the lobsters come from.
Really with the Jordan Peterson lobster memes will leave that to Google.
Yeah, I have either of you read the self authoring books by Jordan Peterson because I was recommended those by somebody.
I haven't read them. My roommate bought the course online and got a lot out of doing it.
Yeah, I had a, I was talking with David Youssef who defends Jordan Peterson's like stuff that he's good at writing.
Yeah.
I guess pre-dark internet and intellectual dark web stuff.
Well, maybe.
Well, I'm not sure when you wrote these.
I think 12 rules is pretty good actually.
Yeah, I've heard that too.
Maybe, maybe his books are just better.
Maybe his books and is not really just books are better than him talking about stuff today about random crap.
The books are still very long winded. I think we've been over this.
If you could skim the books or read a distillation of them.
But I'd considered buying the self authoring program. Is that worth, I think it was 50 bucks?
I feel like you might be better with the CIFAR although I think they're kind of geared more now towards trying to steer people into AI research.
So maybe there's the, what's the Monastic Academy?
Oh man, yeah, you could just go be like a project based monk for a couple months.
I mean, or you could read Replace and Guilt.
That sounds like it's an entire novel length of stuff there.
Yes, if you're ranking these, would you put this one as one of the most valuable things to read on the subject of just like feeling better if you feel like your life sucks?
Yeah, I put it pretty high up there.
I think if you have any kind of even slightly bad relationship with Guilt, you absolutely should read this.
That's the kind of endorsement I was looking for. I didn't mean to interrupt, but that's the yes, perfect.
Yeah, I also would say that, I mean maybe especially for you Aniyush, that part in the beginning about addressing like the nihilistic kind of mindset of like why do I need to care about anything or why should I care about anything
or can people even really care about anything is a really useful part.
Okay, I will also give a look.
A lot of self-help doesn't have that kind of why do I care about helping myself part.
They just assume that like, well, of course you want to get more money or whatever the book is about be more productive.
But like this is like, like let's take a step back.
Why do you want to make more money or be more productive or whatever your goal is?
And then like is this the best like if you don't have a goal, here's a way to find a good one.
If you have one, is this the best thing you could be doing?
Are you doing the things that you're like that will lead you toward that goal correctly?
A lot of stuff that you're not going to hear in your normal self-help books.
Well, alright.
Yeah, that sounds outstanding.
Should we go on to the last wrong post?
Before we begin, I wanted to mention the book club thing that's happening.
Yes.
Okay, so we have a discord.
Yes.
And in the discord, like some people wanted to start a book club, which is cool.
I like book clubs.
I go to a book club myself, right?
And apparently they're going to be alternating fiction and nonfiction and stuff.
And there was a big old vote as to what the first book would be.
And I don't know.
I was kind of hopeful that at some point somebody would be like, hey, we should have leery of what lies dreaming.
But it was the very first book picked.
And I was like, holy shit.
Out of like eight on the list, it won enormously.
Yeah.
So I guess starting when this episode airs is when the book club begins.
So go to our discord if you want to be in on that.
And they're starting with the first four or five chapters.
And then I don't know how frequently they'll be discussing and reading and stuff.
But yeah, that's the first one.
There's a special channel for it in the discord if you're into that sort of thing.
Yeah.
Online book club sounds like much more my vibe too.
I think it encouraged me to read more, like dedicate actual, like that's probably part of the reason that you do a book club that like it actually forces you to read stuff.
Yeah.
And like the social commitment, right?
Rather than just like a personal commitment to finish a boring book.
Yeah.
Well, I mean, if it's a boring book, I don't finish it, even if it's for book club.
Well, that's not entirely true.
I'll sometimes hate read a book.
So I can talk about it in book club.
Hate reading books is pretty fun sometimes.
It's what it's not being fun for me for doing it solo, but doing it when I know I'm going to talk about it.
Like the reason I go to book club is because I really love reading.
But then when you're done reading, you have like this whole thing you've gone through.
And you can't talk about it with anyone else because no one else has gone through.
You can try, but like you could just bore the shit out of one of your friends.
Like, Hey, let me tell you about this fun book I read.
Okay.
So in chapter one, there's this guy and they're like, uh-huh.
That's why I think that's my popularity is so big because you can talk about other things.
That's like why when the Harry Potter train gets rolling, like everyone gets on higher
Potter because you can actually talk about it and the Marvel Universe stuff.
Once you know other people are doing the same thing, you can share the experience.
And so yeah, the book club is like, I read a lot more books than people then get popular
in a year, you know, and so having this other dedicated core people that will read the same
books and we can all talk about it afterwards with is really cool.
So there are like five things that I want to touch on.
Okay.
I'll try and be as fast as possible.
All right.
And I'll probably forget at least one or two.
So one, this is the fastest and least, least relevant.
When things are popular, you want to talk about them.
So Netflix, when they do a series, they do all the episodes at once, which means go home
and watch all of Stranger Things in one weekend.
So you can talk about it with your co-workers on Monday.
I can't.
I can't either.
Many people can't.
And so that's hard for that.
So Disney, when their thing launches in November, they're doing episodic weekly releases for
their original content.
Thank God.
I really think Netflix should go to that too.
They hopefully need to make some changes.
They're losing money.
Because I mean, binging was really big when it was introduced, but now it's like people
want more content every weekend because they've gone through all of your season eight or season
whatever in a matter of a few hours.
Yeah.
I think Netflix has been down in profits and new customers for the last quarter or two.
So they're going to be updating their model if they want to stay in business.
It's like actual healthy competition now, right?
So reading things and boring people by talking about them when they haven't read it yet.
So I'm going to do that to you two and to the listeners.
Oh God, a real time again.
I finished, no, no.
I finished Draco Malfoy in the practice of rationality, which I think I plugged.
If I didn't, I meant to.
I think you did.
I believe you did.
So it was fun.
I enjoyed the whole thing.
I do recommend reading it, although I am not as like vehement in my recommendation as
I was in the first third of it.
It changes kind of what it seemed like it was going to do a bit.
And then it is.
And he opens the book with like, you know, heads up, people complained about the ending.
And I'm like, how can they complain?
This is going to be great.
I'm loving it.
And the, this isn't a spoiler, but the author said that it was a deliberate artistic choice
to make the reader feel as ambushed as the characters because the end is confusing.
There's, there's this complex plot that comes together and you're like, what the fuck is
happening?
And he's like, I wanted you to feel that way too.
And I'm like, okay, well, he succeeded.
So there's that.
And then there's a semi satisfying three chapter epilogue that he apparently released like
a year later, but since this was three years ago, it was all at once for me.
So I do recommend Draco Malfoy and the practice of rationality.
It picks up at year two and it's just a continuation thick of methods of rationality.
It's not another diversion of this and that.
So let's see.
Feel the things you mentioned.
Oh, I didn't mention that apparently some of the people in the discord, they do audio
books like most people do, especially people who listen to podcasts because this is our
preferred medium.
And there's a bunch of people who are just like, or at least one person might be expanding
now.
It was like, sure, I'll read this into a microphone and upload it.
So yeah, if you wanted what lies dreaming in audio form, I guess you can get it on the
discord and I'll probably be putting it up at my website as well.
So people can get it there.
Sweet.
One chapter at a time.
Yeah.
I think they've recorded the first four chapters now.
Yeah.
The fifth one is coming up.
Yeah.
The guy doing the audio book is Steve, who was on episode 14 of our podcast.
Oh.
Which one was that?
The Street Epistemology.
Okay.
Yeah.
That was such a good episode.
Yeah.
And he's a fun guy.
It seems exciting and he is the guy doing the thing.
He's the philosophist on our discord.
Yeah, that's him.
Okay.
I was not...
I don't know if that's who Steve is.
I'm 90% sure.
Okay.
It is.
Yeah.
Okay.
It's weird going back to a medium where people are anonymous by default.
I'm so used to social media.
A lot of people just having their identities.
And like now there's people that just have like a snake as their avatar.
I preferred that, I think.
A consistent identity so that you still have your rotational effects, but enough anonymity
that you can say things and you aren't worried about people burning your house down.
I don't know if I preferred it.
I think like when I was very socially anxious all the time, I preferred it.
And like now that I'm less that, I find it a bit like, man, I don't know who any of
these people are.
And then they can just change their avatars and names all the time.
So even if I kind of started to associate personality with them now, it's like, no,
I don't know.
Who's that?
Is that person that person?
Is that the same?
Ugh.
But if they change their avatar and personality, then that's just a new person with new reputation,
right?
I guess.
I mean, unless they're saying like, hey, I'm the same person I was before and then you're
like, such injured your name, a douchebag.
Yeah.
No, that's what I'm talking about.
I like that thing that's kind of annoying.
Okay.
It's super annoying.
Very much an inconvenience.
I don't have much of that experience, I guess, in my online life.
I think people I knew generally stuck with their handles because that's important.
You have continuity of personality.
Yeah.
I mean, I use my real name on here.
I'm probably in the phone book.
So this one wants to burn my house down.
They could.
I'd ask that you don't.
But I try not to be inflammatory enough to have anyone burn my house down.
So.
Yeah.
To be totally self contradictory and considering changing my name.
Okay.
Like.
Okay.
What the hell?
Are you trying to have a tattoo?
Actually, yes.
That's a transgender joke.
I was, yeah, I was lining up.
I'm glad it worked.
And now I killed the joke.
So.
That's awesome.
Yeah.
That's a good reason, though.
I don't know why people do it online.
I don't.
I guess like if you're changing whatever stuff, I don't know.
I'm actually generally pro people being able to change stuff that they want.
It's just annoying for the other people to have to keep updating.
Yeah.
So like, I get it when people get annoyed at you.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I'm actually generally pro people being able to change stuff that they want.
It's just annoying for the other people to have to keep updating.
Yeah.
So like, I get it when people get annoyed at trans people, change their name and their
pronouns and stuff.
It's like, yeah, it is kind of a pain.
You don't even have to be trans.
You remember the person in high school?
It was generally a girl.
I hate for there to be a stereotype, but it was generally always a girl that would change
her name every semester.
You'd be like, oh, hey, hey, Rose, how are you doing?
She's like, no, I'm candy now.
I'm like, oh, okay.
Hi, candy.
And you know, a year later, hey, candy.
Well, nice to see you again after some vacation.
No, now I'm Catherine.
I'm like, oh my God.
If I talk to more people, I might have had that problem.
Okay.
Yeah, maybe that, maybe I just didn't talk to enough people to meet that person.
Well, I forgot all the other things I was going to plug with.
I got the Draco Alpha and the practice rationality.
So that was the big one.
Cool.
And you mentioned the audiobooks of what lies dreaming, which is super exciting.
Yeah, it's really cool.
I feel like I'm forgetting something, but it's important to come back up.
So.
Back to, should we go on to the restaurant posts?
Okay.
So the first one is making beliefs, pay rent.
And then in parentheses in anticipated experiences.
And this is a very famous post.
This is the, like the one.
If I had to, if I had to share one as one, one post with somebody about like, what is
this rational?
What, what is rationality?
What is like a, what's an example of a technique?
What do you mean?
You like use cognitive science to buddy or thinking, like this is the one I would point
them to.
Huh.
This isn't the, like my favorite post.
It's up there, but it's not the one I get.
The most personal meeting out of, but I feel like it's one that really quickly summarizes
like, Hey, look, here's a thing that you can notice in your head.
Maybe, you know, and this is an example of the, of a technique and it's succinctly readable
in five minutes.
Excellent.
Yeah.
I think I agree.
This one kind of is the core of the skills that you would build on for the rest of the
rationalist, uh, techniques.
Oh, I hope we can do it justice.
Uh, should I summarize the first intro part?
Uh, sure.
So in the beginning, uh, Eleazar, uh, relates the old question.
If a tree falls in a forest and no one's around to hear it, does it make a sound?
One person says, yes, it does for it makes vibrations in the air.
Another says, no, it does not.
For there's no auditory processing in any brain.
Uh, there's a little bit more said, but I'm skipping ahead to though the two argue one
saying no and the other saying yes, they do not anticipate any different experiences.
The two think they have different models of the world, but they have no difference with
respect to what they expect will happen to them.
Their maps of the world do not diverge in any sensory detail.
And he said things like, would they expect for if a recorder was put there to, for it
not to pick up anything?
Or do they expect if similar sound waves hit an ear, would it not make any, uh,
fireings in the brain?
That sort of thing.
So there wasn't, there was, I think it was some internet thing that I missed.
But my coworkers a couple years ago were talking about like the is water wet questions.
Right.
And I relayed this exact argument.
And I'm like, you know, first of all, well, I skipped, I, I, I dove into the argument with
them for a couple minutes.
I was like, wait a minute, let's just take a step back.
What would be the difference if it was or wasn't like, are we having different like
predictions here?
And they're like, no.
And I'm like, then what's the point?
They're like, that's not the point.
I'm like, that is the point.
People seem to often confuse factual arguments for semantic arguments.
The whole, uh, tree falling is kind of like, well, how are you defining the way it's
sound?
Is it, uh, is it the vibrations in the air existing or not?
Or whether there's someone listening to the, it is just, you're making a semantics
argument.
What are you actually trying to predict?
And then.
I never realized that was the other side of it.
That, uh, it's, there's auditory processing, which is what sounds like.
I just was like, of course it makes a sound.
What are you talking about?
How is this a co on?
You know?
Yeah.
Um, Eliezer says a foundational skill in the martial art of rationality is the ability
to spot inside your own head, psychological signs that you have a mental map of something
and signs that you don't.
So in the example of the tree, uh, how are you defining sound?
And, uh, do you know that sound is vibrations in the air and then could you test that?
Could you record it?
And is it going to show sound waves?
You know?
So that's where the, I guess, anticipated experiences part comes in.
Yeah.
Like basically it's kind of saying, change the question to do these two people walking
through the forest anticipate having different experiences of hearing a tree fall and like
the answer is no.
And he points out a little bit later that the experience, different experiences are not
necessarily always like, uh, anticipations of different sensory experiences.
Like he said, when you, uh, if you're trying to determine when a ball hits the ground,
you got to use beliefs like Earth's gravity is 9.8 meters per second per second.
And this building is 120 meters tall.
And those aren't anticipations of a sensory experiences.
They're verbal propositions in your head.
Uh, but these two beliefs have inferential consequences, uh, that are direct sensory
anticipation, like when you would see the ball hit or when you would hear the thing
on the ground.
So your beliefs can change what you anticipate, uh, being your experiences.
Yeah.
It was saying also it's tempting to try to eliminate this by insisting that the only
legitimate kind of belief is the anticipation of sensory experience.
But the world actually has a lot of data that we can't sense.
Like we can't see atoms.
There's sounds past our range.
There's colors we can't see.
We can't see math.
But yeah, you could use math to calculate when the ball is going to hit the ground.
Humans are better than any other species at learning to model the unseen.
And then Ellerser says, this is both our great strength and our great weakness.
Because humans often believe in things that are not allowed to be seen.
Because humans often believe in things that are not only seen but unreal.
Yeah.
Like, uh, he brought up again the alchemists, uh, concept of Flaugistan being something
that creates fire causes heat.
Like what is it?
I don't know.
It's the thing that does it.
Yeah.
Obviously it must exist if it happens.
Right.
I anticipate that when I put heat on this wood, Flaugistan will come out and that'll
make bright lights and more heat, I guess.
But it wasn't tied to anything real.
Yeah.
It's tied to the kind of inferential chain there.
Well, something causes the fire, so I'm going to call it Flaugistan.
Or, um, yeah, this seems like it should be a thing that is true.
Um, or kind of ideas about things like ghosts.
Because we've evolved to model things as being agents.
Like, we're evolved to model other human minds.
So we see lots of things as either having been made by a human or having some kind of
human-like sentience and agency and a reason that it's doing what it's doing that like
follows anthropic principles.
Yeah.
He mentioned a good way to, well, let me just read the poll then.
Uh, the rationalist virtue of empiricism consists of constantly asking which experiences
our beliefs predict.
Or better yet, prohibit.
Do you believe that Flaugistan is the cause of fire?
Then what do you expect to see happen because of that?
Do you believe that if a tree falls in the forest and no one hears it, it still makes a sound?
Then what experiences must therefore befall you?
It is even better to ask what experiences must not happen to you.
Do you believe that Elan Fatal explains the mysterious aliveness of living beings?
Then what does this belief not allow to happen?
What would definitely falsify this belief?
And no answer means that your belief does not constrain experiences.
It permits anything to happen to you.
So, yeah.
If your beliefs don't actually disallow things from happening, they don't do much of anything.
Yeah.
There was also, do you unreal things connect to any sensory experiences?
No.
I'm trying to think like, I'm remembering, what was that show Ghost Hunters where they were trying to,
they're using carpentry tools incorrectly and then trying to say that it's evidence of ghosts.
If a ghost were a real thing, you would anticipate some kind of sensory experience,
maybe a cold drop, maybe sounds, maybe you could capture something on video.
Except for all of those, and this is, I don't think Brian Dunning was the first one to put it this way,
but he put it this way most succinctly when I came across it, that like,
everything that the Ghost Hunters do, all their tools of low frequency vibrations, cold spots, etc.
It's like, they use all of these, and you're like, look, ghosts,
and it's like, we haven't established that ghosts do that.
So, like, ghosts have no known properties.
So, to say that this cold drop is indicative of a ghost means that,
would necessitate that we've already established that ghosts make things cold.
Which like, why on earth should that be the case?
Supposedly there's a bunch of, a lot of anecdotal reports of people seeing ghosts,
and they say that there's connected phenomenon, phenomena.
But if people were actually able to consistently measure the same phenomena
in places where people also experience psychological disturbance,
then maybe that would be something interesting.
But pretty much what we've shown is that no one cannot measure anything like that.
Or like an old basement with creaky hinges,
like, you know, maybe you get light carbon monoxide poisoning down there,
and you start hallucinating stuff, like that would explain all these things as well, right?
What we need is like a ghost in a box that we can hold a thermometer to,
that we can poke with a stick, that we can put a microphone next to, and all that stuff.
Well, lots of times they say that what causes these things to happen is ectoplasm.
Right.
Which is basically flogiston for ghosts, right?
I don't know if the ghost hunters say that.
I know the ghost busters did.
But like, not to say that ghost hunting is a sophisticated field.
I don't think they're quite that unsophisticated.
They're not literally cartoon caricatures of themselves.
Exactly.
Anyway, how about belief in belief?
Oh, can I close out with what his ending paragraph, which is the one that I loved?
Yeah, I know which one you're talking about.
At the very end he says, above all, don't ask what to believe, ask what to anticipate.
Every question of belief should flow from a question of anticipation,
and that question of anticipation should be the center of the inquiry.
Every guess of belief should begin by flowing to a specific guess of anticipation,
and should continue to pay rent in future anticipations.
If a belief turns deadbeat, evict it.
Which is just a great thing.
If your beliefs are doing nothing for you at all, why do you even have them?
Gotta make them pay rent.
That's right, using up all that valuable brain real estate.
So, belief in belief.
Belief in belief starts with Carl Sagan's invisible dragon parable,
which briefly is like, the friend comes to you and says,
hey, I've got a dragon in my garage.
And you're like, that's so cool.
I want to see.
Oh, well, you can't really see it.
It's invisible.
Oh, okay.
Well, no problem.
I'll throw some flour on it.
Well, it's permeable to flour.
Okay.
Well, we'll put, you know, we'll measure the amount of oxygen in CO2 in the air,
and we'll watch it breathe.
Well, it doesn't actually, you know, exhale CO2.
Okay.
We'll listen for its footsteps.
Well, it has inaudible footsteps.
And so, Carl Sagan uses this as the, like, the idea that bad hypotheses do fast footwork
in order to avoid falsification, right?
Yeah.
And I like this because I'd read, or what was the, Science as a Candle in the Dark.
That's the subtitle to-
The Demon Haunted World.
Thank you.
The Demon Haunted World.
Yeah.
Which is like the, hey, what's skepticism?
This.
Read this book.
It's a cool author and create examples, and he's a smart, smart guy.
And very compassionate, too.
I know.
He was wonderful.
Some people I know didn't like the tone of the New Atheists.
I think Carl Sagan kind of, if you're somebody that's just put off by Richard Dawkins for
whatever reason, then like, I would recommend people read Carl Sagan because he's just like,
almost the Mr. Rogers of Science.
Yeah.
He-
Got the sweater vest and everything, I think.
Yeah.
Imagine, like, I mean-
No, we had a turtleneck.
Yeah, he did.
Like, Neil deGrasse Tyson's like, you know, I think Carl Sagan's shoes are so big that,
like, five people fill them now.
But Neil deGrasse Tyson fills them in some of the ways, like, for example, hosting Cosmos.
In the, ah, I could go on and on.
If anyone hasn't seen the first episode of the revamp of Cosmos, just any, if you're
not interested even, just watch the last 10 minutes to get a kind of feel for the character
of who Carl Sagan was.
I could go on, but I don't know.
Yeah.
Carl Sagan.
Yeah, he's great.
Carl Sagan, yes.
So what I liked about this post is that I, I was already familiar with it and as a budding
young rationalist come across this and like, finally, something I've heard of.
And then he goes on to expand it in a way that I thought was really interesting.
So, belief in belief.
Yeah, he says that he uses this parable to make a different point.
The claimant must have an accurate model of the situation somewhere in their mind because
they can anticipate in advance exactly which experimental results they'll need to excuse,
which is pretty cool when you think about it.
Yep.
Yeah, we're capable of holding a lot of contradictory beliefs as humans.
People are really good at compartmentalization.
I used to be really confused as to how, ah, I don't know, a biologist who specializes
in like studying the RNA of bacteria can also be like a young earth creationist.
Right.
And that's how you explain it.
It's just like, this is that my science world beliefs and this is my religion world beliefs
and they don't overlap.
It's a context that I activate them in.
And yet somehow, somewhere deep in his brain, there's something like making excuses for one,
you know, subconsciously because he can't admit that he knows.
It's still not clear.
Like I, so I understand like, yes, you can, you can take your science code off and put
your, your church code on on Sunday.
It's still not clear to me how you don't notice that you're doing that.
You don't have the self awareness.
Yeah.
Or you are aware of the cognitive dissonance and then you just always push it to the side
because you're like, well, not dealing with that.
I remember doing that.
A thing that parts of your mind can do is actively suppress other thoughts if it's useful to do so.
If you're, if you're not inclined to listen to the part of you that's saying, hey, shut
up over there.
Right.
Right.
Like you have to have like a distaste for shutting down your own thoughts to even escape
this in the first place.
I think that's what I've always had.
Like I've, I've never liked, I've always noticed when I was suppressing a thought.
And it always kind of hurts, right?
Yeah.
It's this weird stingy feeling in my, in my brain.
And I think it part of, I guess methods of rationality is raising that to like a, like
a louder noise or a hurtier hurts just to like you're, you're aware that you're doing
it.
I think I almost think that like the sequences and the methods are written for people who
already like have that.
And this is ways of how to fix the things that raise those alarms all the time.
Yeah.
And then now that you've got them and you've got all this, this ball work in place, what
you can do with it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I definitely think that was the context of the sequences.
This was kind of written after new atheism and skepticism became popular.
Right.
I think Steven and I were talking about this one day.
We were just hanging out randomly, but like, I feel like I discovered the sequences after
I kind of went through my like angry atheist phase.
I'm going to argue with believers and then like that kind of got tired of that.
And it's like, this is kind of like the next step, I think.
Right.
Yeah.
That was my journey too.
It's also worth pointing out that Carl Sagan's writings predates the new atheists by like
20 years.
Yeah.
So the, the tone of religion sucks.
Man.
What I mean.
The tone wouldn't have been tolerated 20 years ago.
Exactly.
And to be fair, I think that was basically Sagan's opinion, but he was way nicer about
it.
He had a record saying that actually like being much less charitable when he's like in his
own house.
And also that wasn't 20 years ago.
That was like 35 years ago, but 20 years before the new atheists.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Right.
Gotcha.
Yeah.
It just seems like that was yesterday because we're old.
Yes.
Our younger listeners are like, Jesus Christ, man.
That one 14 year olds.
Geez.
Yeah.
Man, these guys are old.
How did you get past the explicit warning on iTunes to listen to this?
Do we have an explicit warning?
I think so.
We save fuck occasionally.
Yeah.
That's true.
I guess we talk about dead babies and dead baby Hitler.
I'm not sure we've, well, okay.
We do talk about dead baby Hitler.
Did we finish summarizing this?
Yes.
Um, empiricism is supposed to prevent us from making this class of mistake because our beliefs
are supposed to pay rent as we just got finished explaining, but then, and this kind of also
ties back into replacing guilt.
Uh, what about the beliefs that you're supposed to believe?
Uh, Eleazar brings up Santa Claus when you're a kid.
And then also has a little Daniel Dennett quote, um, where it's difficult to believe a thing.
It's often much easier to believe that you ought to believe it.
Should.
And then it gets worse.
Nobody will admit to themselves, I don't believe in the ultimate cosmic sky that I don't believe
the ultimate cosmic sky is blue and green, but I believe I ought to believe it.
Not unless they're unusually capable of acknowledging their own lack of virtue, which kind of answers
your, uh, problem with that.
Steven.
Yeah.
People don't want to believe in belief.
They just believe in belief.
They just believe in belief.
Yeah, exactly.
It's hard to say.
It is.
Yeah.
Again, that was people don't believe in belief in belief.
They just believe in belief.
There we go.
Um, what's virtuous is to believe, not to believe in believing.
Yeah.
I think, um, the, I had another thing with Dan Dennett there, but I forgot what it was.
Yep.
It's gone other than if you liked a little witticism of that.
So Dennett's quote was where it's difficult to believe a thing.
It's often much easier to believe that you ought to believe it.
I think Dennett coined the term believe and believe.
I think so too.
Yeah.
He, there's a lot of things floating around there that Dennis actually responsible for.
Um, the only book of his that I actually finished reading was breaking the spell.
A lot of his stuff is, and maybe I should try again.
It's been 10 or 15 years since I've tried.
But it back then, back when I was a teenager, it was too dense to like, I read it's like,
this seems really cool.
And I'm just like, Oh, this is getting hard and you're not keeping my interest, but I bet it would now.
So, um, anyway, yeah.
So belief shouldn't should include unspoken anticipation controllers.
Belief in belief should include unspoken cognitive behavior.
Guiders, uh, the dragon claimant anticipates as if there's no dragon in the garage and makes,
makes excuses as if they believed in the belief.
Um, that's what I was gonna say about Dennett was that I remember he had another quote that
there are more people that believe in belief than there are people who actually believe
because he's met like, um, I don't know, people like pastor struggling with like,
not believing in stuff anymore, but thinking that they should.
And kind of by default, every believer believes in belief.
And as long as there's one person who just believes who, or rather every,
every believer like believes, right.
And there's at least some people who believe in belief that like,
I should still be believing this.
And that's like, that that's a defective premise of belief.
So he, he, I was, it was just fun to imagine.
Like, yes, there by necessity, more people who believe in belief than there are people who actually believe stuff.
It's not that interesting, but just again, it was one of those other little Dennett kind of,
he has this way of being able to put on like metaglasses whenever he wants.
I think it seems like actually like a rationalist virtue to like be able to have beliefs,
but not believe in those beliefs of like, have the belief,
but then like be ready to just like throw it away as soon as you see any counter evidence that is convincing.
Yeah. I have beliefs that you can update.
Right. I think update is better than just throw away as soon as you see any.
Yeah.
But relinquishment is one of the 12 virtues of rationality.
Yeah. Yeah.
But relinquishing with enough, with enough costs.
Right.
Yeah. We haven't done the 12 virtues.
Maybe that'd be, we'll do that at some point.
Yeah.
All right. The 12 virtues is this short post that I won't go into any of them,
but it's the, as the title suggests, the 12 virtues of rationality.
And it's all written in like preachy high talk that if this was your first exposure to the community,
you'd be like, oh, this guy's insane and they're all cultists.
But it gives nice flowery language to like refer back to and say thus it was written,
or you know, hence it was written that this,
and as long as you know you're doing it tongue in cheek as everyone does,
unless you're coming across one of these things in the wild,
then it's a lot of fun to have kind of that kind of highfalutin language to point things at.
Yeah.
Eleazar says that it's not psychologically realistic to say that the dragon claimant believes it's beneficial to believe that there's a dragon,
but it is realistic to say that they, the dragon claimant anticipates as if there is no dragon in the garage
and makes excuses as if they believed.
All right. And then we had one more sequence.
Basie and Judo.
Which is just a little story.
It's fun.
It's a fun story.
So the true tales of Elias Yucosky.
So Elias Yucosky is at a dinner party when someone said to him,
You're, you're,
Oh, that's right. I'm the doofus.
Doofus.
I don't believe artificial intelligence is possible because only God can make a soul.
Eleazar replied,
You mean if I can make an artificial intelligence that proves your religion is false?
When realizing that he'd made his hypothesis vulnerable to falsification,
he then said,
Well, I didn't mean that you couldn't make an intelligence just that it couldn't be emotional in the same way we are.
To which Elias replied,
Well, so if I make an artificial intelligence that without being deliberately programmed without any sort of script,
starts talking about an emotional life that sounds like ours, that means your religion is wrong.
I, I guess we may have to agree to disagree on this.
Then Eleazar brought up Omen's agreement theorem, which shows that no two rationalists can agree to disagree.
If two people disagree with each other, at least one of them must be doing something wrong.
Finally, he said.
Well, I guess I was really trying to say that I don't think you can make something eternal.
Well, I don't think so either.
I'm glad we were able to reach agreement on this as Omen's agreement theorem requires.
To which Eleazar stretched out his hand and he shook it and then he wandered away.
I love the line.
The one realized he had just made his hypothesis vulnerable to falsification.
But dude, who would have come up with, with that reply?
Well, that's why I liked in the, in the longer version.
He says, at this point, I must have become divinely inspired because I instantly responded.
You mean if I could make artificial intelligence that proves your religion's false?
I would have thought of something like, well, that's stupid.
God doesn't exist or souls don't exist or something.
You know, like this will never be an issue because there are no souls.
But I was like, oh, I can disprove your God with your own claim.
You got to have a shower thought like in real time and have that conversation.
Yeah, that is beautiful.
I also want to say that I, the reason I put these three in for this week instead of just two like we normally do is because this is directly ties back to making beliefs pay rented anticipated experience.
It's, it's one of those things that what does your beliefs not allow to happen, right?
If this guy really believes that only God can make a soul, then you cannot create an AI.
So that is actually a belief that pays rent in anticipated experience, except that he walked it back right away because, you know, can't, can't have your God be falsifiable.
But then assuming that he stuck to it and actually updated, he then changed his belief to be, you know, different.
So his new belief is, his new belief would be there's no God once there's an AI.
Exactly.
Which isn't actually going to happen.
But, but those, that was a beautiful example of beliefs paying rent.
Yeah.
And using that to, you know, Bayesian judo someone into atheism.
Like your beliefs can't kind of just be a bunch of nodes unconnected from each other.
It's really easy to actually like point out contradictory thoughts.
I think, isn't that what people do when they're doing street epistemology is not even really tell the person things, but just ask them questions, leading them to realize that the things they believe are contradictory.
Yeah.
The Socratic method.
Yeah.
Or at the very least that you don't really, and I think our street epistemologists, his name was also Stephen, wasn't it?
I don't remember.
It's been like two, two and a half years.
I'm 90% sure, because that's a great name.
And I think it stuck with me.
Okay.
I think that it's, I think street epistemology is practiced in a way that's slightly less aggressive than the Socratic method.
But that's sort of the same thing.
It's like, look, if you really believed in this, and you'd be saying this, right?
And it's like, well, I'm not saying that.
So I must not really believe this.
Yeah.
Also, back when I was getting into atheism, when new atheism was a new thing, that was what a lot of the forum stuff was.
It was basically, it wasn't street epistemology, because street epistemology is friendly, and it like uses the Socratic method to make, to trick people into questioning their own beliefs, right?
Whereas the forums were a lot of like, boom, checkmate atheists, or boom, checkmate theists, you know?
I just proved the logical contradiction in your own claims.
If people evolved from monkeys, why are there still monkeys?
Checkmate atheists.
Yeah.
Yeah, that was fun.
So for next, next time, we will be covering the less wrong posts, professing and cheering, and belief as attire.
And there will be links to those on our website, thebasenconspiracy.com.
I think I've also related to both of those in examples, either, I think off the air to both of you guys that have seen it happen in real life.
And I'm in these situations and I'm like, oh man, this is applause lights, which I think is a separate post, but it's the same thing as professing and cheering.
It's like, I'm watching this happen.
It was very disconcerting.
Yeah, great.
Cool.
We have one listening feedback and one question from the podcaster.
All right.
So is it okay if we indulge me as I ask a question?
Please.
So for the past, I don't know, I think three months now, past six episodes or so, we've sort of changed our editing strategy to where before.
Actually, it's not important to describe the difference.
I actually kind of want to describe the difference briefly, because I feel really insecure.
Before we like would go through the entire thing like literally re listening to every minute of this, and we would cut out a lot of the likes, you know, is ums, long pauses, that kind of stuff, which, first of all, I thought was very important in a social good kind of way,
because that would cut the time of a podcast from like two hours to an hour and 50 minutes, just cutting out all that stuff that literally conveys no information.
It's just giving us time to think.
You know, when you're talking with two, three other people in a room, that's no big deal.
But when you're being listened to by thousands of people, you add up 10 minutes every two weeks.
That is a huge amount of human productive time that is being lost for nothing.
And so I felt like a virtuous, virtuous person for doing this, right.
And I wished all podcasts would do that.
Nothing annoys me more than just shit wasting my time.
Can I point out that there are podcast apps like Overcast for iOS that automatically skip dead air?
Yeah, but they don't skip like, you know, and such stuff.
That's true.
Yeah.
I should also point out that before you make the rest of this point that the last episode I did kind of go through and crawl through.
I'm not exactly sure why.
So this, if you're thinking how the, how's the episodes previously sounded, the last episode, the Jesus, what was even the topic?
Secretar success? No, no, those two episodes go at this point.
Last episode was Are You Jesus or Hitler?
Right.
Yeah.
So that one I did crawl through and kind of edit slowly.
I'm not exactly sure why I did that.
I was just, I think it was the first time I edited on my new monitor and it was nice and easy.
Cool.
So yeah.
All right.
But the other thing is that when I listened to podcasts, I always listened to them sped up and that makes everyone in them sound smarter.
And I was always kind of happy like, yeah, people are probably listening to us sped up.
So we sound smarter.
And now that we're cutting out all the OMS and you know, as we sound even smarter.
So now I'm like also what we've basically done is stop doing that.
We're just taking way too long to edit every episode.
It takes about four minutes a minute.
Yes.
Yeah.
Three to four minutes per minute to edit that way.
Right.
So a two hour podcast would take us six to eight hours to edit.
Yeah.
And it was just, it was too much.
And we kept hearing about like friends that have their own podcasts that they put online a half hour after they record them.
And we were like, we got to get in on that action.
So basically we jet now just here and there cut out some major flubs when we noticed them happening and put it up as is.
I'm basically wondering, please, if our listeners are willing to give us some feedback, does it sound a lot worse now?
Do you, do you notice a drop in quality?
Do we sound stupid?
Do you have any recommendations for free audio processing software that we could use?
That's an option too.
If there's software that will cut out that sort of shit.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I think I don't know if it exists or not.
It'd be super cool if it did.
It might just be the thing that you need a human to do.
But I mean audacity if it was all on one track can cut dead air.
Right.
It can cut dead air but it can't cut stuttering and such.
Right.
Yeah, I don't know.
There's some kind of audio version of like Photoshop filters that would just take a lot of the work out.
If anyone needs a side, needs to work on a, needs inspiration for a side project, go ahead and make that.
The problem is Photoshop isn't free.
Well, even if it's modestly expensive, we have patron support to buy it.
That's true.
If it makes us sound better and reduces wasted human productive hours.
Yeah, mainly it was just that it would take, yeah, six, six to eight hours to edit and then, you know, another hour for, you know, uploading, downloading, adding the intro and outro music.
And so it would take like 10 hours to do, which is the other main reason that we weren't doing this every week.
Hopefully I can replace the guilt of not doing this anymore with something else.
For what?
I guess two other meta points on that.
One, I like Sam Harris doesn't chop those out of his conversations.
Sam Harris is naturally genius level talking person.
See?
This is the kind of shit I gotta edit.
No, no, I think.
Please leave it in.
You make, I think the, I mean, he has ums and stutters and so does everybody.
I think that's just, that's part of what makes speech natural.
Where the first like dozen of these we went through and we would cut out every stammer, every this and that.
And that took like 12, 15 hours.
Yeah.
And then I, you know, I listened to like, you know, rationally speaking or really every podcast and people talk like they talk.
And a podcast sounds conversational.
And so I don't burn a lot of fuel worrying about does this sound like it's scripted?
Like we're, you know, we're reading this from, you know, a, I'm doing these things.
I'm pausing and I'm on all that stuff, right?
Yeah.
Um, that and I'm told city city listening to podcasts to speed up.
And I seem to be the only person who likes listening at regular speed because I gives me chance to like actually think in the normal speed of human speech to process what I'm listening to.
But I'm told by at least one person that they don't listen to this, but up because of my speak, my speaking rate.
I have, you should have talked to me 10 years ago.
I was incomprehensible this.
I, and right now I'm making an effort to be extra slow, but I think I've gotten a lot better at talking slower.
So maybe, maybe you can't listen to it at 1.15 speed, but one.
Yeah.
It would be really interesting to hear you 10 years ago.
I could go really fast.
Like this, I was able to talk at a pretty, pretty fast pace where people can understand it.
I can understand them and it would be just more or less fine.
Okay.
That was sort of an example.
Yeah, that wasn't bad.
It wasn't bad.
That wasn't maybe as bad as it could be.
It's been a while.
It's a practice habit that I do in the rest of my life too.
Probably requires your listeners to be like, you know, alert though.
Yeah.
Or to not care what you're saying.
I just pretend like the listening.
Right.
The podcast, JN Miles explained the X-Men.
They both just naturally talk at 1.5 X speed.
And just all the time.
They sound so excited about everything.
It's actually really adorable.
That's a good podcast.
I love those kind of people.
Like Mr. Peanut Butter.
Oh, he's the best.
Who?
It was Mr. Peanut Butter.
Mr. Peanut Butter from Bojack Horseman.
The adorable name dog friend.
Yeah.
Okay.
Listener feedback.
What is it?
Rockham on the subreddit says, this is actually something that we got a number of people.
A number of people saying not just Rockham and it was mentioned in the discord a few times as well.
So I'll go ahead and say it regarding the risk free assets, the post risk free, risk free bonds aren't or would I don't remember the exact name.
But Rockham is the one I pulled says regarding risk free assets.
It's not that financial theory is too stupid to realize that there is no such thing rather the opposite.
But it's still so damn useful that we take the next best thing.
And for US based based writers, it was used US government bonds.
And a bunch of people said the same thing that like, yeah, actual finance people know that there's no such thing that's completely risk free.
And this is just the closest thing in the world to what risk free would be.
So they use that term to mean like lowest risk you can possibly get.
And I think that I think we overemphasized the part that these aren't risk free from the post because especially the last.
The peak end theory, which I'm sure you're familiar with the generally what you remember from experiences the highest point and the end right, which is why Eliezer always ends his posts with something really punchy and generally the thing that was his most driving theme in the post.
And at the end of that one, he basically said it's terrifying that this risk free thing that we have we consider the most solid thing in the world is this fucking risky when you really think about it.
That what are the chances that US is going to be around for the next 300 years.
And doesn't that mean that there's a 10% chance every 30 years or 10% of that chance every 30 years that it's going to collapse.
I think the point he was making that was that the world, even when we use the term risk free is remarkably dangerous and risky.
And it's just a bad term to use because there there's so much inherent risk in just living in on this earth.
And that sucks. And we have to fix that shit because holy crap.
Totally. I saw that comment and some of the discussion on the discord, which we should plug because people are on there all the time. It's great.
If you're already on discord, it might be a fun place to hang out.
There's actually there's enough chatter that I can't keep up with it anymore.
They're now dropping and read like 50 messages.
But I just I can't stay current.
Yeah, same.
But I guess there's no way to make like to solve that problem other than maybe making more channels or something.
Us can discord experts.
I just occasionally comment on things that I do see and hope that they still are relevant when people see them.
Yeah.
Yeah, or I've just gone in and been like, here's a random thing I found unrelated to anything anyone's talking about right now.
Right.
I'm not going to pretend that I'm like chatting synchronously.
No, that's that's sort of my strategy too.
But I think in the post that this was responding to it Husky wasn't saying that, you know, economists are talking about risk free things and they're missing it.
And I'm the one who notices that it's risky.
I think he was specifically calling out Talib's use of the word a risk free investment like government bonds, right?
Oh, because Talib should have, especially given the context of that book, not use that term.
Right.
Yeah, I think that was basically the point.
Okay.
Maybe I was being too literal with it.
Maybe I was making a more general point that these people are responding to.
But the way I read it, he was saying, I mean, it's not like him to make a post complaining about one thing one person said.
Right.
So maybe it makes sense that he was talking about a broader problem.
That's why I read it as we have to make the world less prone to collapse and death.
Totally.
That reminds me of my awesome life insurance agent who got me hooked up with Crownix, Rudy Hoffman.
He works for Kansas City Life, which apparently is like the most secure insurance company on the planet.
They are, they have no debt.
They own all the properties where they have offices.
They don't just rent office space.
So he's like, yeah, basically, so, you know, I talked to him, you know, because he's also signed up for Crownix through Kansas City Life.
And he's like, yeah, I want this to work.
So that's why I choose them.
He's also a great salesperson.
I think that's part of it too.
But he's like, yeah, I mean, barring anything short of like a zombie apocalypse like Kansas City Life will be the last life insurance company to fall.
You know, they'll survive floods, natural disasters, all that stuff because they've got, they own their property and it's all insured.
I want to see the zombie movie where like the last bastion of humanity is this insurance company and they've got their shotguns and they're protecting all the uploaded consciousness.
Awesome.
Brains in a jar and the zombies are like brains in a jar.
Already desculled.
So convenient.
I think I mentioned actually being a premise for a fun short story where it's like, I can imagine, you know, armed altruistic rationalists protecting the the tanks in Michigan full of full of
cry protect people.
Like, no, they're going to make it.
writers steal this idea.
Okay.
Yeah.
Let us think our patron.
Yes.
I don't remember whose turn it is to do the thinking.
I did last week.
I'll do it.
All right.
You volunteered this time.
I did.
Um, Smriti Ja is our patron this time.
Thank you, Smriti.
I hope I didn't just butcher your name terribly.
And if I did, I'm sorry.
But we still like you anyway.
I don't even know what I'm saying.
I'm tired.
I'm just trying to thank this person.
We are thankful this will that people do this thing.
Help us keep going and help us.
You know, I never mind.
I keep hammering on how I feel appreciate when I do this.
And I should stop doing that because it gets tired.
Well, it's hard every time.
It's hard not to, but this is the part of the podcast of other
podcasts that I skip.
Right.
Like, I'll get to the part where they say the name and then
they'll give 90 seconds how much they appreciate it.
But that doesn't.
If we're cut if we cut down on the time that we emphasize
appreciation doesn't mean that we appreciate it any less.
Right.
It means the world to us.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
If it was, if I was the person who was being thanked, I would
listen to that part podcast and be like, that's me.
I get to one person who's listening to this part being like,
that's me.
Yay.
Also, man, they mispronounced my name.
I wouldn't.
I wouldn't plug this on prompted, but you reminded me.
Brian Dunning sent out like an email because he's recently,
I guess in the last year or so, started thinking people who
are at the show and he sent an email out like a month in
advance.
Hey, on episode, I forget which one I'll be thinking your
name.
Do you care how I do you care how I attribute it?
And I probably listened to him say, you know, like it was,
it was very nice and thoughtful and it appreciated it.
So that was nice.
So I can confirm that when you, when you get a shout out.
In fact, every podcast that I've given money to that,
I've heard my name said and it makes me smile.
So, um, and I don't have a hard name to say.
So Smriti, if we did ruin it, by all means,
write in and we'll do, we'll fix it.
Uh, but if not, if we got close enough, then still,
we really appreciate it.
And everyone know that that's important to us.
Hell yes.
All right.
Thanks y'all.
We'll see you in a couple of weeks.
Awesome.
Night everyone.
Okay.
