Hello, you've found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm sitting here
today with Vitalik Buterin, the leader and founder of the Ethereum world of cryptocurrencies
and smart contracts. Welcome to the portal.
Thank you. It's good to be here, Eric.
It's terrific to have you. Now, in general, when I see you interviewed, immediately everybody
goes straight to cryptocurrencies and Ethereum. But one of the things that I found fascinating
about your story is that in order to be a good steward of this new and emerging economics,
you've actually applied yourself a great deal to standard and regular economic theory. And
I was curious, if I understand correctly, you dropped out of college after a year, you're
self-taught in economics, but you've taken a real interest in understanding how markets and
economic theory work. Is that a fair description?
Yeah, I think so. And economics has been of an interest for me, definitely for a long time.
I mean, when I discovered Bitcoin back in 2011, and I was still in high school, it was this kind
of interesting confluence of ideas that I was already pretty attracted to. So of open-source
culture, that was something that a good friend from high school, Christopher Ola, had already
indoctrinated me with really well. The mathematical and cryptographic aspects, also libertarianism
in Austrian economics, was kind of the zeitgeist of the Bitcoin space at the day. And those were
ideas that I definitely found philosophically quite attractive at that time. And I was definitely
curious. I read a bunch of books, I read the Austrian economics canon, because that's what the
Bitcoin people were talking about all day. I read some kind of behavioral economics literature,
Arielli, Kahneman, and Chiedini, and all of those people, just because I knew that I had to read
other stuff for balance. And also economics itself is a pretty mathematical kind of subject.
Well, kind of, right? It's on the borderline, because it's kind of both mathematical, and you
got your curves, and your derivatives, and your intersections, but also humanities, right? It's
really at this intersection of both figuring out how to apply these models to specific cases,
and also trying to figure out, well, which models are really correct in the first place.
The first question, you can't answer with math, but the second question, you really can't, and you
need other kinds of thinking as well. This is an area of my own interest, because the way I see it,
economics is odd in a way that very few people, I think, have appreciated, in that if we take what
could be argued to be our two greatest ideas in scientific man, let's say, one would be sort of
the geometric dynamics of physics, and economics has been constructed to be an as-if physics,
if you will. And on the other hand, it inherits from the theory of selection. You could say that
markets are the continuation of systems of selective pressures by other means. And so what
happens when our two greatest ideas touch each other, and they do it in a place which has very
bizarre properties by my way of thinking, that is that economists are on the one hand very rigorous
thinkers, and are also very susceptible to what we might call political economy, and distorted
thinking. Does that ring true to you? Yeah, definitely. There's definitely this kind of
combination of, on the one hand, you have these mathematical formulas, and on the other hand,
these assumptions. And often, the assumptions can be pretty well hidden, and they're kind of
difficult to see at first glance. And it really can be subtle. One of the arguments that economists
tend to put forward is, basically, mutually beneficial transactions are beneficial, and so
we should not interfere with them. If I have a Klein bottle, and I want to sell you the Klein
bottle, you're willing to pay $5, then I clearly value it at less than $5, you value it at more
than $5, therefore, the transaction is not net good. And therefore, I should give you the bottle,
and you should give me the money, and that's what we would do. But the reasons why that 10
sometimes breaks down are in many ways more subtle. First, you have monopoly issues. If
I'm the only person selling Klein bottles, then I might want to sell them at a higher price than
you'd be willing to accept because I want to extract more value. And sometimes, the things that
matter most to society aren't things that we can transfer between people from one person to another,
like Klein bottles, but public goods. And the biggest public good of all is the idea. And an idea,
well, if I have an idea and I give you the idea, I still have the idea. So it's something that,
once you release it, it's out there. And there isn't this kind of property that...
So should we pause just briefly to talk about what a public good is for the audience?
Sure. Yeah.
So a public good is technically defined within economics. Many people have an intuitive idea
as something, which is, as you're stating, has this property of inexhaustibility.
And then the other attribute would be excludability, which is...
Non-excludability for public goods.
Sorry, non-excludability. Sorry, the attribute of excludability is used to define a public
good. So if something is inexhaustible and inexclutable, then it has this weird property
that even hardline economists would agree that the market may fail to price, in fact,
will fail to price the value to society of that object. So there is an admission within economics
that there are zones of failure. Right. Well, I guess the big kind of rethinking that needs to
happen is that there has long been this kind of zeitgeist that private goods, like things that
I have and if I give it to you, I don't have it and you have it are the norm and public goods
are a rare exception. But really, public goods are pretty darn important. If we didn't have public
goods, then we'd be trading sticks and bear pelts and we'd basically still be cavemen. They're
basically these things. Well, like an army would be a public good. Yeah. Well, armies are interesting
because they're kind of, to us, in a medium scale context, they're a public good and in a large
scale context, they're a public bad because if everyone's armies were forced to be cut down by
a factor of 10, we'd all be better off. So economics is really subtle that way, especially
once you have two layers of scale at play. Sure. Now, one thing that I worry a lot about that
almost nobody seems to join me in is that in our mutual world, I don't know what to call it,
of people who are experimenting with what I would say the mainstream would consider far out ideas
like radical life extension, cryptocurrencies as potentially being rival risks with
sovereign currencies. But in our world, we talk a lot about the abundance economy and a world of
abundance. And I'm terrified of a world of abundance because one of the properties that
software has had is that it has replaced physical goods and services which have these attributes
they're not public with small files. And when a small file is not encrypted, it has the attributes
of a public good and therefore value and price can, can chasm. That's terrifying because then
this weird thing of markets which allows us respite from dictatorship and somebody directing our
activities and allows us to self-direct goes away because things can't be priced accurately.
Does that have any purchase on your thinking? Yeah. So I think you've definitely struck at
a very important point. So I think my own framing of the point is slightly different.
Please. I think first of all, start off by realizing that private property and things
is not something that fell out of the sky. It's a social technology. We have these norms that
basically say, oh, we will create this kind of mapping from objects to people. And if an object
is mapped to you, then you're allowed to do basically whatever the hell you want with it.
And other people cannot do anything without your permission. And if that concept did not exist,
then physical objects would be public goods. Because if there's a client bottle over here,
the client bottle would be there, but really anyone could take it. And if you produce client
bottles, then you're not producing something for yourself. You're producing something for
pretty much the first person who comes along and grabs it. And so property rights are this kind
of social technology that helps make private good economies tractable. And we could consider
making social technologies to make public good economies tractable. The existence of public
goods by itself is not good or bad. Arguably, it's even good because it means that people can
cooperate with each other on such large scales. The bad thing is that we don't really have good
tools for handling it. And specifically, we don't have good tools for handling it that manage to
simultaneously avoid both not giving good results and basically being centralized in
dictatorial. And so this is where my interest in radical exchange comes in. So this was this
movement that was started by Glen Weil a couple of years ago when he wrote this radical markets book
and he advanced some of his proposals like Harberger taxes and quadratic voting were the ones
that are kind of the most popular. And the core idea behind the idea is basically is let's create
structures of norms and incentives that try to have the best properties that we can get out of
markets but do so without basically economically breaking in the way that we know existing property
rights systems do once you enter a world where kind of everything that you build just inherently
affects millions of people. Well, this is an interesting perspective. You, of course, are famous
for implementing this Ethereum protocol. But before we ever get to computer protocols,
there are sort of legal and structural protocols that we impose upon ourselves in the form of
government and markets that are subordinate to government. And there's a weird way in which
you may start a process by which you write down rules for how a society should function.
But once those rules are written down, you may discover all sorts of unintended properties
of that rule set. And there's a real question. Can we actually unhook ourselves from the killer
app that is capitalism or American democracy? And if we start to realize that that app is running
out of control? I guess for myself as a social technologist and I definitely don't think that
we should be kind of overturning entire countries with the new mechanisms overnight,
I think. And I wasn't insinuating. Oh, definitely. I think that's figuring out how to kind of solve
grand problems of humanity is a long term goal. But I mean, sure, some goals are there's definitely
there's little things that we can make better. Right. So, and this is actually part of why I
find cryptocurrency and blockchains interesting, because they are, in a lot of ways, this ideal
ground for economic experimentation of different types. Right. So, like to give one concrete
example, and so one of the ideas that Glenn Weil and myself have come up with and are pushing
forward is something called quadratic funding. And the way that quadratic funding works is
roughly this. Right. So, you have a central kind of pool of funding. And you could imagine this
coming from a government, you could imagine this coming from wealthy donors, you could imagine it
just being put together by some like crypto economic protocol could come from anywhere.
And then you allow people to like basically set up projects. And you let people say,
I have a project here is something that I'm doing. And if you like this, then you can donate to me.
And you let people donate to projects. And then the core of the mechanism is basically that if
there's a project that multiple people donate to, so there's some project you donate to it,
and someone else donates to it as well, then your donation doesn't just benefit you, it also
benefits the other person. And the other person's donation doesn't just benefit them, it also
benefits you. And so to kind of counteract that kind of market failure, the mechanism basically
says, well, we're going to multiply the effect of your donation by two and multiply the effect of
the other person's donation by two. And so now both of your incentives are kind of aligned with
the whole. And you extend this mechanism. So instead of supporting two people, it supports an
arbitrary number of people. And you kind of calculate these subsidies across all possible
pairs of people. And what you get is this formula that basically says you let people donate to
different projects, you look at how many people donated and how much money you've donated. And
based on this, from the central pool of funding, you give this extra subsidy. And so it basically
is like a market for public goods. And in the Ethereum ecosystem, there's something called a
Gitcoin grants, where we've basically started trying to use this mechanism to fund public goods
inside the Ethereum ecosystem. So this could be implementations of the Ethereum protocol,
it could be scaling solutions, it could be wallets, it could be educational resources.
And we've had a test around recently with about $200,000 in this central matching pool.
And it recently finished. And you can go to gitcoin.co slash grants to see the results.
And we got contributions from hundreds of people. And the results it gave were actually pretty
reasonable. Fantastic. Yeah. And so I think Ethereum could have a lot of value as in just
being a test net bed for and decentralized governance and decentralized public good
funding infrastructure of this kind. Well, I think that that's fascinating. I guess one of the ways
in which I would understand that is when my wife, who's an economist, and I talk about this stuff,
we often talk about a market democracy has these two voting systems. One is $1,
one vote. And the other is one person, one vote. Theoretically anyway, even if that's on or only
in the breach. Yeah. And like liberal democracy does this horrible thing of like treating these
as opposite poles where something is either one or the other and they're often fighting each other.
One really, everything's a spectrum. And I like that a lot. I mean, another thing that we've
been discussing recently, and this again is sort of joint with PM Elani, is thinking about the
Chicago approximation where you've got some reality that's incredibly nonlinear and complicated.
And then weirdly, in one of these famous instances where the map is not the territory,
you take this incredibly simplified world where agents have this
properties you can't even believe you would have subscribed to a human being where you
would call it homo economicus and it's perfectly rational and it has all of these characteristics
like an automaton that only makes rational decisions. And then you impose that like through
law and economics programs and suddenly you've distorted your society by taking the map as the
territory so seriously that you don't realize that you're destroying something and distorting it.
Yeah. No, definitely. It's one approximation and I mean, we're never going to have approximations
that are perfect because the world is just- I'm glad to hear that. Yeah, and the world is just so
complicated and so even rapidly changing in the 21st century. All approximations are bullshit,
but like you have to find a couple of good ones that work reasonably well and make progress for
us. And I think that one of the things that's unfairly done to cryptocurrencies is that we
expect them to solve all of the problems that already cropped up in our forms of governance,
in our forms of currency and exchange and court systems, and that what we should be asking of
them is to be improvements or to augment already existing systems. Now, one of the odd things
about governance is we could view you as in some sense starting a rival virtual country
that has a legal system because the Ethereum, I don't know what to call it, network platform
protocol. Yeah, it controls coins and it has the right to reassign those coins.
And not only that, but it has a stand in for the legal system in the form of what are called smart
contracts. Normally, we have this concept in governance, I guess it goes back to Weber,
that a government is supposed to be a monopoly on violence, which is an odd definition that
you recover the concept of government from monopolizing violence and then you sort of
unearth and unpack all of the features of government from that one generating function.
In some sense, a cryptocurrency and smart contracts derive from math rather than violence.
Well, they derive from math and social consensus, right?
Well, I love the fact that I was going to get to that, but...
Yeah, I know, because this is important, because for example, you have the Bitcoin blockchain
and then you have the Litecoin blockchain, which operates under almost exactly the same set of
rules as the Bitcoin blockchain. And yet, the Bitcoin blockchain has a $100 million market cap
and the Litecoin blockchain has a $3 billion market cap or something like that in much less
usage. So, like, blockchains are definitely not just math and technology. Math and technology
are the substrate and maybe in the same way that the military is like the substrate of keeping a
country together, but... The extended military, including police forces.
Exactly, but they're the substrate, but they're not the country. The country is the community.
Well, and this goes to what I would love to get into with you, which is the way in which
different utopian dreams collide in the space of cryptocurrencies. So, for example, there are some
dreams that may sound more like, I assume you may be active in the effective altruism community.
Is that a possibility? Which tries to figure out how to do the most good, to do good efficiently
rather than sanctimoniously. There are other people who have this idea of, I just want a
retreat from other human beings and I want to be left alone. I don't want to be taxed. I don't want
to be told what to do. Very strong libertarian perspective. Sometimes those people are the
same people. There's two kinds of libertarians. There's, well, there's many ways to spot
libertarians, the two kinds, but there's the leave me alone type and then there's the kind
of conquer the world type, right? The kind of relishes seeing fiat currencies be destroyed
and replaced by Bitcoin. And it's kind of creating a thousand a year kind of reign of sound money
that and I mean, I generally have this kind of instinct that like when someone says that like
we should impose a lot of short-term disruption and harm on the entire world for the sake of
some nebulous, a long-term gain, that's something to be skeptical of. But so I'm going to line
the word skeptical. You're using an extreme form of understatement.
Yeah, yeah. And I guess so I'm definitely not in the camp that actively relishes fiat
currencies being destroyed. But I definitely don't think that all Bitcoiners do. There's
some that do see it as something that's supposed to coexist and something that's supposed to
provide a check and balance against the government's monopoly on issuing money
without ever placing it entirely. So there's definitely enough different visions within
individual communities. There's different visions between different communities and
it's not just visions about what cryptocurrency should do to the world. It's also visions about
how cryptocurrencies should work internally and what they should do to each other.
So in that sense, I guess cryptocurrencies are interesting in blockchains not just because
of what they can do to the world but also just as this microcosm of the world all into themselves.
We talk about country, virtual countries, but there's many virtual countries now.
There's over 1400 on CoinMarketCap and they have some analog of...
You do think of them as virtual country.
It's... I mean, all models are bullshit but some are useful.
Well, to the extent that a country is a sensible thing to play. So in that world where we're dealing
with often very radical individualism and a very strong sense that there is something
wrong with the coercive aspect of a government, do you worry that something that you have given
birth to may start to behave in very different ways than you would ever want?
Definitely. I mean, probably the closest that we've seen to things like this happening already
would be the initial coin offering boom in 2017 and 2018. And basically what happened there was
that people saw that cryptocurrencies are something that could potentially hit a very high value and
so people started saying, oh, I'm raising money, anyone come and give me $50 million and I'm going
to build a cryptocurrency and I'm going to make it great and I'll turn your $50 million into $50
billion guaranteed. And it's complicated because on the one hand, the possibility of raising money
and using it to fund cryptocurrency development, it did a lot of good. And in general, the open
source community, it acutely suffers from this public goods challenge that we talked about
because an open source software is a very public good and we saw some very public kind of splats
involving open source software being under maintained like the Cloudflare and of issues
a couple years back when it turned out that an open SSL library was really, really under maintained
despite billions of dollars of value depending on it. And with cryptocurrency, suddenly you
can make things that are completely open source that through coins do have a funding mechanism.
And this has massively accelerated the development of many kinds of cryptography,
zero knowledge proofs and peer-to-peer networking, a lot of other things. But on the other hand,
it's also given rise to this kind of speculation. And in many cases, the projects turn out to be
outright fraudulent, right? But it's a really delicious and weird situation. I haven't asked
you about it yet, but I presume that your net worth crashed a great deal, got run up and then came
back down. And were you happy in any way about that?
Relieved.
Yeah. So right at the top of the big bubble, like in December 2017,
when Bitcoin was hitting 20,000, ETH was hitting 1400. I made this tweet and a series of tweets
and that kind of became somewhat famous within the space where I basically said,
the cryptocurrency space has reached half a trillion dollars. Does it deserve it? Do the
things that it's actually accomplished like hold a candle to the promises that the market is ascribing
to it? And I mean, the subtext of my answer is not yet. And that was proven very right fairly
quickly. But you didn't short it, did you? So I did get the Ethereum foundation to sell about
70,000 ETH like basically at the top and that's doubled our runway now. So it was one good decision
that had a lot of impacts, but it did not short.
I should say that I was weirdly somewhat relieved as well. I viewed that the innovation of
decentralized transactions and the bit... It's hard for me to say because I actually
convinced that the blockchain should be an intermediate state and should not be the permanent
version of decentralized computing. I agree. Okay. But I thought that that was such an amazing
innovation that you could have a locally enforced mechanism without a centralized authority,
but with a global ledger, which I see of it as a point of intellectual failure, that in some
sense you're mirroring the transactions of the physical world. So for example,
for those listening at home who don't have a visual here, Vitalik has several glass bottles
next to him. Were he to give one to me, which he shouldn't do right now, but
the idea would be that it would no longer be in his space and it would be in mine.
That property of atoms has been somewhat mirrored in Bitcoin and blockchain and Ethereum transactions.
This is the concept of money as a thing, right? The scarcity of the 21 million limit. If I give
you five coins, I have five less and you have five more. Right. And so the idea is that what
you're doing is you're porting conservation laws from the physical layer into the logical layer.
Right. And to some extent, it reflects the very deeply of Austrian economic libertarian
origins of the space way back in the end of 2009 to 2013 days. And creating digital gold
was pretty much the, and a digital payment system was the first use case. But I definitely think
that we can and should be thinking about point systems that work in ways other than money.
Well, I agree with that. And I also think that it isn't digital gold because
as the saying goes, gold or money has no stench and that the blockchain is this bizarre
difference with the physical world and that it is a distributed ledger that may be somewhat
anonymous, but it still gives the history. Like if I hand you a dollar and you don't have access to
any particular means of analyzing whose DNA is on that dollar, you have no idea where it's been.
And that is violated by the current blockchain type implementations.
So it isn't a complete port of the physical world into the digital, but it is an astounding one.
And I guess I get very frustrated with the economics questions. Like, well, what's it good
for? Where's the killer app? I mean, we have all of whatever's left of human civilization to figure
out what this thing is meant to do. And I'm not very worried that we're not going to figure it out.
I mean, we're going to figure it out sooner or later because a conservation law in digital
space is just too valuable. Is that wrong? You worried at all about the search for...
Like, I just hate this question. Where's the killer app? And I'm thinking,
chill out, man. This is an astounding intellectual achievement. Is that wrong?
Yeah. And I think there's definitely a long time to go. And I think the apps will come.
The ones that are coming right now are basically kind of financial. But I think,
I mean, that's kind of true just in part because the existing financial system is just like
so ready and waiting there to be disrupted. But in the long term, there's...
There's... It's disrupted in polite term for destroyed.
You choose.
Well, but I mean, there is something interesting here. You're 25 years old. Every bit of your adult
life is post-2008. And to be 25 years old and in charge of a financial ecosystem to the extent
that anyone is in charge of a theory. I mean, I don't want to claim that you are sitting there
running and making all these decisions. That's an astounding thing that this has fallen to somebody
who's adult life is post the crash. Do you think about that at all? That you don't have
the same associations the rest of us do with markets when they were claimed to be working well?
Like during the era of the Great Moderation supposedly when volatility was banished,
you were what, 13, 12?
So one thing that I kind of only realized recently that I found interesting is that there
aren't kind of two tribes here. There's three tribes. And what I mean by this is that there's
the tribe that says markets are great. And there's the tribe that says markets are bad.
And like we should move to more things that look like political mechanisms. But then
if you look at kind of the zeitgeist that's kind of fairly popular in the cryptocurrency space,
definitely even still now to a big extent, it's that markets are great. But the thing that existed
and exists like isn't markets. And so I guess like there's people who are pro-market and who see kind
of the existing financial system as being that. And there's people who are pro-market and who see
the existing financial system as being like yet another one of the perversions of that that needs
to be overcome. Well, it's odd because I would love to fix our democracy. I'd love to fix our
markets. But I'm I have to say, I believe that I have grown up in a an approximately 50 year bubble
which the silent generation and then the boomers presided over. And my own read is that
because of their inability to figure out sufficient innovation to take over from the previously
innovative system, that the world of human expertise has been almost completely contaminated
by special pleading and political economy. So that many of us who don't have a particularly
Austrian or libertarian bent are just sick to death of being lied to by people claimed to be
Nobel laureates in economics. Do you have any emotional connection to you?
Like I feel like I'm lied to about almost almost, you know, the doctors are lying,
the lawyers are lying, the accountants are lying, the extraction companies are lying.
And it's not because of a million different reasons. It's because growth ran out and our whole
society is predicated on a need for economic growth. Yeah, no, there's definitely a lot of
things that are that have changed in this and a system that's just not keeping up and doesn't
and doesn't understand that there is such a thing as keeping up. And it's like,
hmm. So like one, like even Glenn talks about this, right? Like he talks about kind of the
markets as social technology mentality versus the like, basically end of history mentality.
And I guess like the way that I kind of, and I definitely saw this kind of,
is I guess 10 years ago that said kind of even more broadly than like markets versus other
mechanisms that's like things are 80% efficient and let's work to make them 95% efficient. Whereas
the thing that's really going on is that things are 3% efficient and we should work hard on making
them 6% efficient. Like if you kind of move away from the narrow context of like, I'm,
I have something to sell and you have something to buy, which is pretty well optimized already,
then there's lots of these kind of very big things that are happening that have just
completely been missed. And in technology and then of network effects and all, and just generally
kind of migrating from atoms to bits are definitely all a big part of it.
So let's talk about something that's a little bit funny, which is if you're start to replace
government as we were talking about, and you see it as a monopoly on violence,
you notice that very often there's a very funny role played by organized crime. Now,
of course, when we think about organized crime, we tend to get emotionally excited by it for
whatever reason. We make lots of movies about it. It occupies the mind as something terrifying and
alluring. And there's sort of two weird aspects to organized crime, one of which is violence as
a contract enforcement mechanism. In other words, you're gambling so you don't have access
to the regular court system. Now you have a gambling debt. And so just the way our government
would put you in jail if you, you know, started doing things, you couldn't fulfill all of your
obligations and you were doing harm to lots of people and you couldn't be stopped. Organized crime
has to do, somebody can't maintain jails. So it can put the hurt on somebody for means of contract
enforcement. So it's not looking to do violent things. It's looking to run illegal businesses
for which there's demand. And then it has a problem of enforcement. Then there's another
part of it, which is violence as the product. So for example, extortion would be a shame if
anything were to happen to this lovely business that you're running is a veiled threat, pay us
or we're going to do harm to your business or, you know, contract killings and the like.
Are you worried that effectively by introducing parallel structures, both in the form of currency
and in the form of contracts, smart contracts that are the
Sinequanon, I guess, of the difference between Bitcoin and Ethereum, that the killer app that
is most likely to happen while the technology is still clunky and cumbersome and difficult,
is in the parallel space that either you are going to replace organized crime as a place to do
contractual business outside of the normal scope, which could be a benefit because organized crime
still exists and is a bad thing because it uses violence and you would use math in place of it,
or that it could actually be used to facilitate violence by, you know, using,
let's say prediction markets or something else to induce people to commit crimes where the
the committer of violence has unusual information about where the violence will be committed and
therefore can profit from it. It's definitely a worry that I and lots of people in the crypto
space have had since the beginning, though I do feel like at least so far I've been surprised,
like it feels like less of it has happened than we had expected. That's the thing.
Now, what do you, what accounts for the idea that something that can be dreamt has mostly not
occurred? I definitely have a, maybe it's a great thing about humans that we didn't realize that
we're not nearly the horrible people we thought. Yeah. And I definitely have a couple of theories
about this. So one of those theories is that like basically a lot of things that people do and
especially a lot of things that people do in the infosphere because like public goods are kind of
chronically underfunded and all that rely really heavily on goodwill. And so, you know, you have
goodwill that if someone, if you pay someone to write some piece of software for your website,
it's not going to include some, yeah, some bug that'll steal people's money or tell the FBI where
you are. If you create a system for enforcing agreements that they'll actually get enforced and
even like on internet forums, they depend on kind of a lot of volunteer labor for just things like
moderation. And if you create a group that just goes like fundamentally against like the vast
majority of people's values, then it's just going to be a hard to find volunteer effort for that sort
of thing. And like this, so like that's probably the big, the big reason I think why so far we
don't really see kind of, you know, complicated decentralized structures being created to facilitate
like black markets for killing people and so forth. Because we'll start off with something more mundane
like a numbers racket. Right. So a numbers racket would probably be a much simpler application
so what do you mean by numbers racket here? Well, something that takes the place of a lottery
where some, let's say some naturally occurring number that would be printed in a newspaper and
presumably nobody has the influence over what number gets printed, constitutes the lotto draw.
Yeah, and lotteries have existed on blockchain since the beginning. Yeah. Even there's definitely
been this kind of sub community of people that created these kind of provably fair Ponzi contracts
where they have a smart contracts and you can throw money in and as soon as if you're the
end person to throw money in as soon as soon as two end people throw money and you get like
1.9 back or something like that. And like this was just a fun game that people have made and
like participated in even fully knowing what the economics of the thing are. So yeah, and
things like that have definitely happened. Though gambling is the sort of thing that
there isn't this kind of 99% plus consensus that it's really horrible and evil, right? Because
on the one hand, like lots of people want to ban it, but on the other hand, people do it.
And it's something that people see negative consequences of, but at the same time it is
something that people participate in and enjoy. Whereas the extremely bad stuff, there's definitely
this kind of barrier between kind of things that are edgy versus things that are just so far over
the edge. And for things that are kind of so far over the edge, it is even with smart contracts
and even with all of those things, it's still hard to coordinate those structures. And I think
the blockchain's inability to directly read facts about the real world could even be a
saving grace here because a blockchain can't directly read whether or not something in the
real world happened. It basically means that if you want to have some application, whether a
prediction market or something else that does make... So can we say a little bit more about the
intellectual problem that you're touching? Sure. So the idea is that there may be something that's
very perceptible to us about the real world. But we might naively think, well, the computer
should be able to tell whether that happened or it didn't happen and that that's a surprisingly
difficult thing to code up reliably so that the interface between the world of bits and bytes
and the world of otherwise physical reality, which often we don't realize we're thinking about
subjectively, that it's hard to maintain that interface so that the way in which the things
that have happened in the real world can be definitely agreed upon without any kind of adjudication
inside of the digital world. I don't know how to say that well. Blockchain's are a fundamentally
programmatic medium. All they see is data that gets fed into them and what they can compute
as a result of that data. And so if you want to create a smart contract that says if someone
figures out what the prime factors of a big number are, pay them a reward, you can do that
because prime factors are something that you can multiply together and verify. But if you
want to have a smart contract that says if there's a hurricane in Sri Lanka, then pay 500 bucks,
then you can't do that on the blockchain itself because computer code has no idea what hurricanes
are. It has no idea what Sri Lanka is. In that case, you could have a designation that the
national... Correct. You can get data from third-party sources and this is the thing that...
Somebody else turns it into data. Exactly. This is the thing that a lot of applications are doing.
But the thing that's important to keep in mind is that as soon as you do that, your smart contract
is no longer fully trustless. Right. Right. So there's this concept which is like a utopian
concept of a trustless legal system so that you don't have the messiness of humans anywhere
in the system and you can have complete faith and confidence in the contract that you've struck.
Yeah. Right. And outside of basically giving bounties for solving math problems, so it's
not something that you can 100% achieve. So I can't necessarily ensure my vacation that if
I go all the way to Argentina and the weather is terrible, it pays out because we can't agree
what terrible weather is. Right. You can create structures made out of individual participants
that can try to align incentives to get people to give correct results. You can have complicated
kind of contraptions involving people giving different answers and policing each other and
rewarding people who give the same answer that other people have committed to and things like
this. But you can only try to approach the ideal of kind of correct truth. You can never 100%
reach it. Now, you started Ethereum in 2014, 2015? Started, started end of 2013. I mean,
launched in 2015. Okay. Would you say, let's use launch date as an artificial date. Sure. Would you
say you are more or less excited emotionally than you were when it started? You've now been through,
you've logged some miles here. I've definitely excited. More excited. I think the main difference
is kind of more definitely excited in the sense of like four years. Well, definite as opposed to
indefinite. Four years ago, it was about like, hey, let's make this platform to kind of try
a bunch of really cool things. We have no idea what's going to happen and let's just stick it out
there. And now we know things about things that people are already doing. We know things about
things that people want to do and we also know more about what the limitations are.
And so instead of just being this kind of extremely fuzzy dream of like, let's stick smart
contracts and algorithms and kind of trustlessify everything, it's something that's kind of both
more moderate, but also kind of more like seeming much more like it actually has a big chance of
kind of transforming the world kind of precisely because it's kind of moderated to some extent.
So are you more, if I gave you a false three choices, and by the way, smart people always
hate these things, so feel free to break the model. If I gave you a choice between saying,
are you mostly excited about the technology and the amount of innovation? Are you mostly excited
about the business opportunities for yourself? Or are you mostly excited about the way in which
this could transform human life? Would that be an easy call or would you say, I reject that
decision tree? Some mix of the first and the third. I don't know. I guess like the framing of
business opportunities is definitely kind of never, like this is weird. I mean, despite
kind of even- I get the sense that you don't love money enough. Yeah, this is true. Okay.
I mean, it's weird because for a long time- You have a lot of it.
Yeah, well, I have a lot of it and it's also even weirder because like for a long time,
I subscribed to this kind of branch of economics that basically says that like love of money is
like the best motivation for people to have. Sort of an Iron Randian. Well, I'd say in that area.
But I don't get that. I'll be honest. I just don't get that vibe.
Right. I mean, there's- I've definitely kind of shifted a lot over the years. I think my
experience even within the crypto space itself has kind of turned and given me a lot of new
information to work with. Is there more? Like basically, and this goes back to this kind of
cryptocurrency as a microcosm of wider society thing, right? Like if you're basically any
movement regardless of what the movement is for, what its goals are, to be succeeded needs to be
sufficiently big. And once something is sufficiently big, it needs to have internal structure to
coordinate and achieve its objectives, which means that it suffers from governance issues. It suffers
from public goods issues. It suffers from conflicts with adjacent movements. It suffers from
conflicts between its own values and its own desire to succeed and so on and so forth. And
like it needs to come up with ways to answer like basically almost the same kinds of hard
problems that the world as a whole is working on. Well, you know, it's interesting. When I look at
this sort of world of people, maybe it had an epicenter in the Bay Area, though I think it's
less true now. We're trying to figure out what is the future and how do we get there. There's a
very clear sense that people's creativity and their intelligence is correlated with their
financial success, but it's not very tight. And so there's like an embarrassment that, well,
that person is super amazing and they're not doing all that well. This person somehow metabolized
a tremendous amount. This is something that I've definitely kind of realized just from
my travels. I've interacted with a lot of kind of super famous people in different kinds of
positions, which includes some world leaders and includes some kind of leaders of fields
and cryptography. And you realize that people in these positions, they are impressive, but
they're not like super amazing, godlike, impressive, right? Some of them are. Some of them are,
but then there's also super amazing, godlike, impressive people that just like don't care to
get that much recognition at all. That's sort of what I'm trying to get at, is that I think about
like if you hang around with musicians, very often you'll have somebody who's a super famous
musician and say, you want to know who's really good? And they'll tell you something you've never
heard of. You say, well, that person's a musician's musician. Exactly this, yes. Right. And so,
you know, if I gave the name of people who are famous for being, let's say, physicists,
they're very often the people on television as physicists, but they would all point to some
guy who doesn't give a lot of interviews and say, well, that's the top guy. Exactly. Basically,
social status is predicted by competence multiplied by basically publicity skill,
and that's half correlated with competence for obvious reasons. Those people also know
the people that have the real competence. And that's one of the things that I've always found
really interesting about people who have this diehard belief that markets produce justice,
which is, I do think that success in markets is somewhat correlated or has been with
things like productivity, but it's also correlated sometimes with how predatory somebody can be or
how lucky they happen to be at a particular moment. And one of the questions that I have is
if you're really interested in innovation, which is what I sort of pick up is one of the main
things. How does something like Ethereum give us a possibility to revitalize innovation after
what many of us consider a period of relative stagnancy outside of the areas of computation
and communication, which everybody knows have exploded? Do you think about how Ethereum can
mediate a new renaissance, a new generative age? You sure talk about it a little bit?
Definitely. And I think there's Ethereum as a platform for experiments in
governance and public goods funding is one thing I mentioned, and education is another thing that
I talk about and obviously do. I have a lot of these blog posts on Vitalik.ca and other forums.
There are one of the big challenges that, for example, is that in internet educational resources
in general, there's basically two kinds. There's papers and Wikipedia and basically things that
are technically accurate, but they're just horribly not understandable at all. And we
forcing people to even try reading them. And then there's Popsite Literature, which is very
accessible, but it's often just actively wrong in really horrible ways. And I personally, even
before Ethereum, like I did Bitcoin Magazine, for example, I've always tried to find this kind
of middle gap, this way to take concepts that are technical and expand them to a broader audience
so that they are more accessible. And this to me has been important in part because I view
accessibility of information about the technology as a precondition for even the decentralization
of the space. If the thing technically runs on 50,000 computers, but only 42 people know how it
works, then your decentralization index is in 50,000, it's 42. It's a very nice point.
Yeah. And so trying to improve even how we, in the Ethereum community, work on innovation
internally. But so those are things that happen in blockchains as a lab for trying out new things,
kind of first for the blockchain space and then potentially exported to other things.
And then we can also look at kind of blockchains as something that can be used to improve and
create better institutions. So like one of the Ethereum Foundation's researchers, Vlad Zanvir,
he actually got into Ethereum because he was looking at how to improve academic publishing.
And like he saw things like the existing peer review mechanisms and how they were
just very flawed in a bunch of ways. And he thought that, hey, here's potentially a platform
that we could use to build something that does better. And that's one of his core interests
and why he's even continuing to work on the technology.
You know, I hadn't understood how insiders viewed peer review in an academic context until a
finance professor got drunk at a party and said, you know, that guy who's harassing you in your
research and finance, you don't know why he's doing it. I said, well, why do you think he's doing
it? He said, I know, he says, we've created a system where our fees are sky high to consult.
And we do this by making the number of professors in our field small by controlling peer review.
And so that effectively we are at conspiracy and restraint. And like this guy's just telling me
straight out that this is a gating function to keep their consulting fees high and that this
guy is going to do everything that they tell him to do, because otherwise he can't come into the
club and charge these rates. That sounds about right. Right. So that one of the another killer
application, so you have one potential suite of applications, which have to do with facilitating
illegality. Some of that might regard result in net reduction of harm, because you could replace
violence with math. On the other hand, a place where you could have a really positive effect
is political economy, where by removing the human ability to act badly,
you effectively create a much fairer, more representative world. Exactly.
Yeah.
What do we do? So you have an interest in the two fields that I find Wikipedia can't explain to
any normal human being are theoretical math and physics. Even biology, you can sort of guess
what's going on because you have something concrete to think through. Yeah, but like even
biology, like you've got to learn math to deeply grow out here, because otherwise you're just
memorizing names of chemicals. I have a PhD in math. If I try to read a math paper one or two
fields over from my own field, I will do less well with it than if I read a biology paper,
even though I've taken no class in biology. That sounds right. Yeah. There's a difference between
the level of math that you have to know just because it's important for you as a philosopher.
That's about the level of math that I think you need, even to be good at biology, to be good
at economics, to be good at a lot of things. It's understanding principles, even things like, for
example, if you have a trade-off between X and Y, and right now you're optimizing entirely for X
and it's a smooth curve, then if you want a little bit of Y, then you can get your first bit of Y
at almost zero cost of X. That's just a property of continuous functions that from the maximum,
the derivative starts at zero. If you just deeply mentally grok about a couple of hundred of these
facts the same way you deeply mentally grok how to walk, then you get a lot. But then from there,
there's also the frontiers. Often the frontiers are less important.
Here's a weird thing I don't know how to bring up. When I try to understand crypto as a space,
I'm always confronted by how incredibly Byzantine and impossible it is to understand all of the
acronyms, all of the sub-pieces of history. It's an incredibly fragmented experience in which I
spend a long period of time just feeling moronic. Isn't it odd that Ethereum itself suffers from
this problem? It's hard to know what's going on. Yeah, it's definitely something that we
want to fix. If you ever have suggestions on what specifically we could make more understandable,
I'm always happy to hear those. Fantastic. Now, one thing that I think is really interesting is this
episode that occurred in the Ethereum space in which you were faced with a very serious question
of leadership having to do with an emergency that you could have either allowed to follow the rules
that had been previously specified in some sense or where you could interject a certain
amount of human intervention, but thereby letting people know that this was, to some extent,
not mediated only by rules and computers. Can you say a little bit about this famous incident
and describe it? Sure. In 2016, there was this smart contract that a group called Salakit launched
called the DAO. DAO stands for a decentralized autonomous organization. Ethereum, I came up
with about three years before, and it basically means that you can have a smart contract, this
computer program that controls digital assets, and if encode a set of rules for an organization.
You can use this kind of smart contract basically as a replacement for things like companies.
Salakit decided to launch a DAO. Their DAO was intended to be basically a decentralized VC fund,
so people could apply. The DAO would vote on which projects were worth investing in.
So, leaderless, rule-based, and virtual. Exactly.
Hit all the cipherpunk notes that are in the right place. The thing launched, and we were all
expecting it during its initial fundraising phase, which was also an open public blockchain process,
to maybe get $5 million, but then it got $5 million, and it got $10 million, and it got $20 million,
and it got $50 million, and $100 million, and then the price of ETH went up, and it got $200 million.
Then, when I was sitting at a friend's- Was this at all alarming that it was so successful?
After the 50 mark, I definitely switched from excitement to deep apprehension,
but it's a contract. Did you let on that you were feeling that way?
A bit. On June 17, 2016, when I was in Shanghai at a friend's apartment, and it was about
15-30-something in the afternoon, I saw a message in one of the Skype chats that I was in,
and someone basically saying, hey, guys, look at the DAO. It seems like there's some money coming
out of it. I checked on the public block explorer on the blockchain, and I saw, oh, look, it seems
like about $2 million ETH has actually already been removed from the DAO, and more ETH is slowly
being drained over time. I pinged the core developers, and I asked, hey, is this normal?
At first, I was thinking, okay, the alternative is unthinkable. There has to be a reasonable
explanation for this. So you were locked into some sort of denial?
For the beginning, yes. The developers looked at it, and over the next half hour, as more and more
people came online and started chattering with each other, it became clear that the unthinkable
has actually happened. I actually burned about 20 of my own ETH, basically just
dossing the Ethereum blockchain itself and just spamming it with transactions to try to
kind of slow the attacker down. Dossing denial of service?
Yeah, just spam the blockchain with transactions. Not all of my listeners will know the terms.
So that the attacker's transactions could not get in as quickly, because the attacker could only
withdraw something like a couple hundred ETH with every transaction, so it was a slow process
in the hopes that the developers would find some way to plug the whole...
Was that an intentional inefficiency, or was just that...
It was not intentional.
So in some weird way, the inefficiency was a good thing.
Yes, it gets even weirder. There was an even bigger inefficiency that would prove to be an
even better thing. But then the developers, however, did not find a way to plug the whole,
but the attacker voluntarily stopped after stealing about four million ETH from the Dell.
But in any case, this is the second inefficiency, right?
Voluntarily stopped?
Yeah.
There was a request made?
No, no, no, as in the attacker just stopped.
Okay.
And so here's the second and bigger inefficiency. The money that was the attacker took out the
four million ETH, it did not go into the attacker's wallet immediately. Instead,
it went into a ChildSmart contract, and only after 35 days could the attacker actually take
that money out. And this was...
A ChildSmart contract, you mean a...
Separate smart contract that was created through a function call of the main DAO smart contract.
So this was also not intended, right?
It was just a random quirk of fate that there was this big bug that was the biggest
smart contract theft in history up until that point, and it put the money into this convenient
box where it would just stay conveniently locked for 35 days, where everyone could stare and look
at it.
Lipo.
Yeah. And soon after this, there were calls happening between core developers and the
proposal to remedy the situation with a blockchain fork came into play, right?
So basically what happened here is the...
There was a blockchain fork and emotional issue for this community?
Yeah.
So why is that?
So I guess first of all...
What is it?
Exactly. So explain what would happen.
So in general, a blockchain fork is a normal process, right?
You have an upgrade, and the developers of the Ethereum clients implement code that basically
says, after block number 437000, stop processing blocks according to the old rules,
start processing blocks according to the new rules, which have extra features attached.
And...
Where blocks are just...
Set packages of transactions.
Yeah.
Yeah, okay.
And so before these code patches are formally proposed, there is this month-long period of
mini-month-long period of deliberation where changes are proposed, people discuss them,
people talk about them, and generally it's agreed that these changes are good.
And so people just go and download the code, and because everyone's downloaded the code,
the blockchain after block 437000 follows these difference in better ways.
This is a very warm and very human process.
It is the cold logic of a machine.
Exactly.
Okay.
And so the DAO fork was also a fork.
It was also a code change implemented by the developers of the clients that was pushed out
through a new version of the different clients that people could download, and users went ahead
and voluntarily downloaded it, and it would basically change the rules of the blockchain.
Except instead of changing them permanently, it would only do a single one-time change.
And the single one-time change basically said, during block 11920000, before processing any
transactions, take the ether that's stuck in this child contract and move it into another
contract that could then basically refund it all to the victims.
And so this was a very kind of manual intervention, right?
It basically says we all agree to run code that just irregularly takes this money and just reassigns
it to this other thing.
It's very weird because we always think in a sci-fi movie that something that you think
is human would rip off its mask and reveal itself to be a computer, and this is the reverse.
The computer face is ripped off, revealing humans behind this technological stack.
Yes.
Ultimately, people talk about blockchain immutability, and this is this idea that basically
you're not supposed to do this sort of thing.
Where does that supposed to come from?
Exactly. So there's definitely a sense in which it exists technologically,
because actually pulling off one of these forks is incredibly hard.
And for example, if it was not the case that the money was conveniently stuck there in one
nice little address for 35 days, it would basically not have been possible to do it.
Because as soon as you announce this protocol change that says we're going to take money
out of here, put it in there, the attacker could just move the money from there to a
different address. Basically, you play this cat and mouse game and the attacker could win.
But sometimes there is this possibility where you absolutely can just do these interventions
and you can just decide to stop running this code and start running this other code.
The only reason why this has not done more frequently is basically because there exist
these norms. And there exist norms in the blockchain community of Vlad Zamfier,
the researcher I mentioned before, and if calls them a Sabo's Law named after Nick Sabo.
And Nick Sabo actually dislikes the moniker Sabo's Law, but it is a pretty accurate representation
of his beliefs and the beliefs of many in the crypto community, which is basically that
even though it technically is code run by humans, we should act as though it is code
not run by humans. And because it is digital gold, right? Gold is not run by humans. Gold is gold.
And so if we want to make something that is light gold, then even though we're unfortunately
stuck with this thing run by humans, we should try as hard as we can to pretend it's not.
And this was the ideology of a lot of people in this space. And the Dell fork very much went
against this ideology. And so even though, in my opinion, having norms that you can't just
like go and edit whatever you want is valuable. But like when so much such a large fraction of the
ecosystem is at stake, it's worth rethinking things. But like other people were kind of even
more rigid in this regard. And so there was this kind of split in the community. And a portion
of the community actually did not download the updates, right? A portion of the community
did not download these code patches and implement the fork. And they just said,
we will continue running our own our old chain. And the old chain has since then been called
Ethereum classic. And it runs to this day. This is a fascinating civil war in essence. Yes. And
what I get out of this is that there's this very weird thing, which is that people
get very attached to ideologies. And then they come to understand why the simplistic version
of that ideology can't possibly work in a warm human system. I watched this. Have you ever gone
to this festival called ephemeral, which is sort of Burning Man on the water that was heard of it?
And I got invited to it, but I haven't had the chance to go yet. So it's kind of a libertarian
water world in the Sacramento Delta. And what was interesting is that one year,
in order to come to the festival, you had to have a lecture and you had to agree that you
would receive the lecture because of problems that had happened the previous year. And you
realized that these libertarians were being forced to invent governance. And rather than
just anarchy, you had to have some organized system. And so one of my questions is, is that
dream of escape from the heavy hand of government effectively not something to be pursued inside
of crypto space for the most part, because we realize that it is going to require governance
and that we can't figure out a way to turn this into a completely cold and methodical process?
It depends which version of the dream you subscribe to. If the version of the dream you
subscribe to is the dream that says that we can finally use algorithms to basically completely
eliminate humans' ability to interfere in things, then if your goal is to see that enforced 100%,
then no, you're not going to get that. If your dream is that you dislike how
existing governments and monopolies of violence have hegemony over this social function of
coordination and enforcing structures of rules and you want there to
exist an alternative, then that's something that we can talk about. So if the dream is to
augment, yes. And I'd argue that blockchains have a very unnecessary role now, especially given
modern political trends where there basically is no single traditional political body that's
accepted as trustworthy by the entire world and it doesn't look like there's going to be one.
But if your dream is to completely overturn things and have some simplistic notion of
digital property rights as the only thing that governs behavior, then that's something that
you can try for but you're not going to succeed. Let me try something else with you that I'm curious
about. You and I are both plugged into this weird alternate world that thinks very differently.
I had Andrew Yang in that chair and you saw that episode of the before.
Some people call this neurodivergence, that this is a non-neurotypical world.
I would say that both you and I exhibit some indicia of not thinking along standard lines.
The thing that occurred to me is that you brought up Slate Star Codex, which is this
website that is extremely influential in our shared world.
I was thinking about the difference between Slate Star Codex and CNN in terms of sense making.
Is there any way in which the Ethereum world can create a counterweight so that the neurodivergent
can rest the stranglehold that seemingly the neurotypical institutional world seems to have
on sense making at scale? Is there a way of promoting another blog in this world would be
less wrong? There are particular thinkers that I think of as being very important and influential.
I think you've given to Aubrey de Grey and Eliezer Yudkowski. There's this very different
world that isn't well known. In part, I view podcasting as like pirate radio, which is the
phrase I keep or some is that because you're Russian. What can we do potentially using your
technology to even the playing field between corporate sense making and this kind of home
brood sense making that seems to me to be of an infinitely superior level.
Well, not infinitely, but quite superior. Yeah. I think once again, there's two aspects to
blockchain TM that I think are equally valuable here. One is the technology itself and then the
other is the existing community around the technology. With the technology itself,
try to create institutions for even things like funding podcasts, for example. Even things like
this kind of Gitcoin grants quadratic voting, for example, that would be potentially a great way
to fund media organizations that avoids the pitfalls of both present day media, which is funded by
some combination of advertising and horrible clickbait incentives and at the same time avoid
the pitfalls of basically essentially controlled media and create a third alternative. It doesn't
even have to be quadratic voting. It could be some other mechanism for funding and blockchains
could be used as a base layer for that. There's also the blockchain community as a group of people
who care about many of these kinds of ideas. Even a lot of Ethereum people are definitely
kind of sweet star codex adjacent. I feel like I've tried my best to kind of bring these worlds
together and get them to talk to each other. Sometimes it is a challenge because there's
ways in which they're similar and there's a lot of people who are in both. There's also
ways in which they're sometimes different, but those differences can be a good thing.
I guess I'm concerned that we're coming up on an election in the U.S.
and I view Fox News and The New York Times and CNN as like watching professional wrestling.
It's got a very clear narrative structure before the facts even come in.
Yeah, this is actually one of the things I've only really started noticing maybe in the last
like one to two years. Narratives are something that don't seem like you're there when you're
fully inside of them, but once you kind of step outside and you start seeing that like
wait these people are missing something and they're making predictions that turn out to be
materially incorrect. Then there's no memory, like there's no cost. Yeah, you want to there's no
accountability at all. Then it's something that you just actively start thinking seeking out how
to move beyond. I think figuring out a better funding model for media organizations in general
in some ways. What I'm concerned about is that something like podcasting is almost a public
good. Well, it's fully a public good, but advertising is the one thing that I keep.
I call it the business model of last resort. Yes, and we are going with an ad supported
model because I don't want to disguise. Somebody offered to endow the podcast,
not my employer. I decided against it because I think what I really want to do is to try to
figure out how to improve the business model. We've talked about a couple of different variations
on advertising in order to make sure that controversial, but very sensible and level-headed
people can weather the storm that the big problem that I keep seeing is that advertisers pull when
there's a coordinated campaign to say, drop that program or else, and there's a need for something
like the blockchain or smart contract to make sure that you can't silence people who are speaking
decently just because they've pissed off a very large activist community. Do you see any way in
which the blockchain, for example, like I might give up advertising if I could figure out a way
to fund not only this program, but allied programs? In 2011, when I was starting Bitcoin
magazine, it started off with this one anonymous person whose name I'll never know, aside from
Key by his internet handle, who was just paying me five Bitcoin, which back then was $4 per article
to write articles for him. This was five times lower than a minimum wage, but I loved it because
it was the highest wage I've ever had. Eventually, despite paying me five times less than a minimum
wage, Key by ran out of money. He told me, hey, maybe Bitcoin week, we will have to shut down.
I came up with this business model that actually ends up saving it for a few months and basically
saving it all the way until I got good of poached by Bitcoin magazine. The business model is basically,
I write two articles a week and we'll publish the first paragraph of each article publicly,
and we'll say the rest of these articles is hidden for ransom. Here are some Bitcoin addresses,
and if people can collectively come together and pay 2.5 BTC to these Bitcoin addresses,
then they're free for everybody? Yes. That's nice.
Yeah. It actually worked well, and it actually started raking in much more money than Key by
had paid before. It's not saying that precise model is going to save.
It's a clever exploit. Yeah, exactly. To me, more clever experiments as what smart contracts are
all about. Let's try lots of different things, and we're going to have come up on some steps
forward that are interesting. Talek, I'd love to have you come back and talk to us about other
things and other points, but let me just close by asking you a couple of questions about the
mysterious origins of decentralized computing, the blockchain, and all of this stuff.
Sure. What the hell? Why don't we know who Satoshi is at this point, where Satoshi seemingly
came up with the first really viable version of this idea. We can prove that
I guess those blocks have never transacted that are under Satoshi's control, one would think.
That's a very mysterious origin story. Yeah. It surprises a lot of people.
Does it surprise you? It does. There's definitely not many people that have
managed to stay anonymous through that level of prominence. Even Silk Road,
first big crypto anarchist outlaw project on top of Bitcoin. After about two years,
Russell Burke got caught. The tools for just continuing to look at things that you say until
eventually you slip up and you use some word patterns that match word patterns that you
used under your name and then you correlate things. It's difficult to get around.
Unibarmer got away with it for a long time. I don't know if you know about the Citizens
Committee to investigate the FBI that pulled off this amazing heist in 1971.
Ted wrote his stuff in the 1970s, and that's also 1970s. Now we have the internet and everyone's
stuff is public who are available. We have machine learning. We have statistical tools.
Do you think it's well known who Satoshi is within a group that doesn't want to talk?
No. I think there's high uncertainty about this, but I think that it's
very unlikely that Satoshi is one person. You think Satoshi is one person?
Yeah. There isn't some very grand conspiracy. Do you think you know Satoshi?
Not that you know who Satoshi is, but do you think it's someone I know personally?
So if I had to pick one person, and I'm not asking you to out that.
You can say if you want to. I'll say it. It's not an uncommon opinion. If I had to bet my life
on one person, it's Hal Finney, basically because in Hal was around in the early days, he clearly
understood what was going on. He clearly participated since the beginning, and he also died at the
exact time, basically, that Satoshi disappeared. So there's a lot of these coincidences in his
favor, but then he's the one person I'd bet on if I had to bet on someone, but I'd also bet
against him. It's well under 50%. It's a pretty good caper. Yeah. There's definitely a significant
chance that it's someone who's still in the crypto space somewhere that I've met at some point,
or it could just be someone we have never met and never will.
He's done a really good job. Even just setting himself up as this kind of perfect
relationship. Or she or they. Yes. She really impressed a lot of people.
I find it very inspiring that one of the great intellectual feats of our time would have
anonymous authorship, and the only story I know that's comparable to that is this bizarre break-in
story where there was a woman, I believe named Judy Feingold, who was determined to take the
secret to the grave, and the other people in the conspiracy left the conspiracy after the statute
of limitations had run out, and they started talking. And then her perspective was we all agreed we
were never going to mention who did it. There's some desire usually to get caught and an urge to purge.
Yeah. Well, that does make it more likely there's one person, right? Conspiracies get exponentially
harder than more people you add. That's true. It's been fantastic having you here. I want to let
you know that you're welcome to come back and to talk about things that are unrelated to Ethereum
and blockchain and crypto, because actually, I have to say, I found very inspiring your attempt
to use this platform to rethink what can economics be repurposed to do. And I think that
that's an unheralded potential killer app for your program. Well, thank you. It's been good to be
on here. Okay. You've been through the portal with Vitalik Buterin. Thanks for joining us. Please
remember to subscribe wherever you listen to podcasts and to check out our YouTube channel
and to subscribe there and click the bell for more episodes when they become available.
Thanks for joining us.
you
