If you define the set of all sets that contain itself as a member,
it can't be a member of itself and it can't not be a member of itself.
So that set cannot exist. Let me give another way of thinking about that.
Suppose you have a museum. You decide to found a museum.
And you say, you notice that there are a number of museums in the world that have small-scale
architectural renderings of themselves somewhere in the museum.
And you can say, well, I really am interested in those museums
because they have models of themselves in them.
I'm going to found the museum that contains only those museums
that do not contain models of themselves in that museum.
So for example, if the MoMA in New York doesn't have a model of the MoMA anywhere in it,
then we could put a model of the MoMA in our new museum.
By contrast, if the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston does have a little model
in the somewhere in the museum of the Museum of Fine Arts
because they're so proud of the new wing they built,
then it will not be a model of the Museum of Fine Arts in our brand new museum.
So we go around the world and we check all the museums
and there's not that many museums, I suppose, maybe a few thousand.
And at each one, we catalog it as has a model of itself, does not have a model of itself.
And for all of those museums that don't have a model of themself,
we put a model of that museum in our museum of models.
But then eventually one day someone can say, well, this museum is a museum.
Does it have a model of itself?
Because if it has a model of itself, then it shouldn't be here.
But if it does have a model of itself in the museum,
then it has a model of itself and is not supposed to be there.
But it is there.
It's the same kind of paradox.
I love paradoxes.
Anyways, the easy fix to set theory was, all right, fine.
Sets can't contain themselves as members.
In fact, we're going to restrict the definition of sets.
We're going to just talk about sets containing points and other sets, sets of points.
All of it will be built up out of points.
And there's something to me as a mathematician very satisfying about that.
A point is a little speck of something that's just about as close to nothing as possible.
And so considering collections of all those kinds of things, seems like a reasonable way to go.
So you might ask at this point, especially since little specks of points look like pieces of sand,
is modern math a house built on sand?
And it seems like it kind of might be.
There's another question that seems reasonable to ask in this context.
There's an old story that I've seen repeated in several places, most notably in Stephen Hawking's
book. But I first heard it when I was a student in a philosophy class before Hawking wrote his
book on space and time. And the joke went like this.
The philosopher John Locke was sitting by his fireplace one night.
He was thinking about space and planets.
And how do planets, how does gravity work on planets?
What holds planets up?
And his maid said, well, Mr. Locke, that's very easy. Everyone knows what holds up the earth.
And he was a little bit surprised and then thought he'd punish her for her cheekiness and said,
well, tell me, what holds up the earth?
And she said, well, how everyone knows that the earth rests upon an elephant.
And he was a bit non-plus, although he liked the image of a really large elephant that the earth sat on.
So he said, okay, well, then what does the elephant stand on?
And she thought for a moment and said, oh, well, everyone knows that Mr. Locke,
the elephant standing on a giant tortoise.
And now he was getting a little bit angry.
And he said, thinking he'd finally had her in a trap.
Well, then what does the tortoise stand on?
And she looked at him and said, ah, Mr. Locke, it's all tortoises from there on out.
