So, is modern math built on a house of sand?
Is it built on concatenations of sets from there on out?
How does set theory work and why do people object to it since Bertrand Russell?
The main reason is set theory brings in ideas of infinity.
And as we saw in the second lecture, ideas of infinity can tie people on knots in a real
hurry.
So there are different notions of infinity that play into math.
There's large and small, discrete and continuous.
For example, we can think of infinity in the large regarding numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
I could count forever and I would keep counting bigger and bigger numbers that would take
me longer and longer to say, but they would go on forever.
I could think about things in the small getting closer and closer to zero but never arriving.
I could go one, one-half, one-quarter, one-eighth, one-sixteenth, one-thirty-second, each time
cutting down by half, I could half and half and half again as we saw with Zeno's paradox.
I would still never get to zero no matter that I took infinitely many ever smaller steps.
We can also think about infinity in terms of continuous objects.
We can think about a line that goes on forever.
That's normally how we think of the real number line.
We can think about a sheet of paper that went on forever and that's how we think of the
Euclidean plane.
Much closer to home and perhaps much more disturbing, we can think about space going
on forever.
Now it's problematic to think about space going on forever because how can it not end?
But it's even more problematic to think about space ending because if it ends then there's
a wall.
If there's a wall, what's beyond it?
If you resort to its tortoises from there on out and say the wall just goes on forever,
that's not a very good answer.
People have come up with some clever ideas to answer those kinds of questions too but
I want to focus more on infinity for numbers because the problematic sides of set theory,
the things that some mathematicians don't accept all hinge on these notions of infinite
numbers of numbers and what are the implications.
There are potentially infinitely many integers, an idea that goes back to Aristotle.
As a way of trying to understand infinity and to answer questions that I'll talk about
in a bit, the mathematician Cantor in the 1800s came up with a definition using sets.
He said two sets were the same size if you could take one member of each set and exactly
map it on to another member of the other set and here's one way of thinking of it.
You have a room full of chairs and a room full of people and all the chairs are stacked
up in the wall so you have a set of chairs and a set of people and you ask are these
sets the same size?
Are they the same number of chairs as there are people?
One way you could do that is by counting all the people and then counting all the chairs
and comparing those two numbers but it might take a long time to try to count everybody
up.
Here's a different way you could do it.
You could say okay everybody grab a chair and sit down.
If everybody sits down in the chairs and there's no chairs with nobody sitting in them and
there's nobody left standing then we can say there's exactly the same number of people
as there are chairs.
We could have billions of people and billions of chairs and rather than counting them that
would be a very quick way to ascertain if the numbers were the same.
