So Cantor called this the idea of the sets having the same cardinality, so two sets have the same
cardinality if there's a way to exactly match them up one to one and onto, meaning for every chair
there's one person and for every person there's one chair. Now this sounds innocuous enough,
especially when we're talking about chairs and people, but let's apply it to the ideas of the
integers to start with. I'm going to do this using a famous construct called the Hilbert Hotel.
The Hilbert Hotel is due to another famous mathematician in the 20th century, early 1900s,
named Hilbert, David Hilbert. The Hilbert Hotel has infinitely many rooms and the rooms are all
labeled with integer numbers. It starts at zero, one, two, three and goes on and on forever,
so it's a very big hotel and one day a busload of infinitely many tourists comes to the Hilbert
Hotel. They all want a room for the night and they're all going to check in and it's actually
quite easy. The desk clerk says no problem, you're an infinite number, but you all have
a number on you. Now you start at one and our room started at zero, but that's no problem.
The person who's number one, go to room zero. The person who's number two, go to room one. The
person who's number three, go to room two and so on and so on forever, so everybody gets out of the
bus, gets into the hotel, they all take their room, they have a lovely night at the Hilbert Hotel,
the accommodations are great, every room has cable and a mini bar, what could be better?
The next day though, another tour bus drives up. It has only two people in it, but there's no rooms
because there's a person in every room. The desk clerk thinks, well this is tricky, what can I do?
And the desk clerk has a fairly straightforward idea and he says, okay, person in room zero,
you go to room two. Person in room one, you go to room three. Person in room two, you go to room
four. In fact, whatever room you're in, just move two rooms up the line. So when everybody moves two
rooms up the line, it creates two new rooms that are empty and it's no problem, the people come in
and take those rooms. And this could go on for days, a bus load of 100 people could show up
and the desk clerk asks everybody to move 10 rooms up the line and that creates 10 rooms.
But then one day, another bus comes in, this bus also has infinitely many tourists on it.
Now that trick's not going to work again. It's not possible to say to everybody,
move up an infinite number because you can only move up a finite number.
So how does the desk clerk create rooms? Can rooms be created for the new bus load of tourists?
And the desk clerk worries and worries and worries and then hits upon a brilliant idea.
The desk clerk says, okay everybody, just go to double your number. So person in room zero,
you're lucky you get to stay there. Person in room one, you move to room two. Person in room two,
you move to room four. Person in room three, you move to room six, etc. So no matter what
room number you're in, you move to double it. But once everybody's moved now, that's opened up
infinitely many rooms. It's opened up the odd numbers. There is no longer anybody in room one,
three, five, seven, nine, or so forth because all those rooms were vacated. Now people moved out of
the even numbered rooms too, but somebody new moved into them. But at any rate then, when the new tourist
bus rolls up with these infinitely many people, the desk clerk can now give them rooms. The desk
clerk says, great, you just take the odd numbered rooms and we all know there's infinitely many odd
numbers too. So no problem, just go on in them. This can keep happening. Anytime another tour bus
rolls up with infinitely many tourists on it to the Hilbert Hotel, the desk clerk just says,
everybody moved to double the number. Now people don't like moving hotel rooms, but
everybody wants to be a good sport and try to fit in the new bus load. In some sense, this is like
saying that the number of positive numbers is the same as the number of negative numbers,
is the same as both positive and negative numbers. We can assign a number to all different positive
and negative integers and put them into this one-to-one onto correspondence with the positive
integers only. If we were doing it strictly by number instead of with tourists at the Hotel
Infinity, we would say zero goes to zero, one goes to one, minus one goes to two, two goes to three,
and so on. We would just alternate positive and negative numbers, although there's
infinitely many of both, there's infinitely many to fill, and we have no problem listing them all.
Let's say that if we can put the numbers in correspondence with the positive integers
that we call that listable, I like to think of it as starting at zero or one and just running
down a sheet of paper forever, and I just put everything in.
