So now that we've talked about the integers, we can ask, what about fractions? What about rational numbers?
You know, there's obviously infinitely many of those because you could just have 1 over 1, 2 over 1, or 1 over 2, 1 over 3, 1 over 4, 1 over 5, and so on forever.
How many of them are there? Are they the same size of infinity? Is there a 1 to 1 correspondence between those and the positive integers?
If the positive integers were chairs, could the fractions all find a seat? Could we just write the fractions as a list and write them all down?
And to me it was one of the most staggering things when I was a student and learned that in fact, although it seems like there's many more fractions, there's the same number of fractions as there are integers.
Now I thought of there being more fractions because if you look between 0 and 1, it's very thickly clustered with fractions.
There's sort of fractions everywhere. There's half and three quarters and a quarter. There's 8s, there's 10s, there's 20s, there's 1000s, there's millions.
There's all these fractions stuffed between 0 and 1, and it seemed like there should be more of them.
But there's a very clever way of listing them, and this is part of Cantor's genius too.
What Cantor realized is that we could spread them out in a giant square. Here's one way to do it.
In the giant square, we don't have them in the list yet, but try to visualize this giant square with me.
In the first column, we have 1 over 1, 1 over 2, 1 over 3, 1 over 4, all the way forever.
Then we have 2 over 1, 2 over 2, 2 over 3, 2 over 4, 2 over 5, all the way to 0.
We're going to get repetitions. One half is in both of those, but that doesn't trouble us.
Then we have 3 over 1, 3 over 2, 3 over 3, 3 over 4, 3 over 5, all the way down forever.
If you keep doing that for each number, you get a column starting with any number.
27 over 1, 27 over 2, 27 over 3, all the way down forever.
When we do that, every single rational number has to appear somewhere in that giant square.
For example, the number 412 divided by 516, if you moved over to the 412th column and then went down, I guess, 517 times,
you would get the number 412 divided by 517.
That says we don't have it in a single column or a list yet, but it's looking good.
We have it in one giant square, all those fractions, all those rational numbers that stuff the number line.
Once we have them in the giant square, we can put them to a list.
We accomplish this by making a serpentine path starting at the first corner.
We pick off the first one, 1 over 1.
Then we move and make a S-shaped path through where we pick the two numbers closest to the upper left corner.
Then we take the three numbers closest to those two numbers.
Then we take the four numbers closest to those three.
We make a giant triangle, if you will, starting at the upper left corner.
The triangle goes on for infinite in all directions, and it looks like a square to us, but if you imagine turning it on its side,
it turns into a giant triangle with no bottom.
We just go through that whole triangle row by row.
At each point, it's a finite process.
The process goes on forever, but our list goes on forever.
When we're done, we have listed every single fraction, every single rational number,
and so there are the same number of rational numbers as there are positive integers.
This really staggered me.
At this point, I think it staggered Cantor and anyone else who told about it.
