The next question to ask that logically follows is what about the irrational numbers?
We talked about those in the first lecture and every now and then since.
What about the irrational numbers?
Those were first found as diagonals of squares and rectangles which had integer sides.
And it turned out that some of them were numbers that just were not rightable as fractions.
They went on forever with the decimals going on and on and on and never repeating.
How many of those are there?
They might be tempting to conclude that they too can be put in a list.
To answer this question, Cantor created the most important, the most profound argument
in all of mathematics.
It's called the diagonal argument.
And what Cantor did was say, look let's ask a simpler question.
Let's just ask about numbers between zero and one.
Irrational numbers, rational numbers, whatever.
Let's ask about numbers between zero and one.
How many of those are they?
Can we list all those?
Because if we can list all those, then we know that all the other infinite tour busts
with numbers between one and two and two and three and so forth can drive up, get hotel rooms too.
Can we get all the irrational numbers in hotel rooms?
The diagonal argument says, well let's think of it this way.
We can write every number between zero and one as an infinite string of digits.
Starting with a point and then let the zeros and ones and fives and nines and whatever they
will run forever.
So if we assume that we can list them all, let's just pretend that we've written them all down.
So we're looking at all the numbers between zero and one written out in decimal form.
If we can list them all, there they all are.
And it's just an infinite string of numbers starting at the left and moving on forever
to the right.
Then the next one down in room two starting at the left moves on forever to the right
all the way down the list.
What Cantor said was, let's create a number that's not on that list.
We've decided that that list has to be complete.
And the way he did it is, let's take the first digit of the first number.
Now if it happens to be a seven, let's change it to a three.
If it happens to be any other number, let's change it to a seven.
So that'll be the first number that's not on the list.
Then for the second, move one over.
Do the same trick.
For the third number down, move one over so you're looking at the third spot.
Do the same trick with the threes and the sevenths.
Do this forever.
In other words, the visual that you should have is a infinite square that has a top
and a left wall and you're looking at the diagonal down it.
And for each of those diagonal positions, you're going to change that number that's there
and build a new infinite number out of those.
So when you've built the new infinite number, it can't possibly be on that list that you
hoped was complete because it has to differ from every other single number on the list
in at least one place that differs in one place.
It's not that number and we thought we had all numbers between zero and one on the list
and we've just constructed one that does not appear on the list.
In other words, the number of irrational numbers there are is infinitely larger
than the number of rational numbers, the number of integers.
