So let me talk about that a moment longer because the implications are profound.
Infinity is a slippery concept to begin with and it was a little bit staggering when we learned
that the number of fractions, the number of rational numbers, was the same as the number of integers.
What Cantor showed with the diagonal argument by constructing a number that didn't appear on the
list is that the number of irrational numbers is infinitely bigger. It's not just infinity,
it's infinitely larger, that somehow this amount of numbers is, it's incomprehensible in a new way.
It's a stretch of the imagination to list all possible fractions in one giant list,
but at least I can see how it's done. But the way of doing all possible numbers
between zero and one, so that's including the irrational numbers, can't be visualized.
There's too many of them. I can visualize them as a line, but I can't visualize them written down
and I find this highly disturbing. I also find it beautiful and remarkable and astounding and I
embrace it. But not all mathematicians felt that way. There were a number who thought this was so
upsetting and so contrary to what could possibly be that they retreated and said,
you know what, we don't like set theory. We don't like the infinite. We don't like your idea of
deciding when two sets are the same size. We're going to just restrict our thinking from now on
to finite sets. Maybe very big finite sets, but finite only. We don't like these kinds of
things that come out. They're not paradoxical, but they're very odd. Now those people in Cantor's
lifetime were led by a famous mathematician named Kroniker. Kroniker hounded Cantor. He attacked
him in print. He attacked him in conferences. He tried to savage his reputation. He attacked
Cantor and attacked Cantor and eventually Cantor had his nervous breakdown and ended up in an asylum
for a while and when he recovered was never the same mathematician. But because I happen to love
the ideas of infinity, I want to pursue it a bit further and talk a bit more about the diagonal
argument. Talk about how Turing used it and talk about generalizations of it. So first of all,
the diagonal argument is an example of proof by contradiction. That itself has come up with people
who disagree with it mainly because of Cantor's ideas. They might be willing to accept infinity,
but they don't want to accept a proof by contradiction. The logic behind a proof by
contradiction goes like this. We know all these kinds of things are true. These are our axioms
and everything we've built from our axioms. Here's something we don't know if it's true or not.
Let's assume the opposite of what we hope to be true. We've assumed the opposite. Now,
let's chase out the implications of that and compare it to what we know. If we find a contradiction,
if by starting with the opposite, we find something that just is untenable, then we say,
oh, okay, I guess we were wrong to assume that the opposite thing was true. There's a contradiction.
Since there are only two possibilities, a thing or its opposite, we tried the opposite. It was wrong,
so the thing must be true. So to say that again, it's a way to show something is true
by assuming it's false. It sounds a little bit weird, but in the world of mathematics,
things are binary usually. They're black or white. They're true or false. And so the proof
by contradiction tries to trade on that. You'd like to show something is black, so you assume
it's white, and then you run it through a bunch of changes and see what you can do with it,
and suddenly you find that one equals zero, that five equals 72, and you say, wait a second,
that's crazy. This all came because I assumed that was white. It must not be white after all,
it must be black. Cantor's proof is an example of a proof by contradiction, the diagonal argument.
He wanted to show that there was a larger infinite size of irrational numbers than rational.
So he began by assuming that the number was the same. If the number was the same,
then contradiction by using the diagonal. Therefore, it must be different. It must be a
bigger infinity. But we can keep playing this game because it invites the next question immediately.
