Mathematics is Power, Lecture 8 Fractals and Chaos
This is the last lecture. We're going to talk about fractals and chaos.
Fractals and chaos can exist independently of each other, but in their most interesting manifestations,
they're intimately conjoined with each other in a crazy embrace that produces amazingly beautiful
and strange objects, often called strange attractors.
To understand them, we also need to talk about dimension and geometry,
again in somewhat of a different way than we have before.
So dimensions as we usually understand them and think about them are quite straightforward,
and yes, that pun was sort of intended.
The way Euclid talked about it was Euclid started with points.
We talked about points with set theory too.
Points are a little bit of nothing. They have zero dimension.
There's nothing there, and yet there is a there there.
They're very confusing in that way.
And if this were a philosophy course, I might spend the next 10 minutes talking about
what does it mean to have something that's so small, it's smaller than everything else, but still there.
But it's not a philosophy course, so I'm going to move on.
And by moving on, I'm taking a point and moving it.
What we imagine is, if we take a point and that point moves,
that point moves in a straight line and moves away from where it is, that gives us a line.
And there's a little bit of craziness there already and just saying that, you know, it moves in a line
and so that gives us a line.
I'll talk a little bit more about that in a moment too.
But at any rate, so we think of a point as zero dimension.
We think of a point that has moved to be a one-dimensional object.
Now, to think of a two-dimensional object, we can imagine a line.
The line moves, the line moves away from itself.
If the line moves away from itself, and the visual I have is, I have a horizontal line at the bottom of my paper
and it moves up the paper, it fills that paper out.
That moving line creates a two-dimensional plane.
And then if I want to get from two dimensions to three dimensions, I imagine I've got my piece of paper flat on my desk
and now that paper just lifts up off my desk towards the ceiling and it fills out space.
So a moving point, which is zero dimensions, creates a line which is one dimension.
A moving line creates two dimensions.
And a moving plane creates three dimensions.
Before going on, I want to talk a bit about the way this, which maybe sounds straightforward
and I hope you have the good picture of it.
We can be misled here by our intuitions to overlook either paradoxes or at least things that need more explaining.
I find them interesting and I hope you do too.
So for example, I use the phrase straight line or move the line straight away from itself to create the plane.
What is straight?
When we think about straight, we probably think about taking a ruler and using it to draw a straight line
or maybe something that's been cut in a particular fashion, the edge of a piece of paper.
But straight on a sphere looks very different.
Now if you're on a sphere and you're at the North Pole and you head directly down the sphere,
so imagine you're on a basketball and you're standing at the top of the basketball.
You're at the top of the world and you walk down one of the longitude lines to the South Pole.
You have moved straight down the sphere as far as you saw and knew at every moment you were walking in a straight line.
But somebody outside would see you as moving in a curved line.
So are you moving straight or are you moving curved?
A line that is as straight as it can be is called a geodesic.
That might sound paradoxical, but it's really not.
It's just a situation that's a little odd and needs some explanation.
But as soon as the word geodesic is introduced, then we can agree that moving along a geodesic is synonymous with moving along a straight line.
And that at least is a good start.
But then we can ask, well, what does a geodesic mean in the Euclidean plane?
What's a straight line?
