When we think about straight lines, we're going back to some kind of platonic ideal.
No matter how good the ruler I use is, or if I pull out a laser and use it to do something,
that's an approximation of a straight line. It's something in space and in the world.
It can't be exactly straight the way I want it to be straight, but it'll be a good approximation.
But what then is that that I've done that I've called straight?
Most of the time, I think, myself included, people would say,
well, a straight line is the shortest distance between two points.
And that sounds like a good definition of a straight line.
Until you ask, well, what's distance?
And then most people would say, well, you just measure along a straight line.
However far you go along that is the distance.
And now we have a problem. It's not a paradox, but it's circular logic.
I've used a notion of distance, an optimization problem in distance,
to give me the definition of a straight line.
But then I've used straight line to give me the definition of distance.
It seems that I can't have one without the other, and there's something wrong with that.
I don't think it was obvious to people for centuries, maybe even 1500 years or more,
to realize that there was a problem even defining a straight line in the Euclidean plane.
And the definition that has been come up with is very satisfying.
And a way to think of it is this.
Take that piece of paper, fold it.
Now if you fold it, when you've folded it and you unfold it, you have a straight line there.
The mathematical operation that corresponds to that is taking a reflection, reflecting across something.
And a reflection is called an isometry.
An isometry is a Greek word that means same distance.
Under the isometry of reflection, points move.
It's like looking into a mirror and like Alice passing through the mirror to the other side.
But distances between points do not change.
And what's held constant under the isometry?
The thing that is held invariant, the thing that doesn't move at all in the plane,
turns out to be a straight line under any and all other definitions of straight we have.
So this is an example of, I think, math at its best.
What it's done is take an idea that seemed very sensible and intuitive.
But then when you looked at it deeper, you saw that it hinged on a kind of circular logic.
And now it's come up with an idea, one straight forward idea, that of reflection.
And use that to define the straight line.
Once we have the idea of a straight line, we call that one dimension.
And we use that, now that we have a good sense of straight,
we use that to get planes and spaces and so forth,
so we know what zero, one, two, and three dimensions are.
We can extend those ideas of dimensions to curved lines, for example.
Imagine taking a straight line and now allowing yourself to bend it.
It's a bent straight line, but it's still one-dimensional.
It takes two dimensions to hold it.
And this is an important idea. It's embedded in two dimensions.
It can't exist in the straight line anymore, but if you look at it locally, any little bit of it,
it looks a lot like a straight line.
You move it onto the straight line and we call it, therefore, a one-dimensional object.
You can glue the ends of a straight line together and get a circle.
There's not too many other things you can do to a straight line that are interesting,
but that situation will change as we move on up the dimensional ladder.
Two-dimensional objects can be found by taking a piece of paper and curving it,
or bending it, or crinkling it.
Each of those locally looks like a Euclidean plane.
Each of those locally could be flattened out to a Euclidean plane,
but it doesn't fit in a Euclidean plane.
It's a two-dimensional object that exists in three dimensions.
Imagine taking a piece of paper and rolling it into a tube.
We now have something that everywhere locally is a Euclidean plane,
but it definitely needs three space to fit into, and it has all new kinds of interesting properties.
We can take that piece of paper, in fact, and rather than just rolling it,
we're going to do things to it.
We're going to say, we're going to glue two ends of it together.
So we take two opposite sides and we glue them together, and that gives us a tube.
The tube has two circles at the end.
We can glue those together, and now we have a torus, the surface of a donut.
And I'm thinking of Homer Simpson right now, and perhaps you are too.
Donuts.
Surfaces of donuts, surfaces of spheres.
Suddenly there's a whole incredible universe of different two-dimensional objects
that we can have by gluing bits of paper together.
So how can we think of higher-dimensional objects?
Zero, zero, easy.
One, pretty straightforward, pun intended.
Two, not so bad.
In fact, if we take any object and look at the surface of that object,
then we end up with a two-dimensional thing.
