What about higher dimensions? One of Einstein's great insights is if we take a three-dimensional
object and move it in four dimensions, that was similar to moving the line across the piece of
paper with a paper off the desk. If we imagine moving the whole desk in time, then at each moment
of time there's a complete three-dimensional desk. One moment later in time, then that's a different
desk because that's a three-dimensional object at a different point in time. So there's one way to
get four dimensions, and he built up all of relativity theory out of that, and a beautiful
theory it is. A different way pursuing what we've been talking about is, suppose we started with
a cube. To get a torus we started with a piece of paper, we first glued opposite sides together
and got a tube, then we glued the ends together, the end circles together to get a torus. We can
do the same kind of thing in our imagination, at least the first steps, with a cube. A cube has six
sides, top, bottom, front, back, left, right. Imagine gluing the left and right sides together,
so it has to be a very flexible cube. So when we do that, we have what looks like a millstone now.
It's curved around on itself, and two of the sides have been glued together.
We want to keep gluing sides together, so we'll glue the top of the millstone to the bottom of
the millstone. So imagine now you've turned the millstone on its side, and you stretch and stretch
and stretch and pull the top and bottom towards each other. They're both discs with a hole in
the middle. They perfectly align. Glue them together. Now try to visualize this. It's a
doughnut surface. It's a solid doughnut now, but there's a drilled out hole all the way through
the inside of the doughnut. That was the hole in the millstone. When the top and the bottom
were pulled together, that hole turned into a torus itself, but a torus of emptiness.
Now, to finish creating the higher dimensional object is where we would have to use our imaginations
and they fail. The inside of the hollow space and the outside would have to be glued together,
but if you could imagine doing that, that would take us to a higher dimension.
But we want to move beyond Euclid and Euclidean dimensions to non Euclidean geometry and
ever stranger and stranger things. So in math, we usually want to create new things by either
merging old things together or starting somewhere we know and building something new.
So we're going to move towards fractals with a slight detour towards non Euclidean
geometries first. When people looked at the marvel of perfection that was Euclid time and again
for millennia, they noticed there was one postulate that seemed very odd, which was that if you have
a straight line and a point outside that line, there's only one line can be drawn through that
point that does not intersect your first line. It sounds a bit awkward. It is a bit awkward.
And people worried about it and thought, that's just odd. We should be able to prove that from
the other axioms. And they tried and tried for millennia and failed and failed and failed.
And again, finally in the 1800s, the great flowering of different and new forms of math,
people just thought, well, wait a second, what is a geometry really? A geometry is a
consistent set of axioms that produces things with dimension and shape. What if we think of
other things for geometries? And before long, people noticed that a sphere was an example
that could be a geometry. It had notions of straight lines. It was a dimensional object.
You can build higher dimensional versions of it. And now straight lines on spheres turn out to be
segments of great circles like equators and longitude lines. If those are straight lines,
all straight lines intersect so the parallel postulate is violated. But people worried about
other possibilities too. And they came up with something called hyperbolic geometry.
