Hyperbolic geometry takes place on curved or bent planes, and here, if you imagine it as a saddle,
like a riding saddle that you would put on a horse, you can imagine a straight line that goes
from the pommel to the back of the saddle. That's a geodesic as straight as possible. If you take
a point outside that line, further down the saddle, the way things curve, you can get infinitely
many geodesics through that point. And I'll add as a footnote that would be interesting to explore
that the large-scale structure of the universe is much more likely to be hyperbolic in parts,
maybe spherical in other parts, but certainly not Euclidean. We just can't imagine that it
goes on forever, and the evidence we've collected suggests that it does not do that.
At any rate, the upshot of spherical and hyperbolic geometry and thinking about a geometry on the
torus was that people began to rapidly expand their notions of what could a geometry be?
What does dimension mean really? How can we define dimension besides moving points or moving lines?
In this led people to consider what are now called fractals or objects of fractional dimension.
That term was coined by B.B. Mandelbrot late in the 1970s. He picked up ideas that had been
worked on in the early part of the 20th century, and with the computers that were available,
even in the late 1970s, he was able to produce remarkable drawings of literally infinite complexity
and realized that these ideas that had been dropped, because people couldn't visualize them very well,
now were worthy of pursuit. We're now going to walk through one of the early ways of thinking
about things that had fractal dimension, and we'll do it by measuring the coastline of Cape Cod.
Now if you look at a map, Cape Cod is part of Massachusetts, and if you looked at the map and
you pulled out a ruler and used the conversion factor, you might find it was a few hundred miles
or whatever it turned out to be. But let's suppose that we're going to be a little bit more careful
on how we measure Cape Cod. So because I received a grant from the federal government for about $10
billion, you'll see why it was so much shortly, I'm going to hire you to measure Cape Cod. And you,
because I'm paying well, and you decided to be really nice to take a walk along Cape Cod and
measure it, your game. So first, I give you a yardstick, and I say, I want to know how long Cape Cod
is in yards. And you go around and measure Cape Cod by yards, and by gum it takes you a long time
to do, but it's pleasant work, and on rainy days you stay inside, and you get a number. For the
sake of argument, let's just pretend that number is a thousand miles. Now that number is a lot
further than we got from looking at a map, and why would that be? Well, that would be because when
you were measuring it, you were moving around the waves and stuff, and you were cutting in and out,
and everywhere we're on the map, we had to draw a straight line that approximated. There were all
kinds of inlets and little dodges and bumps and in and out that probably made it at least 10 times
longer. So if our first measurement had been a hundred miles, by doing it with a yardstick,
we get to a thousand miles. And that was pretty great. But I still have a lot of grant money
left over, and you enjoyed the work a lot, and so I say now, well, you know what, I'm really
interested in you measuring it again, this time with a ruler. So I give you a foot long ruler,
and off you go, and you start measuring it. And now where before you had to just lay the yardstick
across something, you notice that the shoreline cuts in and out a whole bunch during that three
foot span. And when you use your ruler, it takes you a lot longer as you move in and out these bits
that you had to approximate with a yardstick, and you find out that in fact it's 10,000 miles,
or 100,000 miles when you measured it with a ruler. And this was very surprising to both of us,
but we were very excited, and we still have billions of dollars of grant money left.
And so I give you a one inch long measuring stick, and I say, I know this is going to take a while,
but you know, we got such great results, I want you to keep doing this. So now you're measuring
around little rocks, where before you just laid the ruler over a bunch of them. This time you find
out that the shoreline of Cape Cod is 10,000,000 miles. And this so intrigues us, and we still
have some money, even though we're both getting on in years, we decide to measure by eighths of an
inch, and then tenths of an inch, and hundredths of an inch. And we keep going down, we're measuring
around grains of sand, and then around tiny little indentations in sand. And after a while,
we realize that in fact, the coastline of Cape Cod is infinitely long. Let me say that again.
We realize that the finer we measure things, the length of the coastline of Cape Cod goes to
infinity. It's nicely approximated by straight lines or straight line segments stuck together,
but if we try to understand it in reality, our best approximation is, no matter how big we think
it is, if we measure it more carefully, it's longer than that. So for all intents and purposes,
it is infinitely long. And at this point, we say, well, wait a second. This is a one-dimensional
thing. I approximated it by lines. I don't know that I want to call the coastline of Cape Cod to be
one-dimensional. It seems like it should be more than one dimension. And in fact, it has a fractional
dimension. It's a fractal. The formal way of defining fractals involves sophisticated mathematics,
and we can't really do it here. But suffice it to say, what it hinges on is the zooming in process,
the going from the mile to the yard to the foot to the tenth of an inch, and so on,
and seeing how the lengths change when you do that. Let me talk about some things that make
sense to consider as having fractional dimension, clouds, all coastlines, the distribution of stars
in the sky, the branching of blood vessels away from the heart, the surface of foam, your skin,
which is laden with cells and pores, most anything in the natural world. In fact, the more we look
at it, we see it might be approximated in the large by Euclidean dimension. But when we zoom in
deeper and deeper, pock marks appear and all kinds of indentations, protrusions, and nodules,
and that if we tried to measure more and more, we would find that no longer were sheets of paper
straight lines good approximations.
