There are a number of mathematical objects that have been shown to have
very specific fractal dimension. I'd like to describe one fractal in particular. It's called
the Mandelbrot set. It's named after BB Mandelbrot, the corner of the term fractals, and he discovered
this. It ties together a lot of the ideas we've talked about. It's a beautiful image that can
easily be found if you google Mandelbrot set. In fact, somebody wrote a very funny song about it,
but I won't further assault your ears by singing it or attempting to sing it. There's an iterative
process to a Mandelbrot set, and it involves polynomials, which we've talked about,
with complex numbers, which we've only talked about a tiny bit. Complex numbers have imaginary parts,
and you can think of it as a generalization of real numbers. It's taking real numbers
to a higher dimension by allowing them to have imaginary components. The iterative process can
be seen on the real number line without having to go to the complex numbers. So let me talk about
what happens there. We take the very simple polynomial x squared plus some real number,
and what we do is we plug in zero to start. When we plug in zero, we're going to get a number out.
So if we take x squared plus one, we plug in zero. We get zero squared, which is zero plus one,
so zero plus one is one. Here's where we iterate it. Now we take one, and we plug it into that
polynomial again. So now it's one squared, which is one, plus one, and when we add one and one
together, we get two. So now we take two and plug it in. So we take two squared, that's four,
plus one, is five, and we iterate the process again. We take five, we're going to square it
and add one, and when we do that, we get 26. If we continue this process, we'd get 26 squared plus
one, which is a large number, and they get bigger and bigger and bigger. They go skyrocketing off
to infinity. It turns out that if we take our polynomial x squared plus any positive number,
a half, a tenth, 10, 37, 37.2, it doesn't matter what number we take. When we start with zero
and iterate the process over and over and over again, zero goes flying off to infinity eventually.
The numbers get bigger and bigger and bigger. Even if we try it with a half, by contrast,
if we take x squared minus a half, then when we start with zero, we get zero squared minus a half,
which is negative a half. When we plug in negative a half and we square it, we get a quarter.
Quarter minus a half is negative a quarter. When we square that and subtract a half, we get negative
seven sixteenths. When we square that and subtract a half, we get negative 79 over 256. And in fact,
it turns out that if we keep that iterative process up forever, so we started with zero,
we see where it moved, then we see where it moved, then we say where it moved. If we start with a
number like negative a half for x squared minus a half, then zero does not go off to infinity.
It bounces around forever between minus one and zero. So Mandelbrot had the ingenious notion of
saying, well, what are the numbers in the complex plane that zero stays bounded when we look what
happens when we keep chugging the numbers through and iterating the process? That thing that we get
is called the Mandelbrot set. And it's exquisitely beautiful. And the boundary of it is so complicated,
so jaggy, so indented, that if you look, you can find examples of it that zoom in and you can zoom in
more and more and more. And the more you zoom in, the greater the complexity.
The boundary seems like it should be one dimension, because it's the boundary of a two-dimensional
object. But in fact, it's so complicated with so many in-cuts and out-cuts, the dimension is actually two.
