So fractals may be interesting. They're certainly beautiful. Are they useless?
In the 90s people thought they might be able to use fractals to compress images.
They got grants from the government, they took out patents, they started companies,
and they made some breakthroughs. But nothing has come of it to date.
But mathematics is notable for this, and it differs from most everything else in this.
There are ideas that seem useless at the time that people play with because it seems beautiful
and then as enough time passes, eventually people find uses for them.
We saw this in cryptography where things that were thought to be the most
useless and abstract math of all allow us to buy things on the internet.
So let's leave fractals and abeyance for a moment and talk about chaos.
The two of them are usually linked, as I said at the beginning.
There are no universally accepted definitions of chaos,
but a very widely accepted definition of mathematical chaos has three different things.
Sensitive dependence on initial conditions, dense periodic points, and a dense orbit.
So let's talk about those.
Chaos is a description of a system that's changing over time.
So sensitive dependence on initial conditions means that if I start just a tiny little bit away
from where I am now, then things might turn out differently.
You might imagine trying to balance a pencil on a razor blade.
It's not going to balance, and depending on how you have it set up,
it might fall one way or the other.
So imagine that on a much grander scale that if I start in one place,
I might get repelled from where I am or attracted somewhere else in one direction,
but if I start just the tiniest bit away in a different direction,
I might end up doing some kind of crazy bouncing back and forth motion.
A periodic point is a point that bounces around to itself forever and ever and ever.
To have dense periodic points means no matter where I am,
if I move just the tiniest bit, I will hit a periodic point.
That says that I have sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
I might get thrown off in different directions,
but if I move just the tiniest bit in any other direction,
I will be on some periodic point and I will go in a cycle hitting the same points
over and over and over again forever as time runs on.
To add to the complexity, a dense orbit is one that when you follow it through time
from point to point to point, it gets arbitrarily close to any other single point in the space.
So chaos has these three elements.
The upshot of chaos is depending where you start,
you might have dramatically different behavior.
You might get flung in one direction or the other.
You might get on one eternally repetitive cycle.
You might get on an orbit that never ever returns to itself,
never stops anywhere, never gets close to anything in particular.
It eventually moves closer and closer and closer
and fills out the entire space that you're in.
So let's just take a quick look at some of those ideas.
They're great metaphors and various conceptions have come out.
Can a butterfly flap its wings in China and cause a typhoon?
Well, sure.
You know, if the weather is sensitive dependence,
then the butterfly flaps its wings, wind starts to change,
and different things might happen.
But the real question is, is that likely?
And the answer is, no, that's not very likely.
A related question, could a butterfly flap its wings in a typhoon
and cause it to suddenly devolve to a calm, balmy day?
Well, sure, that's even less likely.
Here you have a typhoon, winds whipping around at 80, 120 miles an hour,
and a butterfly flaps its wings.
That's not going to cause anything.
So although typhoons are chaotic,
that's a different kind of sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
The notions of probability that we talked about
when we talked about probability and statistics do apply here.
There are all kinds of things that are possible in the real world,
but most of them are not probable.
So stability and chaos do play into things like weather,
but not on the butterfly level, but more like cold fronts come in,
ocean currents change, solar flares, temperature different places.
There's suddenly all these different inputs coming in,
and they will cause the weather to change dramatically.
