The courtroom trial. It has fascinated human beings from the beginning of recorded history.
Most young children recall the trials of the Bible, God putting Adam and Eve on trial for
eating the forbidden fruit, Cain being put on trial for murdering Abel, Abraham defending
the sinners of Saddam with God being the judge, the trial of Jesus perhaps the most famous
trial in Western civilization, the trial of Susanna and the elders of Thomas Moore. Everybody
knows about some trials. Trials are theater. Trials are history. In this course I'm going
to use the great trials of the 20th century to try to give us a unique window into the
American history of the 20th century and indeed through the beginning of the 21st century.
I'm going to use trials, trials that many of you will have heard of, trials that some
of you probably will be introduced to for the first time to give you a sense of the
period, but also a sense of the enduring commitment of America to law. It was Alex
the Tocqueville who when he visited the New Republic for the first time said that America
is a unique country when it comes to law. Every great issue eventually comes before
the courts and so we're going to look at history through the prism of the trial, the lawyers,
the judges and most important the litigants because the trial presents usually a snapshot,
a snapshot of what's going on at a particular point in time in our history and what's a
great trial. If you ask people today to define what is the greater important trial, they'll
probably tell you the trial of the moment, the trial of Scott Peters and the trial of
O.J. Simpson, whatever happens to catch the fancy of the moment, but those trials are
often not enduring. To make a trial a great trial for purposes of this series of lectures,
I'm going to focus on trials that both reflect important and dramatic aspects of the history
of the time, but also trials that have an enduring importance. For example, the first
trial we're going to look at is the Scopes Monkey Trial. It took place a long, long time
ago and yet as I'm delivering this lecture today, there is a trial in a courtroom in
the United States in which intelligent design is on trial. Several years ago, creationism
was on trial. It's impossible to understand the current trials without looking back in
time to the famous Scopes Monkey Trial. So let's begin with that trial. It's set between
the two world wars. During that period of time, American history was marked by a fundamental
change in the attitudes of many, many Americans. We were quickly changing from a Christian
country, often a fundamentalist Christian country, to a country based on reason, science, progress,
and the Enlightenment.
