Inevitably, there was going to be a clash, and the clash took place in a courtroom in
Tennessee when the state legislature decided to ban the teaching of Darwin's evolution.
What was Darwin's evolution?
It was a simple scientific theory which had espoused the development of human beings,
their evolution from single-celled creatures to other more complex creatures, and ultimately
to the human beings that populate the world.
But the Bible describes the beginning of mankind very differently.
In six days, God created the world, and human beings were part of His creation.
They were created fully formed, there's no evidence of evolution in the Bible, and there's
no suggestion of any kind of change.
The fossil record is unexplained by the Bible.
And so there was a science teacher, an obscure science teacher in Tennessee who wanted to
teach evolution.
He had learned evolution in college, and he felt an obligation to his students to teach
evolution.
The problem was to teach evolution in Dayton, Tennessee in 1925 was a crime.
A crime punishable by fine and imprisonment.
Now the person who tried to conduct the class in teaching evolution, John Thomas Scopes,
he fully understood that he was risking the wrath of the prosecutor and could conceivably
be prosecuted for the crime of teaching.
But he remembered Socrates and all the great teachers that had come before him and decided
it was his obligation as a teacher to teach the truth, and not to in any way become submissive
to the powers of the law.
Although Scopes figures heavily in the trial, as do the two major lawyers who were national
figures, this is not so much a trial about people as it was a trial about issues.
What was on trial was the Bible or more specifically the fundamentalist reading of the Bible.
And many of us know the story of the Scopes trial from having either seen the movie or
the play Inherit the Wind.
It was a great movie.
It was a great play to personalize.
It was the first play I had ever seen on Broadway and it's part of what led me to become a lawyer.
And when I saw the play, it was a clear clash of good versus evil.
On the one side were the fundamentalists who described creation in a way that clearly
defied what science had taught us over the last hundred or so years, and that side was
led by William Jennings Bryant, a great populist, a man who would run for president in the United
States on the Democratic Party ticket.
He had made his famous speech about do not crucify America on a cross of gold.
He had opposed the gold standard because it was favorable to the wealthy and unfavorable
to the poor.
And he was a hero of many people in the United States, including my own grandparents who
had been immigrants and had come over here and saw William Jennings Bryant as somebody
who represented their interests, the interests of poor immigrants rather than the interests
of the large corporation.
