But this time he was on the side of the Bible and on the side of at least many people thought
a fundamentalist reading of the Bible and he thought there was no place for the teaching
of evolution in the school systems, in the public school systems.
On the other side was another crusading hero, Clarence Darrow, the man who represented labor
and the man who represented the people, the man who was always opposed to corporate corruption,
the man who was to represent the two defendants in the case involving Leopold and Loeb, two
people from Chicago who did a thrill killing and killed one of their friends.
He was a household name, both lawyers were household names.
The judge was an obscure figure from Dayton, Tennessee and Scopes was an obscure figure.
But the media descended on Dayton, Tennessee and many of the most famous journalists of
the day also became involved in the case and decided to cover it for their newspapers and
again it was a clash between the light of science and the darkness of the old days of
biblical fundamentalism.
At least that's the story that has come down over the ages.
Now I've discovered over reading many, many, many years of transcripts and this is a theme
that will run throughout these lectures that often truth is more interesting than the fictional
gloss that is often placed on trials by the media.
The Scopes trial has been presented through the vehicle of inherit the wind as fundamentalism
versus progressive attitudes but when you really look at the transcript of the trial
a somewhat different and more complicated story emerges and a much, much more interesting story.
William Jennings Bryant was no fool.
He was no literal fundamentalist.
He was a man who had very, very strong reasons for opposing the teaching of evolution in
Dayton, Tennessee in 1925.
What we often forget is that the school system in Dayton, Tennessee in 1925 was completely
segregated.
Blacks were in separate schools and whites were in separate schools and Scopes was teaching
in an all white school and he was teaching from a textbook which presented Darwin's theory
of evolution in a very skewed manner.
I actually went and got the textbook and have a copy of it.
It's called Hunter's Civic Biology.
The very title suggests that it's more than about biology and evolution.
It's about civic biology.
Civic represents governmental policies and therefore it was all about what the government
should do in response to the realities of evolution.
