So, along come the teachers of intelligent design, scientists, many of them very smart,
some of them very well-credentialed, and they say, tell you what we're going to do.
We're not going to teach creationism.
We don't know how the world came about.
It's beyond our knowledge.
What we do know is if you look at the logic of the universe, if you look at the logic
of beings on earth, it is far more logical and far more consistent with science to postulate
a rational, intelligent design.
And that rational, intelligent design is an alternative to the teaching of evolution.
They both can't be true because evolution postulates randomness.
It's simply facts coming together in nature to accidentally produce changes which eventuated
in the evolution of human beings, of horses, of sharks, of camels, and the intelligent design
theory says, no, no, no, no.
That's not the way it happened.
There was a designer.
When I tell you who it is, we're certainly not ever going to mention the G word because
the G word, God, would get us in trouble with the Supreme Court.
So instead, we use the ID word, the neutral term, intelligent design.
And intelligent design leaves open the possibility that the intelligent designer could have been
an alien from a distant planet.
My friend Robert Nozick, the great philosopher, once said that the earth could have been the
product of a science project by a seventh grader in a distant galaxy, and I added for
which he got a B minus.
You can always postulate extraterrestrial intelligent design.
Of course, that's not what the intelligent design people have in mind.
They want you to assume that it was done intelligently and that there was a designer, and then for
you to make the leap from intelligent designer to God, to the Christian God, or the Judeo-Christian
God, or the God of the Bible, or the God of the Book of Genesis, without allowing you
to say that.
And so now these issues are again before the court, and we will see some great cases in
the 21st century challenging the alternative way of trying to introduce religion into the
curriculum, not by banning evolution as was tried in the Scopes trial, but by presenting
evolution simply as a theory and presenting intelligent design as an alternative theory.
Of course, you could then say, why not present the geocentric theory of the world that the
earth is at the center as an alternative theory?
Why not present alchemy as an alternative theory?
Why not present astrology as an alternative theory to astronomy?
So far, the intelligent design people have not pushed in that direction, but they have
pushed very hard in the direction of preventing the teaching of evolution alone without it
being compared to the alternative theory of intelligent design.
