Fundamental Cases, Lecture 2, The Case of Leo Frank.
In this lecture, I'm going to be talking about one of the most transforming legal events
in American history, the trial of Leo Frank.
Now in one respect, the trial of Leo Frank was an ordinary murder case.
Leo Frank was a factory person, ran a factory outside of Atlanta, Georgia, and it was the
beginning of the 20th century in 1913, and one of his employees was found murdered, perhaps
sexually molested, a young girl.
It was on an important day.
It was on Confederate Independence Day or Confederate Memorial Day, and people were
out having parades commemorating the Civil War from a southern point of view, and this
young girl, Mary Fagan, went past the factory that she was working in to collect her pay
so that she could spend it on her a day off and never emerged alive, and she was found
dead, and she was a belle of the South.
She was the personification of Southern womanhood, a young girl, 13, 14 years old, parents who
had been connected to the South for a long time, and the person accused of killing her
was exactly the opposite.
He was a Jewish immigrant who had come down South from New York City to earn a living and
had done fairly well.
He was quite a young man, married into a decent family, a Jewish family, and the case took
on enormous, enormous religious, racial, and political overtones.
In fact, during the trial, people would sit outside and sing the ballad of Mary Fagan.
It was a song that, if there were a hit parade at the time, would have been number one on
the hit parade in Atlanta, Georgia in 1913, and it included the following lyrics, Little
Mary Fagan.
She left her home one day.
She went to the pencil factory to see the big parade.
She left her home at 11.
She kissed her mother goodbye.
Not one time did the poor child think she was a going to die.
Leo Frank, he met her with a brutish heart, we know.
He smiled and said, Little Mary, you won't go home no more.
Sneaked along beside her till she reached the metal room.
He laughed and said, Little Mary, you have met your fatal doom.
Down upon her knees to Leo Frank, she pled.
He'd taken a stick from the trash pile and struck her across the head.
Well, with people singing that ballad, which obviously assumes the guilt of Leo Frank.
