Indeed, a Supreme Court Justice, Hugo Black, had become a member of the Klan as a young
Alabama legislator and had to renounce the Klan when he was finally appointed to the
Supreme Court.
But the Klan became a very prominent organization and really had its beginnings in this case.
Another organization that had its beginnings in this case was the Benebreath, the Anti-Defamation
League of the Benebreath, which has become a basic human rights organization over the
years, but was formed in part out of concerns rising out of the anti-Semitism that was directed
at Leo Frank by so many public officials, including the prosecutor.
Indeed, one of the leading proponents of the execution of Leo Frank was a journalist named
Watson, whose newspaper, really quite a rag, a populist rag, was instrumental in getting
the death penalty for Leo Frank, and Watson propelled himself as the result of this case
into a seat in the United States Senate and ultimately became the leading populist politician
who ran on programs of anti-Semitism and anti-Catholicism and bigotry and became a very important
public figure in the South during that period of time.
Books have been written about Tom Watson and his newspaper, The Jeffersonian, which led
the campaign against Leo Frank.
So again, as with so many of these cases that we'll be discussing in this course, the people
involved were very important, but the case transcends the people.
The case goes beyond the victim, poor Mary Fagan, who clearly was murdered, beyond the
man Leo Frank, who was, it turns out, falsely convicted for murdering her, beyond Conlon,
beyond Watson.
It really represents a period of time in American history.
It was a period of time following the large-scale immigration from Eastern Europe and from Southern
Europe when many Italian Americans came to this country, many Greek Americans came to
this country, many Polish Americans came to this country, many German Americans came to
this country, many Irish Americans came to this country, and with the opening of immigration
came massive bigotry and a kind of no-nothing attitude that some old-fashioned Americans
represented.
By the time of the Leo Frank case, the doors to immigration were already beginning to close
and they closed shut, really following the First World War, but this was just before
the First World War, and we were beginning to see a bad reaction, overreaction, negative
reaction, counterreaction to immigration and to the influx of people from different cultures,
backgrounds, and religions into the United States, and particularly into some parts of
the United States, which seemed less tolerant than other parts of the United States.
Atlanta, Georgia, and Marietta, Georgia, the location of these cases was not known for
its welcoming and opening toward Northerners and toward Jews and toward Catholics, and
so the case reflected that very, very questionable period in American history.
