And so in the end Leo Frank died. John Connolly eventually went back to prison where he died
an inglorious death. The family of Mary Fagan to this day believes that Leo Frank was guilty,
but several years ago a man who had been an eight-year-old child at the time of the Leo
Frank case came forward and he said he was a witness. He was in the pencil factory at the time
and unbeknownst to anybody else he saw what happened and he saw Connolly kill Mary Fagan,
but Connolly had seen him at that point and threatened him and said if you come forward and
testify I will kill you and I think he threatened his family too and this man his name was Alonzo
finally came forward in the 1980s and said I am a witness and I can attest with absolute certainty
that Leo Frank was not the killer but that John Connolly was the killer and as the result of that
Leo Frank had his sentence ultimately commuted and the state of Georgia they wouldn't pardon him
because it was still a little bit too controversial. There were still families of Mary Fagan and
family members of those who participated in the lynching that were unhappy with a full and complete
pardon and a full and complete vindication and an announcement of innocence but basically the
verdict of history has concluded beyond any doubt that Leo Frank was the victim of an improper
prosecution, an improper conviction and certainly an improper lynching. One of the interesting
things about the case is that the people who participated in the improper conviction and
the improper lynching went down, went forward to have great careers, they all were rewarded for
their actions and the best families in Marietta, the best families in Atlanta still have members
whose families participated, family members participated in the lynching and that I think
tells us something very important about history as well. You know if you're a religious and
believing person you think that virtue is rewarded and vice is punished if not here on earth at least
in some future life. Well at least here on earth cases like the Leo Frank case certainly raise
serious questions about that. Certainly we see people who did terrible things, living good lives,
going on to rewards, going on to financial, political and other forms of rewards and people
who took heroic stands and stood up for Leo Frank often coming out on the wrong end of history at
least short-term history but history has its demands and history is inexorable and never gives up
and there's always the possibility of redoing history and it's so important that people when
they hear about verdicts of trials never think that the verdict of the trial is necessarily
the historical verdict, the verdict that will be reached by history. A trial is not always a
search for truth. One hears that phrase all the time, it's a search for truth. Well if it were
a search for truth it would be done by scientists based on scientific evidence, it wouldn't be done
by 12 jurors who are picked primarily for what they don't know rather for what they do know.
Jurors are picked largely because they know nothing about the case. If they knew something
about the case, if they were witnesses or if they knew any of the participants in the case,
they'd be disqualified.
