So, don't expect that the verdict of a court will necessarily accurately reflect the verdict
of history.
History has a long-term view, whereas the verdict is a short-term view, a photograph
as distinguished from a videotape.
And the photograph will often be a photograph of a short period of time, in this case a
time of bigotry, a time where Jews, Catholics, and immigrants were valued less than white
Anglo-Saxon Protestants who had had long histories in this country, and it shouldn't surprise
anybody that the verdict of the court reflected the temper of the times.
And so, when one looks at today's trials, and one views today's verdicts, you always
have to ask yourself the question, is this going to be another Leo Frank case?
Will our children and our grandchildren eventually ask us, how could you have tolerated the conviction
of now fill in the blank?
Or how could you have tolerated the acquittal of fill in the blank?
And so, I think it's always important when you look at today's trials to think back at
the great miscarriages of justice.
And the Leo Frank case is a perfect example of a miscarriage of justice.
It's also a perfect example of a very difficult ethical dilemma.
The dilemma faced by the lawyer Powell in the case is not an easy one to answer.
I generally present that ethical dilemma to my students in a class I teach at the third
year of Harvard Law School called Legal Ethics and Tactics.
And the class always divides down the middle on what the right thing to do is.
In fact, one class, the division was so strong that after class some of the students were
pushing and shoving each other, it almost turned into a physical brawl because people
feel so strongly on both sides of this issue.
How can anybody let an innocent man die?
My God, there's something terribly wrong with that.
On the other hand, how can anybody violate their oath to a client?
How can anybody violate the rule of law if a priest wouldn't do it?
Why should a lawyer do it?
So these are the kinds of dilemmas, choice of evils that I think we confront in society
all the time.
And the Leo Frank case is a perfect example of how a case, an ordinary case, presents
a dilemma, a very extraordinary dilemma.
The Leo Frank case is also very important on a history because it tells us that justice
is not always done only by individuals.
Here was a case where the individuals involved each had their own lawyers, Leo Frank had
his lawyer, John Conlon had his lawyer, there was the judge, there were the prosecutors,
all the lawyers involved.
But more was at stake here than just the life of Leo Frank.
What was at stake was the future of America.
Would America be able to become a place where people from all places in Europe were fully
integrated into American life at the time we called it a melting pot?
That metaphor is no longer in widespread use because we don't want people to melt into
one pot.
We'd rather see a tapestry or a mosaic in which the blending of cultures is reflected
by the ultimate tapestry that represents all of the input of all the groups that form
America.
This was a testing case and America failed the test very, very badly.
