But if you had to list trials of the century by their notoriety, certainly the trial of the
Apollo and Loeb would rank high on any such list. The facts were banal. They simply got into a car
and they picked up this kid who was a friend of theirs. They knew him, a younger kid in the
neighborhood, took him in the car and brutally murdered him in cold blood and left his body
there and figured that was the end of it. What they didn't realize is that one of the defendants,
Leopold, left his glasses behind because he was so wealthy they were very expensive glasses,
easily traced to a maker of glasses who easily traced them to Leopold who immediately confessed
to the crime, was tricked into it by the most obvious of police interrogations.
A Loeb confessed, Leopold confessed, and by the time Clarence Darrow came into the case,
there was really nothing to defend. It was obvious they were guilty. The only real question was,
would they get the death penalty? And Clarence Darrow decided to use this case as a vehicle
for sensitizing Americans against what he regarded as the barbarity of capital punishment.
In one sense, he had a good case. Why? Because he had
young clients. They were not seasoned criminals. They were not people with long records. They
were not likely to do it again. They seemed to be remorseful. Once they were caught, who knows
whether they would have been at all remorseful, had they not been caught, unlikely it seems. They
were proud of what they had done and proud of what they had gotten away with. So on the one side,
we had their youth, their wealth, which made it clear that they could hire any psychiatrist or
any experts they wanted to. On the other hand, it seemed to be a terrible case for challenging the
death penalty. These were not poor defendants. These were not people who had lived miserable,
difficult lives. These were not people who had been discriminated against. These were not people
who had had a bad lawyer at trial. These were not people who had killed from money. There was no
Jean Valjean here. These were wealthy people who killed for thrill. These were thrill killers.
And if ever the death penalty seemed appropriate, if one justifies the death penalty at all,
one would think that perhaps thrill killers, people who killed for no good reason,
other than just because it made them feel good, would be perfect candidates for the death penalty.
