But, this was no ordinary lawyer.
It could have been an ordinary case, had another lawyer been involved, but this was Clarence
Darrow.
And this was Clarence Darrow at the peak of his career, it was 1924, the Roaring Twenties.
These were spoiled brats of the Roaring Twenties.
Their families were incredibly wealthy and influential and powerful in Chicago social
life and Chicago politics.
In fact, all of the participants in the trial were Jewish, low,ably appalled, and Franks,
but that was not of any significance whatsoever.
Nothing turned on that.
Religion was never raised as an issue, perhaps because the victim was also Jewish.
This wasn't seen as an inter-religious or interracial conflict, it was just two rich kids killing
another rich kid and the rich parents hiring a rich and able lawyer to defend them.
It was a spectacle.
It was a great event in American history because the great lawyer Clarence Darrow was
going to try to persuade a judge that the death penalty was not appropriate in this
case.
This is one case where I wish we had had tape recordings or videotapes.
How remarkable it would be to actually listen to Clarence Darrow make his final argument
on behalf of these two people who at one level didn't deserve his great advocacy.
I will read to you, obviously without the eloquence of Clarence Darrow, some of what
he said.
The brilliance of his argument in many respects always lay in its obviousness.
He makes it easy for listeners to agree with him.
He never asks for long logical or moral leaps.
He had this incredible ability to get into the mind, the soul, the heart of his listeners.
He appeals to common sense, everyday experience, and to a kind of moral consensus.
As you listen to his words, particularly as spoken by him, for whom I am a poor substitute,
you begin to nod your head in agreement with his premises.
I say again, whatever madness and hate and frenzy may do to the human mind, there is
not a single person who reasons, who can believe that one of these acts was the act of men
of brains that were not diseased.
There is no other explanation for it, and had it not been for the wealth and the weirdness
and the notoriety, they would have been sent to a psychopathic hospital for examination
and been taken care of instead of the state demanding that this court take the last pound
of flesh and the last drop of blood from two irresponsible lads.
In other words, he's not trying in any way to defend them.
He's taking their very irresponsibility.
He's taking the very absurdity of their act, and he's turning it into an argument in favor
of their insanity.
You might ask yourself the question, why then didn't he plead insanity?
