And so there are at least some people who believe that the brilliance of his argument was made somewhat easier to accept by the judge because the judge had received some consideration for having an open mind about the case.
Nobody can ever prove or disprove that. Obviously all the parties are long deceased.
But that's the problem with having once been corrupt.
If you once paid off a witness, if you once paid off a judge, if you once paid off a juror, there will always be suspicions throughout your life that you did it again.
And this case was rife for corruption, rich defendants, the city of Chicago, extreme discretion.
A judge didn't have to give any reasons for not imposing the death penalty.
It wasn't as if the judge were bribed to acquit the defendant in a case where he was guilty, that would be hard to justify.
Well, convict somebody in the case where he was innocent, that would be hard to justify.
Here all the judge had to do was decide life or death, life or death.
And if $50,000 or $10,000 was on one side of the scale, it would be much easier to come out in favor of the corrupt side.
This is not the first time that happened.
There was a famous case in New York where judges in the United States Court of Appeals, one judge for the Second Circuit, took bribes and eventually went to jail and was convicted.
But he swore to his dying day that taking the bribes never influenced his decisions.
He only took bribes, he said, in cases where the bribe giver was going to win anyway.
In other words, he was saying, I engaged in fraud, taking the money from the bribe giver instead of corruption, letting the money influence my case.
It was another famous case in Brooklyn where a clerk of court would go separately to each of the litigants in a civil case and say to them, look, I think I can get to the judge and I think I can persuade him to rule in your favor.
I'm not absolutely certain.
Give me $10,000 and if I can get to the judge, I keep it.
But if I can't get to the judge, I promise you I will give it back.
He never went to the judge.
One side would win, one side would lose.
He would keep the $10,000 on the side he won with a wink and a nod, suggesting he had gotten to the judge.
And he would give back the $10,000 to the side that lost saying, gee, I'm terribly sorry, but this judge simply wouldn't see me and I'm honest.
So here I'm giving you your $10,000 back.
Did this happen in the Leopold and Loeb case?
Nobody will ever know.
Did it happen in some cases in Clarence Darrow's career?
Definitely yes.
Did it happen in the Scopes Monkey trial?
No, of course not.
There was no possibility of using corruption in a case like that where the eyes of the media were on every single aspect of the case and where he was a stranger if he ever tried to approach anybody in Tennessee in 1925.
Of course, he would have ended up in prison.
So what lessons do we draw from the Leopold and Loeb case?
A lot of lessons.
First of all, wealth matters.
People ask me all the time, does having a lot of money help you buy justice?
Well, yes, I would put it a little bit differently, though.
Having no money almost assures you that you will not get justice.
