Having all the money in the world doesn't assure you you'll win.
Obviously, you can ask Leona Helmsley who went to jail or Michael Milken who went to jail
whether or not having all the money in the world kept them out of prison and the answer was not.
Martha Stewart went to jail.
So many wealthy people have gone to jail.
But so many poor people have gone to jail undeservedly
because they haven't been able to afford the Clarence Darrow's
or the Johnny Cochran's or the F. Lee Bailey's or the other good lawyers.
And until recently, I had never heard of a case where a wealthy man was ever sentenced to death for a murder.
Recently in Delaware, a wealthy man was sentenced to death.
His case is still pending.
But the vast, vast majority of people currently on death row were represented by lawyers
who were not paid fees, who worked either public defenders or were appointed by the court,
who didn't have the resources, didn't have the ability
to mount the kind of defense that is necessary to mount
if there's any chance that justice will be done.
So yes, I think one of the very important lessons of the Leopold and Loeb case
is that money talks and that it matters.
Money can talk in different ways.
It can talk legitimately by allowing a wealthy defendant to have access to the best experts,
the best lawyers, and it can talk illegitimately
by having those lawyers be willing to pay bribes to participants in the case, particularly judges and jurors.
So yes, money does matter.
How do we eliminate that problem?
Well, I don't believe the way to do it is to deny wealthy people the right to use their resources properly
by hiring experts.
I think the playing field has to be leveled by making resources more easily available to poor people.
In a number of states now, the death penalty has been conditioned on a dollar-for-dollar availability of funds
for the defendant.
For every dollar available to the prosecution, that same dollar will be made available to the defendant.
Will that undo the issues of injustice and unfairness?
Probably not completely, but it will help.
The other very important issue involving the Leopold and Loeb case
is that it really began the debate in America over the death penalty.
And it's fascinating that the debate over the death penalty in America, unlike in England,
was not begun in the case involving an innocent person who was falsely convicted or falsely executed.
That's the way the debate began in England when a mentally retarded person was executed for a crime for which he was almost certainly not guilty.
In America, the debate over capital punishment really began in a case involving two guilty, frivolous, young men
who deserve no sympathy and no compassion.
But it began because a great lawyer, putting aside now the issue of possible corruption,
made an extraordinarily eloquent plea, and that plea was then published around the world.
And people got to hear and read what Clarence Darrow was arguing.
The interesting thing is, unlike some other trends in America,
like trends, for example, against segregated schools,
trends in favor of women's reproductive rights,
trends in favor of equality for gays in America and others in America,
the trend that was started with Clarence Darrow's eloquent opposition to the death penalty has not really continued in America.
Americans are still overwhelmingly favorable to the death penalty.
