My answer is a complex one. Julius Rosenberg was guilty. He received an unfair trial and an unfair punishment.
Ethel Rosenberg was innocent and received an unfair trial and an unfair punishment.
It is possible to receive an unfair trial, even if you're guilty and even if you're appropriately convicted.
It's even possible, this is going to be harder to believe, but it's even possible to receive a fair trial.
If you're innocent that have been falsely convicted, people make mistakes.
But it could be conceivably a fair trial, a trial at least, in which the government didn't put a thumb of unfairness on the scale of justice.
But the Rosenberg case is a perfect example of a guilty person, Julius Rosenberg,
receiving an unfair trial and receiving an unfair punishment and of his wife, his
co-defendant, his alleged accomplice, being purposely framed for a crime she didn't commit
in order to put leverage, to hold her as a hostage, essentially, in order to get him to reveal
his sources and the people that were operating in the United States. Now, that raises the broader issue of McCarthyism.
The Rosenberg case in many respects is a microcosm of the debate over McCarthyism.
The debate over McCarthyism, when I was growing up and for many years tended to be this.
Some people said there was a terrible threat of communism in the United States and therefore
McCarthyism was justified. Other people said there was no threat of communism in the United States
and therefore McCarthyism was unjustified. Again, I think the answer is much more complex.
I think there was a significant threat of communism in the United States, but McCarthyism was not justified.
Now, the threat of communism in the United States was not what I think was the one that was
recognized by many of the statutes and decisions that came during the McCarthy period. There was
never a threat that the United States was going to be overthrown by communism or that
communists would ever get elected to major office in the United States. There were never more than a
tiny handful of Americans who supported the Communist Party. In fact, many, many more Americans
supported Nazism in the period before the Second World War and then supported communism.
There were many, many more Americans who were sympathetic to Germany. The Bund was
a very powerful organization in the United States. The Communist Party was never a particularly
powerful organization in the United States, but there was a very powerful Soviet spy network
in the United States and a very influential one and a very successful one. They did steal the
secrets of the atomic bomb and they did steal many, many other secrets and there were Americans,
some in high positions of authority who were spying for the Soviet Union. That was a legitimate
issue, but the means used to ferret out communists by McCarthy and others was not a fair means.
It was overdone. Many innocent people were captured within its broad net and many unfair
practices were employed.
