Years ago, I urged anybody to come forward with rebuttal or explanation, his many, many friends and colleagues, but nobody has come forward as far as I know, and try to justify Mars' errant's conduct.
The reason I mentioned Mars' errant's is not to pick on somebody who is dead, but to demonstrate what could happen when the atmosphere of the times inclines in this direction.
Even good people can be inclined to do very, very, very bad things, and what Mars' errant's did was a very, very bad thing.
He told the Bureau that he did a psychological study of the Rosenbergs, and he concluded, and I quote,
Julius is the slave, and his wife, Ethel, the master. And of course, this was seized on eagerly by the FBI to justify their conduct.
They had to know it wasn't true. I don't know whether Ernst knew it was true, or didn't know it was true.
And again, I'm not here to point fingers or to condemn, but to illustrate what can happen to even good people, people with good reputations, during a bad period of time.
And McCarthyism was one of the worst periods of time in our history. I was in college during McCarthyism, and I remember some of my own teachers being fired.
A professor named Slockauer at Brooklyn College fired for refusal to testify in front of the House Un-American Activities Committee.
One of my high school math teachers had been fired from the public schools of New York. I was the beneficiary of his firing, because he came to my school and was a wonderful math teacher.
And although he never talked politics, was afraid to, of course, he talked math, and makes you wonder why you have to fire a math teacher who only talked about Euclidean geometry based on what his political views might be.
But that was the temper of the times, and people were being fired from schools, from jobs of every kind, if there was any suspicion that they were red or pink, or not sufficiently American.
Being un-American was the worst thing you could say about anybody.
But I find it hard to imagine anything more un-American than deliberately sending a woman to her death in order to provide an incentive to her husband to become a witness for the government and to provide information that the government generally needed and genuinely needed to combat the spies that were being sent by the Soviet Union.
You know, you can't fight the enemy by adopting the enemy's means. That same issue was coming up with terrorism today. It would be very easy to stop terrorism. All you had to do was hypothetically start killing the relatives of terrorists, and that would stop them.
But we can't go around killing innocent people just because they do. We can't use their means, even though our ends are justified, and yet the temptations are great.
And the Rosenberg case illustrates that those temptations can be succumbed to by good and decent people, some of whom were good and decent people, some of whom were not such good and decent people.
But the history of the Rosenberg case is a history that should be taught and studied in every history class, in every law school class, because it was not possible, just like McCarthyism was not possible, just by having Senator McCarthy, or just by having J. Edgar Hoover, or just by having a dozen or a few dozen other people.
McCarthyism was made possible by good and decent people.
