Now, how did America react?
First of all, the reaction was immediate.
This was the most watched event in television history.
Why?
Why was it more watched than the Kennedy assassination?
Because nobody knew the Kennedy assassination was coming.
Everybody knew the O.J.
Simpson verdict was coming.
Only in Hollywood would they announce that the verdict was going to be rendered tonight
but decided and made public tomorrow.
So they gave everybody like 12 hours or more to prepare for the verdict.
Every television station in the world was carrying the verdict all over Europe, all
over the Middle East.
The Supreme Court stopped its session and got notes passed up to it.
Congress adjourned.
A water shortage was caused minutes before because so many people went to the bathroom.
Five minutes before the verdict would be announced, so they didn't have to go to the
bathroom then that it actually caused some diminution in the water supply because so many
toilets were flushed a few minutes before.
It was absolutely a remarkable event in history.
And as soon as the verdict was announced, America divided itself along racial lines.
The vast majority of American whites were totally outraged at the verdict.
As people described it to me, it was like getting hit in the stomach with a baseball
bat.
It was like getting kicked in the belly.
It was like getting smacked in the face.
Whereas many, not all certainly, but many African Americans cheered and showed enormous
joy that their hero, why he was a hero to them, is unknown to a lot of people.
He had never closely identified with the African American community, but he was black and he
was on trial for killing two white people.
And there was reaction in the African American community was quite different from the reaction
in the white community, even at a place like Harvard Law School where you would think the
audience was more sophisticated.
There was a division along racial lines and it reflected a division throughout America.
Many Americans felt that the verdict was a racially biased one because the jury was
black.
Well, it turned out the jury was not all black.
The jury had nine minority people on it and three non-minority people on it.
And one of the original holdouts was a woman named Denise Aschenbach who had previously
been so tough and a jury that the jury had been 11 to 1 for acquittal and she turned
them around and made them 12th and nothing for conviction.
Very, very tough woman.
She originally voted for conviction, but after hearing some of the arguments then turned
around and voted for acquittal, she was not black.
Several of the other jurors who voted for acquittal said they thought in the heart of
hearts that O.J. Simpson probably did it, that he was factually guilty, but that the
prosecution had failed to prove its case beyond a reasonable doubt.
Several of the other jurors who were interviewed took a different tact and they said, we thought
if you believe the government's evidence, there was proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
But because we found this one piece of evidence to be planted and false, we would not convict
anybody based on false evidence.
There are two variations to that argument.
