One would be, since one piece of evidence was phonied up, who knows, maybe all the other
evidence was phonied up. That is a fair argument to make. That is an argument that goes to the
merits of the government's evidence, the quality of the government's evidence. The other argument
is a little different and is a kind of jury nullification argument. It's an argument that
would go something like this. Look, even discounting all the evidence that may have been phonied up,
there's still enough evidence to convict. There's still proof beyond a reasonable doubt,
based on unchallenged evidence. But I'll be darned if I'm going to reward the government
by giving them a conviction after what they did in faking pieces of evidence. We just won't do
that. That is a form of jury nullification and technically illegal under the law. But you can't
stop a jury from doing what it chooses to do. There's no second guessing a jury. Were there any
jurors who just said, look, he's black. I'm black. I'm not voting to convict a black man. I saw no
evidence of that. Certainly nobody would ever admit that. So who knows? It's conceivable that one or
two jurors may have said, look, enough poor blacks have been convicted of crimes they didn't commit,
and nobody seemed sympathetic to us. Let's stick it to Whitey and show them how they're going to feel
if one of our people is acquitted when they think he's guilty. Who knows? Did that attitude
in any way influence jurors? There's no evidence of it, but it is certainly conceivable.
The OG Simpson case had a very, very negative impact on Americans' perception of justice.
I think in part because it was shown gavel to gavel on television. Although it's interesting,
the polls show people who watched the entire case on television from gavel to gavel were less
surprised and less upset with the verdict than people who got the reports of the trial
by five minutes of news in the evening or by reading the newspaper in the morning. Because
those who didn't see the trial themselves got reports which made it seem like the defense was
losing and made it seem like the prosecution's case was very credible. Those who watched the whole
trial saw how weak the prosecution's case was at points, saw how questionable Furman was as a
witness, saw how questionable some of the other police officers were as witnesses, and so they
were somewhat less surprised. But the typical American came away thinking the justice system
is skewed, that the justice system is worthless, that the justice system rewards the rich and
punishes the poor, that the justice system is racially skewed and biased. What people forget
is that the nine minority people on the jury were largely selected by the prosecution. They
decided where the jury trial was going to be conducted. They could have conducted the jury
trial in a much wider district but they didn't. They chose to do it in downtown LA and were told
the reason for that was downtown LA is the media center and the prosecutor was running for reelection
and he wanted to make sure that there was immediate access to the media and he also wanted to show
the black citizens of Los Angeles that even a black jury would convict this man for what the
DA believed he had done. Well, it backfired. What also backfired is the way the prosecution
decided to conduct the prosecution.
