What do we do with that? How do historians deal with that? If you go back and you look at the history books,
you find that historians for the most part have concluded that they were probably not guilty.
But that may reflect an ideological bias. We don't want them to be guilty because they had an unfair trial.
But
history has its own independent demands and ideology should play no role in history.
The Rosenberg case, we were very fortunate. Files became uncovered. The Soviet Union
folded. We were able to find evidence that could not have been available to the fact-finders at the time.
And there are those who hope that this may indeed be the case with Sacco and Vanzetti. The hope is a false one.
We are stuck
with the knowledge that we will never know for sure whether Sacco and Vanzetti
were or are not guilty, whether either of them was guilty, whether neither of them was guilty, whether both of them were guilty.
We simply won't know. And how do you go on and write history?
How do you write judicial history with that in mind? How do you evaluate the judicial process
when you don't know what the outcome of the case is, whether it was an injustice
because a guilty person was
falsely convicted by an improper process, whether it was an injustice because innocent people were convicted, or whether
justice was ultimately achieved. We feel very uncomfortable with that. We love certainty.
We love knowing what the truth is, the trial as a quest for
truth.
Mythical as that may be gives us
a solace, gives us a sense of
closure. We're not getting closure in the Sacco and Vanzetti case.
There are several other cases on our history where closure looks impossible.
But this one, most of all, and so
when you have the debate about capital punishment, where does this one rank? Where does this one fit?
Does the Sacco and Vanzetti fit among the cases where innocent people were convicted?
No, we can't say that with absolute certainty. Does it fit among the cases where
guilty people were
convicted and justly punished? No, we can't say that. The one
clear category it fits into is the category of cases where the process failed, where the process broke down,
where bigotry, where racism, where anti-
Italian feelings, where anti-immigrant feelings played more of a role than the evidence
clearly dominates. A reading of Felix Frankfurt, his great book on the Sacco and Vanzetti case, shows that
the life of the law, as Holmes once put it, is not logic.
Holmes once said, the life of the law is not logic. It's experience.
I would change it a little bit. The life of the law is not logic. It's not always experience.
It sometimes is simply the bigotry of the times.
There was no possibility that Sacco and Vanzetti could have been acquitted in this case. No matter how
slight the evidence of their guilt may have been, or how overwhelming the evidence of their innocence may have been,
once the establishment
