It showed that there was no insulin.
It showed that the maid who had testified against Klaus von Bülow at the first trial
had lied and that she had falsely claimed that she had seen insulin.
When she had told the lawyer during the interview she hadn't seen any sign of insulin that everything
was scratched off the vial and you couldn't read what was in it.
So we were able to use these notes at the second trial to cast doubt on the prosecution's
case and after a second trial with a full exploration of all the medical evidence the
jury was able to hear the whole truth rather than just a partial truth.
Before we get to the verdict in the second trial there were lots and lots of side shows
in the case.
In one instance a young man came to us and said he had proof that Sunny von Bülow had
injected herself with insulin.
How did he know that?
He had brought the drugs to her and when we said we didn't believe him he said well would
you believe a priest?
And we said a priest of course we would believe a priest.
So he produced a priest and the priest corroborated his testimony.
Little did we know that the priest was gay and that he and the priest apparently had
a homosexual relationship and he extorted the priest by threatening to expose their
relationship, extorted him into falsely corroborating his false testimony.
So much for always believing a priest.
Well I think many people have learned the lesson of that after some of the scandals
that recently engulfed the Catholic Church but at that time there were no scandals and
at that time I had no reason to doubt the validity of a priest statement and I bought
it hook line and sinker.
Fortunately we began to develop some doubts and never used that evidence and never introduced
it at any trial but at the same time that man who tried to extort the priest was tape
recording me and having conversations with me and then taking the conversations he had
with me and switching my words around on the tape and creating fake tapes having me say
things that I never said and I got a call one day from my lawyer in Providence saying
did you say the following on the tape and I said no of course not he said well you have
a problem because I've heard the tape and you say the following on the tape and I said
no I know I would never say anything like that on the tape so I have no worry and no
doubt about it the tape is a fake and sure enough the FBI then proved that the tape was
a fake but you know criminal lawyers can also run into problems if people manufacture evidence
against them well those are all the side shows.
Finally we were able to bring the case to its second trial and got a very good trial
lawyer from New York to argue the case we provided him with all the medical testimony
we were able to disprove the insulin in her body we were able to disprove the insulin
on the needle we were able to disprove the case in which the insulin was found was Klaus
von Bülow's case it turned out not to be his case at all we were able to disprove financial
motives we were able to disprove the testimony of the nurse and in the end the jury very
very quickly rendered a verdict of not guilty.
