So you go for 20 minutes, then the prosecution goes for 30 minutes, and then you get your
10 minutes of rebuttal.
And I love my 10 minutes of rebuttal, because that what really helps you focus on the case.
And I tell everybody who I teach appellate advocacy, never waive rebuttal.
It is absolutely essential.
It's when you can really zero in on the mistakes the prosecutor made.
Well I argued for my 20 minutes, and it looked okay.
And then the prosecution got up and argued for it's in half an hour.
And the state gave the prosecution, the judges gave the prosecution a very tough time.
And when their half an hour was over, I started to get up to make my rebuttal.
And my associate counsel, Susan Estridge, who's now a very distinguished professor at
University of Southern California Law School, literally grabbed me by the back of my pants
and said, Alan, sit down.
Stay down.
You've won.
You've won.
The only thing you can do now is lose.
Honors have to learn how to shut up.
And she kept badgering me, and I finally said, half being held down by her, your honors,
I have nothing further to add to my argument.
If the court has no questions, the defense rests.
Well that was fine.
The court had no questions.
The defense rested.
The only problem was it was live on television.
And the television stations had scheduled that 10 minutes.
And they had 10 minutes of airtime with nothing filling it.
And there's nothing worse on television than empty airtime.
And so they had to quickly bring in a couple of talking heads to debate whether I had done
the right thing in waving my rebuttal time or not waving my rebuttal time.
And that took the 10 minutes.
And then finally, they could get on to other matters.
And the court eventually reversed the conviction in a divided vote.
But the jury was unanimous in its acquittal the second time around.
And so for me, the lesson of the von Bülow case, and I think the important lesson to
convey to people who are not familiar with the legal system, is that appeals matter.
That you can, by raising issues on appeal, increase the chances of getting justice done.
There's an old expression in England that every Englishman is presumed to know the law,
accept Her Majesty's judges, which have a court of appeals above them to set them right
and to correct them on the law.
And what it basically means is that nobody's expected always to get it right.
The only court that is above review is the Supreme Court of the United States.
And as Justice Jackson once said, we're not final because we're always right.
We're always right only because we're final.
If you ever had a court above the Supreme Court of the United States, and for example
in Europe there are now appellate courts above the country's highest courts, the European
courts, the various other international courts, we in the United States have never subscribed
to those courts and we have no court above the Supreme Court.
But if there ever were a court above the Supreme Court, it would often correct mistakes.
Judges make mistakes, juries make mistakes, lawyers make mistakes.
Mistakes are an essential part of the legal system.
No legal system can ever operate mistake-free.
And the question is, what kind of a procedure do you build into the system to correct the
errors?
And we have the appellate system built in.
In fact, in many jurisdictions now, we have multiple levels of appeal.
If you've been convicted in a trial court, you get to appeal to the first court of appeals.
If you then have your conviction affirmed, you have a chance to go to a second court
of appeals as a matter of discretion.
