She was a friend of mine. I was on the next plane to New York, and I met Truman Capote at his apartment
near the United Nations, and he went into his library and he pulled out a book that had been given to him by
Sonny von Bülow and then returned to Sonny von Bülow to him and then given back to him, signed by Sonny von Bülow,
and it was all about injections. All about how to inject vitamin B12 and other kinds of injectables that people in that
society were using frequently in those days, and he literally showed me how he taught her to inject herself
and where he taught her to inject herself in her hip and persuaded me that there was some plausibility,
and we actually got an affidavit filed by him, and then he died, and we were not able to use the affidavit in the trial itself,
but it was a very, very interesting sideshow that almost became part of the second trial.
But sideshows do not a victory make, and we had to ultimately win the case on the merits of whether or not there was an injection,
and it's so interesting because when Truman Capote came forward with this theory that he taught her how to inject insulin,
Klaus von Bülow immediately said, that can't be true because this was not a case about insulin, and it turned out he was right.
It was not a case about insulin, it was a case about barbiturates.
One of the memorable aspects of the Klaus von Bülow case was it was the first case in modern times where the media played a major role in
shaping public opinion. This was the great media case of the 1980s. It was a prelude to the O.J. Simpson case.
Nothing could be done by anyone in the case, not by Klaus von Bülow, not by the prosecutor, not by the defense attorneys,
not by the witnesses that didn't make it onto the front page of the tabloids.
And for me it was a new experience because I was in a fishbowl. Everybody was watching everything we did, and everybody was second guessing everything we did.
It taught me some very important lessons. When you have a case that's so much in the media, and it was in the media well before I got into the
case that had been in the media during the first trial, you must not ignore that reality.
It is absolutely crucial that as a lawyer you take into account the fact that the newspapers are driving this case, that the media is driving this case.
Judges are real people. They read the newspapers. They listen to television. They listen to the radio. They read the magazines.
And people ask me all the time, is it proper to try your case in the press? Well, I have a simple answer to that.
I try my case wherever the prosecution tries its case. So I had a case a few years ago where two of my clients were on death row.
And I wrote a letter to the prosecution. I said, if you don't try your case in the press, I won't ever talk to the press.
And I went through seven years of litigation, finally won the case, saved the lives of the two voters on death row, and never once gave a press interview.
It did not serve my client's interest to do so. Most of my clients would never want their names in the press.
They wished the newspapers and the television didn't cover their trials. But once the prosecution is trying my client in front of the media, I have to respond in front of the media.
Wherever the prosecution takes the case, I have to follow.
