And, in fact, self-defense applies not only to the self, even though it's called self-defense,
it applies equally to your right to defend your family, friends, and sometimes even strangers
on the street.
If you see a person assaulting another person and it looks like the victim is in great danger,
you're entitled to defend that victim if you can do so in a proportional means and if the
other elements of self-defense have been met.
But self-defense is one of these laws where the law itself matters less than perceptions.
Go back to the Getz case.
In the Getz case, Getz was not entitled to shoot the people in the manner in which he
shot them.
The law of self-defense is very clear.
You're only allowed to take such actions as are necessary to prevent the imminent danger.
Once the imminent danger is over, you're obliged to stop your actions and report the matter
to the police.
That's plainly not what Bernard Getz did.
And that's plainly not the way the judge instructed the jury to decide the case.
But the jury were twelve New Yorkers.
The setting was the middle 1980s.
The place was the New York Subways, the graffiti-filled Subways, the filthy Subways, which people
were riding less and less frequently in those days.
The Subways were regarded as a place of fear, a place of terror, a place that people would
want to get out of.
Things have changed.
If one goes to New York today, one sees a very different subway system.
The graffiti has been largely eliminated.
The Subways are air conditioned.
They're much more pleasant.
Crime has gone down considerably.
There are many, many more transit police in the New York Subways.
But all cases must be judged at the time when the events occurred and when the jury sat
in judgment.
And New York City, the Subways of 1984, were very, very different places.
Even in 1987, by the time the case came up for trial, the New York Subways was still
hell holes in which the residents of New York were very, very fearful.
So Bernard Getz became a mixed character, a hero to some, a villain to others.
And the verdict of the jury reflected the mixed nature of his role.
It was a very interesting verdict.
The jury rendered a split decision.
They found him not guilty of attempted murder, but they found him guilty of going into the
subway with an unlawfully possessed gun.
And then the interesting job the judge had.
He had to decide what an appropriate sentence would be in this case.
Now normally the sentence for simply possessing an unlawful gun would be a few days in jail
at most, perhaps probation if it had been a first offender.
But the judge in this case decided that the sentence should reflect not only the unlawful
nature of the gun, but also the unlawful nature of the gun.
