but the crime for which Bernard Getz was acquitted, namely the misuse of self-defense,
and so he imposed a much harsher sentence than would normally have been imposed for mere possession
of an unlawful gun. He essentially split the difference. He said, look, it was an unlawful
gun, maybe you get a small sentence for that, but I believe, unlike what the jury believed,
that you probably should not have shot the gun in the manner in which you shot it.
And so Bernard Getz went off to jail, but that wasn't the end of Bernard Getz's career.
Several years after he got out of jail, he decided to run for mayor of New York and to run on a
platform essentially reflecting what he had done. The problem was timing. Had Bernard Getz run for
mayor in 1984, or 85, or 86, who knows how many votes he would have garnered. He really had a lot
of support at that period of time, but by the time he decided to run for mayor of New York,
things had changed quite considerably. The crime rate had gone down, the subways had been cleaned
up, and Bernard Getz was regarded as something of an embarrassment to New York, an embarrassment
to the new New York and somebody whose racial attitudes no longer reflected the racial attitudes
of the large number of New Yorkers who would be necessary to elect somebody to mayor. So he
got very, very few votes and went into obscurity as a kind of ranting, raving New Yorker, of which
there are so many, who constantly goes on talk shows and complains about how the police has
soft on crime and how the mayor soft on crime and how Bernard Getz has saved the city of New York
from becoming a crime-ridden, crime-infested, impossible place to live. So the Bernard Getz
case represents a great many important issues that confronted America in the last part of the
20th century. Urban crime, urban crime not only became a very serious problem in the United States
and particularly in places like New York and Chicago and Detroit and Miami, but it also became
very much a political issue. And this had enormous implications for politics in the United States.
It became clear that running against crime and running in favor of victims, putting victims'
rights at the top of the agenda, and victims' rights often didn't reflect really victims'
rights. It reflected more an attitude against the rights of criminal defendants. That became very,
very good politics.
