who had called 9-1-1 the day after the alleged rape with her mother standing by her kind
of orchestrating the call, and who had a contingency fee agreement with the lawyer who was to get
a percentage of whatever she and her family collected, not only from a lawsuit, but from
movie rights and book rights growing out of this encounter.
The cases were so dramatically different as presented by trial, and as the real evidence
later revealed, that four of the jurors said that if they had heard the actual evidence
in the case, they would have acquitted Mike Tyson.
As one of the jurors put it, we the jurors felt that a man raped a woman.
In hindsight, it now looks like a woman raped a man.
The juror now believes that the woman in the case, the beauty pageant contestant who accused
Tyson of raping her, that she had committed a crime, namely the crime of a perjury, by
testifying falsely at the trial itself.
It was quite remarkable, and very few people know the actual story of what went on behind
the scenes at the Mike Tyson case, and the reason it's so important is that there are
two possible evils that can occur when unwanted sex takes place.
One, a person who was an actual rapist could be acquitted, and that happened very, very,
very frequently, early in our history.
Women's stories were not believed, corroboration was required, lawyers were able to probe into
the sexual background and history of a woman, all of which led to many, many false acquittals
of actual rapists and many instances where rape charges simply were not brought against
people who are actually guilty of rape.
That's one evil.
The other evil is false accusations of rape, and tragically, there are a considerable number
of them that have been documented over the years.
Women falsely accusing men of rape, either for revenge or to obtain financial settlements
or for other reasons as well.
The object of the law, plainly, is to reduce the frequency of both kinds of errors, to reduce
to the smallest amount possible the number of guilty people who were freed by jurors
erroneously, but at the same time reduce to the smallest possible number those who are
falsely convicted when a rape didn't in fact occur.
To make matters even more complicated, many of these cases are gray area cases.
To the woman, there may be a perception of having been forced.
To the man, there may be a perception of the woman having consented, perhaps initially
reluctantly, but having consented.
To make matters even more complicated, alcohol very frequently intervenes and affects the
judgments of both parties.
Indeed, in many, many so-called date rape cases, both parties were drunk, and it's very difficult
after the fact to reconstruct the precise dynamic that went into the sexual encounter that eventually
turned bad.
And so the law has an extremely difficult task in trying to sort out the factors that
should lead to the conclusion as to whether something was rape or was an innocent sexual
encounter.
The facts in the Mike Tyson case wonderfully illustrate this complexity.
