And when her father found out about it, her father threatened to beat her up, and she at that point falsely accused the quarterback of having raped her in order to avoid a beating by her father.
When the father then said to her, alright, if he raped you, let's go down to the police station and report it immediately, she withdrew her accusation of rape, and her father, in fact, beat her up.
This was clearly in her mind as her parents were coming to visit her and as she knew that everybody in her room, in her suite, was aware that she had had a sexual encounter with Mike Tyson.
At that point, she, in my view and in the view of many others who have observed this case, concocted the story after the fact of the rape to avoid consequences from her father.
She went down with her mother to the hospital where she reported that she had participated early on in the necking, but had refused the actual act of intercourse.
She told a number of inconsistent and conflicting stories, but the jury never heard those stories. All the jury heard was a simple pattern of clear rape.
The jury also never heard that she had a financial interest and a financial stake in the case. In fact, it became a very serious legal matter at some point because the prosecutor refused to allow her lawyer, her private lawyer, to attend the trial.
And had the private lawyer attended the trial, he would have been there. The trial was not televised. When she testified that she had no contingency fee agreement, had no interest in bringing a civil lawsuit, and had never discussed movie rights, the lawyer would have had an obligation to stand up and say,
Wait a minute, Your Honor. That's not true. We have a contingency fee agreement. Here it is. We did discuss movie rights. Here's what the conversation said. And she was very interested in suing and collecting a lot of money, exactly the opposite of what she had testified to.
We learned about that after the trial and the conviction. We learned about it in a very strange way. The lawyer, who was a decent and honorable man, went to the authorities in Rhode Island. He was a lawyer from Rhode Island.
And he went to the bar and to the court and said, What am I supposed to do? My client has lied under oath in a criminal trial. I have information that contradicts that. But I learned that information in a confidential manner.
If you remember one of my earlier lectures, we talked about the Leo Frank case in which a lawyer had to decide whether to turn in his own client who had admitted a murder. But in that case, the client was not planning a future crime.
In this case, the lawyer had sat silently by while his client had committed perjury had lied in the courtroom. And the courts in Rhode Island and the bar in Rhode Island said, You must disclose that you are not permitted to withhold it.
You must tell the truth. You must come forward and tell the court that your own client has made statements under oath, which are contradicted by what she told you. And by the fact you actually have the contingency fee agreement that she denied having and said she doesn't even know what a contingency fee agreement is.
And so the lawyer brought this to the attention of the Indiana authorities. But the Indiana authorities completely ignored it and affirmed the conviction.
