And so he used the pretense of his wife's encounter with me, which to this day we don't know whether it was deliberately done or just accidentally done,
but he used the pretext of his wife's encounter with me to recuse himself from the case.
To make matters even more complicated, we did all the research and discovered that had he cast the deciding vote,
at least according to his prior decisions, he would have had to cast it in our favor.
He had written the previous decision, which says that you can't exclude witnesses from testifying at a trial just because they may have come forward late.
And you'll recall that the four key witnesses had come forward late.
The trial judge had ruled that their evidence had to be excluded, their testimony could not be heard,
and his prior decisions would have clearly inclined him to rule in our favor.
And so the combination of factors, his prior sexual accusations, his wife's encounter with me, gave him an excuse to recuse himself from the case.
He recused himself from the case.
The case was affirmed in a two-to-two vote.
Mike Tyson went off to jail.
Desiree Washington collected money in a civil settlement from the case.
Mike Tyson's career was ruined, and the jury, no jury ever heard the full evidence in the case that would have led at least four jurors and probably more to have voted for acquittal.
Well, what does this tell us about changing rules relating to the laws of rape?
Plainly, the rules have changed in a positive direction for the most part.
Rape shield laws are very important.
They properly protect a rape victim from having her private sexual conduct spread on the public record.
They properly prevent defense attorneys from engaging in extortion, essentially, and keeping people who have actually been raped from testifying and from bringing charges against people who have raped them.
So in general, the rape shield law works very effectively, but should it include, for example, protection against false accusations of rape?
If a woman who is accusing somebody of rape has previously falsely accused somebody of rape, should that be covered by the rape shield law, or should the jury be allowed to hear that?
I think quite clearly the jury should be allowed to hear that.
The relevance of that testimony plainly outweighs its prejudicial impact.
If a woman who has falsely accused one person of raping her might very well falsely accuse another person of raping her.
And in this case, the rape shield law was improperly used to prevent that evidence from coming before the jury.
