We later learned that her name was Norma McCorvey and in the case she claimed that her pregnancy
had been caused by a gang rape and an interracial gang rape. Well of course that presented
particularly in Texas where the case originated. A very sympathetic situation, a woman becoming
pregnant, a white woman becoming pregnant as the result of being gang raped, doesn't even know who
a father is, doesn't even know what the race of the father will be, compelling, compelling
situation. Even today some of the staunchest opponents of a woman's right to choose will
say well in the case of rape or incest perhaps there ought to be an exception. By the way some
say no, it's not the child's fault, the child is alive, the child is a fetus, it's potential life,
it's real life, it has a soul. Why should the child suffer because the woman had been raped
or the victim of an incest? But in this case it was very very sympathetically presented because
of the alleged rape in the case. It's not clear whether the lawyers believe the story of rape
because they don't actually allege it in the papers, in the court papers, but in all the media
coverage of the case and in all the discussion of the case the underlying assumption was what
she had said over and over again namely that she was the victim of rape. The whole story was a lie,
there was no rape, there was no interracial issue, she had simply gotten pregnant the way
most people get pregnant and then decided to lie about it. Important cases sometimes have very
strange litigants involved, not only did she lie about the underlying circumstances of the case,
she then changed her mind completely and became a born-again strong opponent of any abortion,
going around the country, speaking to Christian fundamentalist groups and pointing to her own
case and her own experience as proof that abortion should never be permitted and claiming that she
was forced to lie about it by pressures and by the pro-abortion folks and by the choice folks who
were now the devils and the villains and she's changed sides and she's changed her story and
she's changed her attune. That doesn't affect the decision itself because the decision was based on
an assumed set of facts and the decision remains on the books. It's a very interesting decision in a
lot of different ways, sometimes people compare Roe vs. Wade as a woman's rights decision to Brown
vs. Board of Education, the very very important United States Supreme Court decision that desegregated
the schools, certainly one of the most important cases decided as well. The difference between
the two cases is that Brown vs. Board of Education, once it was decided, really changed minds.
If you ask people today, do you believe that public schools should be lawfully segregated,
you will find very very few people saying, oh sure, it was right to lawfully segregate the
schools. The prior decisions were correct, apartheid is perfectly acceptable in American
public education. You're not going to find very many people other than the David Dukes of the world
and extreme racists making that argument. Even today, no governor of Alabama or Mississippi
or Georgia would assert that position, a position of course they did assert shortly after Brown vs.
Board of Education. But within a few years, attitudes changed. The Supreme Court's decision
influenced the attitudes of Americans on racial equality and today almost all Americans support
racial equality, certainly in public schools and certainly as a matter of law.
The same cannot be said about Roe vs. Wade.
