It didn't change very many minds.
The nation is very deeply divided today about abortion, as it was in 1973.
And I think the reason for the difference is a profound one.
Racial segregation is simply wrong, and I think people realize that treating blacks
or any group as racially inferior is simply wrong.
Nobody can today get up there and articulate a plausible moral justification for that action.
On the other hand, abortion is very different.
If you believe that the fetus is a live human being, if you believe from a religious view
that the fetus has a soul from the moment of conception, or from a secular point of
view, and I have a friend of mine who's a fervent atheist, Nat Hentoff, who is also
a fervent opponent of abortion, believing that abortion trivializes human life, and
that abortion should not be permitted, even though he's not at all a religious person.
If you have those attitudes, they're not going to be changed by a Supreme Court decision.
If you think that killing a fetus is murder, and against God's will, or trivializes human
life, a Supreme Court decision, a 7-2 Supreme Court decision, which perhaps now is even
closer, 5-4, with current votes of current justices, is not going to influence your view,
particularly if your view is supported by your church.
And remember that the dominant churches in America, many of them, the Catholic Church,
many Baptist churches, several other Protestant churches, some branches of Judaism, and other
religions fervently oppose abortion at will, abortion by choice.
And if you have support from religious and ethical leaders, you're not going to change
your view.
No church today, no religion today, supports lawful segregation.
So the analogy between Brown v. Board of Education and Roe v. Wade crumbles as the result of
that.
Now was it right for the Supreme Court to constitutionalize a woman's right to choose
abortion?
Well, if you're a literalist, like Justice Scalia, and you look to the text of the Constitution,
that's a difficult argument to make.
There's nothing in the Constitution about abortion, by the way, and this is interesting
to many people of a religious background, there's nothing in the Bible about abortion.
There's only one very, very vague reference in the Old Testament to a law that if a man
hit a pregnant woman and she is not hurt, but merely loses her child, that is not a
capital offense, whereas if she is killed, that is a capital offense, strongly suggesting
that the Bible does not regard the fetus as a live human being with the same rights
and the same protections as somebody after birth.
But neither the Constitution nor the Bible speak to the issue of abortion, and yet the
Supreme Court was asked to decide whether a woman's right to choose abortion is not
a legislative matter, but rather a fundamental constitutional right that can never be changed
by legislation.
