Roe vs. Wade, by constitutionalizing a woman's right to choose abortion, took it out of the political process.
And that had some very, very negative effects.
Number one, it energized the right to life movement, and it created a major important political force in America that didn't exist previously.
There was now a Supreme Court decision, a symbol that could be opposed.
And so the right to life movement, the evangelical churches, the born-again Christian churches, the Catholic church, many other churches got together and formed a right to life movement,
which has become one of the most powerful influential political forces in America today.
At the same time that happened, the right to choose movement, the woman's right to choose abortion fell asleep at the wheel.
Why?
They had one.
They had justices on their side.
They had seven justices, seven men.
The Supreme Court was all men at the time.
Seven men were going to support a woman's right to choose.
They didn't need to create grassroots support for their movement.
And so politically what happened is the opponents of abortion were energized and created a mass political movement, and the supporters of abortion fell asleep and lost the opportunity to create a mass movement.
Nonetheless, a majority of Americans still to this day, and probably always, has favored a woman's right to choose, at least in the first trimester, and at least if there is some decent reason for it.
So that's a good political issue for those who advocate a woman's right to choose.
But now that it's become constitutionalized, it's no longer an issue that is prominent in political elections.
Let me put it very specifically.
Take a family that lives in Westchester, New York.
They're a suburban New York family.
They're wealthy.
They want tax cuts.
They're economic Republicans.
Generally, they'd like to support what used to be called in the old days, Rockefeller Republicans or Giuliani Republicans.
Tough on crime, tough on inflation, conservative in financial outlook, but not religious or social conservatives.
They don't believe in prayer in the schools.
They don't believe in the government's right to intrude on people's private rights at home or abortion rights.
Consider that family.
Prior to Roe vs. Wade, they had a difficult time when it came to an election.
Their pocketbook would incline them to vote Republican, but their desire to make sure their daughter or their niece had access to abortion would incline them to vote either Democrat
or for Rockefeller Republicans, moderate Republicans.
And the Rockefeller branch of the Republican Party was alive and well.
In fact, President George Bush I was clearly in that group.
He was a pro-choice Republican, and there were many pro-choice Republicans.
The day Roe vs. Wade was decided marked the end of Rockefeller Republicanism and pro-choice Republicanism.
Why?
Because the issue was no longer an issue that was of concern to voters.
The right of abortion was protected by the Supreme Court.
It couldn't be taken away.
And therefore that Westchester couple that wanted to vote their pocketbook found it much easier to vote for the Republican Party.
