When I was a kid, I would ask my grandparents, how could you have tolerated segregation in
the schools?
How could you have tolerated, and then you fill in the blank, various terrible things
that my grandparents' generation seemed to accept as normal and routine, and today we
look at as grave injustices, and I always ask myself, what are my grandchildren going
to ask me?
What are my grandchildren going to ask me about what my generation accepted?
And I think one of the primary issues is discrimination against people based on their sexual orientation.
When I grew up, it was the most natural thing in the world to think that gays were different
and worse, and to be either pitied or discriminated against, nobody would want to have a gay child
or to want a friend to be gay, it was regarded as a terrible stigma, we had words for it
in my neighborhood, words I would never today repeat.
And yet it's amazing to me that as recently as the end of the 20th century, it was still
against the law, essentially, to be gay.
That is, it wasn't a crime to say you're gay, or it wasn't a crime to think like a gay person,
but it was a crime to have sex with a person of your own gender.
And that was true in the United States until virtually the end of the 20th century, a Supreme
Court decision called Bowers vs. Hartwick had allowed the state of Georgia to make it
a crime for two gay men to engage in consensual homosexual conduct in the privacy of their
own bedroom.
I don't know what I would say if my grandchildren or great grandchildren asked me how that could
have been tolerated in America.
My children and grandchildren don't understand that.
They have gay friends, they have gay teachers, being gay is simply not an issue for today's
young people.
They don't understand, don't ask, don't tell.
In the Army, they have no frame of reference for discrimination against gays.
Gays are in every walk of life today and are openly and proudly homosexual.
But yet, there was a time in America where gays were executed, lynched.
Thomas Jefferson, when he wrote a new code for the state of Virginia, made sodomy a capital
crime.
He hated sodomy, he thought it was a crime against nature and him being somebody who
believed in nature as God had very, very strong views.
Many liberals had strong views against homosexuality as recently as the middle of the 20th century.
And the United States Supreme Court legitimated that in one of the worst decisions ever rendered
by a high court of justice.
Thomas Berger, the Chief Justice of the United States, in his opinion, suggested that gay
sex was in some ways worse than rape and that being gay was an abomination and something
that the Bible disapproved of and all of civilized law disapproved of for thousands and thousands
of years.
And who was the Supreme Court to change that?
