How many people realize there are laws against adultery? In Massachusetts, there were laws against adultery until just a few years ago, making it a crime for a married person to have sex with anyone other than his wife or her husband.
And then Scalia continues, fornication. How many people realize that it's a crime for 225-year-olds to have sex with each other if they're not married, if they're both single, if they're both dating?
Can you imagine what it would do to all these dating services and these dating bars if the laws against fornication were enforced?
But Justice Scalia says, the pillars of our society will crumble, and the laws against masturbation, adultery, and fornication would be struck down.
Then he lists a few other things, bestiality, obscenity, and he could list a few others. He could list drug laws as well.
He makes an interesting point, but the point is overdone when he includes issues like masturbation and fornication.
The interesting point is the slippery slope. Where do we stop?
Scalia continues, and he makes the following point. He says, I do not know what acting in private means.
Perhaps the Scalia state could prohibit nudity in the privacy of one's home.
That's one of the implications. If you don't know what privacy is, Scalia would say that the state would have a right to say you have to dress up to take a bath, as you used to have to, in Victorian England.
And it should be able to criminalize fornication, masturbation, and a range of other private conduct or conduct that seems to be none of the state's business.
But where do you draw the line?
If homosexual conduct is protected, how about drug use? That doesn't hurt anybody, the use of marijuana in the privacy of one's home.
How could the state distinguish between permitting alcohol use and not prohibiting marijuana use?
The Supreme Court has cases asking whether or not even medical use of marijuana is permitted by the Constitution.
And the court has generally said, no, the states can prohibit the medical use of marijuana, the use of marijuana just for pleasure, and other kinds of activities.
But it can prohibit homosexual conduct in the privacy of the home.
So what is the limiting principle, and where is the line to be drawn?
If one takes the view that the Constitution only gives the states and the federal government limited powers, then there's a very, very broad interpretation that's possible of this decision.
Namely, anything goes in the home, unless the state can demonstrate a significant harm, it has no basis for preventing people from engaging in conduct which they choose to engage in.
As George Bonaccio once said, do not do unto others as others would do unto you, their tastes may be different.
And of course our tastes are all very different.
Conduct that some of us regard as disgusting is conduct that other people find pleasurable.
For example, should masochism and sadism consensually practiced be allowed to be done in the privacy of home?
Should cross-dressing be allowed to be done in the privacy of a home?
Should group sex be permissible involving more than two people?
Scalia talks about bestiality.
There you can at least argue that harm to the animal might be a result in animals' consent.
