The defense was rather low-keyed and smartly low-keyed because the job of the defense was
not to alienate any potential votes in favor, not to provoke any opposition, but just to
let the matter go as smoothly as possible because they had enough votes in their pocket, essentially,
to assure that there would be no removal.
It was another goal as well to try to get some Republican senators to vote against removal
so that the vote against removal would be perceived as bipartisan and the vote for removal
would be perceived as partisan.
And in fact, that goal succeeded as well, at least in part because several Republicans
eventually voted against removal, although the majority of Republicans in the House
had voted for impeachment.
Even those who voted against removal made a point of condemning the president's actions,
but tried to, in a statesman-like way, distinguish between improper conduct by the president and
an impeachable and removable offense by a president.
Where does this leave us?
We're a country of common law, which means precedent is very important, which means we
always look to the past for guidance to the future.
What now are the criteria for impeachment?
What are the criteria for removal?
Is the private conduct of the president, conduct that occurs outside of his official actions
as president, proper subjects for impeachment and removal?
The House of Representatives said yes, the Senate tied, but because the two-thirds vote
was required, said no.
The Chief Justice made no rulings during the case, no substantive rulings.
He could have been asked for an opinion, presumably, on whether the conduct at issue constituted
a removable offense, and then he would have had to rule subject to being overruled by
the Senate itself, but he made no such ruling.
And so we're left with a relatively ambiguous historical record, and it's not the only
ambiguous historical record, because if you go back to the impeachment of Andrew Johnson,
the president who had the misfortune of succeeding the great and revered and martyred, Abraham
Lincoln, one finds very, very similar ambiguities.
The impeachment was carried forward largely on party lines, and then the removal went
along primarily on party lines too.
The real reason why Johnson was being impeached and why they sought his removal had nothing
to do with the grounds on which the actual impeachment was sought.
The impeachment was sought on ground that he had violated the tenure of office acts and
technical statute of Congress, which forbade the president from firing certain people,
but that really wasn't what was at stake.
What was at stake was reconstruction.
The post-Lincoln America, whether Johnson a Democrat who replaced a Republican was carrying
out the mandate of his predecessor.
The issues were broad and general, though the focus was particular.
I think one can say the same thing about Bill Clinton's impeachment.
Bill Clinton was an extraordinarily divisive president.
He was beloved, and he was hated, and the people who hated him hated him with a passion,
and started out seeking his removal and his delegitimation from his first day in office.
