And the reason they sought his impeachment and removal had very little to do with the
particular Oval Office encounter and his testimony at a sorted trial involving sexual harassment.
It was much more about Clinton the person, Clinton the style, Clinton the president,
Clinton the person who challenged and confronted so much of what the hard right in America stood
for but Clinton gave them the ammunition with which to impeach him and gave him the ammunition
with which to seek his removal. Of course, the one matter that is hard to ignore in the
entire impeachment of Clinton was the fact that it wasn't done only by the House and by the Senate.
There was a third institution involved and a very unusual institution in American life and that
is the institution of special prosecutor. And in this case a special prosecutor was appointed.
Actually two special prosecutors were appointed. In the beginning a very objective neutral
professional prosecutor named Robert Fisk was appointed by the Justice Department to oversee
the investigation of Clinton. But then some of the Republicans got concerned that he wouldn't
be sufficiently tough and they decided instead to have appointed Ken Starr who was one of their own,
somebody who was seen as an ideological right winger, somebody who could be counted on,
somebody with little prosecutorial experience and therefore may be more easily subject to
political pressures. And Kenneth Starr undertook the investigation which began as investigation of
financial corruption, of whitewater, of travel gate, of a number of other alleged financial
irregularities. But quickly as soon as the incident with Monica Lewinsky surfaced,
Ken Starr immediately began to focus his investigation on that assorted affair. And he
managed to make Monica Lewinsky into a witness for the prosecution over her clear objection.
She had no interest in doing that but Ken Starr threatened to bring her mother into the case,
threatened to indict her, threatened to make her life miserable and eventually she cooperated with
the investigation and she became the central focus of what ultimately became the Starr report.
The Starr report was a remarkable document in American history, a very thick with appendices
multi-volume document which went into excruciating detail about the private sex life of the President
of the United States.
