Some people regard the Star Report as itself x-rated or pornographic.
It is a document unique in American history, never before and never since and hopefully never again.
Will there be an investigation looking with a microscope into the president's sex life,
talking about semen stains, talking about the excruciating details of the sexual encounter,
describing it in clinical detail and certainly making it very difficult for the president,
again to be seen as a man who is above it all.
Bill Clinton is the only president whose sex life has ever been subject to that kind of scrutiny.
And I think the reason for it, again, lies squarely with his lawyer.
Had his lawyer taken the position, the principal position early on in the case,
the sex life of the president is beyond the scope of investigation.
We will not, under any circumstances, cooperate in any such investigation.
We will not testify about it.
We will not be deposed about it.
We will not answer interrogatories about it.
He is the president to the United States.
There's plenty of time to go after him after he's left office.
But while he's president, he is not going to testify in this manner.
And whatever consequences there are, let those consequences apply,
because the consequences were only civil and only financial.
But once the president agreed, once the president submitted,
once the president put his own statements under oath on record,
he opened himself up to the kind of inquiry that eventually resulted in his impeachment,
eventually resulted in the publication of the Star Report,
eventually resulted in the trial in the United States Senate,
which did not result in his removal, but clearly tarnished his presidency.
And one can only imagine how difficult it must be to govern under those kinds of pressures.
Governing is difficult enough.
Being the president is probably the hardest job in the world,
but trying to govern while a private prosecutor,
a prosecutor who is not part of the general apparatus of the Justice Department,
a prosecutor whose special role is to investigate only you
and to come forth not with an indictment, because Kenneth Starr never came forth with an indictment,
but rather with a report detailing the life of the president outside of his presidential duties.
The difficulty of governing while that investigation is going on,
while an impeachment is in progress, while removal is being sought,
while indictments are being talked about, while a grand jury has been convened,
having to have your own lawyer, having to have the presidential lawyer,
having to have the attorney general, having all of these working not so much in tandem,
but against each other at the same time, must have been an extraordinary burden,
not only on the president, but on the presidency.
