Third of all, the decision itself was based on a ground, at least partially on a ground
of equal protection, that the five justices, all of whom had had much, much more limited
equal protection approaches in prior cases, and had had more limited equal protection
approaches in subsequent cases, particularly justices Renquist, Thomas, and Scalia, who
have said over and over again that equal protection does not apply, except in certain
limited contexts involving discrimination based on race, gender, and the like, but not on
discrimination, which was not racially based or invidiously based.
In fact, if anything, the discrimination, in this case, was directed in favor of white
voters, and against black voters.
Black voters' votes were discounted, and white voters' votes were counted more heavily in
the process by which the Supreme Court ultimately validated the election, completely inconsistent
with what the Supreme Court majority had previously said was a far narrower view of the equal
protection clause itself.
Well, what does this mean for critics of the Supreme Court?
When the decision came down, a number of professors announced, quite categorically,
do not question the motives and integrity of the justices.
And that has been a mantra in academic scholarship.
You don't look behind the opinions.
You only look at the face of the decisions.
Well, I don't think that's proper.
We certainly wouldn't do that for senators and presidents.
If a senator said, I'm voting for a certain bill because it's right on the merits, and
we discovered that he had been lobbied, and major campaign contributions had been given
to his campaign, every newspaper in the country would print that fact.
We're entitled to go behind the statements of senators and presidents and look at their
actual motivations.
Why shouldn't we be permitted, indeed, encouraged to do that with Supreme Court justices?
Supreme Court justices are human beings.
In the old days, they wore wigs.
Today, they still wear robes.
The wigs and the robes were intended to hide their humanity from the public, designed to
prevent us from probing into their lives, into their motives, into their backgrounds,
into their religions.
But today, we know that justices determine cases, often on the basis, of their own ideology,
their own background, their own partisanship, their own religious background, their own
views of law, views of life, and views of politics.
