The public reaction to Bush versus Gore was very, very considerable at the moment Bush
versus Gore came out.
It really looked like the Supreme Court could not survive and endure as an institution with
credibility that much of the work that it had done building up its credibility in cases
like Brown versus vote of education, the case which desegregated the schools in the south,
some of the reapportionment cases, some of the free speech cases, had received a self-inflicted
wound from Bush versus Gore.
For the first months after Bush versus Gore, critical opinion, academic opinion, scholarly
opinion, media opinion was almost uniformly a derisive of the Supreme Court and of the
majority opinion.
Justices were booed when they went places.
Their integrity was attacked.
They were much criticized for what they had done.
And then an event occurred in American history which changed all of that, namely the attack
on the United States of September 11th, 2001, only shortly after President Bush had assumed
office.
And that event changed everything.
Once 9-11 occurred, Bush versus Gore was taken off the table.
Nobody wanted to hear about the possible illegitimacy of the Supreme Court or questions about how
our president got into office.
It became clear that we wanted to unite around the president at a time of crisis.
And the first way of uniting around the president was to not question his credibility and not
question the credibility of the institution that had contributed to putting him in office.
And so if you look at the academic literature, the media, you see that 9-11 marked the crucial,
change in attitudes toward the Supreme Court's decision in Bush versus Gore.
Actually, one judge and professor, Professor Richard Posner of the University of Chicago
who's the United States Court of Appeals judge, in a book he wrote predicted that that would
happen.
He couldn't have predicted or anticipated September 11th, obviously.
But he said that the Supreme Court's decision in Bush versus Gore will turn on whether or
not President Bush is regarded as a successful president or not as a successful president.
He said if the Bush presidency succeeds, then the decision of the Supreme Court in Bush
versus Gore will be partly credited for bringing a good president to office.
And if the Bush presidency fails, the Supreme Court will be partly blamed for bringing a
bad president to office.
What Judge Posner could not have anticipated was the events of September 11th, which made
all of America immediately gather round and circle the president, circle all the institutions
of governance as a way of kind of defending ourselves against an external enemy.
It wasn't a question of whether we thought he was a good president or a bad president.
He was our president at a time of crisis, and there should be no effort to delegitimate.
Where Posner was, I think, wrong is that even now, after 9-11, when there are grave questions
being raised by many about the presidency of George Bush where public opinion numbers
have been very, very low at times, nonetheless the criticism of Bush versus Gore has not
resurfaced.
That's the kind of case which you get an immediate criticism.
