After listening to Lecture 13, a student posed this question to Professor Dershowitz.
How can it be said that Bush v. Gore was the worst decision in the Supreme Court's history?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
How can it be said that Bush v. Gore is the most disastrous decision in Supreme Court history,
a history that includes, for example, the Supreme Court's decision in Dred Scott,
which declared African people in the United States to be essentially property?
Look, there's no decision which has more despicable language than Dred Scott,
but I think most legal scholars will tell you Dred Scott may have been properly decided
by the constitutional standards of the day.
After all, the fact that blacks were not citizens and didn't get to vote
was not decided by the Supreme Court, it was decided by the framers of the Constitution,
who permitted slavery in the Constitution, ended the importation of slaves only in 1820,
and regarded blacks as three-fifths of a person for purposes of voting,
but they didn't get to vote, only the white people got to vote,
but their bodies counted as three-fifths.
So, Dred Scott, though it contains the most despicable language imaginable,
was the language of the time, and a decision that may very well have been in accord with the original intent of the framers.
Now, I'm not an originalist, so I would never have joined a decision like Dred Scott,
because by the time it was rendered, times have changed, but an originalist,
who looks to the original purpose, original language, original intention of the framers,
had to agree that that was what they originally intended,
that surely was Jefferson's view, which surely was the view of many, many others at the time.
Even Lincoln, who eventually freed some of the slaves, it's a myth that he freed all of the slaves,
had views of inequality between blacks and whites.
The reason Bush vs. Gore is so much worse as a decision of the Supreme Court,
not as a statement, but as a decision of the Supreme Court,
is there's just no justification for it in the Constitution,
and it's just complete judicial election deciding,
and it's just so outside the scope of what anybody would have contemplated
when the original Constitution was written, or what a living Constitution would bring us to today,
and whatever else you might say about Dred Scott, and nobody can say anything good about it,
it wasn't decided on the basis of the names of the litigants,
it wasn't decided on the basis of partisan considerations.
We needed a civil war to, unfortunately, change our Constitution,
and bring it into the 19th and 20th century through the 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments.
So in some respect, it could be said that the justices were just doing their job in Dred Scott,
maybe doing their job the way the guards at Auschwitz were doing their job,
you can argue, but doing their job.
Whereas the justices who rendered the majority decision in Bush vs. Gore were not doing their job,
they were doing a job which simply was not allocated to them by the Constitution of the United States.
This ends lecture 13.
