So, the trial was going to be a trial putting the various leaders of the Nazi regime in
the dock and accusing them of crimes ranging from waging aggressive war to a very questionable
and controversial charge against the editor of Der Stürme magazine, which was the Nazi
rag that had put out all of the anti-Semitic propaganda. His name was Streicher, Julius
Streicher, and he was put on trial basically for publishing his Der Stürme magazine, which
had become the Bible of Hitler's racism. Among the others on trial were Gehring, who
was the military leader, and other important military leaders, and civilian leaders, and
heads of the various organizations, some of the most important Nazi leaders from Hitler
to Goebbels to several others had died or had been killed or had committed suicide.
But there were enough Nazi leaders to have at least a symbolic trial of Nazism and of
the Nazi regime. Now, can a trial like this ever be a real trial, or is it always going
to be Victor's justice as Hermann Gehring characterized during the trial? Could it be
really the foundation for a new legal order, or would it create only rules that Victor's
could enforce against those who lost the war? After all, the critics complained nobody was
put on trial for the bombing of Dresden, the fire bombing which caused so many deaths,
or the bombs that would drop non-civilian targets at Hiroshima, or Nagasaki, or from
the mistreatment of prisoners of war done by some allied generals and others. That's
always a hard question. At the end of the Civil War, we put only one person on trial,
and that is the head of prisoner of war camp in which many northern soldiers were killed
and died horrible deaths. But no northern commanders were put on trial for what many
regarded as equally bad camps for people who were captured in the south, or for Shermans
marched through Atlanta, or for other kinds of actions which were deemed to be questionable.
So certainly Victor's justice is part of it, but can Victor's justice be real justice?
And the rules that emerge from a trial like Nuremberg become the foundation for enforceable
legal rules against aggressive war and crimes against humanity. That certainly was Justice
Robert Jackson's goal. Justice Jackson took leave from the Supreme Court of the United
States and he served as Chief American Prosecutor at Nuremberg. He was succeeded by General
Telford Taylor, a close personal friend and mentor of mine, who was my professor at Yale
Law School and who became the Chief Prosecutor after Justice Jackson returned to the Supreme
Court following the trial of the major Nazi leaders, and Taylor presided over the trials
of the doctors and the lawyers and others who had been complicit in the Nazi atrocities.
