But these were kind of lawless actions taken outside of the United States, sometimes not even
taken by United States government officials. What we would do is subcontract the case to locals
from the Philippines or from Jordan or from Egypt, countries that we reliably believe would torture
or use extraordinary means on these people. We would then use the information, but our fingerprints
would not be on the torture itself. Well in 2004 the United States Supreme Court finally decided
it had to review some of these cases and it rendered a series of very very interesting decisions
that are still works in progress. The Supreme Court essentially ruled that the law applies,
but that the law has to be flexible and that it must recognize the reality of terrorism.
Nonetheless it gave the authorities broad latitude and had a deal with these kinds of prisoners.
And here again we have the dispute between the mystificit mentality on the Supreme Court so
often condemned by Justice Scalia and the originalist view of Justice Scalia so often condemned by the
other side. Justice Scalia interestingly enough became the liberal in these detention cases
because he said the Constitution of the United States is a dead document. It is not a living
document. It does not expand and it does not contract. Generally he said I'm criticized because I
complain when they try to expand the Constitution. He said today I'm complaining because
they're trying to constrain or contract the Constitution. They're trying to make it less
than what it was in 1793 when the Bill of Rights were enacted. And so Justice Scalia insisted for
example that the confrontation clause of the Constitution which permits which entitles every
person who is subjected to a trial in America a criminal trial to confront his accuser to actually
use cross-examination and subpoena power. He said you can't water that down in the name of terrorism.
What was good for America in 1793 is good for America he said in 2004. I don't want anything new.
I don't want any innovations. I don't want to expand the Constitution but I also don't want to
contract the Constitution and make it something less. Whereas the mystificit justices on the
Supreme Court Justice O'Connor in those days and Justice Breyer and some of the others said well
let's just try to make it right. Let's figure out the best solution to the problem. Let's think
what's best for everybody involved and let's come to a compromise resolution. Scalia says no no
that's not the job of the Supreme Court that's the job of the legislature. And so what we're left with
is a basic outline of what the law will look like in the 21st century as terrorism gets worse and
worse. And there's no question that we will see increases in terrorism. We will probably see
an attack with mass casualties sometime in the not too distant future. Whether it will be an
attack by biological weapons, chemical weapons, nuclear weapons or conventional weapons nobody
knows. It was difficult to predict the attack of 9-11 and it will be even more difficult to predict
future attacks. Are we ready? Is our legal system prepared for these attacks on our physical being?
Are they prepared for what will inevitably be attacks on our legal structure? The answer is
no. I'll give you a striking example.
