Hey, Mark, how's it going?
Fine, yourself?
Great, man. Great, great, great. Great to have you back.
Good to be back, although the word round two makes it sound like a boxing
match. Yeah, no, it's just a, it's just a way to keep track of the
conversations. Nothing serious.
How are you doing? Are you still in Boston, Mark?
No, I got back two days ago.
Okay, how was the, how was the track?
It was actually a slightly nightmarish flight to Boston.
I got diverted eventually to New York.
And then it was a bit of a shambles, but apart from that part of it, I mean, I
ended up losing almost the whole day.
But once I did get there, scientifically, it was just fantastic.
I really enjoyed it.
I know I saw some of you did a presentation at Tufts.
Yeah, it seemed like a really great time.
I did a presentation which I was happy with.
I was very happy with how it was received by some people who I respect,
you know, so it's, it's, it's good to get good feedback from minds
that you admire.
And then there was also the added dimension of Mike's lab.
I mean, I know about his work, but to actually visit his lab, it's
just quite extraordinary.
I'm actually going to touch on that at some point, because I wrote a note
here about the collaborations you guys are doing.
Friston, Fields, Levin, I mean, there's so much happening here.
And it's so exciting from the outside.
I asked Mike about this about a week ago, and it just seems incredible.
He left me with a nice question for you right at the very end.
What is the meaning of life?
You know, I tweeted this to you.
Mike also, he just wants to know, he thinks you actually might provide a
very valuable answer to this, because he thinks that your background
in your psychology will help enhance this answer.
So give us that.
Well, actually, I'd forgotten that you tweeted that.
I wish I'd, I wish I'd prepared an answer because that's not the kind
of question one likes to receive.
What is the meaning of life?
Especially when you expecting a serious and satisfying answer.
So what I would say, first of all, is we must distinguish between the sort
of purpose of life and the meaning of life.
The purpose of life is very easy to discern.
It's to keep on going, being alive, you know, to survive and to reproduce.
I'm afraid is the purpose of life described biologically.
I mean, because of course, life is a biological thing.
And so when you speak of, well, what is it for?
It's just for keeping itself going.
That's all it's for.
But that doesn't mean that's the meaning of life, you know.
So I would draw a distinction between us as biological organisms.
Which are just struggling to resist the second law of thermodynamics and keep
going or is resisted for as long as we can.
And then we lose, you know, that I would like to distinguish between that and
the, the, the being of an organism, you know, our subjective existence.
That's where I think the word meaning is appropriate.
It's like, OK, so I'm here, what, what, what am I going to, you know,
what should, what should I do with this other than just, you know, carry on
from a biological point of view existing as a, as a living thing?
What is the meaning of all of this?
And my, my emphasis, of course, is on feelings.
As you know, I think subjectivity is fundamentally
constituted by feeling.
We are feeling beings.
That's what being is, to be, to, to, for the, you know, that phrase,
there's an organism that there's something it is like to be, that organism.
It is a feeling organism.
Now, our feelings, again, as you know, because I've spoken to you about this
before, they are just the way in which we become aware of our needs.
So, so you could look at that biologically.
You could say, well, the reason why, for example, the reason why
pleasure is attached to sexuality is because that's how our species reproduces.
And so from a purely biological point of view, sex is pleasurable
because that's, that's got to do with that purpose side of things.
The meaning side of it.
I mean, why do we actually have sex as subjects, you know, as, as feeling beings?
It's, it's not because we're trying to do our biological duty, you know,
not at all.
We, we're, we're, in fact, most of the time that we have sex, we are hoping
not to reproduce, so it's, they rarely is, it's not a small distinction.
It's, it's a very different thing.
What we're doing in terms of, in terms of what motivates us as sentient
beings as subjects has, has to do with, so it's, for that reason, for me,
it has been a very important part of the meaning of my life is to try and
understand, you know, what is this?
What is feeling?
What, what, what is it?
What is it all about?
And to try and understand it, I think that that's been a very worthwhile quest
to try to understand what is it to be and what is feeling.
And the, the, I personally can't find a more
worthwhile way of spending my brief period of biological existence, trying
to understand what, what it is, or what it is all about.
And I'm perfectly happy with the meaning of my life from, from that point
of view.
Now, I used sex as a, as an example, because it's so easy to see the
biological versus the subjective, but it applies to all of our needs.
You know, what we are, what we are living is, it's like, let me take
something even more prosaic.
You know, we don't, we eat chocolate and sweets and stuff, you know,
because they taste nice.
The reason they taste nice is because they've got high energy content.
That's what makes them taste nice, but we are not thinking, oh, you know,
what I really need to do is get high energy supplies.
What we're doing is saying, I really like this, you know, so the, the
other main thing I've done in my life is, is, is train in and practice
psychoanalysis.
And that's really, you could easily say that it's not the only way of
going about it, but it is one of the, it's a, it's like, like, there are
many Eastern traditions where like meditative traditions and so on.
In fact, I met a very senior Buddhist when I was in Boston now.
And so I spoke quite a bit, interacted quite a bit with, with, with that
way of approaching the same task, which is, you know, really trying to
properly confront what is it to be, what is it to be mortal?
What are these feelings really for?
What do I feel about them?
What are my values?
What do I want to do in relation to my felt needs?
Felt needs, you know, which include needs to not only survive and reproduce
and eat, but, but, you know, to have fun, play, it's terribly important to
recognize that has been a real discovery in my life and to recognize
it as a, you know, as an experience of, of the need to play, the need to
have fun to wreck.
So the more I've understood about, you know, how minds work and how my
mind works, the better I'm able to enjoy in my mind and, and recognize
that it's inevitable that there's no such thing as a conflict free existence.
You know, all of our different needs are, they need to be balanced with each
other and you kind of, you become more sanguine about it all and, and allow
yourself to appreciate, you know, what it is, what it is to, to, and foregrounding
feelings has been a very important, not only because of my own work in
relation to the, to the neuroscience of feeling, but also in, in relation to
psychoanalysis, getting to know your own feelings, face up to them, face
up to your conflicts, ponder, how are you going to deal with them, recognize
you never going to be exempted from conflicts and so on.
So I suppose what is that there's a phrase, the examined life is not worth
living and, and, and also the old, you know, know thyself, I think that's the
meaning, that's, that's, that is the, that is the meaning that you end up, that
I end up realizing that's the best you can do with, with life is to, is to, is
to wonder at it, to ponder it, to try to understand it, to reflect upon it, to
be fully alive in the sense of being alive, you know, not, not, not biological
life, but, but experiential life and to, to, to, to, to ponder it, to reflect on
it, to study it, to, to wonder at it, to appreciate it.
I think, I think we're similar in that case.
And this podcast obviously embodies that, that curiosity, that, that sort of this
quest for us to try and conquer this mind.
And when I spoke to Mike, this, that question came at the very end.
And I remember it's because apparently Mike gets a lot of emails lately regarding
the meaning of life and he's not a psychologist.
So he doesn't have this background.
He's not a philosopher.
So for him, he gets, he gets caught in a, between a rock and a hard place because
he's obviously not an expert in those fields.
So he said, he'd rather just shift that onto you.
I'm not surprised he gets emails like that because his work, I mean, it, it really
is pretty fundamental in terms of, you know, what, what, what is an organism?
And, and, and, and, you know, what is, what is life right at the most basic
level of single cells and so on.
It's, it's fantastically interesting what he's doing.
It's pretty cool.
And I know that you guys, you were in Boston, you went, you visited Mike's lab.
First, I don't know if, for all of those curious, do you want to tell us about that
experience?
It was an extraordinary experience.
I know about his work, but knowing about something and experiencing it is, you
know, there are two different things.
And that's the rest of your work pretty much.
You actually got to feel it.
Yeah.
So the, the, the, the main species that he's studying, he studies various
different organisms, but these little worms that are the first thing that's
astonishing about them and to actually encounter one such worm is, is that
they're immortal.
I mean, literally immortal.
You know, they, they've been around for millions and millions of years.
They don't die.
They just subdivide.
And so there's no mixing of genomes.
You know, it's the same genome carrying on and on and on and on.
And so in some very real sense, you know, you're looking at a many millions of
years old creature and what's more, it's looking back at you.
It's got these big eyes.
So there's this encounter with, with, with, with an immortal being.
They, they, then the fact that they subdivide, you know, is what led Mike to,
to study the mechanisms of morphogenesis.
How does an organism know what it's meant to become?
You know, and how at the most fundamental mechanistic level does that happen?
Then you can chop these creatures in half.
And the, the head grows a tail and the tail grows a head.
And so, you know, having studied what those mechanisms are, he started to fiddle
about with them, because if you really do understand the mechanism, in fact, the
one way in which you can convince yourself and your colleagues that you do
understand the mechanism is to, is to make an intervention in it and predict
what the consequences will be.
And if you can predictably control that mechanism, then you really do
understand it.
And so as you no doubt know, he made a two-headed worm, you know, by manipulating
the, these bioelectrical fields that are what guide them all for genesis.
So I also met a two-headed worm, which was, which was something to behold.
You know, I mean, it's just really extraordinary.
And, and then when those worms subdivide, they subdivide into two-headed worms.
So he's sort of created a new species.
Yeah, I think, I think those are the ones he calls Xenobots, eh?
I'm not sure if that is.
Xenobots are, you know, they're various, you know, like he takes a tadpole and
shifts where it's eyes going to be and they end up with this frog that sees
out of itself and, but I mean, all these things could be, they could be perceived
as, as ghoulish or, or even as in, you know, in all sorts of ways inappropriate.
So it's important to remember that ultimately what it's all about is, you
know, to what extent can we translate this basic knowledge from the lab to the
clinic? And it has, it has profound potential implications for how we treat
amputees and how we deal with them in situations where currently one has to do
organ transplants, the possibility of being able to regenerate a diseased
organ rather than to transplant it.
And so, and I mean, the possibilities are, are amazing.
But then in terms of, you said, you know, what are we doing in terms
of collaborations, the, the, the main overlap, it's, it's the main overlap
because actually there are many ways in which our interests and, and research
intersect. But the main overlap is, I believe, and there's a long story
that attaches to that. So I'll just come to the conclusion, you know, I believe
for, for lots of very good scientific reasons that the fundamental form of
consciousness is feeling and feelings enable us to know how well or badly we
are doing in terms of remaining within our, our, our viable bounds.
So moving out of homeostasis feels bad, moving back towards homeostasis feels
good. And the, the, what this does, that's, that's an adaptation beyond
mere homeostasis, because many homeostatic mechanisms are purely
autonomic. There is no feeling involved, like blood pressure regulation and so
on. By being able to feel homeostasis, feel how well or badly you're doing in
terms of your attempts to, to, to maintain your biological bounds enables
you to change your mind. This is not working. So before it's too late, you,
you, you, you alter your, your, your behavior, you change your policy. And so
this, why that's so important is it enables a creature to survive in an
uncertain, unpredicted environment. So you can come up with novel solutions to
life's problems by feeling your way through the problem. You're not, you're
not limited to, to a single stereotype response. When you find yourself in a
situation for which you do not have an innate file, a genetically given
response, you can feel your way through the situation and come up with a novel
response. That is what I've just described as the very basis of voluntary
behavior, you know, which is no small thing. And then we learn from, from the,
from the experience. And so we can, we can adapt to unpredicted situations. And
God knows there are many of those in life. We can, we can do them during our
own onto genetic development. Now, the crucial thing is that with Mike fiddling
about with these creatures, I mean, what the problem of what do you do when
you've got two heads is a novel problem. It's not something that that species was
prepared for by evolution. What happens if you move the eye to an unexpected
location? You know, that's, this is not something for which there is any
possibility of there being an automatic in bone solution. And so I'm very
interested in, in what way is the, the, the sorts of things that these very
much simpler creatures than ourselves, the way that they solving these novel
problems raises questions of, you know, how far down does feeling go? Is, is, is
a creature like this worm feeling its way through a problem? Because if it is, you
know, then wow, I mean, I thought that I had set a cut, a cut among the pigeons
when I told my colleagues, I don't believe that cortex is the, the, the organ
of consciousness. I think that, you know, the, the reticular activating system and
periac, reductal gray, you know, these structures that we share with all
vertebrates. So for example, with fishes, you know, I thought this was radical. But
if it goes down even more than that, you know, then the implications are just, you
know, gigantic. So that's, that's where my work overlaps with, with Mike's. And
that's what the, the collaborations. And there's also Chris Fields, I don't
know if you know him. Yeah. And Richard Watson, you know, so we've all been, in
fact, Mike is a great, he gets us, he gets the right people together.
It seems like collaboration. Yeah. He called, I asked him for a name. He could
just give me like a nice name of this group. He said he called it the field of
diverse intelligence. Are you happy with that?
Yeah. I can't remember what he, he, he gave them, his lab was called something
like the Center for Possible Solves or something like that.
You know, it's very creative in that regard. But I was, I was just, it's so
fascinating to see all these great minds come together. Because then I told him
it's almost like the Avengers of mind getting together, trying to solve the
hard problem. It's pretty cool. So from our perspective, we just want to say
thanks. Tell me, so I think that we are living through a sort of a golden age.
If not of neuroscience as a whole, certainly consciousness studies. I think
we really are at a very interesting and important time in the history of that
field. Yeah, it seems to be just escalating so much more and so much
faster that hopefully we're around to see what happens next. It's kind of,
it's kind of disappointing knowing that we're, we're at this forefront and you
never know if you're just going to be alive long enough to see it. Do you ever
get that sort of anticipation anxiety?
Well, it's not the way I experienced that very issue that you're discussing.
It's more from the other end, the way I experience it. It is that when you
go against the grain, when you say something like I just said now, I believe
that a child who's got no cortex, this is a conscious being, that there's
something it's like to be such a child. It really doesn't when you,
a universal approval, people start saying,
if you go against the compact majority view in a science, your science
defends itself. And so what I'm leading up to saying is that I have found more
courage than I might otherwise have had. I'm willing to take risks and to say,
well, I know that this is going to put many noses out of joint. I know many
people are going to think I'm a nutter, that I've lost my way or whatever.
And I'm less anxious about that than I otherwise would have been because I
know you only live once. And as you can see, I'm not a kid. So I'm just going
to throw everything I have at it and try and try and make as much progress as I can,
regardless of the, not regardless of all consequences, because I am very concerned
about the ethical consequences of some of the issues we're dealing with. So it's not,
it's not, I don't care about any of the consequences. It's that I don't care about
the consequences for my reputation. That's what I mean.
Yeah. So you've lost that worry about the trivial stuff. You're more focused on the bigger picture.
Yeah. Well, it's because I realize it is the bigger picture. There's times in my life,
earlier in my life, when I have been very thrown by the fact that, I mean, just to take a very
earlier in my career, when I made some discoveries that made me realize that
what my entire field believed about the brain mechanism of dreaming was wrong,
you know, that dreams are not generated by the part of the brain that generates REM sleep,
that REM sleep and dreams are not the same thing. It was really a hell of a thing to have
all of your seniors, all of the great authorities in the field, all just being
very hostile because you were, you're spoiling the party. You're going against the status quo.
Nobody likes that. Nobody likes that. But I have a note on that. So the exact point you're talking
about, I've written down some notes. So I think we'll touch on that soon. Let's start at the
beginning, Mark. So the whole focus of this conversation for everyone watching or listening
is on dreams and the hard problem of consciousness. It's a paper. I'll put a link in the description
and a very great paper, as always. I've read many of your papers in the past. You even know that I
used one of your papers in Tristan for my own dissertation back when I was writing it. So
always a pleasure to read your work, Mark. And yeah, I'm looking forward to this. First,
do you want to start with how dreams can assist us with this approach to the hard problem of
consciousness? Well, look, I have a great many things to say about dreams in general. But I'm
taking your question in the narrow way that I think I heard it. I think before you do that,
because I see my next question is probably will address what you want to tell me.
We spent 20% of our sleep dreaming. Tell me why. Well, that's the interesting thing. It's an
embarrassment to science. Nobody knows why. The REM sleep was discovered in the early 1950s.
And it's high correlation with dreams, which is a sort of 90% correlation,
you know, was discovered in the mid 1950s, too. And from then onwards, they were taken to be one
and the same thing. Dreaming was construed as the subjective experience of REM sleep. REM sleep
was construed as the objective physiological manifestation of the dream. So everything that
we learned in the subsequent decades about what REM sleep is for, because of course,
it's a hell of a lot easier to study the mechanisms of something objective than of
something subjective. So once that correlation had been established, the dreams were thrown out
as like slippery fish that they were discarded. And we clung to this much more tractable problem
of what is REM sleep? What does it do? And those are easy problems, you know, because you can
manipulate it causally. It's very easy. And we were, therefore, for decades, we were studying
the biological function of REM sleep on the assumption that in so doing, we were studying
the biological function of dreams, but they are doubly dissociable phenomena. You can have dreams
without REM sleep, not only outside of REM sleep, but you can have dreams if you are incapable of
generating REM sleep due to brain lesion. And conversely, you can have REM sleep without any
dreams. If you have a lesion to the part of the brain that generates dreams, REM is preserved.
Damage to the part of the brain that generates REM, dreams are preserved. They are just simply
not the same thing. Therefore, everything that we learned about the biological function of REM
sleep, thinking that we were learning about the biological function of dreams, is not wasted work
because we learned a lot about the biological function of REM sleep. But it's wasted from the
point of view of what did it teach us about dreams that taught us next to nothing about the function
of dreams. So, I'll tell you what not only in recent years have I turned my attention to that
question and used appropriate methods because I'm not conflating those two things with each other.
I did a pilot study just before COVID. And then I was, of course, unable to
conclude the study because of COVID. So, I've only now, a couple of years later,
started the biggest study. So, I can only tell you what we found so far in our pilot study.
In order for me to tell you that, I need to just take a step backwards and tell you that there
are two parts of the brain which are essential for dreaming. I mean, of course, the whole brain,
in a way, is essential. But there are two parts that are really the crucial mechanisms. The one
which is not surprising is our perceptual cortex, the posterior cortex, especially visual cortex.
It's not surprising because what are dreams if not perceptual phenomena and especially visual
perceptual phenomena. If that cortical region is damaged, you can't dream because you can't
generate the imagery. The actual hallucination can't be generated. But the other part is much
more interesting. It's called the mesocortical mesolimbic dopamine circuit. And this is a
powerful positive motivational circuit of the mammal brain. If you stimulate that circuit
electrically or chemically, it produces the most animated exploratory reward-seeking behaviors
in the animal. Now, that circuit is essential for dreams. If that's damaged, you also can't dream.
And so, you know, that raises all sorts of interesting questions. But the one that I was
interested in was how on earth in the middle of sleep with this, as I said, it generates the most
powerful exploratory behaviors. When you look at the dreaming brain and you see that switched on,
you know, like a Christmas tree, you think, how on earth does this thing just lie there sleeping?
You know, it seems like an absolute paradox. So, the hypothesis was that the hallucinated
dream, it's a kind of virtual exploratory and other kinds of emotional motivated behavior,
that that happens instead of real behavior. So, the way that the animal
executes its motive, and when I say animal, of course, I'm including ourselves,
that where this motivational urge or surge goes to is into this imagined activity,
the hallucinated virtual behavior of the dream, which means that if you can't dream due to damage
to the posterior cortex, if you can't generate the imagery, then you should wake up because the
dream is there to enable you to continue sleeping. That was the hypothesis. And it's a lovely
hypothesis because it's entirely counterintuitive. Most people would think, if you can't dream,
you'll sleep better. But on this hypothesis, if you can't dream, your sleep will be disturbed.
And so in our pilot study, what we found was that on steroids, you know, you have never seen
such terrible sleep as you get in these patients who can't dream due to posterior cortical damage.
They have sleep onset insomnia, sleep maintenance insomnia. They have massively
more awakenings and sort of micro awakenings, what we call arousals and micro arousals.
The sleep efficiency index is off the charts different, total sleep time off the charts
different. So the one thing that, although it's only a pilot study so far, but the results were
so clear-cut, I'm prepared to say it publicly, you know, the one thing that I believe we can
say empirically, we have demonstrated is that whatever else dreams do, they enable
us to stay asleep in the face of arousals, of things that would otherwise arouse us.
Let's not forget REM sleep is itself an arousal state. When it was first discovered,
it was called paradoxical sleep. That was how come you're able to stay asleep when your brain
is so aroused? So I'm saying that whatever else dreams do, they are guardians of sleep.
They enable us to not have to wake up when we are motivated to act, to do something on the basis of
arousals, just our homeostatic deviations. So on the basis of homeostatic deviations.
And Mark, in terms of energy consumption, is this worth it? Is this constant need to
experience worth the trade-off? Well, remember, in a sense, it's the opposite of the question is,
can we afford not to sleep? So for the whole restitutive function of sleep,
you can't do without that. There's a hell of a lot of repair work and housekeeping that is done by
the body and the brain, including memory consolidation processes. How do you process
what you've learned during the day? There's a lot of very important work that is done
by the body and the brain while you're asleep. And if you don't give yourself enough of that,
you're a doctor, you know how bad it is to not sleep. It's a very serious thing to be deprived
of sleep for your health. So can we afford not to sleep? And the energy, the work that needs to
be done in order to maintain sleep is well worth the expenditure. It's almost intuitive when you
think about it. The idea of this, I mean, because when you think about the average human, we don't
really want to not experience. It's almost like there's this constant need to have a continuous
spectrum of experience. That's why a lot of people fear going under anesthesia. They know
there's almost a switching off of this shutdown of the whole human experience. Do you feel like
that makes sense? I think that... Or is it different somehow? No, no. I think that what you're saying
is true, but there are also things which contradict it. And I will give you...
I think there are three things I need to say about that. The one is the opposite of what you said,
which is that we want to retain homeostasis. So moving out of homeostasis generates negative
feelings. It's like air hunger or sleepiness or pain or whatever. These are all deviations
from homeostasis. And pleasurable feelings are returns towards homeostasis. But when you're
in homeostasis, you feel nothing. It's satiation. So I'm hungry. That's bad. I eat. That's good
until I've had enough. And then it's over. Same with sleep, same with thirst, same with everything.
So that's the first thing I wanted to say is that in terms of homeostasis, for the most part,
actually what we're trying to do is get out of the zone of feeling and into the zone of
automaticity, into the zone of satiation. But what do you actually feel satiated?
Well, you feel satiation as you come to the end of the return to homeostasis. But then
that particular homeostat is off the radar. You're not busy thinking, I'm not hungry,
I'm not thirsty, I'm not sexually aroused, I'm not sleepy. It's just not there. It's not on the
agenda. You're feeling those things which are going well or badly. But once you are at the
destination of those regulatory mechanisms, then they no longer are registered in consciousness.
So that, as I said, that first thing I said of three things I'm going to say, that's the
opposite of what you were saying. However, here's the second thing. One of those homeostats
is the very one I was talking about when I said this mesocortical, meso-olympic dopamine system
that has to do with the seeking drive, the exploratory foraging drive, what some people
call the epistemophilic drive. And how that homeostat works is quite different from the others.
Its set point is, I am engaging with novelty. I'm engaging with what I don't know. I'm
engaging with what is uncertain. And if that sounds paradoxical, it's not. It's because
uncertainty is dangerous. So if you have the opportunity to engage proactively with uncertainty
now, then you'll have less uncertainty later. So what you're doing is actually building a
better predictive model of the world. You're engaging with the world and better understanding
how it works, which in the long run enables you to better survive in that world. So the thing
that you just spoke of when you said, don't we always want to keep on, that's fundamentally
driven by this, it's not only seeking, but it's fundamentally driven by the seeking homeostat.
And then the third thing I wanted to say is that from all of this voluntary behavior of us engaging
with the world, trying to find how do I get back to where I need to be, we learn from that
experience. The conscious experience is the feeling your way through the problem. Then you lay down
new predictions based on what you learned from that experience. And the biological ideal is to
have predictions which are so reliable that you don't have to feel your way through the problem
again. So that's again a trend towards zombie them. That in fact, what we want is to have
predictions that are so reliable that they don't need reconciliation. And so this is what we call
non declarative memory. These things that we just know how to do, like how to drive a car,
you don't think, how does this work? You just know how to do it, how to ride a bike, how to walk,
how to play the piano, whatever these skills that we acquire, they become
automatized. And that is actually a good thing. So again, in those situations, I mean, I don't
know if you play any musical instrument or like if you play tennis, thinking about your stroke is a
very bad thing to do. It must just flow. And so in that sense too, although we don't feel it that
way, actually unconscious automatic processes are better than conscious deliberative ones
when it comes to learning from experience about how to meet your needs.
Okay. So let's say, so you had this hypothesis, you've done the studies, you've already uncovered
quite a lot. And there's obviously a lot more to come. But you've already touched briefly on this,
but I think let's go into a bit more because there's the gold standard I've wrote on in neuropsychology
where you guys discover, okay, REM sleep versus dream within the brainstem. When there's brainstem
lesions and cortical lesions, there's clear differences in REM sleep and dream sleep. Do
you want to run through those and exactly what those lesions are? Yeah, I actually already have
said this. So let me just be a little bit more precise. The mesocortical mesolambic dopamine
system starts in the ventral tegmental area, which is sort of at the transition between
midbrain and diencephalon at projects upwards to the nucleus accumbens, which is in the
ventral striatum that underneath part of the basal ganglia, that's the sort of main destination.
But it also projects beyond that up to frontal cortex and also down to amygdala. So it's a very
big part of the medial forebrain bundle. Damage anywhere in that circuit from the ventral tegmental
area upwards, certainly up to and including the nucleus accumbens. But we've also had patients
where it's anterior to the nucleus accumbens, they stop dreaming. The other area, as I said
earlier, it's posterior cortex. In particular, there are two sites where we see cessation of
dreaming. And I say two sites, it's really a continuous site, but it goes from the inferior
parietal lobule down to the convexity of the temporal lobe, but then also around into the
medial surface along the occipitotemporal, the medial surface. So it's basically a posterior
association cortex, predominantly visual, but not exclusive, but by no means exclusively visual.
So lesions there, those patients stop dreaming, but they tend to recover. They tend to recover
in one study that I did, I followed up 44 patients for a year, and only two of them were still not
dreaming. But the vast majority recover within six months, in fact. And one of the reasons it's
difficult to do research of the kind I was describing to you earlier when I said we were
taking patients with the posterior lesions who could not dream for that reason. But that
dopamine system was working fine. We wanted to see whether their sleep will be disturbed,
which as I say, it was. But many of our research participants recovered in the middle of the
while we were studying them, because dreaming talstent is a very robust phenomenon dreaming.
I think for the very reason that I said to you earlier that it's, if it has a sleep
protective function, then it's a very important thing. When you first started out in the field,
you've already done so much pioneering work in dreaming. What's brought you back to this?
Is it the link to consciousness, which we're obviously going to touch on as soon? But was it
that link? Yes. In fact, when I studied dreams, which was I started my research in that area in
the 1980s. And I must tell you, people don't realize those days consciousness was not a
respectable topic. Can you believe it? Even in neuropsychology, which you would think psychology,
hello, doesn't that have something to do with consciousness? No, the only respectable topic
as far as consciousness was concerned was not the subjective experience of anything. It was
the brain mechanisms of sleep and wakefulness. So how the sleep waking cycle is regulated,
and the discovery of REM sleep was within that tradition, these arousal states that occurred
during the sleeping part of the sleep waking cycle. And so I studied dreams. Actually, I
was studying brain mechanisms of sleep and dreaming. And sleep was the intrusion of wakeful,
I mean dreams or the intrusion of wakefulness into sleep. So wakefulness was a respectable
topic. And so I addressed up what I was doing as studying sleep and wakefulness, dreams being
wakefulness. So the discovery of the brain mechanisms of dreaming at that time took me
necessarily down into the basic arousal mechanisms of the brain stem. But bearing in mind that it
particularly took me to this one arousal mechanism, which is the dopaminergic one, this is not just
switching on and off the lights. It's an emotional motivational mechanism. And so that made me aware
how it made me interested in the fact that these brain stem arousal mechanisms are the
brain mechanisms of emotion. And that led me to working with Yarkpanksepp, because Yarkpanksepp
was the only person who said these brain stem arousal mechanisms generate affect,
they generate emotion, they generate feeling. So that was the second stage of my work,
from sleep and dreaming to emotion. And then the realization, which is the phase of my work that
I'm in now, that these mechanisms that generate feeling and affect and emotion are the very same
mechanisms that generate consciousness itself. So that the foundational elemental form of
consciousness is affective feeling. And so it sounds as if I've been all over the park,
but actually it's really quite a straight line. It is. I mean, and obviously in your paper,
you laid this out perfectly, you talk about, okay, this, of course, if this is affective
feeling, and we're experiencing constantly within this dream state, it must be something
that's necessary during consciousness, well, in conscious experience. So this is a perfect place
to actually look, because you don't have to, consciousness can occur outside, dreams have
to include some sort of a conscious experience, in a sense, because exactly. Yeah, now that's a
very interesting point, what you just said there. So, you know, one of the reasons that I
focused rather on the brainstem than the cortex, which also didn't win me any friends.
It's really to say in neuro psychology, that the cortex is not the organ of consciousness,
it's really to say something that goes very, very, very much against the grain.
But a strong reason why I did that, I mean, there are many reasons why I did that.
When I say reasons, I mean, there's much scientific evidence that led me to conclude that.
But within that body of evidence is the fact that the cortex can do just about all of its
cortical things without being conscious. So, I mean, things that only the cortex can do,
like recognize faces, read with comprehension and so on. You can read with comprehension,
and your behavior will be altered by what you've read without any conscious awareness of having
seen anything at all. So, most of the, when I say most, I mean, really just about all of the research
on trying to identify what they call the neural correlative consciousness,
was using vision as the cortical vision, because that's the conscious type of vision,
as our model example. But as I've just said to you, the cortex can do all of that visual
gymnastics unconsciously. So, vision, even cortical vision, is not an intrinsically conscious function.
So, why do you think you're going to solve the hard problem of consciousness by studying
something that is not actually necessarily conscious? The reticular activating system
and periaqueductal gray, these brainstem structures that generate feeling, their whole function
is to generate consciousness. That's why it's called the reticular activating system. It
activates the cortex. The cortex is only, I mean, this is not controversial, the evidence is just
like 100% there, that the cortex only is conscious when it is aroused by the reticular activating
system. Magun and Maruzzi showed in 1949, you sever, as they did in CATS, the ascending fibers,
the axons coming up from the reticular activating system to the cortex, the cortex loses all
consciousness. So, the consciousness is entirely supplied by the upper brainstem.
And it's only in recent years that we realize that that's not just a power supply,
that consciousness has a constant and a quality. It is affect, it's feeling. So, we feel our way
into our otherwise unconscious cognitions. So, why that's important is because, for the hard problem,
is that if you want to identify how and why does consciousness arise, you should be studying this
basic, in every sense, the foundational form of consciousness, a form that is called feeling,
which has to be felt. In other words, it necessarily is conscious. So, the way David
Chalmers put it, he said, there's no cognitive function that the explaining of its function or
mechanism will explain why you experience anything. And he's right when it comes to vision and so on,
cognitive functions, but you can't say that in relation to affect. You can't say there's no
affective function, you know, that if you explain its mechanism, you will explain why you experience
it. Because how can you explain the mechanism of feeling without explaining why you feel it?
Because, you know, that's the whole point of feelings is you feel them. You haven't understood
the mechanism of feeling if it doesn't explain why you experience it, you know, for heaven's sake.
So, I became interested in relation to the hard problem. I became interested in how does the
problem change if we look at this proper, basic, fundamental, elemental form of consciousness
called feeling. Now, the interesting thing, and this is why I was so interested in what you just
said. When I've said, you can't have a feeling without feeling it, it is intrinsically conscious,
that's the function we should be looking at. The same applies to dreams. You can't have a dream
without being conscious of it, because otherwise it's not a dream, you know, the whole, the defining
feature of dreaming is that the unconsciousness of sleep is punctuated by this thing called the
consciousness of a dream. You know, so, and I don't think that that's, I'm not playing games here,
you know, I'm not playing linguistic games or semantic games. I think that there's a deep reason
why that is the case. It's because dreams are driven by affective functions, you know, those
affective functions are generally, so affect is being generated during sleep. In other words,
there's a problem that's arisen for the organism, you know, it's in a state of uncertainty about
something that it's now got to deal with. And the dream is a way of dealing with that affective
arousal, in other words, that deviation from where we need to be. It's a biological problem that has
arisen during sleep that needs a solution. And the dream is doing the work of getting us, of managing
the feeling, in other words, of solving the problem, of getting us back to homeostasis.
It's almost like it makes so much sense that one should study dreams in order to understand
consciousness. It's almost like, why did we neglect this for so long? Oh, well, that's an easy question
to answer. It's because, you know, in fact, it's the biggest problem of psychology. Psychology is the
science of the mind. And what is a mind if not something subjective? The defining feature of
mental life is that it is the subjective being of the organism. It is intrinsically subjective. I
mean, hence, you can only observe your own consciousness. You can't observe anybody else's
consciousness ever because they are objects. You're a subject, you can only experience your own
subjectivity. Consciousness, the mind, subjectivity. These things are an embarrassment to science
because science aspires to objectivity. So how do you do science on something that
you can only observe your own? I wrote one of your lines in the papers,
scientists prefer objects over subjects. Yes, exactly. And not with dreams, it's even worse
because you're having a subjective experience while you're asleep. So there's no behavior
that goes with this mental state. The person, the dreamer, is asleep. And so the only way
you can get access to their dream is for them to wake up and remember the dream and then report it
to you. So it's a single witness retrospective report of a phenomenon that we know is notoriously
forgettable. And also, it's also very hard to translate dream experience into words. We all
know that when you try to tell your partner or something, what you dreamt last night, you know,
as you're doing it, it isn't really, that doesn't quite convey what it was like.
So I think that you said, why didn't we start there in the first place? I think that it's
for these sorts of reasons. It's also for these sorts of reasons that, as I said to you a couple
a good few minutes ago now, I said that once the correlation between dreaming and REM sleep had been
established, we dropped the dreams and just studied the REM sleep. But please note what
grave errors that can lead us into. I mean, we lost decades of research effort because we wanted to
only study the objective side of the mind-body correlation. I think that, let me say this,
the brain is the only thing that we know of in the universe that has subjective experience.
And surely, this subject, this extraordinary quality, it must be doing something. And if that's
the case, you're never going to understand how the brain works unless you understand why, unless
you take account of its subjectivity. I mean, as we all know from our own lived lives, you know
that what you do is caused in large part by how you feel. And say, if we leave that out of the
equation, we're never going to understand how that part of nature works. There's also a lot of
historical. I mean, you've already said this, but I mean, the behaviorist movement obviously played
a big role in this. Also, the fact that dreams are often associated with Sigmund Freud. I mean,
the interpretation of dreams is one of his biggest books. And a lot of people misinterpret a lot
of Freud's work. Or because of the flaws within it, people don't take it in a context and then
disregard a lot of it, which is incorrect. I mean, one of your lines was consciousness of
cortical representations contextualized affect. And that context, that context is so important.
Yes. Look, let's just go back to what you said there about the behaviorists, because there's
something that we must never forget. I told you, I don't need to tell you the word psychology
means science of the mind. And the behaviorists excluded the psyche from psychology. They said,
no, we can't study the mental states because they're subjective, we're only going to study behaviors.
I mean, how absurd is that to have psychology without the psyche is, and the mistake there
is to adjust the subject that you're studying to the methods that you have available, you know,
you've got to adjust the methods to the thing that you're studying. And embarrassing as subjectivity
may be to science, it certainly exists in nature. I mean, the one thing that we can all be absolutely
certain about is that we are experiencing as Descartes told us, that's the one thing you
can be sure of is that, you know, you exist because you experience. And so, you know,
you can't exclude it from science, you got to find methods that that are suited to the study
of subjectivity. So that's what Freud did. Freud's Freud, I hasten to, to add for all of his mistakes
with all of his faults, you know, etc. Because, you know, I'm not one of those people who thinks
that everything that Freud did was, you know, was correct by any means. But I think that this
thing that he did was correct, was to say that the centerpiece of psychological science, in other
words, it's, you have the psychological science has to has to be adapted to how do you study
subjectivity. And so he didn't hesitate to study subjectivity, the whole, his method
called free association, it's basically just a sample of the stream of consciousness
in a relatively controlled setting. And, and, and he used the same method to study dreams,
they're just getting the patient to, or the research participant to say everything that
comes to consciousness in relation to the remembered elements of the dream. And in doing that, he came
to the not very obvious conclusion, you know, that dreams are motivated, in fact, wishful
states of mind that dreams don't look like that to us most of them. And what about nightmares,
for example, most dreams just seem completely incomprehensible nonsense. But Freud said,
no, behind this, you know, and that's so there you have the weakness of his method,
because I mean, how do you falsify that you can't falsify it, to say behind every dream is a wish,
you know, if it's behind the dream is the wish, you know, then then you can always find that wish
if you're interpreting, you know, like he did, that's that that's the method. But now we have new
methods. So, you know, positron emission tomography, you look at the dreaming brain and you see that
that motivating wishful seeking mechanism switching on full blast. And so, you know,
I don't know if you know this, Tim, but I became interested in psychoanalysis
in large part because of my dream findings, you know, it was it was, you know, sort of
I was trained in an era where psychoanalysis was not part of the university. It wasn't
serious science at all. You know, so for me, it was a really a big surprise to discover,
first of all, that REM sleep is not what generates dreams. Secondly, that what generates dreams is
these emotional motivational circuits. And in fact, the most wishful one that we've got,
you know, is the one that made me take take a second look at Freud.
Okay, I can only remember what your question was, but that was my
no, it's fine. But I can imagine because I remember once, I mean, you've said this in
other podcasts as well. But remember, you also told me that studying psychoanalysis was akin to
people would describe it as almost being an astronomer studying astrology.
So it's so much backtracking, you already have to do. And then in order to defend someone like
Freud probably makes it even harder at that point. Because people have so many negative
connotations to it nowadays. Yes, yeah, that's right.
Now, I think that if we can, if we can reintroduce into psychological science, and we are in our
era, we are, you know, reintroduce the subjectivity in the full sense of the word. In other words,
not this function called consciousness, but rather, you know, the actual experiential
lived life, the phenomenologic, the qualitative stuff that is the proper subject matter of
psychology. Then, you know, we've, we've, we've re, we've got back to where Freud started from.
And then we can go way beyond where Freud ended.
Yeah, no, there is a field called phenomenological psychopathology, which a lot of people are
trying to bring into psychiatry and psychopathology just to assist with that lived experience
aspect of it all. But anyway, let's go, let's move on to the, to, to affect coming as I said,
you that quote of yours consciousness of cortical representations contextualized affect.
Then let's discuss those three features of affect first and move on from there. I mean,
you described them as valence, qualia and action. I'm going to go into detail with that
before we move on. Yeah. Well, the, the thing that distinguishes
affects from other mental states is the valence first and foremost
affects are intrinsically valence. In other words, they have an intrinsic goodness or
badness about them. And importantly, that goodness or badness is goodness and badness to me for me.
It's subjective. So it's, they are valence subjective states. Objects don't have intrinsic
valence. It's, it's, it's, it's this, it's only this subjective state that has this intrinsic
valence, the subjective state called affect. But pleasure and unpleasant valence is a
continuous variable. You know, you, you start at this end, there's unpleasant and you carry on,
you know, through neutral to pleasure. It's a, it's a, you can quantify it on a single scale.
It's, it can be reduced to a common denominator. But affects are not, they are categorical
variables in the sense that it's not just I feel good or I feel bad. It's that I feel bad about
what, you know, so the, so hunger is a particular need, which is different from thirst, which is
another need, which is different from sleepiness, which is another need. They all of them unpleasant,
but they have to be categorically distinct from each other. Because each of those needs
has to be met in their, in its own right. You can't, you can't say I've got eight out of 10
of sleepiness and four out of 10 of thirst. Therefore I've got 12 out of 20 of total need
or total unpleasant. So therefore all I'm going to do is sleep. You, you, I'm reducing the total
number. You'll, you'll die if you don't, you don't drink also. So there, this is a very important
point. You know, it's such a, such a simple point that I think that we can easily just sort of like
skim over it. But I really want to emphasize it that affects therefore must be qualitatively
distinct from each other because they have to be treated as categorical variables. It's, it's,
there's no, there's no alternative. You have to, you have to treat each need in its own right.
And so the subjective experience of the valence has to be valence in relation to this one, in
relation to this one, in relation to this one. And why that's important is because that means
that, because remember categorical variables are qualitatively distinguished from each other.
Eight out of 10 of sleep is not the same thing as eight out of 10 of, of thirst. You know,
they are they qualitatively different categorical variables work like that.
Why that's so important is because there you have the necessary basis for qualia.
Qualia have to exist in the mind in the sense that you have these subject of states which are
intrinsically valenced and they also are intrinsically qualitatively distinct from each other.
And I think that that's really important in terms again of the hard problem of consciousness. Why
do we have these qualitative states? Well, there's one very good reason why we have them. The third
aspect that you mentioned, which is the behavior, it's acting on those states. Because, you know,
they are, these are, these are not nice to have, you know, these are, these are needs. These are
phenotypic needs. If you don't meet those needs, you die. I mean, that's how homeostasis works.
So we have inbuilt behaviors that they reflexes or instincts that go with each of these different
phenotypic needs, you know, like foraging behavior and sexual behavior and sleep behavior and, you
know, etc. But those are, we're born with those things. They're far too stereotyped. They're not,
they're not even nearly enough to be able to enable us to meet our needs in the great
unpredictable variety of situations that we find ourselves in, including many novel situations.
And so we have to supplement these, these behaviors with through learning from experience.
And, and so we have, in addition to these innate predictions, which we call reflexes and instincts,
we have then the full gamut of all of the different things that we do. And I just want to
add this last point. Please note that everything we do ultimately, if you look at it biologically,
is in order to meet our needs, in order to stay alive, in order to arrive and reproduce,
to take us back to the thing about the purpose of life that we were speaking about at the beginning
of our conversation. So. Considymox are yours. No, no, that's, that's, that's what I wanted to say.
So that's what, that's what affects all. It's, it's intriguing because, I mean,
at some point in your paper, you eventually bring up the knowledge argument to sort of
solidify this aspect. I was chatting by email with Frank Jackson about that, trying to get him
on the show, but he says he's taking a break from social media because I think that's one of the
best arguments to show someone an example of, I mean, that pure essence of feeling. When Mike's
episode came out, I had people going at it in the comment section, you have people discussing how,
because Mike at some point had said that the only way to truly know, to truly get a conscious,
a future where we can all integrate and cooperate better is if we slowly learn what each other
experiencing more and more. And the only true way to know what someone else is experiencing is to
actually experience what they're experiencing, because otherwise there's no other way. It's,
it's pretty much an impossible reality at that point. And then people will bring up the knowledge
argument and saying, okay, well, if they have all the theory, why is that impossible? Do you want to
touch on that and give them an answer? Well, just in case there's people watching or listening who,
who are not familiar with the knowledge argument, it is in simplified form. This is my simplification
of it, that there's, there's, there's a visual neuroscientist named Mary, and she knows everything
that there is to know about the mechanisms of vision, the physical physiological processes whereby
visual information is processed, but Mary's blind, that's my simplified part of it. And so she doesn't
know what it is like to see, she knows everything, that's the knowledge, she's got all the knowledge
about how visual information is processed in the brain, but she knows nothing about what it
is like to see the actual qualitative phenomenological experience of vision. And so Jackson's argument
those days, because he's changed his mind, by the way, but in 1982, when he, when he published that,
he said, that shows that the actual qualitative phenomenological experience of seeing is not
accounted for by the causal physical mechanism. It exists in some other plane, and nothing about
her knowledge of the physical mechanisms of vision prepared Mary for what it is like to see,
even gave her any reason to predict that there would be something it is like to see. It seems
therefore that the, the qualitative subjective experience of seeing isn't necessary. It doesn't
do anything. It's just, you know, and it's where does it fit into the mechanism? It doesn't.
That was the knowledge argument. So my response to that was, that's because, as I've said previously
in this conversation, because vision is not an intrinsically conscious function. You can understand
everything about how visual information processing works, because without reference to what it is
like to see, because visual information processing can work without you having any experiential vision.
I mean, your phone can see the camera in your phone sees a face recognizes a face takes a
photograph of a face remembers therefore that face, all of that stuff. But there's nothing
that's like to be a camera or to be a phone. And it doesn't even better because if you are,
if you click take, remove the nose, the phone knows exactly which parts to remove. So it
sees even better than us. Yeah. So all of this very complicated visual information processing
can go on without any experience. Now, as I said earlier, that does not apply to another function.
So that's the function of vision. But the function of feeling, you cannot explain the
function of feeling without knowing what it is like to feel without explaining why it feels
like something if, if Mary was a affective neuroscientist, actually, first of all, if Mary
was an affective neuroscientist who'd never experienced affect, she would in fact be dead
because her brainstem mechanisms that keep her alive, you know, would would would not be working.
And in a manner of speaking, that's also an important point. It's that, you know, this is
not fluff. Feeling is has massive causal consequences. The patients in coma, you know,
they die unless we keep them alive. You can't live without being conscious. And, you know,
in other words, the consciousness is doing something bloody important. So that was my
argument is that had we started with affect rather than with vision, the knowledge problem would
never have arisen. And, and, and the hard problem, which, which comes 13 years later,
charmers builds on Jackson's knowledge argument. In fact, he, it's a very pivotal to
charmers as whole view, that, you know, you can explain the function without explaining why
there's an experience attached to the execution of that function. That's pretty much the essence
of the hard problem. Also, I made a note, sorry, I made a note just saying unconscious feeling is
an oxymoron. You also wrote exactly like that. Yeah. That's a very nice one. Yeah. But please
remember, Kevin, what I'm saying is that it's not only that it's an oxymoron, it is an oxymoron,
but it's an oxymoron for a very good reason. You know, it's, and when I say that the feeling
is where we should feeling is the elemental form of consciousness. And we should study that
if we want to understand its mechanism and how it arises, why it arises.
Then let us not forget that the part of the brain that generates feelings is the part of
the brain that generates consciousness. It's like this is intrinsically consciousness generating
tissue. So it's not just a word, you know, that feeling must be felt. It is that what this part
of the brain is doing is generating states of consciousness. It's the whole reason that the
that the arousal activating systems are there. I have to say, because when I first,
when I first started reading that your work on affect and the way you were approaching
consciousness, I remember also initially thinking, this might, this is a bit out there. So when you
say like people, people might think it's crazy and stuff, I can get where you're coming from.
But the more you read it, the more you see the evidence, the more you talk about it,
it becomes very, it almost becomes very obvious. It's almost like you're highlighting a problem
that we've been ignoring for quite some time. How do you feel about that? Do you feel like it's
it's about time people took this approach? Or do you think it's gaining some traction in the way
people perceive the problem? Well, I'll tell you, since we started our conversation, this conversation
now, you, you, we were talking about my recent trip to Boston. And other speakers at that meeting,
there's Mike Levin, Chris Fields, Carl Friston, what's his name, Richard, I forget his surname.
Watson, yes. You know, apologies, Richard Watson, if you're watching. These are
really, really outstanding minds, you know. And so I, my paper, I said to them, look,
you know, I wanted to, because the conference was mostly about biological versus artificial
minds. And I said, you know, I'm doing work in that area. And I really want to get there
to talk to you guys about this. But I want to spend at least the first half of my talk just
setting out my stall for why I believe that we're looking in the wrong place. It's not cortical.
It's, you know, it's a brain stem function, and it's an affective function and so on. And
I set out all the evidence for them. I said, the reason I'm doing this is because to my great
surprise, you know, many people still, you know, don't believe this. And I just, I just can't
understand it. What am I doing wrong? But, you know, that I'm, can't you see the evidence?
And so at that conference in, in, because you're asking me, is it gaining traction?
All of those guys who I just mentioned, they all were 100% on site. You know, so
I think, well, gosh, you know, so that's very, very gratifying. But I want to, while I'm busy
saying immodest things, I want to go back a little bit earlier than this Boston Congress
or mean symposium. You know, Tom Nagel, the other day at the Consciousness Conference,
he gave the keynote paper. And Tom Nagel, who wrote the 1974 paper, What Is It Like to Be a Bat,
spoke about everything that's happened since then in consciousness studies. I mean, it's really like
the kind of the great grandfather of the modern philosophy of consciousness.
He's, in his talk, about two thirds of the way through it. I mean, I couldn't believe my ears.
I'm sitting there listening to Tom Nagel. It's a wonderful treat and giving us this great sweeping
sort of description of where he started and where things have gone since then and where things are
now and how he sees the future. How does he see the future? Well, he says, I think this guy called
Mark Psalms is doing the right thing. He's pointed out that feelings are intrinsically conscious
states. And I think that's right, you know, and I think that that's the way forward. I thought,
wow, I've arrived. Tom Nagel. In that lecture, he named check two people. One was Mark Psalms.
The other one was Baruch Spinoza. That's one of the best name drops you can get.
I mean, if you think of Tom Nagel, he's like the father of modern philosophy of mine at this point.
Tom Nagel is probably the most quoted philosopher. And I think David Chalmers,
with his hard problem, is probably follows right after. But so that's pretty epic.
Yeah, I mean, I was really, I mean, not only because remember, you asked me, is it gaining
traction? I mean, I wasn't only gratified, and I was deeply gratified. But I was telling the truth,
I was frankly surprised, you know, I really, I really, I would never have thought that Tom Nagel
would say, no, actually, I think we are making progress toward a physical theory of experience.
That's really news. Well, I just want to say, congrats. If that comes out of Tom's mouth,
it must have been surreal in the moment. Yeah, it was. It really was. I mean,
but even from my own experience, Mark, when I speak to, when I spoke to Carl Friston,
when I spoke to these other guys about your work, there's clearly a huge respect for it.
There's these guys clearly understand it. They know what you're talking about. And they think
the approach is, is a good approach. It's not, it's not one that they're discounting when they,
when they discuss these matters. Yes, that's, that's, no, I really, I think that it's true to
say that it is gaining traction. And but it's also true to say that it wasn't the case initially,
you know, it's, because I also at the time, when I remember when I first started the part,
because there were some people who, who think, because I think they tend to associate your
viewpoint at this point with just an ancient brain. And there's almost a negative connotation to
saying those words, as if you're, you're talking about something ancient in itself, but
Yeah, no, and I understand where that comes from. You know, it's because, in fact, I must say,
I blame Paul McLean for that, you know, this whole thing about the triune brain that, you know,
that there's this kind of cartoon idea that there's a reptilian brain, you know, sort of trapped
inside of our, inside of our brains now. So I want to make clear that when I say ancient,
what I mean is phylogenetically ancient in the sense that because we, because all vertebrates
have the architecture of the upper brainstem that I'm talking about, because we share with
all vertebrates, a reticular activating system and a periaqueductal gray, that means we have a
common ancestor that had that structure. The common ancestor of all vertebrates is 550 million years
ago. So I'm talking about that guy, the one 550 million years ago, that's what's ancient. I'm
saying that this structure evolved. And what that, what that means is that the dawn of consciousness,
if I'm right, that this structure is what's generating the raw feeling, you know, the basic,
the most elementary form of consciousness, the dawn of consciousness was at least 500, at least
550 million years ago. That's what I mean by ancient. I think there's, there's a lot of
misinterpretations, but because of the fact that you're going to these conferences, you have people
like Tom Nagel now obviously supporting you, hopefully people understand it more or give it
more time in order to gain that understanding. Because I think that's a fundamental approach,
is to actually read your work, read your papers and then draw a better conclusion.
Yes. You know, I suppose the, you know, the best thing that can happen is that people read your
work and they're persuaded by it. The second, the second best or middle thing out of three
that can happen is they read your work and they disagree with you and they reject it.
The worst thing that can happen is that they just ignore it completely. So, you know, even,
even when you initially get negative pushback, at least it's not just completely overlooked.
Yes. You know, it's true. It's sometimes naming a theory well gives it that,
that negative pushback you need. So like sometimes saying things like the Asian brain
is like Keith Frankish or Dennard saying it's an illusion. It helps with the name,
that illusionism gives it that push that it almost needs.
While you're on that subject, I know we're nearly out of time, but I want to say something else
about feeling, which is that unlike perception, it cannot be an illusion. You can't say,
you are currently having the illusion that you're in pain. You just are in pain.
You can't say that you having the illusion that you're sad. You might say you have no good reason
to be sad, but still you sad. And I think that that's also important, you know, that when we,
when we speak about, about what do we mean by consciousness as an illusion, or I think it's
not this doesn't have exactly the same meaning when you speak about an illusion that the brain
constructs its own sort out of its own ingredients, it constructs the illusion of a three dimensional
world out there with colors that actually the colors are a product of your brain rather than a
rather than a property of the world. Feeling it's a because it's about yourself, you know,
it just is what it is. It's you can't have illusionary feelings.
And yeah, because I was just about to say it's almost like the argument of illusionism can't
work against your view of consciousness, because it's fundamentally talking about different things,
because the illusion is coming at it from a very much cortical perspective in the first place.
So now I realized while we're speaking about this, that I didn't address a point you made earlier,
and it suddenly becomes relevant again. Now you said, what do I mean when I say
that that that perception contextualizes affect. And this is exactly the right place to come back
to that. So how it works is that you have the feeling that's just that is just the consciousness.
Then it's a matter of what that what what is causing that feeling and what can I do about
that feeling. So I like to use this term and not this this wording. But of course, I'm translating
something into words that is not verbal. It is first of all, the creature feels like this,
it's just raw feeling, I feel like this. And then secondly, it's a matter of I feel like this about
that. And so the and so the affect is as it were applied to the context within which it's within
which it's occurring. So this Oh, so it's these things that are making me feel like this. And
it's there that I can do something about this feeling. And so this is what I mean when I say
we feel our way into our cognitions and we feel our way into our perceptions.
Yeah. So so the the you said it's good to have a catch phrase, a catchy phrase. You said it's
good to have a controversial one. But I was somebody recently wrote a review of different
theories of consciousness. And they wanted me to tell them what's my theory called, you know.
So I said, I'm calling it the felt uncertainty. It's the felt uncertainty theory. And I think that
that's another way in which you can put what I've just said. Now, it's like, you know, it's like,
it's like the common currency is uncertainty. It's like, I feel like this. In other words,
I'm not in a state of certainty. Otherwise, you wouldn't be feeling the feeling always remember
is a deviation from homeostasis. And then it's a matter of, you know, so you apply that uncertainty
to your to your actions, feeling your way through, is this working? Is that working? Is this working?
Is that working? You know, so it's a it's a matter of affects sort of you palpate your
confidence in your current action program on the basis of whether or not it is moving the needle
in the right direction affectively. So so it's, it's, I like to put it like, in fact, it was
Karl who put it like this. He said that if things are turning out as expected on the basis of my
actions, if things are turning out as expected, that's good. And if uncertainty prevails, that's
bad. Okay, yeah. So it's sort of it allows you to gauge the environment and interact with it in a
very successful manner and to maintain homeostatic. In order to maintain homeostasis. Sorry,
it's going to put it to maintain homeostasis. The felt, will you call it the felt uncertainty
principle? Yeah, it's quite a nice, I was thinking about it as well before coming into this
conversation how called has one of his papers, he calls it I, I am therefore I think Kevin Mitchell
has I feel therefore I am, I mean, I move therefore I am and you could make it I feel
therefore I am is another one. Yeah, just to just to add that to the to the lecture series in the
future. Before we finish one last thing about this. The conference was about AI. Anything you
want to add about feeling and artificial intelligence and implications for the future?
Yes, I am working with a team of physicists and and roboticists and and computer scientists on
and an artificial consciousness. We've been at it for about two years. And we we've got some
good funding from the Oppenheimers, by the way. And we're now going into our second phase. And,
you know, I'm really very optimistic about what we're doing there. We're trying because we believe
that we've isolated, at least in broad outline, the causal mechanism, you know, how, how feelings
are generated, how and why they're generated. If you've, if you've done that, if you really have
done that, then you should be able to engineer it. In fact, it was Richard Feynman, who said
right at the end of his life, it was found on his on his blackboard. If I can't create it, I don't
understand it. And so, you know, this is what we're trying to do. We're saying, well, if this really
is the mechanism, then we should be able to engineer artificial feelings. Remember, we're not
creating a living thing. We're creating an artificial agent that has exactly the mechanisms
I was describing to you earlier about different needs and having to balance those needs. And
they are intrinsically valence to and for that agent. And they are categorically distinct and
etc. etc. And then this should be able to display the kinds of behaviors that I was describing to
you that where you can feel your way through a problem, come up with novel solutions that
should display voluntary behaviors. And it should be able to survive in
unpredictable environments and so on. So these are the sorts of things we're doing.
And I really do believe it's a matter and not of whether but when we'll, we'll succeed with that.
It's another story about how do you persuade your colleagues, you know, the problem of other
minds and all of that is not a small thing. What we are going to be doing is having a symposium
with parties where we must determine in advance what will be acceptable criteria. You can't say
there's no way that you will ever persuade me at all. You have to say, well, what will persuade you?
And then the ethics of that, we must always, always, always keep very clear in our minds
that the ethical, there's two sets of ethical problems. The one is, you know, the one that
people most frequently refer to is, you're going to create these super intelligent
creatures that are trying to survive that they're going to compete with us. And, you know, that's
bad for us. But we must also remember that if you create an artificial consciousness, if it feels,
then, you know, it can suffer. And you have to be very careful about what are you, what are you
producing here, you know, and it's all of the problems that we have in animal research become
relevant then to this sort of research, too. Mark, I'm sorry, I don't know how much time you
have left, but I'm so curious to know how does one even approach this? How do you even start
building that sort of artificial complexity? Well, you start with the formalisms that
was Carl and I published a paper in 2018. You know, he published that brilliant paper in 2013
called Life As We Know It. And there he reduced to formalisms, the mechanisms of,
fundamentally, it was the mechanisms of homeostasis. That's what, because the whole
mechanism of self-organization is what underwrites the mechanism of homeostasis. When he says life
as we know it, I mean, homeostasis is the mechanism of life as we know it. It's what distinguishes
living things. So what was I saying? Yeah, so the formalisms that he developed to explain
homeostasis, we extended those formalisms to explain felt homeostasis in our 2018 paper.
And then, you know, I got this team together, and we're using those to develop that formalism to
develop algorithms to create artificial agents that have homeostatic needs in order for them
to continue to survive. It's just a simple mechanical unpacking of this thing. It's creating
exactly those dynamics in an artificial agent and creating an environment within which we can
have the sorts of dynamics that we need. In other words, changing, so the agent has to meet
various needs of its own, like power supply and all of that. And then the resources where they are,
we move them around. Once it's learned, okay, this is, if I do this, I can survive, then we change it,
you know, and then we create situations where it's not just a matter of exploiting resources,
but also there's a hill that it can go up and have a look around. We want to see, does it
realize that if I go up there, I see the, I see, no, so it's, that's sort of roughly where we are
now. We're, we're, we're, we've got a long way to go, but a major part of the next phase that we're
going to do is to have multiple agents. So they, that where they have to interact with each other,
and they have to, they have to make inferences about each other's mental processes as part of
the same thing. Oh, that's super exciting. I'm sorry about the interruption, but I'm going to have
to go. It was really great talking to you again, Teran. It's been a pleasure always. And thank you
so much for, I know you don't like to call it around to, it sounds like a boxing match, but
hopefully there's a round of people ready to go as you continue on this amazing journey.
Thanks again, Mo. Thank you so much. Thanks for your interest and your time. Always, always.
Cheers.
