I've been reading your work for many years and you are someone who's managed to incorporate
so many different fields together. At this point, your free energy principle can be discussed
in fields of mathematics, physics, biology. It seems you've managed to cross all these
borders and I think it's perfect for this show. One thing I want to start off with is
when you think of the topic of the mind-body problem, you think of Rene Descartes and he
often said, I think therefore I am and you've now become synonymous with I am therefore I think.
I think let's start off with that because I think it's beautifully poetic considering this
podcast is called Mind-Body Solution. Yes, I do like that homage to Descartes.
So the cheekiness of the reversal is based upon the free energy principle read as a physicist
and effectively this is a description, a principle that will be applied to anything that exists
and the maths tells you that if something exists in a certain sense then it can be read
or interpreted as making inferences. So if you allow me to equate inferring with thinking,
that means to exist is to infer. So if I am therefore I think. So that's the genesis. It's
one of those down that it's strange inversions. Speaking to the slightly sort of deflationary
aspect of the free energy principle, it's a slightly tautological aspect. I think at that
point it would be a perfect opportunity to let's play with definitions. Let's talk about free energy
principle, a Bayesian brain and perhaps active inference. Let's play around with these definitions
before we move to a formalism of the free energy principle. Right, so they're all very closely
related. So defining the free energy principle, first of all, what is it? It's just a principle
of the kind that you would remember at school in physics like Hamilton's principle of least action.
And as such it is effectively a mathematical method. It's a method or a tool that you would apply
to a particular situation. And when applied to things like you and me, or in fact many other
animate things and biotic things, one gets an interpretation of the behavior of such things
in terms of active inference. The inference part is just a statement of sense making and
representation on the inside of the thing, where the thing in question can be a person
or a particle, it could be you or me. And that sense making speaks to making sense,
representing, explaining, inferring the causes of sensory impressions from everything else,
from the outside world. And the best or the most, if you like, inclusive way of understanding
that kind of inference and sense making, when applied to the brain would be the Bayesian brain
hypothesis. So the Bayesian brain hypothesis is the notion that we can understand our sense making
and to a certain extent with one commits to neuronal process theories, the underlying neurophysiology
neuronal dynamics, in terms of Bayesian belief updating, basically changing our physical,
biophysical states by neurodynamics to represent probabilistic beliefs, Bayesian subpersonal
beliefs, probabilistic beliefs about the causes of sensations. So that's inference, inference
loosely described under the Bayesian brain. Active inference is the simple move that you
acknowledge that the sensations upon which you're basing your inference are actively
sampled. You are in charge of the data that is subtending your inference. And that sort of
closes the loop between you as an inference machine, a statistical organ, or your brain,
at least as a statistical organ, and the world supplying that sensory evidence of those sensations.
And that story, that sort of closing the loop, an action perception kind of cycle,
a description of sentient behavior, appealing to the notions of active sensing and active learning
is one way of reading what comes out of the Fienta principle. So that's in my mind how
those things, how you triangulate amongst those three notions.
When we think about, I mean, obviously, as you said, they're all very linked. When you think
about the free energy principle, the formalism of it, do you think of energy minus entropy? And
then you obviously go into different aspects, surprise, divergence, then you discuss obviously
your internal states, hidden states, action perception, talk to us about how this formula
actually works. And how you, because a lot of people have noticed when they question you about
this theory, everyone comes from a specific field. So someone often tends to attack you from a
psychological perspective. Someone tends to talk to you from a biological perspective. How do you
navigate all these territories? And I think with that, I'd like to say that you, one of the few
people that I've noticed, who seems to be a genuine polymath in that regard, because you're always
able to answer these questions succinctly with a lot of definitions. And just beautifully, how do
you manage to do this? I have a lot of naughty and inquisitive students, so you get used to
answering questions after a while. Again, very gracious of you to say that. But it's not,
I don't think it's my wisdom. I think that ability to jump from different disciplines or just take
different perspective or views on what is probably the most important thing to all of us, which is
how do we work and why are we here? And is the gift of things like the free energy principle,
and the free energy principle, I'm not claiming that the free energy principle is just the current
formulation of millennia of thinking and physics and psychology and philosophy,
and probably nearly every other field, including behaviorism, economics and the like. So the whole
point of the free energy principle is that it is there to try and unify and to try and encompass
and thereby endorse all the various perspectives you could take upon scented behavior or choice,
the imperatives and write our decisions right through where do I look next in the next few
hundred milliseconds through to which school should I send my children to? And so the eclectic
aspect that is brought to the table by the free energy principle is just due to its fundamental
nature. It's a first principle account. And by definition, if it is a first principle account,
if it is applicable, then it should be applicable widely to various phenomena read or looked at
through the lens of an economist or a psychologist or a physicist or a philosopher. It's interesting
you say, oh, I talk about things like surprise information theory and entropy and intrinsic value.
You didn't actually say that, but I do talk about that. The whole charm of having a first
principle account that is sufficiently simple to write down mathematically is that you can see
that the same mathematical quantities mean different things to different people,
but they're all the same thing. So perhaps you're just to give you a couple of examples of them.
Underneath all of this is just basically a description of the states that I exist in,
those states that are characteristic of me. So how would I express that mathematically?
Well, I could just write down a function of any particular state that reflected how
characteristic it was of me. And that would be most commonly written down as a log probability
of me being in this state. Now, any log probability is basically a potential.
And if it's a potential, you can now read it in by analogy to thermodynamics.
That log probability of being in a particular state via me can also be read as a statistician,
and you can call that model evidence or in statistics marginal likelihood. If your information
theory would be called self-information, and the average of self-information is entropy.
If you were an economist, it would basically be the states that I aspire to. It would be description
of my attracting set, written as if you were a theorist dealing with vandal dynamical systems.
So now this same quantity now becomes an expression of utility or value. If you were
ET James, you would call it a constraint on the imperative to maximize the entropy,
and so on and so forth. So the key thing is that everybody's talking about exactly the same thing.
It's just that they've got different words from it. So the joy of sort of seeing that
central quantity under the hood being able to make sense to lots of different people
just is an expression of the explanatory scope of this kind of first principles account.
So everybody's right. They've just been using different words.
I think you're absolutely right. I think when people try to develop any theory or hypothesis,
it's always very important to sort of realize that we don't exist in a vacuum. There's so
many different fields of study that are studying the same things, but just defining them differently
discussing them very differently. But they all come together at some point and any good
theory needs to be able to explain these various expertise as well. There needs to be some sort
of a full explanatory version of all of these and there shouldn't be a gap and you manage to
bring these all together. When you talk about hierarchal Bayesian inference, it plays a very
central role in your work. And I remember when I was reading about this and doing computational
psychiatry as part of the blocks during my masters, I remember coming across your work and
thinking, this is so beautiful. This is the way you've managed to sort of incorporate this into
psychopathology is even more intriguing. Because I remember the first time I read about it and you
spoke about posterior and priors and the way it will dictate how someone experiences hallucinations,
delusions, and just general differences in their field of vision, etc. How did that come to you?
At what point did you manage to realize that this theory has a very active role to play in mental
health? Well, the answer is another strange inversion, I'm afraid. I started as a psychiatrist
and what used to be called a sort of mathematical psychologist or what I wanted to be a mathematical
psychologist. I think a clinical version of that is exactly as you say, a computational
psychiatrist. That phrase introduced by my friends, Reed Montague and Peter Diane,
has only been around for about half a decade. But now we're all computational psychiatrists.
So as a young man, I aspire to be a computational psychiatrist. So the free energy principle is
the denouement of that formalization. But I think it's a really important point you bring to the
table there. And I think there are two moves you have to make to appreciate the potential
applicability of things like the Bayesian brain of the free energy principle to the suffering
of patients that you might see in the health patients. The first move is to have a physics
of beliefs, a physics of inference, a physics of sense making, if you like, a physics of basic
sentence that is inactive. So it has to be sentient behavior. So it's all about choices
and decisions and how I move and indeed, how I control my autonomic reflexes, you know,
respond to my gut feelings and exert some sub personal control over my physiology and internal
learning. So that's the first thing that you have to have. You have to have a physics of
sentence. You have to have a mathematics that connects the foundations of our dynamics in a
physical world to the world of beliefs and inference and sense making and representation
in this inactive sense. So that's the first thing. Then once you've done that, you can then say, well,
okay, under what circumstances or what would it look like if this inference
went awry, was in some sense not fit for purpose with a particular world or eco niche or environment
or direct interpersonal relationship that this person was having to infer and to learn and to
actively navigate to deploy or active inference, for example. And then you get, I think, to
computational psychiatry. But that does depend upon committing to a view of all psychopathology
as intrinsically some kind of false inference. But it's a very natural view that if you just
think about hallucinations and delusions, for example, I mean, what are they? They are effectively
inferring something is there when it's not. So if you were a statistician, you'd say, oh,
yes, that's a type one error. That's just bad inference because you've got something wrong
with your standard error. But of course, you know that the standard error corresponds to the precision
in, say, predicted coding variants and the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which itself then
relates to synaptic gain and neuromodulation and the action of certain drugs. Similarly,
all neglect syndromes or in the old days would have been called dissociative or hysterical
syndromes. You know, again, read as false inference would simply mean I'm inferring
something is not there when it is. It's a type two error. And if you think about all the different
disorders and ways of suffering that people present within psychiatry and indeed quite a
lot of neurology as well, they can all be cast as some kind of false inference, you know,
dysmorpho-phobias, say, anorexia nervosa having false inferences about my body.
And even simple things like parking not simple, but awful things, but simple in the sense that they're
more motor and neurologically oriented conditions like Parkinson's disease, you could think of a
failure to infer and to realize my inferred intentions that I am now about to move. So
you would make two moves. First of all, we've linked physics to belief updating and inference.
And then we've taken psychiatry as instances of a kind of aberrance or a kind of failure
of the inference and belief updating process. But I repeat, put it in an inactive context.
So you couldn't explain Parkinson's disease unless you talked about
aning as inference, you know, treating movement and an active engagement with the world as the
realization of inferred plans, things that I am likely to do next in this moment or indeed
again, choosing which school to send my children to.
I still remember there was one specific line that I quoted from one of your papers. I can't
remember the name of the paper, but you actually spoke about that phenomenon way. Someone who's
acutely psychotic, schizophrenic, when you look at these patients and you show them visual illusions,
you're able, they're able for some reason to see the reality of the situation, whereas we fall for
this trick. So in those cases, people often say that they're seeing the real reality, the vertical
truth, and we're not. Talk to me about this phenomenon, because I think it's quite intriguing
that they don't fall for it, but you, with the free energy principle, with your theory, you're
able to explain this with the brain as well. Yeah, no, it's a fascinating area. So there are
rare instances where psychopathology or any pathology can actually improve certain performance.
Of course, one has to qualify what one means by improved performance, but the particular example
you're talking about, I think is absolutely fascinating. And it's a resistance,
characteristically shown with certain people, either people on the spectrum or people with
schizophrenia or schizo-type approaches to life, that renders them uniquely resistant to the kind
of illusions that we all experience. And it's just worth noting, well, what's an illusion?
Well, it's a false inference, but why is it false? It's perfectly good from the point of
view of the person having the inference and having the presumed percept and qualitative experience.
However, the experimenter, the naughty experimenter who's deliberately crafted this stimulus
in a way which is so unlikely that they can now say, no, no, this is a false percept because
I know how it was caused. And the subject, I, for example, have completely the wrong idea,
the wrong inference about how it was caused. So it is a wonderful tool for people in psychophysics
to actually test how our inferences can fail in relation to the actual causes of our sensations.
But to put that another way around, what it does, it's a beautiful pro
of the prior beliefs that we bring to the table. So that, you know, going back to the notion of
the Bayesian brain, read simply, that means that we have at hand a number of hypotheses
that can explain the causes of this pattern of sensory, for example, visual information.
And we generate these hypotheses actively, say predictions in predictive coding,
and then we look at the adequacy of these predictions in explaining the sensory data.
So we're effectively little scientists. We are testing hypotheses against sensory data.
And if they're not good hypotheses, we will reject them and revise our hypotheses. And this is the
Bayesian belief updating that we were referring to previously. But that adjudication and that
updating rests upon your prior beliefs before you see some sensory data,
relative to the precision of those data that are going to move your prior beliefs to making
it to posterior beliefs after seeing the data. So we come back again to this notion,
and a key notion of the precision afforded your prior beliefs, the way that you think the world
works, or the way that these particular sensory, panther sensory stimulation are generated,
relative to the evidence at hand through that you're accessing through your sensations.
So when people, well, certainly when people like me and you talk about this resistance to illusions
in people separate from schizophrenia, what we are effectively saying is that they
have less precise or imprecise prior beliefs that they're more sensitive to any sensory evidence
at hand. So if illusions are the things that reveal our prior beliefs, and people with schizophrenia
are resistant to illusions, that means they don't have very precise prior beliefs. And that tells
you an enormous amount about the message passing the dynamics and the sense making in people who
are resistant to illusions, particularly in relation to how we think the brain encodes
that precision, because you have to estimate the precision, it doesn't come for free.
It's very much like a statistician computing the standard error, which is the inverse or the
component of precision, it has to be evaluated. And if you get that wrong, you can produce your
type one, your type two errors, all that false inference and the rights and these nations and
delusions. And in this instance, a resistance to a particular kind of, not a pseudo hallucination,
but a particular kind of illusory person. I think I'm glad we're touching on this,
because this leads me into my next question, which which is surrounding illusionism as a
theory of consciousness. When you think of an illusion as a misinterpretation of a sensory
stimulus that does exist. And you think of the theory of illusionism, Keith Frankish, Daniel
Dennett, Susan Blackmore, lots of people working. And to an extent, when you take into account
certain things that someone like Anil Seth says with perceptions being active hallucinations,
you sort of come to this conclusion that, okay, the sensory stimulus we're receiving
sort of gives us an idea, a posterior belief at some point that we have what is known as a
conscious experience, a phenomenal first person subjective experience. Sorry, I'm going to head
into philosophy at this point and then we'll try to get back into the neuroscience, but and the
physics, etc. So when you think of Dennett and all these philosophers who discuss illusionism as a
theory of conscious, the basic premise is that we are experiencing something. However, because
let's say someone like you or Donald Hoffman who takes fitness payoffs over reality. The fact is
we are never really perceiving what is actually out there. We're just perceiving what is meant to
allow us to survive long enough, perhaps to breed to whatever we have to do. And in this case,
consciousness believing we have some sort of an entity, something similar to an Ian Vitale.
I mean, the fact that we believe this allows us to go through life and successfully reproduce
and continue to thrive. Do you think this has a lot of value? And do you think that these theories
of illusionism as a theory of consciousness has value using your theory of free energy principle
and the Bayesian brain to back it up? Well, in the way that you articulated them, absolutely, yes.
Okay. Do you have any rebuttals against that?
Not whatsoever. No, I think you phrased it in a compelling way and it fits exactly with the view
of a Bayesian brain and more generally the free energy principle. Your controlled hallucination
is just an expression of the way that sensory impressions somehow control our sense making
on the inside and the degree to which we let them control depends upon the precision that we afford
the sensory impressions. By definition, we'll never actually know what's going on on the outside.
So the whole point of inferring is you don't know the answer. You're just left with the best belief,
the best probabilistic guess as to what's going on out there. There will never be any
true access to the causes of that. And in a sort of complementary fashion, I will never know
what you are thinking. I can never know. So I'm on the outside looking at you.
So you're all including the free energy principle, but as applied to your brain, this is just a
hypothesis. It's just a belief. There is a fundamental divide that in the physics application,
the free energy principle rests upon something called a Markov blanket. But there's a fundamental
divide, an informational barrier, or probably beyond information, an existential barrier
between the inside and the outside of any thinking thing, which means that the question
is what is reality? Is there a metaphysics? Is unanswerable? All you can do is, I think in
itself, as inference to the best prediction as opposed to explanation. But inference to the
best explanation is perfectly okay in terms of explaining the world to yourself as you
sample it and as you sense it. So I am not a philosopher, so that's the one area that I am
very naïve in. However, I did want to make a philosophical point here that you use the phrase
that we believe in some aspect of ourselves, including the fact that we believe that we
have experiences. There is an argument that this is just another illusion. It's just another hypothesis
that in fact, selfhood in and of itself is just another hypothesis, that these are sort of illusions
that we bring to the table to make parsimmonious sense of the fact that there appears to be some
coherence in mind-bodied interaction with the world. But it's not a necessary belief for
living and surviving and adapting. I'm sure if viruses could tell you, they would deny
having a sense of self. You might argue that consciousness, either the kind of self-consciousness
that you refer to, or just the notion that I am having a qualitative experience. The kind of
experience that people like Thomas Mixinger would associate with opacity or phenomenal opacity.
These in and of themselves are still just hypotheses. They're just ways of explaining
my sense-making and this instance on the inside, as opposed to explaining what caused my external
sensory states. Does that make sense? But all of this I think is entirely consistent with the
views that you expressed. I think it's, sorry, were you continual? Well, no, you asked for a pushback.
The only pushback I can think of, and again, forgive me if I'm using the wrong words, but
the free energy principle inherits from the theory of sparsely coupled random dynamical systems.
And the special case that emerges when you have a particular kind of sparse coupling between
something and everything else. If that is true, it does have, if you like, a metaphysical commitment
that there has to be something else out there. So there is a sense that you can
be a complete skeptic. There is no reality from the point of view of applying the free energy
principle to my sense-making or indeed applying it to your sense-making, your sentience. But
the free energy principle in and of itself starts from a very metaphysical position that
there is an outside and there is an inside. And what we are looking at is quite simply a
generalized synchronization between the dynamics on the inside and the outside. That can be read
as inference and belief update. That's a pushback I can think of. I think that's exactly where
someone like Daniel Dennett would break away from someone like Donald Hoffman. Exactly what you're
talking about. Where Dennett would suppose that there is a reality, there is an external reality.
However, there's still no such thing as phenomenal experience or conscious experiences because we
are crafting this as we're going along or interpreting it that way. That might not be the
best way to say it anyway. Whereas Donald Hoffman then goes to the assumption that all conscious
experience is the reality we're talking about. And that might take it a bit further because now
there is no external reality. We're sort of creating reality from conscious experience.
But yeah, he takes a different physical route. Just called briefly what I wanted to say was,
I mean, I've got tons of notes here. Just want to show you a lot of different things. I've got a
bunch of equations here. The main goal was because I've seen so many different talks with you and
so many different interviews, I've noticed how people tend to, as I said, ask you questions
based on their expertise or their field of expertise. And I didn't want that to happen because
for the most part, I'm so on board with your view. And I love the theory so much that I used it in
my own master's dissertation to defend illusionism. So I, the dissertation is called psychiatry's
defense for illusionism as a theory of consciousness. And a huge chunk of that actually
incorporated your work, yourself, Chris Frith, many others. But I was worried that when I get
into this interview, I'm going to start defending it even more. And I did not want that to happen.
So I made very specific notes to sidetrack me off that path. But before I do leave that part,
the last thing I do want to say is, if someone does ask you what consciousness is,
how do you actually go about answering that question? Do you find that you go down a
philosophical route? Or do you stick to a neuroscientific slash psychiatric route?
Well, I think very much like you, it would depend upon who I'm talking to and who is listening.
It would be very context sensitive. If you're talking to
people who are in a more physics-y world, and they are interested in the naturalization of
consciousness, I would appeal to this, well, go right back to the Cartesian dualism. How would
you repair that? Or should you repair that? There is actually an argument I've heard recently from
very valued colleagues that there is a neo-Cartesianism that emerges from, specifically,
the free energy principle on the one hand, and quantum information theoretic formulations on the
other hand. This is due to things like the inner screen hypothesis by Chris Fields, which is a
fascinating resurrection of the Cartesian theater of a particular sort. But if I was talking to
somebody who wanted to naturalize in relation to the laws of physics written as usually differential
equations or in quantum information theoretic terms, I would be looking to answer their question in
terms of how do you bridge these two? How do you arrive at some kind of dual aspect monism
that still preserved the duality that explained it? And I would be talking about
the difference between a posterior belief, a Bayesian belief that is encoded by the states of
a brain, for example, and the probability distributions that are entailed by the states
of those brains. So you've got on the one hand an intrinsic information geometry that inherits from
the probability distributions that somebody in thermodynamics, a physicist, would understand
the kind that we use in brain imaging, for example, to look at brain activations through
the expenditure of thermodynamic energy in order to support neural dynamics,
but exactly the same by physical states are those that parameterize another kind of information
geometry, which is the information geometry of beliefs, the space in which I do my belief
updating, moving one belief from this point to this point. And of course, that moment is important
because most of the much of the arguments that I would engage with in terms of consciousness
would frame consciousness as a process. I think you mentioned that explicitly. What does that mean
from the point of view of trying to naturalize a conscious process that was quintessentially
believed basis movement on statistical manifold. So you do get that for free from the free energy
principle. So that's why I and a number of at least close friends and collaborators use the
phrase, you know, a physics of sentience. Sometimes we don't want to be quite so bold.
Sometimes you get told off for using the word sentience. So but at least you can talk about
a physics of information. And it is that sort of link between the information theoretic, the belief,
the statistical aspect of neural dynamics, and the thermodynamics that underwrite that,
which does, I think, provide that link between the, you know, the mensuric, well, you know,
the Cartesian dual aspects of certain things like the brain. If I was talking to people
in philosophy who are more interested in, you know, phenomenology, I think you have to address
some hard questions about, you know, what would be the necessary properties of a
self-organizing, self-evidence free energy minimizing system that could possibly support
qualitative experience or qualia as and then you have to ask other questions about
when would there be some self-awareness of this and, you know, issues of self-modelling of the kind
again, addressed by people like Thomas Metzinga. Those kinds of conversations would take a slightly
different route and would focus on the phenomenology. And interesting, they come back to the precision
we were talking about before. If you remember, we were talking about having to estimate the
precision, which means that you've got, well, for those kinds of systems or creatures or
particles that have the capacity to estimate the precision of their implicit beliefs and
the sensory evidence that is updating those beliefs, that the very act of deploying those
estimates of precision and inferring that precision becomes a kind of mental action.
So now you've got a way of linking mental action, red as people like Jacob Nynowski and Thomas
Metzinga and that kind of philosophizing and with the psychological reading of this mental
action, which is just attention, it's just basically deploying or affording more attention
to this level of representation in a hierarchical context or this sensory stream, thereby selecting
that for belief updating, giving those sources of evidence privilege access to your deeper,
higher level belief updating. So now you're in the world of building bridges between attention,
mental action and phenomenology. Then you start to talk to people who like to think about
selfhood and self-modeling and self-awareness and you start to think about how do these things
unpack in terms of the kind of generative models that are necessary to define model evidence,
margin and likelihood, variational free energy. What kind of models would you need and you normally
get to your very, very deep models, hierarchical models where we normally have in mind a sort of
heterarchy or a centrifugal hierarchy. So your deeper is usually sort of more abstract and slower
and what normally starts to think about what kind of depth would be required
for me to have a sense of self. Well, first of all, I have to be an agent. To be an agent,
I have to have a generative model that entertains the consequences of my action, otherwise I can't
plan. So immediately we're talking about generative models entailed by certain creatures or people
that escapes the moment simply now because I've got a generative model of the future.
Unlike a thermostat or a virus, I've now got a very deep generative model of a particular sort
which goes into the future. It's future pointing, but crucially, it's my future. It's not your
future or anything else, it's just my future. What will happen if I do that? So that makes me
to an agent. So immediately you're talking about a very special class of self-organization,
self-evidencing. And then you have to ask the question, well, at what point do I recognize
that it is me that is actually doing the planning? And why? If you want to apply the
free energy principle, you have to ask the question, well, what licenses this kind of deep
generative modeling? And that's a pressing question because you have used the phrase
self-evidencing. I should just very quickly qualify that, which is a philosophical term,
which I know nothing about in philosophy. But I do know that Jacob Hoey, my friend in Melbourne,
is a philosopher, thinks it's quite apt to use as a description of the Bayesian brain minimizing
its free energy. Because if you remember, the free energy is synonymous with technically a lower
bound on surprise, surprise is self-information, but it's also the negative model evidence or
log-bottle evidence. So as you're doing optimal inference, you are implicitly trying to maximize
the evidence for your models of your nipped world, so you're self-evidencing. So the interesting twist
here is that you can easily show, literally on the back of a matchbox, that the log evidence
is equal to accuracy minus complexity, which means that every move I make and every aspect of my brain
that is engendered during neurodevelopmental need evolution has to pay a price for every more accurate
explanation, illusion that it deploys. And that price is the complexity cost. So it means you're
trying to minimize the complexity. So why in earth would, say, evolution equip you and me with this
really deep generative model, where I've got all this extra complexity that I can be in this state
of mind, on that state of mind, I can be anxious, I can be in that, I can be frightened, I can be
embarrassed. Why would it do that? Well, of course, if it provides a parsimonious explanation
of my sense making and my active engagement with the world, then it pays its way in terms of the
increase in accuracy of the kind of things I can explain and engage with,
pays its way or compensates sufficiently for the increased complexity. And then you ask yourself,
what kind of worlds would potentially justify this kind of modeling, this kind of very
sophisticated hierarchy, deep modeling? And usually one ends up, and now I'm talking to people
in your ethology and social neuroscience, you end up with, well, the only kind of worlds in which
I need to infer I am me and I am in this dispositional state is in a world in which there are lots of
other things that are exactly like me that have certain dispositional, intentional states in
relation to me. Otherwise, I don't need this. It would be an overly complicated model. So you argue
yourself into a situation where this kind of consciousness, it can only be present, or is
any licensed under the free energy principle, in a world full of conspecifics and creatures,
and usually N and N functioned eternally, that depends upon lots of other people. So that now
becomes a slightly relational aspect to this kind of consciousness. So I haven't talked about the
inner screen hypothesis, but there is another quantum physics version of this. So there's lots
of different stories you can tell depending upon what people want to hear.
Carl, you touched on so many different ones there. I love the last one because
it reminds me of Chris Fritz's work, and he loves to talk about this social and relational
aspect of consciousness. You guys have written many papers together, and someone else you've written
with is a colleague of mine from South Africa, a very good friend, Mark Solms.
You guys have also written together, and I know Mark takes us down to a more basic level of
existence in terms of conscious experiences coming from more basic parts of the brain.
What got you guys to write together, and how did you guys sort of get together and do this?
These beautiful papers together. Right, well I'll just mention both Chris and Mark in that.
So interestingly, when I, as a young psychiatrist, got into brain imaging,
it was exactly at the same time that Chris was, Chris Frith, came from basically clinical
psychology and neuropsychology. Those were the worlds, certainly the UK's experts in schizophrenia
research. He came to join us at the MRC Cyclotron Unit, the very first brain imaging, also an
emission tomography studies of people with schizophrenia. So he's been my mentor and friend
since the inception of my academic career, and he's still meant to be writing the last paragraph
of the last paper that I'm trying to submit at the moment. Mark, but there's an interesting
connection and comparison between Mark and Chris. Mark, I met later in life at international
conferences, and we're very impressed with, in those days, his encyclopedic and very embracing
knowledge of Freudian ideas in relation to psychoanalysis, but also neuropsychology.
So he's one of those polymaths who can transcend different fields. He can write volumes on Freud,
and yet bring the most informative and puzzling neuropsychological cases to the fore
to evince some very deep questions about how we experience our world and how that can be
expressed via things like neuropsychanalysis. So the interesting thing is that Chris really
hates Freud, whereas Mark loves Freud, but they're both, they're both committed to understanding the
brain as an organ, as a social organ. But as you rightly say, Mark is much more on the sort of,
you know, it predicates his work on the neuropsychology and the neurobiology,
whereas Chris is much more in terms of the dyadic and the social and social neuroscience aspects
that underwrite sense making where it matters. But both of them at the end of the day are trying
to understand the, you know, the patients they saw as young men, and perhaps Mark is still seeing
patients, I don't know. So that's how I got involved. Mark's ideas, you know, I think you're
absolutely right. They are more grounded in the wetwear that would have this,
that would endorse certain psychoanalytic, psychotherapeutic, neuropsychological and
psychiatric readings. And interestingly, he's happened upon exactly the same
focus that I suspect to your computational psychiatry thesis
focused on. So again, we come back to this key notion of precision and uncertainty. And of course,
you know, if you want a, you know, to naturalize psychopathology, it's all about beliefs. And
if you want to, what is definitive of a belief? Well, it has clearly, when thought of or when
read as a probability distribution, it has an attribute of content in terms of the location
parameters. But more importantly, it's got an attribute of uncertainty of dispersion.
That's the whole point about a belief as opposed to a point estimate. So if we are creatures that
deal in beliefs, then the, you know, the challenge that we face is basically evaluating and knowing
and representing our own uncertainty, either personally or subpersonally. You know, and indeed,
you can see this throughout, say, in economics, you know, the markets of lost confidence,
there's in, you know, things that matter, I usually knows the confidence and the uncertainty
that I hold my beliefs with. So that, that I keep using the word uncertainty, because there's a
lovely little phrase that Mark has celebrated in his most recent book that you know, The Hidden
Spring and Subsequence and Academic Publications, which is a notion of felt uncertainty. So he thinks
that feelings are all about the estimation of and deployment of precision uncertainty in exactly
the same way that we ended up trying to naturalize the resistance to illusions in people with
schizophrenia. It's all the same thing. So he puts a very heavy weight on that. To the extent he
gets very cross when people become cortical centric, you know, they think he's all in the
frontal lobes. He's literally deep in the hierarchy, literally deep in the cells of origin
of these really powerful neurotransmitter systems that do the attentional game, they do the
neuromodulation, they set the precision, they balanced and coordinate our belief updating.
And of course, that fits very comfortably with what we've talked about before, which is a mental
action read as attention, being able to get some control over those dynamics and belief updating
processes, that Bayesian mechanics that's going on inside our head.
So, I mean, you guys, both of your papers, I remember, you all sort of culminate and get
together with this idea that this Bayesian brain, this is fundamental to what we do.
When you think about perceptive experiences, we realize that at some point, my red sunset and
your red sunset are not the same. It's a very two different experiences, both comprised of
different neural, neuro factors, different social factors, different experiences in the past. So
even time plays a big role. This comes along well when you think of Markov blankets, because you
think of these different internal states, different active states, perhaps for each person who's
thinking, how do you find Markov blankets play? Well, let's first talk about how Markov blankets
play a central role in the free energy principle, and how this sort of navigates across different
areas from physics to chemistry to biology to psychology. Let's go to economics, etc.
Right. I thought you were going to talk about synchronization across Markov blankets and
communication. I wasn't sure you can get that at some point.
Excuse me. So, yeah, as you say, the Markov blanket plays a foundational role in the physics
reading of the free energy principle, where you have to, before you can start to talk about anything,
you have to be able to demarcate and define what you mean by something. And the first move is
to individuate that thing from everything else. How do you do that? Well, you simply identify
those states that intervene between everything else and the thing in question. They separate the
internal states, dynamics, paths, narratives. Technically, these would be states in a state
space, from the point of view of, say, a Langevin equation or some kind of statistical physics.
What transpires is that if you want to individuate the state's internal to something,
from the state's external to something, then one way of doing that, and one could argue the only
way of doing that, is to demonstrate that they are conditionally independent. If you want to be
able to separate, there has to be some kind of probabilistic separability. There has to be
some kind of independence. But it's conditioned upon the Markov blanket. So what does that mean?
Well, it basically means that you and I, almost specifically your brain and my brain,
are not closed systems. We are open systems, and our systems are open to our niche, our
environment, or our heat bath, if you were a physicist. But that kind of openness is a kind
that preserves that conditional independence between me on the inside and everything else
on the outside. And that's where the Markov blanket comes in. And then you can, for most things,
partition the Markov blanket into two sets of states, the active states and the sensory
states. The semantics are rather obvious in the sense that it's just making a distinction
between those states that mediate the exposure of the inside to the outside. So the influence,
the vicarious influences of the outside on the inside and those of the sensory states.
And then to complete the circle, to induce the necessary kind of circular causality we need
for the synchronization we're going to talk about, you have to have the other side of the street,
which is the active states that mediate the influence of the internal states on the external
states. So you've got this rather delicate, fundamental sparsity structure where the sparsity
is read in terms of the influence that one state has on another state. The foregrounds
a special set of states that are called blanket states that can be divided into active and
sensory states that intervene between the external and internal states. The inner screen
hypothesis we were talking about before inherits from a quantum information theoretic formulation
of this notion where you can look at this blanket as a screen onto which I can write,
say the environment or the world out there writes onto this blanket, writes onto this
holographic screen and those become my sensations and I can then read those sensations from the
holographic screen on the inside and then I can couple back so that the environment senses me
through my actions. So there's a, if you like, one level of perfect symmetry between the two
and that symmetry is just, sorry, that symmetry is evinced by the minimization
of free energy in the sense that if I can predict what's going on out there and what's going on
out there is at the same time in some sense trying to predict what's going on inside my head,
the ultimate free energy minimizing solution, the most likely solution just brings us back to
being in characteristic states for the environment and the mean. So we're talking just about a
description of a generalized synchronization or a synchronization of chaos between two
sparsely coupled dynamical systems with a special sparsely structure that allows me to preserve
my conditional independence. So in a sense the illusionist perspective we were talking about
before is a must, it can't be any other way if you define existence as conditional independence
from the world in which you are immersed, but of course there has to be a world in which you are
immersed so you can't take that too far in terms of a skeptical position. Yeah, when you think of
Markov blankets, in the context of let's say neural networks, how could the concept of Markov
blankets be used to better understand flow of information or computations within a neural network?
Is this applicable and are there any specific applications we could
utilize this concept to enhance our understanding of consciousness, neural connections, etc.?
Yeah, I think there are, it's interesting that you should ask that and what you should do is get
Maxwell Ramstead and Chris Field and possibly even Mark and then Mark Serms has also been
involved in these conversations and another other people I'm sure they will also suggest.
So this group have been thinking for a year or two and are currently submitting papers to things
like the general consciousness studies and elsewhere that rest explicitly on arving the
internal dynamics of a brain in terms of nested Markov blankets and trying to ask the question,
is there something unique about a Markov blanket on the inside in your brain which
may be physically very distributed but statistically well defined that could possibly
support consciousness? So this is the inner screen hypothesis that I mentioned before.
So your question, perhaps you've actually seen a preprint.
Well, it's a very prescient and astute question then because this is exactly what people like
Maxwell and Mark and Ken and David and everybody else would love and Chris would have loved to
have been asked. Yeah, so that's the whole premise that well, first of all, it's a spin back.
So you're right to ask, are Markov blankets useful? I think that they are foundational and
they're used implicitly everywhere. I mean, not only are they foundational in the sense that they
define your existence and my existence and anything that we engage with or we think we engage with
but they are implicitly used whenever you start to simulate or reproduce
or emulate any kind of sense making or intelligence, artificial or natural.
Whether you're playing with neurons, neural cultures in a dish, the cell membrane is a Markov
blanket that defines the cell, the connectivity of the neurons defines another scale of Markov
blanket or another scale, which says that this is a network.
And exactly the same maths applies to neural networks in machine learning and artificial
intelligence research and the operation of your iPhone or Google search machines.
So these things become practically really important in defining the network of a thing
that's doing the computations or the information processing in a pragmatic sense.
And indeed, you can read these active and sensory states as the inputs and outputs to
anything that is doing some kind of computing. So they are essential in defining things like,
say, von Neumann architectures. You and I don't use a von Neumann architecture,
but you can still use Markov blankets to define them. But even if you look at the kind of architectures
that we use for sense making in the hierarchal Bayesian brain or hierarchal predictive coding
story, then the message passing that is required to do the brief updating becomes tremendously
efficient due to the presence of these carefully self-maintained, self-evidencing Markov blanket
structures. So remember the Markov blanket rests upon a sparsity structure. It's what the connections
and the influences that are not there. So that means that you can now do local computations.
If you can define the Markov blanket of you, you may be just an element of your dendrite,
dendritic tree, you may be a synapse, you may be an entire dendritic tree, you may be a cell,
you may be a brain region, you may be the campus, you may be an entire brain,
you may be an entire person, or you may be a family, you may be a species, you may be an institution,
you may be a biosphere, and every scale the same rules apply whereby you get the efficiency from
the sparsity where the sparsity underwrites the very structure and the ability to actually dissect
every scale, the system at hand. So that leads to, I repeat, that's practically really important
when you're designing your networks or chips. You need to keep all your computations as local as
possible and you do that by using your Markov blanket. If you wanted to, if we return to
the implications for belief updating in a brain, then just saying the phrase hierarchical predictive
processing or hierarchical Bayesian inference immediately connects you to a certain class
of Markov blankets because the hierarchy is just defined in terms of the connections that are not
there. So each hierarchical level possesses a Markov blanket that separates its superordinate
level from its subordinate level. So just talking about hierarchical structures is just one special
case of a particular kind of nested Markov blanket. And then we get to, is there a special
Markov blanket? So now this is the crux of the paper that you haven't read, but I thought you had.
I'm looking forward to it. Well, I'll send you, well, I asked, you know, if you email Maxwell
Ramstead and Montreal, he'll send you, he'll send you, I've only got a copy with all the authors
redacted, so I'm not quite sure who the authors are. I'll take up that off, I'll take up that
off and definitely do that. No, he'd be delighted. So the idea of one of the key ideas that fits very
comfortably with the ideas from Chris Field and people like Jim Laysbrook and Mike Levin,
which is this inner screen hypothesis, is that there is one irreducible Markov blanket.
There is one that you can't get inside and find any hierarchical structure or any partition.
So what would that mean if there was one or more possibly, but there was certainly at least one
irreducible Markov blanket in my brain? It would have some quite profound implications.
It would mean that it could never see itself other than acting on the outside, which is the
rest of the brain. So the only way it can solve evidence is by engaging in mental action.
And now you ask, well, what kind of mental action would it engage? What are the executive
systems, the active states of this particular minimal Markov blanket? They are precisely
the cells of origin of the neurotransmitters that implement precision control and attention.
So we're right back with Mark Soames again, but we're in a very comfortable position because
not only are we friends with Mark Soames, but we're also friends with everybody who talks about
things like higher order thought theory. So predicate the entire argument on this hierarchical
structure, which means that at some level, and usually it's the higher level or the deeper level,
do interesting metacognitive things start to happen that you could associate with
conscious processing. But this is exactly what the minimal Markov blanket, irreducible Markov
blanket would say. It is something that is deep within the hierarchy that there is no higher
or deeper level. Because if there was, you'd be able to partition the internal states within
that minimal Markov blanket. It also fits very comfortably things like the global neuronal
workspace theory. I mean, what is global? And what is a workspace? Well, it's something where you
can share stuff. So you can't further subdivide it and it's global because it sees everything.
So it has, it has a lot of constructability in relation to a game where we started,
everybody's right, but they just got their own way of expressing it. But in this instance, we are,
or one is expressing it explicitly in terms of individuation, separability, read through the
lens of the free energy principle in terms of Markov blankets, crucially in a scale applied
to a particular scale, this scale is the scale of brains. So this wouldn't work when you're
trying to describe the weather or evolution. It wouldn't work when you're trying to describe
things at a quantum level or indeed at the level of a single neuronal, neural population.
This argument is scale is tied to a particular scale, but it has, if you like, a scale free
aspect in the hierarchical partitioning that induces the notion of a non partitionable or
irreducible Markov blanket. So, funnily enough, that notion of the irreducible Markov blanket
being the inner screen is exactly the new Cartesian theater that we're talking about.
That's very fascinating. I mean, I'm scheduled to chat to Mike Levin soon,
and I had no idea. I think I should send him an email to chat about this. You said it was Mike Levin,
Mark Sorms, Chris Fields, who else was, there was one more name you mentioned.
The inner screen hypothesis that, if you like, provides a cornerstone for this more collective,
inclusive effort to try and get at, you know, what Vanya Weiss would call a minimal unifying
model of consciousness. That includes people like Mark Sorms and David Rudolf and lots of people.
Organized by Maxwell Ramstead, and Chris Fields is a really important player in that,
but the inner screen hypothesis in and of itself is indeed due to Chris Fields and his
friends, and particularly Mike Levin and people like Jim Glacebrook. So, that formulation is
another, if you like, access, which you'll have some great conversations with both Chris and Mike.
So, they come at this from the point of view of sort of basal cognition, the notion that
everything is effectively, can be cast, and possibly even is, just a process of information.
It's just information processing, and self-organization just is
the processes that evolve that effectively do believe updating or process information,
usually classical information, you know, when it comes to sort of kind of biotic self-organization
that Mike Levin deals with. So, he's famous for Xenobox and all sorts of really insightful
takes, new takes on cellular and biological self-organization.
You know, some of my favorite ideas are, you know, if you'd, you might like, is that, you know,
when you appreciate that sort of, you know, physics, and this is a Chris Fields quote,
there is no bright line between sort of physics, biology, and psychology. They're all the same
things, just using different words. And Mike takes this to his extreme, what he used to,
he's got more sophisticated in the past review, but several years ago, he had this notion that
cancer was a delusion, a delusion that arose from a pathology of basal cognition, which I think is
why your cells are failing to infer, know their place, they're failing to infer that, no, I shouldn't
be growing in this context. They've got this delusion, oh, I should keep on growing. And of
course, he's absolutely right. So you can even get a computational psychiatry of cancer out of this,
but it does require a commitment to think about all self-organization as basically a process that
can be read as an inference process or a belief of basic dating process, the right kind of
processing and bounding self-information and entropy read from the point of view of information
theory. Chris Fields' particular take comes from his skills with Jim Glacebrook in quantum
information theory. So that's where the information theoretic aspects come, and then you can start to
talk about the relationship between the principles of unitarity and entanglement and the like,
and what that means when read or what it means in terms of a quantum formulation of the classical
reading of the free energy principle that doesn't normally deal with quantum, you know, it usually
starts with, you know, classical mechanics with all the kind of formulation of the like.
I know, I love so much about what you just said, because when I talk about it, I often think about
the same thing. I often call ourselves receiving persons organized by organelles, crafted by cells,
designed by DNA, manufactured by molecules, assembled by atoms, forged by fusion over,
forged by fusion via stellar supernovae. So this is a saying, because I think if you don't
incorporate all these things together, you're just, you're missing out an opportunity not to
reduce things to the nothing but aspects, but rather to grow the complexity of what we're talking
about. You just increase the scope of the conversation so much more by discussing every realm of reality.
And I think you get that, and you seem to be working on that from that perspective as well.
Absolutely. That Gail, I think that's a lovely way that you actually expressed it.
You should definitely get Chris Fields on your podcast, because his big thing is that scale
freeness, that scale invariance. And in fact, I was on a call literally about two hours ago,
where he made, I thought, a delightful point that because the free energy principle is by
construction scale free, it cannot be reductious at the same time. So it is quintessentially
anti-reductionist. So what you just expressed, I think, covered all those scales. And I think
that's part of the saying, your formalism has to be scale free. It has to be deployed
for me, mathematically, in the spirit of the renormalization group. It has to be deployed
time and time and time again. And as soon as you realize that, then you start to ask deep questions
about bottom-up and top-down causation between scales. So as soon as you've got a scale free
theory that can apply either to gamma oscillations in your hippocampus, or it can apply to natural
selection, led as Bayesian model selection. Then you start to ask big questions, well,
how does this very slow self-evidencing process contextualize and be informed by this very fast
self-evidencing process or information processing in a way that is emergent from just having these
same kinds of processes unfolding with a separation in this instance, temporal scales. So, you know,
Chris would wax lyrical for a long time about this. So you should perhaps you can get Chris and
Mike together. I think that's a very good idea. I think I should start doing that. I know the
last, I think you Kurt and Mike, I think spoke together as well, if I recall correctly, I can't
remember. Yes. Yes. I wanted to ask you, when you think about this project that everyone's talking
about, and Markov blankets, do you think that because some systems are so complex, do you
find, do you think there will be any sort of indirect or hidden causal relationships that
might hinder this from happening? What sort of applications or techniques should be employed
to effectively identify Markov blankets within complex systems?
Ah, right. Yeah. So this is a very sort of practical issue. And it would be very nice to be able to
sort of parcelate the brain, for example, or parcelate an institution or an economy to be able
to identify the different Markov blankets given some empirical data. There is a worked example
of this, which is little known because it's just so complicated. It's almost impossible to read,
but I wrote it and I'm quite proud of it. And I think it was in network science, but it was
exactly the challenge of taking brain imaging data with thousands, hundreds of thousands of
measurements of activity over time, and then parcelating it at different scales. So it was
exactly what we're just talking about. It was creating Markov blankets and Markov blankets
and doing it in a way that was empirically constrained by measuring the connectivity
and its sparsity to imply where the Markov blankets were. And then once you've got a Markov
blanket, those now constitute the Intel states of a bigger Markov blanket. And then you can sort
of carve up the entire brain at successively course from course spatial scales. And what was
really interesting is a phenomena that is, I was going to say emergent, but in fact it's actually
baked into the normalization group that you would access mathematically, or you would use to access
the scale free behavior, at least formalize or naturalize it, that things get slower as they
get bigger. So we could actually estimate the time constants of the neuronal fluctuations
and implicit belief updating associated with different spatial scales ranging from a cubic
centimeter or millimeter or so of the brain through to entire frontal lobes. And then we can
extrapolate out to very, very big things and very, very small things and look at the characteristic
time scales. It was just implicit by scanning through the time scales by having lots and lots,
you know, literally hundreds of thousands, well at least a thousand, a thousand little Markov blankets
all jostling together, partitioned and then moving to say a hundred of them and then to ten.
And just by extrapolating, you could then think about sort of collections of brains,
ten brains, or a tenth of a cubic centimeter of the brain right the way down to the quantum scale.
And just look at the different time constants that were engaged. So that was a really interesting
academic exercise, but it did rest as the same, being able to identify Markov blankets. What
you're asking though is a key issue in terms of complex system analysis and modelling, being able
to carve the system in the right kind of way in order to usually to simulate it in a way that
allows you to do forecasting or scenario modelling and the like or projecting a response to a
therapeutic intervention in say clinical neuroscience or psychiatry through to weather forecasting.
You know, getting the right course-graining, the right Markov blankets in plain is absolutely
essential. There are lots of people working on that at the moment. One email exchange I've had
this week is from a gentleman called Jeff Beck who's taken on the very deep challenge
of considering Markov blankets that wander around. So one interesting aspect
of a simple definition of a Markov blanket is that it depends upon a probability distribution
that exists over a non-trivial amount of time. But if you think of something like a candle flame
that is moving and furthermore the constituents, the molecules and the irons that constitute
the plasma that is the surface of the flame, is it fair to say that the flame has a Markov blanket
given all its constituent molecules, i.e. other small-scale Markov blankets, are continually
being exchanged and moving and wandering around. So he's taken on the challenge of taking Markov
blankets into this sort of more liberal domain and dynamic domain and see if one can still apply
the free energy principle in a practical way. But to do that, he has to have at least simulations
on numerical studies that allow him to actually identify Markov blankets that move like waves
in certain media. So that's still an outstanding problem which a lot of people, when I say a lot,
a few key postcomings are looking at and I think it's a very useful ability to be inquiring.
That's quite fascinating. It's great to see that so many different people are working on this at
this point because when you look online and you look at the amount of citations, I mean you are
one of the most cited neuroscientists on the planet and it's great to see that a lot of people
are taking these concepts seriously and trying to roll with it. Looking ahead to the future,
what directions or advancements do you anticipate in the study of Markov blankets, for example,
except for the one you just mentioned? Where do you think the free energy principle is going from here?
I think there are probably three directions of travel and we've implicitly already covered
the most important ones in our conversation. So the first one is indeed computational psychiatry
and computational neurology. I mean in a sense all the work that Chris Frith and I and many other
colleagues put in decades ago into understanding functional brain architectures via brain imaging
was in the service of ultimately asking questions about neurology and psychiatry and much of the
theorising that led to active inference and the free energy principle inherited from the data
analytic and modelling that we were applying to make sense of brain imaging data and realised
exactly the same principles could be applied to the brain or when I say realised we're told by
people like Geoffrey Hinton you can apply the same principles to the brain, the Helmholtz machine.
So that's one direction of travel I think. Again, I use the word naturalising. I recently
learned what it means and I think it's a useful phrase to naturalise psychopathology in a way
that you can write down the laws and the maths and you can start to create in silico patients
and digital twins and intervene on them without actually giving drugs or psychotherapeutic
interventions to patients until you've shown. To a certain extent that style of approach is
already starting to bite not in the context of the free energy principle explicitly but certainly
in the modelling of things like epilepsy. Having naturalised a pathophysiology say the
transmission of epileptic discharges and seizure activity in the brain to the extent you can
actually put it in the computer and start to do weather forecasting of this particular person's
brain and what might happen if we did this and that. I think that's one very exciting way forward.
Another complement of that sort of applied application of the free energy principle
would be the ability to phenotype people. So there's a phrase computational phenotyping which
I quite like which basically means being able to characterize this person or this cohort
in terms of the parameters of their generative models that they use to explain their world
and that provides a really powerful and efficient summary on this person and in terms of their beliefs
and their belief updating and their prior commitments and being able to be able to measure
and quantify somebody in that kind of way can be very very useful not only in terms of tracking
the responses to therapy but also just getting the right nosologies the right way of carving up
various psychiatric conditions and their etiologies because now you've got a naturalised
process theory under the hood. So that's one kind of thing. The other direction of travel I think is
in artificial intelligence just actually building see practically what the free energy principle
brings to the table is not really a pretty first principles account of existence and sentient
behaviour but practically another strange inversion another denit strange inversion
instead of having to instead of having to understand the system in terms of its dynamics
as you would the complex system modelling you're trying to understand the underlying mechanics
by saying well these dynamics this set of say differential equations looks as if
it's performing a gradient flow on this light who not functional this
Lagrangian and I'm going to try and estimate what this what this underlying potential function
is that causes my dynamics and it's best a simple explanation for the complex system I want to
understand. For me of course that's always going to be this surprise or the log marginal likelihood
or the free energy bounds on that but what you can do is if you know that the dynamics of your
complex system can always be expressed as a gradient flow on a free energy functional
of a gerative model where the gerative model just scores or articulates characteristics states of
being that you want to emulate then what you can do is you can just write down the free energy
functional of your preferred states of being and then just integrate the system to reproduce
the sentient behavior that you would have seen if this thing existed and had these was attracted
to these characteristics states so it's a really powerful way of building machines that look as
if they exist in a particular way of course that's the aspiration of machine learning and
artificial intelligence you know and so it's certainly in principle you could deploy the
free energy principle in the context of building artifacts that do the right kind of belief updating
by the right kind of course I mean being able to model their world where their world is basically
the world of users basically you and me which brings us to the third direction of travel which is
the kind that Chris Fifth would like which is you know the explicit acknowledgement that
what is really interesting here is this scale free application of free energy principle where
you've got lots of different free energy minimizing self-evidencing Markov blankets
all living in Markov blankets of a different scale in institutions and theologies and their
ideologies and your ethnic bounds and all that so how does that unfold and how do you get the
right kinds of ecosystems that have this joint free energy minimizing behaviors that does not
incur upon or require certain Markov blankets to be vitiated or destroyed you know so what
we're talking about now is a physics of an ecology that has sustainability at its heart
or at its core because the whole point of the free energy principle it's a description of systems
that have an attracting set and how they sustain themselves within that attracting set so I would
imagine that the free energy principle will be useful and indeed pursuing this with colleagues
that and versus AI so my colleagues in industry this this is one application the free energy
principle in the service of in you know underwriting in a principled way the aspirations of all
right-minded people engaged in designing the next version of the world the world wide web
or artificial intelligence or information services and speak not to growth but speak
to sustainability that you're a biomimetic take on sustainable ecosystems but in this instance
ecosystems of intelligence so that was a bit hand wavy but it's you know it really is a fascinating
game when you start to talk to people who are actually in charge of engineering the next the
next web there really is so much potential um there's something I wanted to ask and I forgot
about it earlier but I was thinking about Markov blankets and how they they play this role um to
sort of this differentiate between let's say it can sort of play a role between differentiated
between a self and an other in a sense and does it have any role or impact when it comes to free will
how can you incorporate these ideas together well let's do my games
um so the self versus others
check the sound there as your sound is my sound good on your side
my sound is good and your sound is good otherwise yeah good
are you hear me yeah I can okay so I think you picked two ideas um
I haven't been able to return to that question um so let's um self and services
uh sorry just having an issue with your audio
um okay are you
okay are you okay no no sorry I was having issues with this audience
yes I couldn't hear you for about
it's back it's back sorry what did you do
okay so what I mean was when you think of Markov blankets they can indirectly play a
role in differentiating between a self and an other
how is this possible is this what's the trait of the free energy principle and
Markov blanket and what role does this
when it comes to
right yes thank you okay um so the self versus other I think is really important um
it was irrespective of
issue that that's that's that's what we didn't know we haven't covered any of our conversations
and it is the
and so you're thinking about early development and
I myself have been thinking of a new goal in Charles as to engage in that kind of work
out behind the world of this system and of course the first thing that I think we need to
um and recognize where the further is that is that another is not part of itself you know
the free energy which shall enslave to being right in the sense and um you know
has to
so I think
you know
So I think that's quite the notion of just having blood in the blood of others, in a
clear way.
It's a really central aspect of having a model of pregnancy, building estimations and illusions
about women and the world, and what behind your model of pregnancy, when you're looking
well, that's what it means like you and your mother.
So I would, I know that, you know, and I think that's how she's going to do that, which I'm going to introduce now.
There are a lot of my colleagues who have done this, you know, and you've got an actual
attention on the side of it.
There's, you know, there's a hundred years on your side, so I think it's certainly
the exercise of the audience of that, and I've also seen a lot of human-human disasters
as you can see, and I'm sure you've heard about it, because certain things tend to be
different, and that's where, between the modern world model of the world, and I think that
is the world model, and it's not just the gender model, it's part of the self-advocacy,
because I have access to every kind of healthcare, including your children.
So I think that's how the space needs to be, and I hope that the world will experience
what it is, and that it's constituted by, I would say, two hundred years and a half.
I think that's a really important point, and I'm sure that, you know, that was in terms of
how it really was, as long as I was a scientist, and I'm not saying you've got conditions,
but I think that's how it's going to work.
So in order to have, you know, in a certain psychology sense, I have to be able to select
myself, so what are the things that I'm going to select from?
Well, under the three-energy principle, that's underactive influence.
Only those things, such as objective models of their country or future, can select from
those counter-factuals each other, and that are under their control.
So for example, just pictures of a family, or only objective models, and then containing
all sorts of things in their plans and policies, and that are in their position,
or in their own way, to select what are available to them, and what they have in mind,
as well as in their world models.
So this is just how the statisticians are at the point of view.
It's just an easy one to select.
But it needs to be applied in the context of selecting these features.
For me, that's a nice use of the word, in the real world.
In the real world, you need an employment, you know, in the real world.
That's an easy one to select.
I mean, don't you suppose it applies to agents?
I mean, it only applies to patients.
That's an objective model of their future.
So in order to survive this virus, in order to make some thermostat, I mean,
it would apply to a bicker.
So that would be one melody.
There are other ways of using this in the basic level, in terms of terms of devices.
I think what's more interesting, obviously, in terms of agency and self-governing,
I think that brings me to something I wanted to ask you from the very beginning.
With the free energy principle in mind, what do you call is the meaning or purpose of life?
Well, as a physicist, that doesn't really have too much of a question, has no meaning.
So from the point of view of physicists observing a universe that was comprised of things,
all of the free energy principle is saying is that if this universe is settling onto an attracting set,
and if they are all like attractors, then it must be the case that it is, on average,
maximizing the geobing on things, attracting the characteristic states.
It's just like rolling to the bottom of a hole. That's it.
What way of reading that rolling to the bottom of a hole, that convergence to the attractive set
is in terms of a minimization of thermodynamic free energy.
The special claim that's brought to the table by the free energy principle is the assertion of a Markov blanket.
Now, you can read the minimization of thermodynamic free energy in terms of a minimization of certain beliefs,
infants, where the beliefs are held by internal states, but they are about external states.
So this is the point, and I phrase it like that, because of your purpose on the media.
So the free energy principle gives you what people like Ramster-Custom,
Maxwell-Ramster-Core, amazing mechanics, which is exactly the same as physical mechanics,
exactly the same as physical mechanics, exactly the same as quantum mechanics.
The only difference is that you've got a Markov blanket in a partition inside the outside.
So in this and only this situation, when you talk about beliefs having a meaning about something else,
there is no something else unless you have a Markov blanket.
You can't get the input information in statistical mechanics.
It's just the probability of being in a state, whereas in the free energy principle, it actually requires beating now.
So this particular physical state has a meaning in the nation in every sense.
It is explaining its hypothesis about it is a model of this external state about something else,
this illusion of what might be out there.
So I think that the meaning of life, if there is life in the sense of there being a Markov blanket,
there is an urgent meaning and that meaning is permanently internal dynamics of life.
And its meaning is established in a relational sense,
in the sense the relation of the internal sense making,
the measurement of your quantum physicist,
of whatever is causing the observations and the sensations that you are using to do your measurement.
So this is a model to our Levy and Lech's quantum information theory, which I'm completely subscribed to.
So that would be one way to do it.
I think a slightly more popular answer to the question would be,
well, what's the meaning in my life where I am one of these junior systems that has this capacity
for agency in the sense that I have very precise dynamics
and that I have the ability to model the consequences of my action
in this very particular case where I can now infer what I am going to do in the future.
There is something called expected reality, it gets it's name.
So you can compute the probability of a particular narrative action trajectory into the future
as basically a very softmax function of the expected free energy.
So the path to the future that has the lowest expected free energy is the most likely path that I will follow.
And it will select very well.
I will select the path that has the lowest expected free energy.
What does that mean in the expected free energy?
In the same way that you can express log evidence as equal to accuracy minus complexity,
you can express the expected free energy as the expected information gain minus the expected cost.
Where the cost is, it supplies the negative self-evidence that stores the characteristic state.
So if you have a very uncharacteristic or dead dissipating,
then that would be very surprising, highly costly.
So you have now got two affordances or imperatives for amps that you will select,
which is what I am reading, the meaning of life to be,
what is my life meaning, what is its purpose, what is my purpose.
Well, it is the imperatives and the libel things I choose to do.
What do I choose to do?
I choose those things that minimise my expected free energy.
What does that mean?
It means I will try to choose those things and maximise the expected information gain
or minimising the expected cost.
The expected information gain is just curiosity.
So the meaning of life for me, assuming that I am avoiding the most costly states of being,
is like, you know, don't put myself in danger of going out very much to trouble with my life,
then the majority of my meaning is the curiosity.
It is basically being a scientist, the energy principle is like a person.
I think that is a beautiful way to put it, Cole.
There are so many things I want to ask you about, but something I often love to ask is,
and I think it is because this gives us an idea of how you were crafted as a thinker
and how you really developed as a thinker over time.
If you had to give us a Mount Rushmore of your favourite philosophers or scientists,
who comes to mind instantly?
Who are these people who really guided your thoughts growing up and made you the man you are today?
Because I am pretty sure when people look at your work today,
when time moves on, we are going to be talking about you, have a feeling,
the same way we talk about some of the greats,
and I think it would be great to know who inspires Carl Friston.
Right.
That was a tricky question to ask that one.
One reason it is tricky is my hero is Sherlock Holmes,
but Sherlock Holmes is not a real person.
He is my hero too. I think that is a great option.
I think the two people, when I read or reference with warm feelings and a tinge of excitement,
especially when I find their quotes, are Helmholtz and Feynman.
Look, the Helmholtz reference, that makes sense.
When you think of unconscious inference and all your work, it makes a lot of sense.
What about these guys really get you going?
Well, very much what probably gets you going about people like Mark Somes and possibly me.
He was a clear polymath.
If you just think about every move you make,
every move I make in my little world in trying to naturalise psychology and psychopathology
and more generally what makes us tick.
You come across some foundational idea or principle or decomposition that he has brought to the table.
You have mentioned the notion of unconscious inference.
That is just basically the Bayesian brain,
as beautifully articulated by Peter Diane and Geoffrey Hinton's Helmholtz machine in the early 90s.
That is certainly one thing, but it does not stop there.
You look at his work in perception generally.
He had all the one aspect of illusionist thinking, at least, down to fine art.
Anything that was worth saying at some point, even if you said it.
More than that, of course, the Helmholtz notion of free energy and the contribution to thermodynamics
is also pretty central to what I am, the kinds of things I talk about.
Interestingly, right down to something called the Helmholtz decomposition,
which I suspect you probably won't know about if you are more interested in computational psychology.
This is an expression of the fundamental theme of, what is it?
The Helmholtz decomposition just means that what you can do is describe any dynamics
in terms of two effectively orthogonal parts.
One part is dissipative and it climbs down the hills, like the ball rolling down the hill.
This is the thing that generates energy.
It is a thing that does basing belief updating in an information theoretical energy principle context.
The other part is called the conservative part, also in a solenoidal flow.
This part, if you like, circulates upon isocontals of potentials or probability distributions.
This can be read in many different ways.
If you are an engineer, it is a decomposition of procedures that you would use to simulate data
or estimate unobservable states to do inference as an engineer using, say, a Kalman filter.
You would have a prediction.
Given my beliefs about states, the prior prediction about what I am going to sample next.
That will be the conservative solenoidal part.
Then you would have your update, which is basically a prediction error weighted by its precision,
which changes my prediction, my prior belief.
That is the, if you like, the dissipative part.
That is my engagement in the world.
That is what takes energy and does the belief updating.
That is written down mathematically, very beautifully, by the Helmholtz decomposition.
What it tells you is that if you have got this, by appeal to the Helmholtz decomposition,
you have got this solenoidal flow, then you are necessarily breaking something called detail balance
of the kind that you see in open systems and non-equilibrium systems.
There is a direct mathematical mapping between the Helmholtz decomposition
and the class of systems that physicists use and study,
which largely in the past few centuries has been sort of systems,
closed systems that are equilibrium.
In this century, it is now all about non-equilibrium systems.
That non-equilibrium aspect is just due to the conservative part of the Helmholtz decomposition.
Also, it is exactly the thing that makes us lifelike.
It is what equips us with life cycles, with bio-rhythms, with oscillations in the brain
at every scale of gammas, oscillations in our favourite hippocampal dendrite
through to our beating heart and respiration, through to our sleep-wake diurnal cycles,
through to our life cycles, through to the orbit of the heavenly bodies.
All of these are not quite a biological aspect.
Certainly for biological systems that break detail balance
and have this particular kind of itinerancy, while still maintaining their integrity
and a free energy principle.
Then you have a description of biotic self-organisation that foregrounds oscillations
and rhythms and arancers returning to the states I was once in,
which of course is part of this sort of keeping of stuff within the characteristic states.
So I got on a little bit there about Helmholtz.
You can see why you are such a fan of Helmholtz.
I mean, it is clear.
You can see the joy in your face when you are talking about this,
and it is very fascinating work as well.
It makes sense why this really gets you going.
And Feynman, what about Feynman really?
Because Feynman, I am a huge fan of Feynman's work.
Sometimes even for fun, I end up watching Feynman lectures just keep me calm at night.
Yes, it is one side of the entertainment that I can enjoy.
My wife watches as well.
My wife is a nurse and not into the physics.
He is a very annoying personality.
If you didn't know this, it is probably worthwhile just saying out loud.
I mean, the variational free energy was his invention.
So he was trying to...
Well, one reading of the history is that it was his invention.
You could have good arguments with Russian mathematicians
that can get at compression and free energy minimization
from the point of view of algorithmic complexity
via things like soft induction and the like.
And certainly there is a school of thought that really celebrates
that sort of compression view that is described by free energy minimization.
But the Feynman view is much more closer to my academic training and inheritance.
So what he was trying to do was to solve exactly the impossible marginalization problem
that people would try to solve if they wanted to engage in exact base and inference,
exact sense making, the exact statistics to actually get a grip
of the very best explanation of this metaphysical world that of course doesn't exist.
But that is intractable in the same sense that he couldn't possibly integrate
over all the paths of small particles, say an electron would take and quantum electrodynamics.
He couldn't possibly normalize that probability distribution
by integrating over all the universe of paths an electron could take.
So what he did was to dissolve that problem by converting this
inference marginalization integration problem into an optimization problem.
And he did it by creating this band on the quantity he wanted to optimize,
namely the log marginal likelihood, which is the variation of the energy.
So all of the Feynman view principle owes its greatest debt, I think,
one that is not quite fair on health health, so everybody else runs through from can't through to...
And base all the way through.
Yeah, that's sorry people, you couldn't mention.
But anyway, certainly from a technical point of view, that that ethical formulation is so beautiful.
It is leveraged directly, certainly in my personal work and the way that I would normalize the free energy principle.
It's not the only way you can read the free energy principle as due or to James' Maximum Entry principle.
but when read or written in its pathological form, that is really a homage to Feynman's original
conceptions. But as you say, he's such a delightful person to watch as well. And unlike me, he was
a committed smoker. So I like that. Yes, you love your cigars. I know that. I often think about that
video of Feynman, where he's talking about a red flower, I think it was. And he says his friend
his artist friend looks at this, looks at this flower and then tells him,
you as a scientist, you're obviously going to break this down and ruin it. And he's like,
no, no, no, it's actually because I'm a scientist, I'm going to look at the cells beneath the flowers.
I'm going to look at every single flow of each atom. He's going to look at every single aspect
of this flower in so much greater detail that it only increases in its complexity and beauty.
And to him, the flowers fall more beautiful because of this. And that goes back to what
we were talking about earlier. And I think that's something that you guys have in common.
Yeah, and with you apparently with you. It's beautiful because Feynman has that
perfect way of blending the science with the art. And that brings me to this question I wanted to
ask you, when are you going to make or write a book? Because your work is so complex, to a point
where most people really don't know how to approach it when it comes to whether it's a neuroscientist,
psychologist, physicist. If they don't understand the work, they're going to find it very difficult.
Have you ever thought of writing a book that is a bit more for the layman out there?
Yeah, no, I'm notoriously bad at writing accessible those of a kind, I think would be
required for for a book. And so I'm probably not going to what I've found tends to work best
is to have the next generation of people who are much more fluent, usually either because they're
sort of in a person facing kind of science like psychology or medicine. Or they've had a philosophical
training. So I find these these people are much better than I am at articulating in prose in
narrative form, the ideas. So they can write the books. I did try ones. So for the book called
Robert Pryor, Robert Pryor, MIT Press, who has been asking me for at least three decades,
when I go into write the free energy principle book, and he thinks he's got precedence because
his surname is Pryor. So he thinks any book that appeals to me, especially the free energy principle
has to be commissioned by him. And he was absolutely right. But the problem is,
the only stuff I can write is so tortuous. And I have to say that, you know, as with the free
energy principle itself, with its emphasis on complexity minimization, namely, providing a
parsimonious explanation, the free energy principle becomes simpler and simpler, the longer it
baronates, certainly in my head. So I've taken now every year now I write a paper, you know,
describing how a simpler version and a simpler version, that process will go on. At some point,
it may be sufficiently simple to be attractive to Bob Pryor or any other editor who invites me
or asks me the question that you've just been asking. My suspicion is I will probably be
retired or die before that arrives. So, you know, but there are some wonderful
renditions of the free energy pro and con. But certainly, as recently the active inference
book by Thomas Parr and Giovanna Pazzullo, you know, I actually say it there that, you know,
I was allowed to write the four with nothing else.
Yeah, that's okay. I was just about to ask you, what are some of the reading recommendations? I
think that's definitely one. That's on top. That's actually a book that I want to read desperately.
And I cannot wait. If you had to recommend us any other books, what type of books
would you recommend to either increase our knowledge with regards to the free energy
principle or active inference in general, or just books that you find help a scientist,
philosopher in general to grow in this field?
I'm afraid I'm not going to give you a very good answer to that. There's a reason for that.
There are two reasons. One, I don't have time to read books. When you get to my age,
you tend to be, you get asked to write blurb for books. So, I have to speed read certain
chapters of books, but I don't actually have time in my working life to read books. I can only
review papers and scientific proposals. That's even working seven days a week.
Any papers that come to mind? Oh, there are lots of papers. Yeah, but I'm not going to tell you
what they are because the people I don't mention will be very, very upset. So, I'm not very good
at sort of reading books nor recommending books. So, what I'm going to do is what my
father is. So, he sometimes sends me books to read, which he thinks are good for me.
So, I'm just going to mention the last one that I read, literally a couple of weeks ago,
which is Hel-Go-Land by Carlo Rovelli. I really like that. So, that would, I would certainly
recommend that. And I think that had Carlo written that last year, as opposed to, I think,
2014, there would have been more emphasis because the Fraynish-Britjewel is just that,
you know, that viewpoint, I think articulated slightly more in a classical setting, in particular
the pathogen formulation of Richard Feynman. So, I really enjoyed that. But otherwise,
if people are generally interested, there are lots of wonderful papers usually by philosophers,
usually by, again, people like Andy Clark, Jacob Howe, and Maxwell Rammstead,
when he's wearing his philosophy hat. But there are also lots of really wonderful others.
But you can just go to a repository. So, Baron Rovelli has got a nice repository and GitHub
of his favourite FEP papers. There's something called the Active Imprints Institute, run by
Daniel Freedman, that is dedicated to trying to organise the material in a didactic or
pedagogical way. They're actually writing now, I think, another Active Imprints book,
which is an explainer for Thomas's and Giovanni's Active Imprints book. So, if you're interested,
I think you go to the people who actually know how to teach and articulate these ideas.
It's funny because one of the last people, well, this was actually a year ago now that I think about
it, who talks about hierarchical Bayesian brains and active inference. It was Lisa Feldman.
And one of the books, yes, exactly. And the book she recommended was Halkeland. And this was
just when the book came out. So, it's funny that you both basically talk around the same
topic and recommend the same book. So, it clearly is an impactful book in general.
Well, she's also written some very influential stuff in the emotional sphere. And there's now
quite a key player in the Active Imprints, certainly the emotional inference and
intercepted inference field, along with Anil Seth and Colin.
Just a close-up call. Any theories of consciousness, the brain, that you feel
sort of go against the free energy principle? Anything that you know stands out that Cantor
argues this principle in a way that does sort of get you, get your shield up?
No, I'm afraid not. I think that probably reflects the fact that I don't have a philosophical
training. So, I don't, you know, I'm not used to adversarial progression, adversarial argumentative
approaches. Now, I don't, you know, the whole point of the free energy principle is it has to
explain everything or it explains nothing. So, if there is a viable theory of consciousness out
there, there has to be some way of, if you like, reframing it or substantiating that right theory
by naturalizing it using the free energy principle. Remember, free energy principle can never be
wrong. So, it doesn't need to defend itself. It's just a method or a tool, very much like
Hamilton's principle of least reflection. Inherently, unfaultifiable.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think just I'd like to say thank you so much for all your work. I
clearly supported in the fact that I quoted you a couple of times, referenced you numerous times.
So, to me, it is replicable. It is work that a lot of us are using out there. So, from my side,
I just want to say thank you so much, Col. It's a pleasure. It's an absolute honor to actually
chat to you. And I really enjoyed this conversation. Well, so am I. You've asked some really
excellent questions. You've kept me on my toes, but also kept me smiling. Thank you very much.
