Okay, so one of the term in our Richie decomposition for Riemann tensor was c
mu nu alpha beta and this is traceless. It has no trace. This is called
the Weyl tensor. So basically Riemann tensor has 20 independent components and
Richie tensor has 10 independent components and Weyl component has the
other 10 independent components. Now Richie tensor, well actually some of the
properties in Weyl tensor is 0 for 3D geometry. What else? It has all the
properties, algebraic properties of Riemann tensor and in addition it is
traceless. Moreover, we did talk about a formula telling that what is the
geometrical meaning of Richie tensor and we said it tells how the volume element
changes as it moves down geodesic. I mean it follows the space-time
curvature. Let's say if you have volume element, it follows the space-time
curvature. How does the volume changes for this volume element? I do not have
a similar formula for Weyl tensor but we know that what is the contribution of
Weyl tensor is encodes the stretching and squeezing property of space-time
curvature. So it may happen that the space-time curvature may be such that it
can stretch or squeeze something. For example, you may have a thing like this
and if it moves through space-time, it can actually get elongated or it can
actually get squeezed, stretched or squeezed something like that. Now, how do
we know this property? Well, we know this from the fact that if there is no
matter present, whereby matter I mean is the stress energy tensor is 0, we will
talk about that. If T mu nu is 0, that means it's free space. In that case, Riemann
tensor is also 0 because of Einstein's equation. We will talk about that. We will
talk about this later. This is 0. The only, so the 10 components of the Richie
tensor are gone but it is still Riemann tensor has 10 components remaining with Weyl
tensor and this is actually seen as gravitational waves. Let me summarize what I'm trying
to say here. In the free space, Einstein's equation have solutions which are called gravitational
waves and the property of gravitational wave is stretching and squeezing. Also in free
space, the only component of Riemann tensor remains alive is the Weyl tensor because Richie
tensor is 0 because T mu nu is 0 and T mu nu is 0 because of Einstein's equations, Richie
tensor is 0. This stretching squeezing property can be attributed to the Weyl tensor part
of the Riemann tensor. This is very qualitative. I don't know how to make it quantitative but
as we proceed, I will try to do that. But right now, this is the information I have
regarding Weyl tensor and we will talk more in the following
