Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe Lecture 2, The Central Sun.
In the last lecture, we looked at generalities. We looked at the small picture to the big picture.
With this lecture, we begin our real progression in astronomy from the Sun, our own star,
to the most distant reaches of the Universe that we'll cover at the very last lecture, lecture 14.
At the end, here we're going to look at our own local star, our Sun, and look at its bulk properties,
what it's really like on the outside, at its temperature, mass, luminosity, all of which are spectacular numbers,
and at its most fascinating characteristics, its activity, sunspots, how they're made,
what they actually mean, the magnetic cycle of the Sun, and what that actually means to the Earth,
because the Sun's magnetism reaches out to touches, and we'll begin to see the interrelationships
that actually exist between the Earth and the Sun.
It's an extraordinary body, as I think you'll admit when we've looked at its basic properties.
From the Earth, it doesn't look all that big, bright, yes.
I'm going to be using the phrase, when we see the Sun, when we look at the Sun, for heaven's sakes, don't look at it.
Don't try to go out and see some of these phenomena on your own.
Looking at the Sun is extremely dangerous. The Sun is simply too bright for the human eye,
and the lens of the eye will focus the Sun onto the retina and cause burns and scars that are irreparable.
There's only one safe way to look at the Sun, and that's through professionally made filters,
and even there you have to be careful, so please, it's just a phrase, don't look at the Sun.
It's about a half a degree across from the Earth, doesn't look all that big.
Actually, about the same angular size as the Moon, which is wonderful,
because a couple of times a year the Moon passes across the face of the Sun to produce a total solar eclipse,
which allows us to see the outer solar layers, which we really can't see very well in the blue sky.
We'd either have to wait for an eclipse or go into space at an enormous expense, of course.
Layers that we'll talk about in a little while down the line in this particular lecture.
We know the Sun is 100 million miles away. We measure it to be half a degree across in the sky,
which is 93 million miles, 150 million kilometers, the astronomical unit, remember.
And with a little simple trigonometry, we can calculate the diameter of the Sun,
which turns out to be 860,000 miles. We can use a variety of units, 1.5 million kilometers,
one and a half million kilometers, 109 times the diameter of the Earth.
The Earth is just a little dot. The Sun is this big. The Earth is only about that big compared to the Sun.
Only a hundredth diameter, only a millionth the volume.
You put a million Earths inside the Sun. And the Sun is a hundredth of an astronomical unit in diameter.
You could line up a hundred Suns between us and the Earth.
It's a large body, far greater than anything else in the planetary system,
10 times the size of Jupiter, the biggest of the planets. But it just dominates.
We can get the mass of the Sun from Kepler's Laws.
I promised to talk about the Third Law and Newton's generalization of that.
Kepler found that p squared equals a cubed, where p is the period of the planet around the Sun in years,
and a is the average distance between a planet and the Sun in astronomical units,
the so-called semi-major axis of the elliptical orbit, half the size of the major axis.
Newton beautifully generalized that. We know that the force of gravity depends upon mass,
the product of the masses, yet in Kepler's Third Law, the mass doesn't appear.
So there's something rather odd going on here.
It's that the masses of the planets are very small compared to the mass of the Sun,
which is what allowed Kepler to get away with that simplification of the real rule.
Newton found real equation in terms of physical units, seconds, centimeters, grams,
that p squared in seconds.
Now, the orbit of the Earth is 31 million seconds.
If you like, just start January 1st, start counting all the way, get 31 million.
If you have the patience to do that, or you can just multiply a few numbers together,
it comes out very nicely.
31 million seconds, p squared equals a constant, well-known constant.
We don't need to bother with that here.
Times A, again, the semi-major axis of the orbit, cubed,
but now in centimeters, or meters, whichever physical unit you wish to use,
divided by the sum of the masses.
That's the kicker.
The mass of the Sun plus the mass of the planet.
Well, the mass of the planet is very small compared to the mass of the Sun.
It's inconsequential.
We don't have to string numbers out to a hundred decimal places.
We can't do it.
We want to know the Sun to within a factor of a few tenths of a percent, perhaps,
or a tenth of a hundredth of a percent.
So within that realm, the mass of the Earth is simply not consequential at all.
Neither is any other planet.
So the mass of the Sun in Newton's generalization of Kepler's third law
becomes a constant itself, gets thrown in with a constant,
because M Sun plus M planet is about the same for all the planets in solar system.
So you re-derive Kepler's law as he derived it, p squared equals a cubed,
when you put it in terms of the same quantities for the Earth,
you know, years and astronomical units.
Well, if you've got p squared as a constant times a cubed over the sum of the masses,
you can derive the sum of the masses, the mass of the Sun plus the mass of the Earth.
It's the only thing you don't know in that simple equation.
But the mass of the Earth is inconsequential.
So what do you have? You have the mass of the Sun.
We can get the mass of the Sun, the amount of matter within it,
without any kind of direct sampling.
What we're effectively doing is measuring the gravitational field of the Sun
at a known distance, that is, at the Earth.
You could do the same for any of the planets,
and you come up with exactly the same number,
that the mass of the Sun is 2 million trillion trillion kilograms,
number that's unfathomable to the human mind.
It's about 333,000 times the mass of the Earth.
So you see, the Earth is just a moat compared with the Sun,
about a thousand times the mass of Jupiter.
You roll all the planets together, and they still don't come up anywhere near to the Sun,
tenth of a percent, that's all.
So we now know the mass.
The Sun's the self-luminous body.
It's hot, and it's radiating because it's hot.
All warm bodies, anything above absolute zero, absolute zero.
Well, any body has heat in it, has an energy within it,
vibration of the atoms, movement of the atoms,
even the solid within crystal structures.
You can remove heat from a body, and the temperature goes down.
Temperature reflecting the amount of heat within the body, reflective of it.
Now, eventually, you remove all the heat,
and the temperature reaches some kind of zero,
and you can't go below that.
It's a minimum.
In the temperature scales that are generally used in daily life,
Fahrenheit, the United States,
Celsius or centigrade, pretty much everywhere else,
absolute zero, where you have all of the heat out of the body,
is at minus 459 Fahrenheit, minus 273 Celsius or centigrade.
We don't, for the most part, like to deal with negative temperatures in astronomy.
So what we'll do is start with zero as absolute zero.
It's called the Kelvin scale.
Start with absolute zero and work our way up in centigrade degrees.
So water, which freezes at zero degrees centigrade on that scale,
freezes at 273 degrees Kelvin.
And the room temperature is roughly 300 degrees Kelvin.
It's a much friendlier scale to use once you get used to it.
As we'll tell you now, the sun's surface temperature is 6,000 degrees, 5,780 degrees.
How do we know that?
Well, all warm bodies, if they're in a cooler environment,
will radiate their energy into space via electromagnetic radiation.
Light, light is a small example of electromagnetic radiation.
We characterize radiation as a result of electric and magnetic forces
as a flow of electromagnetic energy as a wave.
Sometimes there's a particle called a photon,
which I guess you could think of it as a chunk of a wave.
It's a bad way to do it.
There's really no way a human can envision this.
It's a mathematical concept, really.
If you have a little piece of a wave flying along as a photon,
the kind of light you have depends upon the length of the wave.
The human eye sees very, very short waves,
less than a 10,000th of a centimeter long.
The shorter the waves, the higher the energy.
So in that little realm of a fraction of a 10,000th of a centimeter,
that's enough energy to activate the chemistry of the human eye.
And then you see the colors of the rainbow,
which Newton first did artificially by passing sunlight through a prism.
The refraction.
Red light bent a little less than blue light.
So we have red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet.
Violet light having about half the wavelength of red light.
But that's not all there is.
That's just a factor of two in wavelength.
If you go beyond red, you get into the infrared.
Lower energy radiation, which could be felt as heat on the skin, actually,
and then into radio, long waves that may be anywhere from a millimeter to a centimeter
to a kilometer, 10 kilometers or more long.
There's no known limit.
And then you go short-word of violet and you get the ultra-violet,
and then you get into very, very, very short waves.
X-rays, a hundred millionth of a centimeter,
and gamma rays that are produced in atomic bomb blasts.
Deadly stuff.
Very, very high energy radiation.
Even the ultra-violet, just off the end of the human vision,
is dangerous and can produce burns on the skin.
Natural ultra-violet light from the sun.
So a cooler body can't possibly produce high energy radiation.
The things around you are producing infrared radiation.
They're producing what we might think of as heat radiation.
Infrared, sure. Infrared camera can capture it.
A body near absolute zero can only produce long waves, radio waves.
The higher the temperature of the body,
the greater ability it has to produce short-wave radiation.
In addition to all the long-wave stuff, at around 6,000 degrees,
you're producing a lot of optical light.
That's why the sun appears visible to the naked eye.
The cut points around 1,000, 1,500 or so, you begin to see it as red light.
Cool stars are therefore red. Hot stars are blue.
Now, hot stars will produce red light.
Sure, but they're dominantly producing blue light,
so they tend not to take on a bluish cast.
It's just the opposite of what we tend to think of ice cold, red hot.
That's not true. It's the reverse of that.
Blue stars are hotter than red stars.
And we even have infrared stars.
There are stars that you can't even see with a human eye.
They're so cool.
And then you can go up to stars that are in the hundreds of thousands.
So it's quite a range.
So from where the sun produces most of its radiation,
where in the spectrum this array of waves,
the sun produces most of its radiation,
you can get the temperature. You can get it remotely.
Just by taking sunlight and spreading it out
and measuring the intensities of the different colors.
We can do another way, too.
We can take the total amount of energy that the sun produces.
We can measure the amount of energy that falls on the Earth.
The first way of doing it was just to put a pan of water out on the ground,
see how fast it heats up.
There are much more sophisticated ways of doing this now from space.
You don't have absorption by the Earth's atmosphere.
And you can derive the amount of radiation falling on the Earth from the sun.
Well, we know how far away the Earth is from the sun.
So we take the amount of radiation that passes through a square meter,
let's say per second.
We know the number of square meters in a giant sphere around the sun
at the radius of the Earth's distance.
And then you can calculate the amount of energy that the sun releases.
It, too, is a staggering amount, by the way.
It comes out to be 400 trillion, trillion watts.
Everybody's familiar with the watt, 100 watt light bulbs and all that.
A staggering amount.
If you wanted your local power company to run the sun,
it would take the gross national product of the United States for many millions of years
to pay for running the sun for one second.
That puts it in a little bit of perspective, at least.
Well, the amount of energy coming out of a body, the total amount of energy
when you integrate it across the whole spectrum,
depends upon the fourth power of the temperature.
What you do is take a little square centimeter or square meter unit area.
The amount of energy coming out of a unit area, the power output in watts,
is equal to a constant known from laboratory times temperature to the fourth power.
This is a very, very fundamental physical rule.
We know the area of the sun, the surface area of the sun.
Euclid, thousands of years ago, shows surface area of a sphere, 4 pi radius squared.
So we know the total luminosity of the sun.
We know the surface area. You divide one number by the other
and you can get the amount of energy coming out of, say, a square meter
or a square centimeter of the sun's surface
and apply the physical rule that was discovered long ago.
That is, the amount of energy coming out equal to a constant
known from lab times temperature to the fourth and you derive the temperature.
You get the same thing that you got from where the sun produces most of its light
in the yellow part of the spectrum.
5,780 degrees Kelvin.
We actually know it to a pretty high order of accuracy.
Now you have to be a little careful with that.
There's a concept in physics and astronomy known as the black body.
It's a body that absorbs all radiation that falls upon it.
That same black body, of course, must release as much radiation as it absorbs
in order to maintain itself at a constant temperature.
It's a physical ideal.
There really isn't any such thing in the universe.
This is very common in science.
You come up with a perfect mathematical ideal,
but real nature deviates a little bit from that and so does the sun.
So what that 5,780 degrees is, is called the effective temperature.
It's the temperature a perfect radiator would have at the solar radius.
And we can use that perfect radiator idea to compare stars
even if they're not perfect radiators themselves.
They're close enough for a good, good approximation.
So roughly, okay, 6,000 degrees,
at which point the sun releases much of its light in the yellow part of the spectrum,
where the human eye turns out to be actually pretty much most sensitive.
Then there are stars that radiate better in the red,
cool stars that radiate better in the blue,
tend to take on, let's say, a blue-white cast.
So you can actually go on outside night and look at star colors
and get some idea for many of them of their temperatures,
just with naked eye observations.
Crudely, of course.
I talked about the solar surface.
The sun does not have a solid surface.
The sun is a gas.
Unlike any of the other planets,
the sun has no solid, liquid, or anything else in it.
It's gaseous throughout.
It appears to have a sharp edge on it.
That's only because when you reach the so-called solar surface
and there are gasses outside of it.
When you reach that point, the gasses suddenly become very, very opaque
as a result of an atomic process.
You fly over the lovely cumulus clouds
and it looks like you could jump out of the airplane and walk on the clouds.
Don't try that because you'll go right through, of course.
They're not solid.
They just look solid because they're very opaque.
The solar surface is the same way.
The razor-sharp edge is viewed from the earth.
If you got close up, you could see that the edge was a little bit fuzzy.
Then you could actually see its gaseous nature.
The remarkable thing is that it's gaseous all the way through.
The density of the solar gasses near the solar surface,
depending upon where you are and the huge variation,
is not all that much different from the air in the room.
It's crudely comparable.
When you get down in the middle of the sun,
which we are going to deal with in the next lecture,
the density goes up to 160 grams per cubic centimeter.
Now, the density of water is one gram per cubic centimeter.
Of lead, a heavy metal, maybe 10-11 grams per cubic centimeter.
I mean, it's even this dense, heavy stuff.
The sun is 10 times denser than lead at the center.
And it's still a gas.
It's a gas because it's at 15 million degrees.
Closer to 16, actually, and very hot.
That keeps it in the gaseous state.
Almost all stars are gaseous throughout.
There are exceptions where some dead stars can take on crystalline structures
and some very cool stars can precipitate solids in their outer parts.
It's sort of dusty clouds, almost.
But basically, stars are gaseous throughout.
Among the most intriguing things about the sun,
and stars in general, is their chemical composition.
Again, in the next lecture, I'm going to defer this to the next one,
the details of the atoms and how they work.
But we're all familiar with the basic properties,
the kinds of substances that make the earth hydrogen, helium, iron,
the chemical elements, the roughly 100 chemical elements.
What's the composition of the sun?
Now, as sunlight flows out of the sun,
as Newton showed, you pass sunlight through a prism
and you get a continuous array of colors.
You go from violet to red, red to violet.
However, if you spread it out enough,
as was found in the early 19th century,
if you spread it out enough, you see gaps in that color.
You have to do this great detail,
difficult thing to do at home.
You see little narrow cutouts.
They're called spectrum lines.
Sometimes they're called absorption lines,
and they're produced by the individual atoms
in the gases of the outer layers of the sun,
where the density gets down a little bit low.
Each chemical element has its own characteristic pattern
or set of patterns associated with it in these absorptions.
Hydrogen has four that are very well known.
You know exactly what colors are cut out.
Whenever you see those four cutouts, those four absorption lines,
you know you got hydrogen,
and we do see these hydrogen lines in the sun.
We see the absorption patterns
of about three-quarters of the known chemical elements,
and we know the others are there.
It's just that many of the elements are so rare
that they just don't superimpose their features on the sun.
We can take the strength,
the amount of energy subtracted from the solar spectrum,
and factor in the efficiency of absorption,
which comes to us from the atomic physicists,
and learn that the sun is 90% hydrogen.
Helium lines, although helium was discovered in the sun,
was discovered in an outer solar layer,
not the bright solar surface.
The bright solar surface is called the photosphere,
the sphere of light,
and from the spectrum of that photosphere,
we can get hydrogen 90%,
and we can get the chemical compositions of all the other elements.
We can't get helium, but we can get helium from the solar wind,
this flow of particles from the sun,
which we'll be describing in a little while.
The chemical composition of the sun turns out to be profoundly important.
It's a collective datum, so to speak,
against which we compare all the other stars,
and which we try to replicate with our theories
of the universe and of stellar evolution,
because all of the chemical elements,
heavier than helium,
have been produced in stars,
in earlier generations of stars before the sun was born.
The universe is 13 or so billion years old.
The sun is only 5 billion years old.
That lift 8 billion years' worth of the aging processes of stars
that create chemical elements and toss them into the cosmos
out of which new stars are born.
Oh, this we'll discuss much later in the course,
but needs to be said now.
So what do we find?
90% hydrogen, actually probably closer to 92%,
8% or 10% helium, that adds up actually to 100%.
Leaving no room for anything else.
You get down into the tenth of a percent is the everything else.
Oxygen is number three,
then you've got neon, carbon, nitrogen,
some of the lighter elements,
and then you go down and down and down
with a little bit of a peek at iron
as you go up to the heavier elements.
Iron's a very, very common element
in terms of the heavy stuff,
and then finally down all the way to uranium,
which hasn't been found in the sun,
although it has been found in other stars.
Certainly it's there in the sun.
We just haven't detected it yet.
So we find a very curious chemical pattern in this body.
The details of which we can actually produce pretty well.
It's that tenth of a percent out of which the earth was made.
If you could distill the sun, put it in a huge still
and boil away the hydrogen and helium,
the residue would be kind of like the terrestrial planet.
It's not exactly the same proportion,
but the basic idea is correct.
We are the distillate of the sun,
as are all the terrestrial planets,
making this really quite special,
even more so when we realize that all this heavy stuff
has come largely from the debris of exploding stars
before the sun and the earth were born.
The sun is also a rotating body.
It spins around with a period of about 25 days at the equator.
Odd thing about it is when you go up toward the pole,
it's spinning around at closer to 30 days.
It's what's called a differential rotator.
Troubeter does the same thing as a result of winds
that make it look like it's spinning faster at the equator
than it is up toward the poles.
The sun is a little different.
This differential rotation goes way, way down inside.
All stars do that because they're gaseous.
The earth is a solid body.
South America is always south of North America,
but that wouldn't be the case were it the sun.
If you look at the sun in great detail with a telescope,
you also find the surfaces modeled.
It's not a smooth surface.
It's broken up into about a million and a half bright points
of light that are called granules.
Sometimes they're called rice grains.
Granules is really the proper word.
The solar surface is granulated.
In between the rice grains are dark lanes,
dark relative to the bright part of the granules.
The granules are the tops of convection cells.
The hot gas flows up from below, reaches the top,
radiates its energy, and then falls back down.
The sun is in a constant state of convection,
roiling gases at the surface.
Each of these little granules last for only five or ten minutes,
and typically they're about the size of a big United States,
state, Montana, Texas, California.
They're large, not large compared to the sun.
They're large compared to us.
That's how the sun releases its energy through this convection
and then radiation at the surface.
The combination of rotation and convection,
the convection goes about a third of the way in.
The combination of the differential rotation and convection
produces a magnetic field, very comparable to the strength
of the magnetic field of earth globally,
but it also concentrates it into very thick magnetic ropes.
The convection takes these ropes and bubbles them up to the surface,
and where the magnetic ropes pop through the surface.
They loop around like that.
They come out of the solar surface, come up and loop back in.
Where they're anchored at the solar surface,
they inhibit the convection, they prevent it,
and it makes two dark spots on the surface of the sun,
one with a magnetic direction this way,
one with a magnetic direction this way,
or up, down, however, opposite each other.
Sunspots, almost any view of the sun is going to show sunspots.
Sunspots are famous.
Sunspots, people have tried to correlate sunspots with everything.
They correlate with some things, not with most.
Sunspots don't do anything.
They just sit there, develop and disappear.
They are symptomatic of the magnetic activity of the sun,
and these large loops that come from out and back in again.
At the time of a total solar eclipse,
you see that the sun, the photosphere,
is surrounded by a bright reddish ring.
Actually, it's a narrow shell called the chromosphere,
the sphere of color.
The red color is coming from hydrogen,
that's radiating light.
Hydrogen is emitting light at these four points,
rather than the spectrum, rather than absorbing it.
The strongest one is in the red.
That's where the helium was discovered,
because now we're not dealing with this perfect radiator
of a black body anymore.
Different processes take place
and can radiate energy at specific wavelengths,
and surrounding that chromosphere
is a huge pearly shell called the solar corona.
You can't see it in the blue sky.
This blue sky is just too bright.
Blue sky being basically scattered light from the photosphere.
The molecules in the Earth's atmosphere
selectively scatter the blue component of sunlight,
so the sky turns blue.
The corona really doesn't have an edge,
and if you look at it very closely,
you see that it consists of big loops,
same magnetic loops that are coming out of the sun,
anchored in the sunspots.
Actually, it's more complicated than that.
There's loops within loops within loops within loops,
extraordinarily complicated.
The corona of the sun has been measured at 2 million degrees.
Clearly, this is not a perfect radiator of a black body.
If it were, with this temperature to the fourth law,
it would fry us all.
The corona is not a black body.
It's not even close, because the gas is so thin.
So it doesn't radiate according to its temperature.
Only these ideal radiators do.
But the speeds of the atoms in the gas
are appropriate to the 2 million degrees.
A hot gas wants to expand.
A hot gas is always going to expand.
However, the magnetic field keeps the gas from expanding,
so you get these big loops in the corona.
In the spaces between the loops, however,
the gas expands away and produces a wind
that blows throughout the entire planetary system,
blows beyond Pluto until it finally rams in
to the gases of interstellar space
in what's called the heliopause.
We've not been there.
The Voyager spacecraft are expected to hit this heliopause
around the year 2020, and we'll know finally where it is.
We are sitting in a flow of gas out from the sun.
The speeds are anywhere from this,
a slow solar wind to fast solar wind, that's equivalent.
It goes from about 200 to around 700 kilometers per second
as the flows pass us.
It's what produces comet tails,
and as it rams into the Earth's magnetic field
that distorts the magnetic field,
produces electrical effects in the Earth's upper atmosphere,
causes the upper atmosphere to glow, air glow,
and near the magnetic poles of the Earth, causes the aurora.
Now, these magnetic field loops are very unstable.
It's like a spark from two wires that jump around.
They cross over, they collapse.
The magnetic field loop on the sun collapses, disappears.
You get a big bubble of corona flying off
into the planetary system, which can smash into the Earth
and produce a Northern Lights display
that will extend all the way down to lower latitudes.
It can turn off power stations.
It can shut off circuit breakers in billion-dollar satellites.
We have to look for space weather now,
not just weather on the Earth,
but weather in space coming from the sun.
Discovering in the last century that this sunspot pattern
is cyclical, 11 years long.
It'll go from 5 to 15, but it averaged roughly 11 years.
At a minimum, you can get rid of all the sunspots.
The sun can just go blank.
At maximum, there can be hundreds of spots all over the sun.
We're in a period of rather high maximum.
1960 maximum was huge, 1970 and so on.
They've been pretty good.
There are correlations between solar activity
and climate patterns on the Earth, actually.
The sun through the solar wind, which is also cyclical,
and through these coronal mass ejections,
which produce the Northern Lights,
are cyclical as well with this 11-year pattern.
Curious thing happened. Galileo discovered sunspots.
Then they sort of went away.
Later part of the 1600s, early part of the 1700s,
we can't find much in the way of any evidence
for the solar cycle or sunspots.
And for a long time, astronomers thought
that the earlier astronomers just didn't care.
Well, it turned out they were looking at the sun.
They just didn't see sunspots.
It's called the Maunder Minimum.
It went away, and this period of time
correlates with what's called the Little Ice Age on Earth.
No sunspots? It got cold here.
Very cold.
Deep snows in Northern Europe.
The Danish colonies were driven out of Greenland.
It became very difficult to live in the...
was now the upper United States.
So we have additional evidence of other warming periods
and cooling periods that do correlate with solar activity.
We haven't been able to figure out quite what is causing this,
but it's more...
the sun's influence is more than just radiation falling on the Earth
and heating up the Earth to living room temperatures.
The solar magnetic cycle has something to do with this as well.
And we see these cycles in other stars.
The magnetic cycle influences the emissions in the chromosphere.
We can see those emissions.
Even though we can't see sunspots on other sides,
there's direct evidence and rotation of other stars.
More about that later.
But we can see that these stars, about two-thirds of the solar-type stars,
have magnetic cycles, so we're not alone.
We're one star among millions that are like our own.
Many of which may have planets like our own,
and who knows, maybe people thinking these same thoughts,
although we have certainly not found any at this point.
The next lecture we're going to dive inside.
What is really causing all this?
Why is the sun still radiating its energy?
Four and a half billion years after it was formed,
there must be an extraordinary energy source to do it.
Found in the early 20th century,
we understand how the sun radiates,
why it stays alive, why all the other stars stay alive,
and begin to look also at the process of chemical element building,
which is what is really responsible, ultimately, for sunlight.
After listening to lecture two,
a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Can you tell me more about the Earth's magnetic field?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The Earth has what's called a magnetosphere,
which is the structure of the magnetic field surrounding the Earth,
and if the Earth were all alone,
the magnetic field generated by a circulating liquid iron core in the Earth
would be quite symmetrical,
kind of like the iron filing pattern that kids play with, with bar magnets.
But the solar wind hammers the magnetic field of the Earth,
compresses it on the near side,
and stretches the other side in a very long tail.
The interaction of the sun's magnetic field,
the solar wind drags the sun's magnetic field outward,
and actually links the sun's magnetic field with the Earth's magnetic field.
The sun and Earth really lock together magnetically in a loose kind of way.
Particles from the solar wind can then flow into the Earth's magnetic field.
The interaction generates a current ring, a ring of electrical current,
a very powerful one that surrounds the magnetic poles.
Now, the magnetic poles are inclined to the rotation axis by about 11 degrees,
and this ring is about 20 or so degrees around,
and when you're under that current ring, you see the sky glow
as a result of the electrical activity on the Earth's upper atmosphere.
That's called the aurora.
Now, it passes right overhead in Alaska,
and in Alaska in a clear night, you'll see the aurora a good fraction of the time.
It's sort of permanently there.
Same true around the southern hemisphere, the northern lights and the southern lights.
So they're really a North country phenomenon,
but if you get this big bulge of solar wind plowing into the Earth,
it so disturbs the Earth's magnetic field that even magnetic field,
magnetic compasses can wander around,
produces what is sometimes called a magnetic storm,
and that can enhance that current ring, and it expands,
and it can expand down to mid-latitudes,
and suddenly somebody in Wisconsin, Minnesota, Illinois, even farther south than that
will suddenly see the sky light up.
You will have flashing lights.
They're stunningly beautiful.
Grapes hanging in the sky.
Coronas bursting through the sky.
I've seen the whole sky illuminated with these northern lights so bright
that it gets almost difficult to see the background stars.
That, of course, is relatively rare.
I've seen it as far south as Arizona on a rare basis.
Weekly, but present.
You've got monumental electrical currents running in the Earth's upper atmosphere.
That produces magnetic fields which produce currents in the ground.
Electrical currents.
They're dangerous, but over a long scale,
that can produce disturbances in electrical power lines
and blow circuit breakers.
There's a famous case where in the 1980s,
the whole province of Quebec went dark as a result of a coronal mass ejection
from the sun and the result in auroral effects.
That's very expensive.
And many of our satellites orbit outside the protective magnetosphere of the Earth,
outside the magnetic field,
and they can get hammered right away with coronal mass ejections,
and that can switch them off as well
and produce a great deal of damage in an Earth-orbiting satellite.
So we have to be able to know what's going on in the sun
and we can actually see with orbiting satellites.
Once you get way outside the Earth's atmosphere,
which blocks the coronary,
you can actually see the structure of the coronary
and you can watch these coronal mass ejections take place
because they radiate so you can see the light from them.
And we have a couple of days' warning before the blob of gas gets here
and we can protect our satellites, protect ourselves on the ground.
A low-technology society doesn't need to worry about this.
You can just admire the northern lights and that's fine.
They're perfectly safe.
They don't hurt anybody on the ground.
But once your technology gets to the point of what we have here,
we've got to pay attention to space weather.
And we'll send you a free copy.
A shipping charge will apply.
