Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies in the Universe, Lecture 12, Galaxies.
In the last lecture, we looked at our own galaxy, this disk of stars that contains all the different kinds of stars we know of that makes the Milky Way across the sky.
In this lecture, we're going to start looking at other galaxies, first examining how we know.
In the first place, there are other galaxies out there and then look at the different kinds.
Our own disk, our own spiral galaxy is just one kind of a great many other.
The variety is almost staggering, the different kinds there are.
And then we will look at how we know how far away they are.
We can actually pick them apart, see the other stars in them and tell their distances.
In some cases, out to distances of billions of light years away.
And then look at a bit of their assembly, how they're put together in their clusters, they cluster, they gang together.
And finally, at the activity that they exhibit, because some galaxies have systems within them that produce energetic processes that are beyond almost anything we can imagine.
Over the last few hundred years, astronomers have observed things in the sky that weren't just stars.
They went by a variety of names and we can loosely call them non-stellar objects.
They might be made of stars, but they are not themselves individual stars.
They first appeared as just fuzzy things through the telescope, things that couldn't be resolved in the early, poorer telescopes than we have today.
Some of them were resolved into just clusters.
If you have poor eyesight, the Pleiades even might look fuzzy to you.
And then other more distant clusters would look like fuzzy blobs and then they would be resolved into speckles of stars.
And then we have things like the Orion Nebula and other nebulae in the sky that astronomers for a while thought were just distant assemblies of stars.
But no matter how hard they looked at them, they couldn't resolve them into stars.
And the spectra eventually showed them to be gas clouds, yet other kinds of non-stellar objects.
There were other fuzzy things that exhibited kind of the spectra of stars as we found out later, but couldn't be resolved in individuals.
Yet a few of them showed oddly shaped spiral structures and they became known as the spiral nebulae.
Nobody knew what they were.
There were surmises that go back a couple of hundred years that the spiral nebulae and the unresolved fuzzy things
might be galaxies like our own, but nobody could prove it.
And even into the 20th century, the arguments raged as to whether these unresolved fuzzy things were actually island universes,
bad term because the universe is one thing, but you will hear the phrase on occasion,
what we think of now as galaxies like our own, or whether our galaxy was just one big galaxy,
the only one and all those other fuzzy things were local to us.
The arguments raged back and forth.
They began to be resolved in the early part of the 20th century when an astronomer named Vesto Slifer of the Lowell Observatory
began a serious study of their spectra and he found oddly enough that their spectra were Doppler shifted
such that with the exception of a couple of objects, they were all moving away from us at relatively high speeds,
implying that they really didn't belong to our own galaxy.
And yet without the distances, without being able to see what they're made of, we really couldn't tell.
Finally in the 1920s, Edwin Hubble, after whom the Hubble Space Telescope was eventually named,
managed to resolve the nearest one of these big ones into stars.
Going out in the northern hemisphere autumn evening and look east and watch the rising of the great square of Pegasus
and the graceful curves of stars that make the constellation Andromeda.
And you'll see just a little bit above Classic Andromeda, you'll see this little fuzzy patch.
You can actually see a few of these with the naked eye.
This one in particular got the name of the Andromeda nebula.
It's got a variety of other names in catalogs.
It's called M31 on occasion, in fact quite popularly, after a catalog by Charles Messier
who compiled a list of about a hundred of these objects so that people who were hunting comets
wouldn't be fooled by the permanent fuzzy blobs that are up there.
Edwin Hubble finally resolved the Andromeda galaxy into stars.
It is made of stars.
And he made the assumption, which is quite rational, that if those stars in that galaxy, that system,
were anything like the ones in our system, it had to be terribly far away because the individual stars are so faint.
And he made an estimate of the distance of that galaxy that was clearly beyond our own system.
He finally established the existence of other galaxies.
His distance was not terribly good, but that's beside the point.
The point was he knew that the M31 galaxy, the Andromeda spiral, was not in our own system.
Finally, it established the existence of other galaxies.
Not long after that, he found a special kind of variable star in M31.
Around 1915 or so, around the time the HR diagram was being established,
an astronomer named Henrietta Levitt was examining two other galaxies that are very close to us,
the large and small Magellanic clouds.
You can see them in the southern hemisphere.
They're quite invisible from most of the northern hemisphere.
It turns out that they are companion galaxies to ours.
They're little scrappy things, maybe one percent the mass of our own galaxy.
The beauty of the Magellanic clouds is that we don't much have to worry,
at least initially, about their distance.
You have a whole set of stars that are at one distance, and the distance then factors out,
and that allows you to intercompare one star with another.
So you don't have to worry about whether one is farther away than the other and the like.
And she found a bunch of Cepheid variable stars.
They're named after delta Cepheid.
It's a star that varies over a period of a few days by a amount of magnitude or so,
a very easily visible star.
In Cepheid, you can actually watch it change its brightness very regularly, very regularly.
It's almost clock-like.
And we found that the star pulses back and forth.
It's a giant star in an unstable part of the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram.
Many of the more massive stars, stars of upper giants and super giants,
pass through a zone that slices down the middle of this diagram called the instability strip.
Even Polaris, the North Star, is one of their number, although very, very subtly.
You can't actually see it vary with a naked eye.
Well, the Cepheid variable stars have a particular property that Leavitt discovered
that the longer the period, the brighter the star.
Long period Cepheid variables of 50 days or so were very luminous super giants.
For a short period, those with a day or so were somewhat much lesser luminous giant stars.
And the relationship was very strict.
All you had to do then was to establish the distance of one or two Cepheids in our galaxy
or learn the distance to the large Magellanic cloud or small cloud one way or another.
And you could establish a relationship between absolute magnitude of the Cepheids and their period.
That means if you see any Cepheid at all, anywhere in the universe,
if you measure its period, you know its absolute luminosity through its absolute magnitude.
All you need to do then is measure its apparent magnitude,
make a little correction for the amount of dust between here and there, because that dims things some.
And you've got the distance.
We can then get the distances to individual Cepheids in our galaxy,
but the beauty of it is that if you find them in a distant galaxy,
you can then get the distance to that galaxy.
The Cepheid becomes what is called a standard candle in astronomy.
Well, Hubble found the first Cepheid in M31 in the Andromeda galaxy,
and that just nailed down the distance.
Sure, we didn't have a very good calibration at that point.
Good calibrations were not available until after roughly 1950.
And then we really began to learn the scale of the universe.
It turns out that the Andromeda galaxy is two million light years away.
It's the most distant thing you can see with the naked eye.
You're looking at light that left there two million years ago.
Quite sobering, especially when we've dealt with stars that are only a few light years away.
It's funny how local, the term local, keeps changing its definition, local are the planets, the sun,
then local become the stars, local became the galaxy.
And as we'll see, local will become M31.
That's just around the corner for us, quite literally.
Hubble also began to establish the distances to a variety of other galaxies based upon the distance to M31.
And then he began to look at the different forms, different shape.
Photography was taking real whole, real shape and astronomy.
In addition, he had the biggest telescope in the world, the 100-inch Mount Wilson Hooker telescope.
Beautiful instrument that's still being used today, very effectively overlooking the Los Angeles Basin.
Same telescope with which Bada discovered the different populations of stars in M31,
and ultimately in our own galaxy.
Hubble began to classify galaxies.
It's a classification system that has been expanded upon many times, but is still used today.
And if you look carefully, say at the Andromeda spiral, you see right next to it two little galaxies that are satellites to M31.
One's called M32, and the other one just has another catalog number.
Sometimes it's called M110, just out of friendliness to keep it in the Messier catalog.
These are called elliptical galaxies.
And there are many others out there.
Once we establish the existence of elliptical galaxies, we can see that many of them have this elliptical shape.
Galaxies divide at the first level into these disc-like spirals and into the ellipticals, and they are profoundly different from each other.
Very little in the way of crossover.
The disc galaxies have this strong population, one component.
They have the interstellar dust, gas, star formation, bright blue O and B stars, core collapse supernovae, everything associated with stellar youth.
The ellipticals, by their very definition, have no discs, or they wouldn't be called ellipticals, and they may come in a variety of shapes,
everything from spherical to egg-shaped, lenticular things, but they have no discs.
They have almost no gas and dust, precious few young stars, if any at all.
No core collapse supernovae.
White dwarf supernovae, yes, these famous Type 1A, but none of the characteristics of population one.
Now there's no star formation either, and it looks almost like the halo of our galaxy thickened up without the disc running through the middle.
There are a population two galaxies, whereas ours is the pop one, plus the thin pop two, quite different from each other.
The elliptical galaxies are broken down, we don't want to get deeply into classification here, but they're broken down into the spherical or the round ones as they project against the sky.
Two rather lenticular ones that look something like this in EE galaxies, E1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, where the lenticular ones are somewhere like this,
kind of egg-shaped, flattened out, but they never get down to disc proportions.
Then we have the spirals, and spirals come in two broad forms.
So now we've got two different kinds, we've got the ellipticals, we've got the spirals, now we take the spirals and we make two branches out of them.
The normal spirals, which everybody thought ours was until very recent times, in which you have a bulge in the middle and then the spiral arms come off of the bulge, like this.
And then you have barred spirals, the beautiful graceful things, in which you have a bulge and a bar that goes through the middle,
just like a knitting needle through an orange in a way, and then the arms come off the bar, like so.
Why these two exist is not entirely clear, it almost looks like a bar can form naturally, and it's almost like, why isn't there a bar in many galaxies?
But they do divide into these two broad types.
Then you can subdivide them into that, because not all spirals are alike.
In fact, it's like people, they all sort of look alike, with two hands, two feet and so on, but when you look at them, they're all individuals.
And anybody who studies galaxies for a living will instantly know, this one is this one, this one is this one, this one is this one.
Just by their differences among their appearances, rather like stars, actually.
You get spirals with tightly wound arms, big bulges.
Then you get spirals with looser arms, smaller bulges, and then ones with wildly open arms, tiny bulges in the middle.
And you get the same kind of thing with the barred spirals.
Spirals tend to be big and massive, like our own.
Ours may have a bar, we're finding a bar in the middle, so we may be a barred spiral, or at least an incipient barred spiral.
It's kind of hard to tell, since we're in the middle of it, after all.
We're not going to get outside of it.
We've been here to the moon, remember.
Star travel is massively difficult, whether we'll ever get there or to another star is certainly problematic.
And that's just the nearest one, getting hundreds of thousands of light-years outside of our own to look back on it as an absolute impossibility.
We know much about our galaxy simply by looking at others and seeing ourselves reflected in the other systems.
The normal galaxies like ours tend to be quite large.
Remember, we have somewhere around 100 million solar masses in our galaxy, without even counting the dark matter.
The ellipticals can get even bigger than ours.
There's a galaxy known as M87, Messier 87, in the Virgo cluster, more about clusters later, but not all that far away, 50 or so million light-years,
and that is at least 10 times, maybe 100 times, the mass of our own, called a giant elliptical for very obvious reasons.
And then the ellipticals go all the way down to little scraps like the ones that surround M31, the Andromeda spiral,
even down to little dwarf ellipticals that in some cases are these little dwarf galaxies are not much bigger than huge globular clusters, in fact.
So it's quite a range.
We seem to require some kind of large mass in order to generate the spiral arms in the first place.
So now we've got ellipticals, we've got spirals, we've got barred spirals, and then we've got all the other kinds.
I mean, there's all manner of leftovers, irregulars, which are just that.
If you can't figure out what kind it is, call it an irregular, most of them are pretty small.
The two galaxies that flank ours, we're a triple galaxy like M31.
It's us and the two Magellanic Clouds, and there are a couple other small satellite galaxies as well,
including the one that's plowing through ours at the moment, the little Sagittarius galaxy.
But the Magellanic Clouds, named after Ferdinand Magellan in honor of his visit to the Southern Hemisphere, really belonged to us and orbit us.
See, so we've got a triple galaxy, this massive one of ours and the other two.
They're irregulars, the small one especially, the big one has kind of a bar on it,
and it looks like it's tried to get spiral arms, but it couldn't really manage it very well.
Locally also, you can see with the naked eye M33, the great triangular spiral.
It's smaller than the Andromeda spiral, but if you are young, good eyes, exceedingly dark sight, there it is.
Not all that far away from the Andromeda spiral at roughly the same distance.
So a few of these things are visible to the naked eye, but really, really, you need telescopes.
And the bigger your telescopes, the more you're going to find.
The realm of the nebulae, a term used by Edwin Hubble himself, but changing the meaning of it a little bit, is perpendicular to the disc of our galaxy.
We can't see, optically, galaxies in the Milky Way, within the band of the Milky Way, simply because of all the dust,
the same dust that produces the formation of stars.
So this is one of the things that confuse astronomers so much.
This is a zone of avoidance of galaxies. They're there. You just can't see them. We know that now.
If you really want to look at the galaxies, however, you look away from the plane of the Milky Way, vertical to the disc of our galaxy,
where there's not a lot of dust in the way, and there they are blossoming out in the constellation Virgo,
and Ursa Major, and Coma Bernices, where you find huge clumps of these things, clusters of them, vast numbers of galaxies.
The distances can be determined through a variety of standard candles.
The Cepheid variable stars are probably the best ones, but there are many others that you can actually use.
Planetary nebulae, which we talked about, these gas clouds ejected by old stars.
O stars, B stars, anything whose absolute magnitude, whose true luminosity you can infer from our own galaxy,
can serve as a standard candle in another galaxy, and the list just goes on and on.
Different kinds of variable stars, and you can study whole books on this subject of standard candles,
and the ability to get distances to other galaxies.
One of the primary purposes in the launching of the Hubble Space Telescope was, in fact, to get distances to other galaxies.
Accurate ones by observing the Cepheid variable stars in relatively distant galaxies out to 50, 60, 70 million light years in that general neighborhood.
A difficult task, very hard to do from the ground because of the twinkling of stars and the obscuration produced by the Earth's atmosphere.
But there they are, and the Hubble has worked magnificently to establish the periods of these Cephides,
to establish their apparent magnitudes, allowing us to get their distances.
And once you have the distances to these standard candles, which requires working your way up from parallax,
and it actually goes back to the astronomical unit.
You start with that, you get the parallaxes of the nearby stars within 500 or 1,000 light years.
That incorporates a whole bunch of stars whose characteristics you know.
That allows you to get the distances to bunches of clusters, which allows you to get the absolute luminosities of stars that are not within parallax range.
And you just work your way out one step at a time.
You can see some of these stars whose magnitudes you know, whose absolute luminosities you know in the Magellanic clouds.
You can get their distances, that allows you to calibrate the absolute luminosities of the Cephides.
You can see them in distant galaxies.
And then we can now go to really the ultimate standard candle that allows us to work to tremendous distances away.
The supernovae.
Now supernovae are of course very rare in our own galaxy.
We haven't seen one in our system since 1604 of any brightness at all anyway.
But there are so many other galaxies out there, you see these things popping off all the time.
How many are there?
Billions?
Trillions perhaps.
The Hubble Space Telescope focused in on a little blank area of sky up near the Big Dipper.
The field of view is terribly tiny.
It's only a fraction of the angular size of the moon across.
The field of view is not much more than the resolution of the human eye.
And they focused in for somewhere around 100 hours of observing time on this little almost blank area of sky.
It found 3,000 galaxies.
It's called the Hubble Deep Field.
And just to be sure that it wasn't some kind of anomaly, it did the same thing in the Southern Hemisphere in the constellation.
I think Dorado and same thing showed up.
You replicate that around the sky and you'll get somewhere around rounding off 100 billion trillion galaxies,
maybe more that could be counted by the Hubble Space Telescope if you had 10,000 years to do it.
Astronomy is, after all, a sampling science, a statistical science, a very strong degree.
You can't catalog that many. It's impossible.
But we give an idea of how many there are.
There are so many that we always see these supernovae popping off,
which allows us to get the distances of quite a large variety of galaxies.
We can get distances from the sapphire variables to a bunch of them.
And then when a supernova goes off in another galaxy whose distance you know,
we then get the absolute magnitude, the absolute luminosity of the supernova.
So we can calibrate these and then we can see them at enormous distances, know how bright they are,
measure their apparent brightness, get the distance again.
And we work our way out stepwise from the Earth, from the basic astronomical unit,
out to literally billions of light-years away from us.
The real candle is the Type 1A.
For reasons nobody is still entirely certain of,
they all seem to reach the same absolute brightness,
something like 10,000 times brighter to the eye than the most luminous normal supergiant.
Enormous luminosity, which is what allows you to see them so terribly far away.
So the whole distance ladder has become pretty well understood at this point,
starting at home and working our way out literally to billions of light-years,
far greater distances than we can ever measure parallaxes for.
We don't really need them.
And we'll get better at it.
We'll get better at better parallaxes over the decades to come.
But the distance problem to a large degree has been effectively solved.
We just need to make it better and better and better.
Back to the individual galaxies.
A number of characteristics or their properties of them come to mind.
They cluster together.
They seem to gather together in clumps,
if not clusters, even clusters of clusters,
into great filaments of galaxies.
We live in a relatively minor cluster.
We call it us.
It's the local group.
We don't really have any other name for it.
It's about three dozen of them.
Us, the Andromeda spiral, the Triangulum spiral, the Magellanic clouds,
two dozen or so others, most of them small little things.
We're at the fringe, the very fringe of the great Virgo cluster.
You know, most of the constellation is filled with a thousand galaxies.
A backyard telescope will pick out one after the other after the other.
Most of them close, quite bright.
A couple of giant ellipticals.
It's M87 in the middle of it all.
And then up toward the Big Dipper,
the great Coma Bernice is clustered,
which is quite a bit farther away.
Virgo cluster is about, oh, 45, 50 million light years,
something like that.
See, we're now talking of this as just local.
Ah, just another local cluster.
You look out farther and farther and you see yet more clusters.
And yet more clusters, hundreds of clusters, thousands of clusters,
so many that the clusters begin to overlap.
And you can't even tell in three dimensions,
unless you're very careful which one is closer than the next one.
And in the middle, lots of other galaxies.
All these things are kind of in the form of cellular structure
with great voids in between.
In that kind of environment, galaxies can collide.
It sounds like this must be something awful,
like the collision of two stars, which can happen, believe it or not,
in the central regions of our galaxy.
And in globular clusters, the stars can be so densely packed
that we are almost certain, in fact, that they do collide
and merge into one star.
It must be quite a sight.
And then what must the collision of two galaxies be like?
It's surprisingly serene because they consist of stars
that are terribly far apart,
millions of times farther than their diameters.
So here come two galaxies and they just pass through each other.
However, however, all the interstellar matter slams into itself.
And you can strip a galaxy of interstellar matter from the collision.
Or if you get a near collision like this, let's say,
as they get closer together, tides, the differential gravity,
you know, we repeat this, it always bears repeating,
tides are such a powerful force in the universe.
You have a body here and a body here,
the small, let's say the moon here and the earth here,
we can go back to that.
And that gravity is stronger on the earth here than it is over here,
and that stretches the earth out on a line to the moon.
You see this in the waters.
Stars can be enormously stretched out if you have two double stars,
a pair of double stars close to each other.
And galaxies will do this too, so they tidally stretch each other.
And that can dissipate the energy and they can fall together like this
and gradually blend and merge and you get one galaxy out of two.
This may be a fine way to grow galaxies from small ones into large ones.
The shock waves produced by the interaction and the tidal streamers
disturb the interstellar medium within the galaxies
and within these tidal filaments and within the regions
in which the galaxies are interacting,
this promotes tremendous star formation.
So many of these interacting galaxies,
if they were gassy and dusty to start with,
contain long strings and filaments of bright blue stars.
They're fascinating to watch.
Now, we can't, of course, see any of that happening in real time.
It takes millions of years.
But we can see the effects of this one, this one, this one,
and within a cluster, you find all of this tidal stripping going on,
tidal interaction, galaxies colliding.
And if you strip gas, it falls down the potential well to the middle of the galaxy.
And the galaxy in the middle, the giant elliptical,
grows at the expense of the collisions of the other around it.
The whole cluster sometimes filled with a hot gas from the time of its formation
is radiating x-rays.
These things can become quite complex, you can see.
There are other ways of dividing galaxies,
not just ellipticals and spirals and barred spirals and irregulars and so on.
We can divide them on the basis of what was originally called activity,
and still is.
So we've got quiet galaxies, and we've got active galaxies.
Now we've got some galaxies that are active in the radio,
and they're called radioactive galaxies,
not to be confused as radioactivity.
This is an astronomy, wonderful.
Same sort of thing why we've got blue white dwarfs and red white dwarfs.
Things grow up in a vocabulary before we really begin to understand what's going on.
M87, the giant elliptical in the Virgo cluster,
is a fine example of an active galaxy.
Right down in the middle of that thing is a brilliant, almost point source of radiation
that can be seen optically from the ground and with the Hubble Space Telescope.
But what really set M87, this giant elliptical apart,
is that it is one of the brightest radio sources in the sky.
So bright it was picked up by early radio equipment and called Virgo A.
We don't use that kind of nomenclature anymore.
There are far too many radio sources, but the bright one, Sagittarius A,
remember, is the nucleus of our galaxy.
Cassiopeia A is a supernova remnant.
So here's Virgo A, M87.
Coming out of that bright dot in the middle is a long jet pointed kind of at us,
hugely long occupying a good fraction of the galaxy, straight as an arrow.
And you can see a little jet coming out the other side just faintly,
but the one coming at us is very bright.
This is part of a relativistic amplification.
If a high-speed jet comes at you, it will look brighter than it ordinarily would
if it were going across to the side.
And we can see little knots in that thing, and the knots in that jet
are moving at nearly the speed of light.
There's something incredibly active going on in the middle of this galaxy.
We can, with the Hubble Space Telescope, look down into the core
and actually measure the speeds of things going around that bright spot.
And what do we come up with?
But a huge mass tucked into a little tiny area, a little tiny volume,
very much like what we have in our own galaxy.
But now we're talking of millions upon millions of solar masses,
a truly supermassive black hole.
It's the only explanation we have for a huge amount of mass stuffed into a small volume.
And we look at other galaxies, active galaxies, and we see very much the same thing.
One bright point with jets, they're all over the place, these active galaxies.
Many years ago, in the 1960s, astronomers found these little bright points
without galaxies around them.
They were called quasi-stellar radio sources.
They're bright radio sources.
We began to find them optical counterparts as well called quasi-stellar
because they looked like points, but weren't points.
They're quasi-stellar radio sources.
Quasars, they became known as.
QSOs sometimes.
It turns out that they're just ultra-distant active galaxies
because we're now beginning to find faint galaxies surrounding them.
These black holes at the centers of galaxies seem to be almost an organizing principle of galaxies,
and we have one at our center.
Actually, we seem to have a little bitty quasar at the center of our galaxy.
It's a mile, one that's only a mere million solar masses of a black hole.
They can range up to 100 million solar masses, far grander than ours,
and the bigger the massive black hole at the core of these galaxies, the more active it is.
And remember, we get these same themes that run through astronomy.
We had the formation of stars where the disk of gas falls into the T-Tauri star
and it's blown away in a long jet.
We see the same thing in the core of a distant galaxy.
Some of the stuff falls into the black holes as a result of stellar interactions
and gas interactions in the neighborhood.
And not all of it falls into the black hole.
Some of it is whirled out in the opposite direction so you get these long streamers.
Sometimes the streamers exit the galaxy themselves and produce long filaments
out in intergalactic space where they ram into giant balloon-like affairs,
shock waves sweeping up the gas of the intergalactic medium.
Huge, herby-hero objects.
Remember, when we look back at star formation, the jets came out of the star
and produced these blooms at the ends of the jets.
That's how we identified young stars.
They do the same thing on an intergalactic basis, the same physics apparently.
And we can look back now at our own galaxy and look at funny-looking objects
where we have high-speed jets coming off some central object.
They become known as mini-quasars because the same thing happens in our own micro-quasars, if you like.
Same thing must happen in our own galaxy where you have a black hole
as a result of the formation of a supernova.
Gas falls into it and gets squirted out in both directions in jets.
The jets are all over the place.
In a lecture down the line toward the end of this course,
we will look at all of this on the grand scale
and begin to see where these initial black holes may have come from.
We're beginning to solve the whole problem.
And we also have not talked about how we know these quasars are at great distances,
how we know what they are,
because we left out one very significant factor in the distance equation,
and that is the expansion of the universe itself
and the movements of these other galaxies away from us.
That is what led us to realize the expansion of the universe at large
and to realize that all of this has come from some event that we have termed the Big Bang,
the sudden expansion of the universe.
In this lecture, we've just looked at the morphology, the structures of the galaxies,
how they're put together, how we can get at least the distances that are relatively nearby ones
and even the farther ones using the Type 1A supernovae.
And the next we'll start to put it all together.
In fact, in the next two lectures, we'll put it all together.
And the next one, look at the expansion of the universe itself,
which allows us to determine when we reverse the procedure
how the galaxies are really structured around us
and finally how the whole universe seems, at least from our provincial perspective,
to have been put together.
This ends lecture 12.
