Astronomy, Stars, Galaxies, and the Universe, Lecture 5, Ganging Up.
The last lecture we looked at the different kinds of stars, at the giants, at the dwarfs,
at the white dwarfs, at the super giants. This time we're going to look at their organization
in the sky, starting with the simplest possible kind of organization, something about the
constellations and how the stars are named, and then working into their gravitational
organizations to look at double stars, from which we derive stellar masses, at triples,
at hierarchical systems, at quadruples, at groups finally, at coal clusters, gigantic
clusters, to see how they are fit together from single stars all the way up through the
largest assemblies that we know. You look into a nighttime sky and you see patterns
in them. Looks like somebody's drawn them up there. There's a Ryan, looks like a figure
of a man. There's this dipper over here, part of what the ancients called Ursa Major,
the Great Bear. It doesn't look much like a bear, unless you really use your imagination.
These constellation patterns are not real. They are made of stars that are more or less
in line of sight, many at all different distances. And they don't really look like what they're
supposed to be named after either. They're commemorative. They were meant to tell stories.
They were meant to honor heroes. They were meant to be fertility symbols. They were meant
as a great variety of things. Scattered throughout the sky are 48 ancient constellations that
were handed down to us from old times. They are in the northern hemisphere of the sky,
part of the southern. They only name the very bright patterns. In the later centuries from
1600 or so to 1800, the burgeoning knowledge of science required that all the sky have
constellation patterns in them. So many were made up around the southern hemisphere. Many
modern constellations were fitted in between the ancient constellations. And as a result,
we wind up with 88 sky patterns that all have names. Some of them from times that predate
ancient Greece to Homer. Many of these constellations were already ancient. We don't really know
where they come from. Stars are named in a variety of ways. Some carry proper names. In fact,
about 2000 of them carry proper names. Most of them named by the ancient Arabs on the
basis of where the stars are in their constellations. Although a few come down to us from ancient
Greece, a few from Rome. The bright star Sirius, for example, the brightest star in the sky
means searing or scorching. Very, very appropriate, of course, for the brightest one in the sky
from Greek. But most of them are Arabic. Deneb, the end of the tale of Cygnus the Swan, means
literally tale in Greek. Betelgeuse comes from a long Arabic phrase meaning the hand
of the central one. Not even Orion, from part of their indigenous constellation lore. All
cultures have at some point named the patterns of stars. Proper names are really very difficult
to remember. Only the first magnitude stars have proper names that are continuously used
over and over again. Vega, Arcturus. Arcturus meaning the bear driver because it follows
the great bear around the pole. Procion, Procyon in Greek. It rises before Sirius, the dog
star, the bright star of Canis Major. So it's called before the dog in Greek. But it's so
hard to remember all the others. We have to have something that is a little bit more systematic.
So around 1600, Johannes Bayer in Germany named the stars using Greek letters. More or less
in order of brightness of the star within the constellation but almost as much by position.
So the brightness rule is very commonly violated. Sirius becomes Alpha of Canis Major in Latin
that would be Alpha Canis Majorus because you put a tag end, a case ending on the noun
to imply possession. So all good astronomers have to know the 88 constellations and the
88 possessive cases or at least know where to look them up. That only gives you 24 stars
per constellation and there are 8000 or so that are visible to the naked eye. So we resort
to a number of other schemes as well. Toward the latter part of the 1600s as a result of
a star catalog developed by the first astronomer Royal John Flamsteed for the purpose of navigation,
the stars were numbered from west to east within a constellation. So the first star
whose parallax was measured in fact was 61 Cygni, number 61 in Cygnus in Flamsteed star
catalog. That's limited too because Flamsteed did not go down all that faint. Beyond that
we use a variety of catalog names from the Harvard Revised System in the Alebright Star
catalog that takes us all the way around the sky irrespective of constellation patterns
and then literally dozens of other catalogs where the star is being studied for one particular
reason or another whether it's a parallax catalog, a spectroscopic catalog and the like.
Nevertheless the ancient names are often used even in professional astronomy. The constellation
patterns however rarely have little to do with each other. The stars are independent
of each other. They're not gravitationally bound. There are some exceptions to that.
The stars of Orion do have a somewhat of a common origin. Something we'll talk about
a little bit farther down the line here as do the stars of Scorpius and a few of the
other constellations but they are the exceptions. But remember these exceptions because it is
the relationships that these stars do have with one another that make these wonderful
constellations so very prominent in the nighttime sky. Organization beyond star naming leads
us to organization due to gravity. The Sun is actually something of an exception in
the sky because it doesn't have a stellar companion. It has a set of planets in orbit
around it but it is very definitely a single star. Whether it was born that way or not we
don't really know odds are it was. If you take even a small telescope out to the backyard
and begin poking around looking at one star after the other you'll find that quite a number
of them in fact aren't single. They're in fact double. Some of them are triple. Sometimes
you find even more complex systems than that. The study of double stars leads us ultimately
to the study of the masses of the stars and the actual meaning of the main sequence and
ultimately the meaning of all of the other stars that we find splashed across the Hertzsprung
Russell diagram that we examined in the last lecture.
Start with simple doubles. Some of you can see with the naked eye. Look at the end star,
the second star in from the end of the handle of the big dipper. Look at it carefully and
you see it's double. A second magnitude star coupled with a little fourth one very close
to it. The Arabs called it the horse and rider. It's an actual double star. Mizar is
the bright one, Alcor is the fainter one and the two orbit each other over a very long
period because they are terribly far apart. So far apart that you can get into an argument
with other astronomers as to whether they really are a double or not. Likely they are.
Scattered around the sky are other naked eye doubles as well. A little bit rare but you
see quite a number of them. You look closer you see even more with a large telescope and
with good examination actually somewhere around 60% if not more of all the stars in
the sky have companions of some sort or another. This means that even through a small telescope
a good 10 or 20% of the stars you see are doubled. Some of them are exceedingly pretty.
Star colors are relatively washed out. Stars aren't emitting just red light or just blue
light. They're emitting across the spectrum with a dominance in one color or another and
consequently the colors take on a very subtle tint rather than a bright splash. If you put
two stars next to each other however, especially if they're somewhat dissimilar in brightness,
the eye-brain combination greatly enhances the star colors. So you could have two stars
that are nearly white whereas through the telescope one will look oh the old time astronomers
had such fun with this lilac and ashen and pale yellow, pale gold they tried desperately
hard to describe what these colors were to someone else and they had the idea in fact
that star colors of double stars, stars that are separated only by a few seconds of arc
in the sky. For some reason double stars had different colors and single stars and it all
turned out to be in the mind and the brain. But it makes the viewing of double stars from
the backyard with it by an amateur astronomer a wonderful treat after looking sometimes
for some of the faintest things you can see to jump into albirio, beta-signy, the star
at the head of Cygnus the Swan at the end of the northern cross. You look at it and
see a wonderful orange and a wonderful blue star right next to each other orbiting each
other over very, very long periods, thousands of years, no motion ever actually seen. The
study of double stars began with William Herschel back in the latter part of the 1700s. He actually
looked at double stars thinking that one was much farther away than the other, that it
was just a line of sight coincidence, hoping to get the parallax of the nearby one relative
to the more distant one so that he could estimate or measure stellar distances. Instead, as
so often happens in science, he discovered something quite different, a serendipitous
discovery of one star in orbit about the other. Now people knew about doubles but he was the
first one to actually see in orbit. Jupiter goes around the sun, the moon goes around
the earth, two stars can equally well go around each other in orbit, and many of them
are close enough that you can see over a period of just a very short interval of time. Alpha
Centauri is a fine example. It's the closest star to the earth, only four light years away.
Look at it with even a small telescope and you see a class G2 dwarf, main sequence star,
very much like the sun. It's kind of odd that the nearest star to us would be a solar clone,
coincidence. It's being orbited by a class K dwarf, an orange class K dwarf a little
bit less massive than it, and the two orbit in a period of around 80 years, around a human
lifetime. Over a lifetime of observing, anybody can watch the motion. Double stars divide
themselves into three very broad overlapping groups, and I really do mean overlapping,
but let's just try to separate them a little bit. Visual doubles are the first ones. These
are the ones that you can see with the eye through the telescope. The limit is about
one second of arc, about a 3600th of a degree. If you get them closer than that, then the
twinkling of stars robs them of their individuality. That is, you've seen stars twinkle in the
sky. The twinkling that you see with the naked eye is largely caused by changes in
brightness of the star as the starlight is focused and defocused by patches of warm and
cool air in the atmosphere. If you look at the star in the telescope, it jiggles back
and forth as well over a pattern anywhere from a second of arc to a minute of arc depending
upon how bad your conditions might be. It's one of the reasons we put telescopes on mountain
observatories up high above the Earth's atmosphere to still down the images of the star, and
it's the principal reason for the Hubble Space Telescope. You put it out in space where there's
no atmosphere and the stellar images just quiet down to almost perfect points, allowing
you to separate things and seeing things in very, very fine detail. But from the ground,
the visual double star is limited to roughly a second of arc because the twinkling of
stars smears out the images, disallowing you to see them any closer together than that.
Nevertheless, a great many of these stars are easily visible through the telescope.
We've been looking at them now for a couple of hundred years, and we have orbits for a
large number of them. The orbits of, well, we start with the apparent orbit of one star
about the other. Remember, of course, that they have mutual orbits, but let's pretend
that one star is just an orbit about the other. We do a relative orbit here. Remember Kepler's
third law, how we measured the mass of the Sun from the orbit of the Earth. Period squared
is equal to a constant times the size of the orbit cubed divided by the sum of the masses.
If we know the size of the orbit, if we know the period, we can get the sum of the masses.
The period is trivial, especially if you can see an entire orbit and don't have to estimate
what it might be from a little short piece. The size of the orbit is not difficult to
measure in angular units. If you want to measure it in physical units, astronomical units,
you of course need the distance, which means we must get the parallax, which means, of course,
we're limited to relatively nearby stars or have some other indirect means of estimating
the distance, but we can do that for hundreds of these stars and derive to some of the masses
of the two stars. Now, the two stars may be very disparate. In some cases, gamma-virginist
porous, it's called identical f-stars. You can't tell apart. Then in some cases, you'll
have one blooming one and another one 10,000 times fader. There's quite a range. What
you really need is to get the center of mass. Remember, we talked about orbits being mutual.
The moon and the earth are in mutual orbit around each other. The moon really doesn't go around
the earth. They go around a common center of mass. The earth is 80 times more massive
than the moon. The center of mass is consistently 80 times farther from the moon than it is
from the earth. That is, the center of mass is from the distance of the center of mass
to the center of the earth is one 80th the distance of the center of mass to the moon.
This is the perfect ratio. If you find the center of mass, then, in the orbits, you can
get the individual orbits. That's quite a bit more difficult in double stars. You've
got to have excellent observations, but you can still do it for quite a number of them.
If you have the sum of the masses and if you have the ratio, simple calculation gives you
the individual masses, and we're on our way to serious astrophysics of the stars, because
it is the mass that is more important than any other single thing in the lifetime of
a star. Well, what happens when the two stars are too close together? They look like one.
All you see is one little dot. Can you tell? Sure. It's not hard. If you have two stars,
you'll have two sets of spectra. Each spectrum will have its own center of mass, and each
spectrum will have its own set of these fine absorption patterns. If the stars are in orbit
like this, one of them will be coming at you at one point of its orbit. Another one will
be going away from you. One set of absorptions is Doppler shifted this way, the other set
this way, and you can watch the two sets go back and forth and measure the velocities.
If you measure the velocities, you have the period of orbit. You can get the size of the
orbit. If you have the size of the orbit and the period, you have the sum of the masses
all over again, and from the degree of shift, you have the ratio of the masses. You can
do it all over again, even though the star looks like one through the telescope.
Problem is, of course, that you don't know where the orbit is tilted. If it's face on,
then you get zero velocity. So all you'll get here is a lower limit to the mass. Nevertheless,
this being a sampling science, you can use this information statistically to put limits
on things. Then, the best one, what happens if the orbit is right in the line of sight
like this? One star gets in front of the other, and one will eclipse the other one. So here
you are watching the star algol, beta-perseye. About as bright as alpha-perseye, the two are
fairly close together in the sky and similar in brightness. And every once in a while,
algol, which means the demon star, the ghoul algoul out of Arabic, you can see why it was
named such, I suppose. The demon star suddenly drops to third magnitude, and then a few hours
later, bounces back up again to second magnitude. It winks at you. It blinks back and forth
and back and forth as two stars orbit each other. It consists of a class K, an orange
giant star, that is orbited by a hot class B star. It's a partial eclipse. When the B star gets
mostly in back of the orange star, all of its light is hidden. It's very small, but very luminous.
And that's what causes the plunge in brightness. In between, the little star, the dwarf passes
in front of the giant, and you cut out a little of the light of the giant, and then you see
a little blip, a little dip, as a secondary eclipse. These eclipses are wonders. They allow
you to know the tilt of the orbit. Once you have the tilt of the orbit, you can get the masses
from the velocities. From the durations of the eclipses, you can actually measure the sizes
of the stars. Once you know the luminosities, the sizes of the stars, you can calculate
temperatures. You can get all manner of curious information. You can even derive the shapes
of the stars, because some of the eclipses, by their very nature, for a star to be likely
to be an eclipsing double, they have to be close. If they're very far apart, the odds
of getting one star in front of the other are very low, but if they're close together,
it allows for a pretty good range in the tilt of the orbit. If you have two stars very close
to each other, they raise tides in each other. That is, they make each other sort of egg shaped,
much as the moon causes the oceans of the world to be pulled out on a line toward the moon.
The result is you have stars that look something like this, and you can even see the changes
in shape, projected shape, as the stars orbit each other. Some of these stars are so close
together that one will even throw mass onto the other. If one star reaches a point, if
they're like this, let's say, we're at the surface of one star, the effect of gravity
of one is equal to that of the other, you'll have mass that'll flow. And the stars can
actually exchange matter. And as we'll see later when we talk about evolution, they can
exchange matter back and forth over the course of their lifetimes. One can actually evaporate
the other, and we see this kind of effect in eclipsing double stars through the spectrum.
The bottom line and the result of all of this is that we have a wonderful array of stellar
masses, all correlated with the kind of star that we're dealing with. And it turns out
that the main sequence is a mass sequence. That's what it's all about, with the sun right
there. The lowest mass stars for which we have actual measured masses are a little less
than about 10% of a solar mass. Those are the ones way down at the lower end of the dwarf
main sequence. Those are the ones of the class M stars, the ones that you can't even see
with the naked eye, but the ones that dominate the universe. Nature loves making low mass
stars. We don't really know why. Then we climb up through the K stars to the G stars, roughly
the mass, and we go up to stars like Vega and Sirius, Vega and Lyra, Sirius and Canis
major, with masses of double or more the mass of the sun. Climb up higher into class B
where you can get up to 8, 9, 10, and then the class O stars above 10 solar masses. The
full range, qualify that a little bit, the full range of normal stars that are running
in a proton-proton chain like the sun, goes around 8% that of the sun, up to around 100
times that of the sun. We don't really know the upper limit. The most massive stars are
in the upper tens that we've actually measured, 50, 60 or so. Then we have to extrapolate
on the basis of luminosity up to about 100. It seems that nature doesn't like to make stars
more than about 150 times that of the sun, and they are exceedingly, exceedingly rare.
This is just that rarity that cuts them off, but up to 100 is about fair. The main sequence
is therefore a mass sequence, which makes perfect sense physically. Think of a star
squeezing down on itself. The temperature of the core is going to depend upon the
gravitational compression, the greater the compression, the greater the core temperature.
If you pile on more mass, you're going to drive up the temperature of the core.
If you drive up the temperature, you're going to make a more luminous star.
You're going to make the thermonuclear reactions run faster, but that is sort of irrelevant.
Simply out of good old Kelvin-Helmholtz contraction, the whole idea of how we thought the sun was
a light before we understood about nuclear reactions, and what makes Jupiter shine in
the radio. Just this squeezing will reproduce most of the features of the main sequence.
High mass stars are going to be exceedingly luminous, low mass stars won't be very luminous
at all. Theory also shows us that by the time you get down to around 0.08 of a solar mass,
around 8% of a solar mass, that the temperature at the core of a star drops to the lower limit
at which full fusion is allowed. So around 0.08, you shut down the proton-proton chain.
Full hydrogen burning ceases. Now there's no reason why nature, as we'll see when we talk
about star formation, there's no reason why nature in the forming of stars should know
anything about the nuclear reactions involved. That depends only upon the masses of the blobs
out of interstellar matter that actually make it into stars. So we postulated for many many years
that there should be stars below that lower fusion limit. They're called by a number of names
and finally we arrived at the term brown dwarf. We have ordinary dwarfs, we have white dwarfs,
now we have brown dwarfs. We looked for decades for them. They were discovered, then they were
undiscovered. I don't know how many times. It took the proper technology. Brown dwarfs are
by their very nature cool. They will be more or less really cooler than the class M stars
and they are not visible to the naked eye. You're looking for the very coolest ones.
These are going to be infrared radiators. They will be very feeble radiators in the optical part
of the spectrum. So what you need are infrared cameras and telescopes that are optimized for
infrared observations which we finally, finally got. And once we have the technology, brown dwarfs
all over the place. They're everywhere. There may be as many brown dwarfs as there are ordinary
dwarfs. Of course, continuously increasing our idea of the number of stars in the galaxy.
It could be equal numbers between the two. So we had to invent new spectral classes for these
brown dwarfs. Class L falls off the end of class M. It's characterized by not oxides of
metals, titanium oxide and the M stars, but by hydrides. Even by precipitation of some of
these metals into dust grains that may even form clouds over the surfaces of the stars.
And then down at the bottom, the very bottom, a new class T in which we see methane. In the
solar system we see methane in Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune. It almost looks like the stars
may go down as faint or as massive as maybe even the giant planets of some of the solar
systems in the galaxy. We don't know yet. There's a big difference between a low mass star and
a planet. Low mass stars are thought to have been formed in a piece from condensation out of the
gases of interstellar space, whereas planets seem to have been built up from dust from below.
That doesn't mean that they can't overlap each other. Brown dwarfs do fuse hydrogen and
helium, but they can't run the full proton-proton chain. They start at the natural deuterium that
is always present in the gas, and that's easily burnable into hydrogen. They can burn hydrogen
and helium down to around 13 times the mass of Jupiter. And then the temperature falls down so low
that nothing happens. And it could be that we have stars as low in mass as a planet. We don't know.
It's a brand new field, and it's going to be likely to be a long time before we've got the full population
senses figured out. And that's just double stars. Look at Mizar again. The second star in from the
handle of the Big Dipper. You've got Mizar and Alcor. If you look at Mizar, the brighter of the two
of the telescope, there are two stars there. 14 seconds of arc apart. The first double star actually
found, which take a long time to orbit each other. So now you've got a double with another one out here
going around it like so, but when you turn the spectrograph to each of these, they're double again.
So now we've got a double-double with another one going around it like this. These two go around
each other. These two go around each other in matter of days, weeks, whereas this will take these two
go around each other in matters of centuries, and this matter may be a million years.
A quintuple star. Many are the stars like this. They're called hierarchical doubles because you have
double-double-doubles. Each in a triple. Here's a double. Here's another one out here. This one sees these
two basically as one, so it can easily and stably orbit. If you go into the middle of a famous gas cloud
called the Orion Nebula, which we're going to address in the next lecture, you see a stack of four stars
like this. No hierarchy to them at all. They're milling about. These are unstable systems, and eventually
one star will get too close to another, speed up and be tossed right out of the system, be lost.
Eventually you'll wind up with a hierarchical system. So we have these stable multiple stars,
stable double stars, and here we are with the sun just plain old single. It must be an odd thing to be on a
planet in a double or multiple star, and having another star that you could actually visit and go to,
there are such systems. We can actually detect planets in orbit about other stars via the Doppler shift,
and in a couple of cases we've got planets in orbit around double stars. We don't know how common this is.
Again, something to be addressed a little bit farther down the line. At the end of the hierarchy of
organization or the clusters. Take a good look at the constellation Taurus in the zodiac. The head of Taurus
the bull is made of a V-shaped set of stars with a bright star that represents the eye of the bull, Aldebaran.
Aldebaran is not part of this V-shaped set. The V-shaped set is a cluster called the Hyades. It's the closest
actual cluster to us. Stars tend very strongly to come in clumps and groups and clusters. It could be,
in fact, that the majority of stars are actually born in clusters and then escape. The sun could have had its own cluster,
but clusters disintegrate over time. Tides raised by the galaxy, individual interactions among the stars in a cluster,
one of them gets tossed out and gradually they diminish. So most clusters of this sort tend to be young.
Remember we had a disc of a galaxy, a long flat plate with a bulge in the middle and a big halo around it.
Most of the stars in the disc. Clusters like the Hyades and its mate, the Pleiades, certainly the most famous cluster in the sky.
The Seven Sisters, the mythology, the daughters of Atlas and Plione. The human eye can see six, by the way, except for a few people
who can see eight or nine. It's called the Seven Sisters largely because of the magic of the number seven, the seven
moving bodies of the sky, from which come with the seven colors of the rainbow, et cetera, et cetera.
The Seven Sisters appears just a few degrees off the Hyades, the Pleiades. Two clusters within Tars.
Beautiful thing, gorgeous to look at in a small telescope or a set of binoculars.
Clusters like this are known as open clusters because they're kind of ragged and open.
There may be a few tens of light years across and they contain anywhere from a few tens to maybe a few hundred stars,
which clearly shows us the commonality of formation that stars tend to be born in groups like this.
One's even a double cluster, curiously enough. You can barely see with the naked eye in the constellation Perseus.
Two beautiful, beautiful clusters going through space together probably will separate sometime in the distant future.
The open clusters pale beside the clusters that are found in this gigantic halo.
Here is the realm of what is called the globular clusters.
A couple of them are visible to the naked eye. A couple of them even have star names, they're so bright.
Omega Centauri in the Southern Hemisphere, 47 Toucane in the Southern Hemisphere.
Unfortunately, neither visible from Northern Hemisphere climbs.
Omega Centauri's fourth magnitude. The first time you see it, look at what is that fuzzy thing up there.
It's the oddest looking sight, even with the naked eye.
Through a telescope, it is utterly spectacular. Over a million stars visible at one time.
Same true with 47 Toucane and a variety of others.
All packed in a space that is again no more than a few tens of light years across,
straggling out maybe to a hundred light years across.
If you lived inside of one of these clusters, which would be very unlikely,
it seems unlikely that planetary systems could form under conditions like that,
but if you could visit the inside of one...
Well, our sky here has 21st magnitude stars.
Imagine thousands of first magnitude stars spread across the sky.
So many that you could probably go out and read by starlight.
It would be an amazing sight.
They're rare, these globular clusters.
They're among the most beautiful things you can look at in a small telescope,
where you can resolve them in individual stars.
Just splashes of starlight.
But they're rare.
We know only about 150, where there must be thousands of the open clusters
peppering the disc of the galaxy.
We think there may be about 200 total.
There are probably a number of them that we haven't seen yet.
And they're very distinctive.
The globular clusters have very little to do with the open clusters.
There's no real overlaps between them.
It's from these clusters that we can learn so much,
because we can plot the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram of the cluster.
And we can begin to see the stellar aging process at work.
From the kinds of stars there are in these clusters,
we can learn the age of the cluster.
We can learn the distance of the cluster.
We look in the galaxy for the oldest things we know.
The oldest things we know, look at this and why we know this in a further lecture.
We look for the oldest things we can find.
It's like looking for the oldest rocks in the solar system.
You look for the oldest one.
That must be the age of the planetary system.
Four and a half billion years.
You look for the oldest stellar system, the globular clusters.
At ages of between 12 and 13 billion years,
that must be the age of the galaxy,
which fits almost perfectly with the age of the universe as found by other means.
The subject we will address at the very last lecture of the course.
In multiplicity, the stars tell us what they are.
In their clusters, they tell us what they are.
If they were all single, we would remain ignorant.
Fortunately, nature has given us a wonderful gift of stellar duplicity and stellar clustering
that allow us, our small planet, orbiting this single star to understand them all.
We now know what kinds of stars we have.
From the different kinds in the main sequence,
through the giants and the super giants,
we know something of their organization, the doubles, the triples, the clusters.
But stars don't last forever.
They die. They all die.
They must come from someplace.
Where do they come from?
They come from the hidden regions in the spaces between the stars,
the regions of space that are filled with gas and dust,
in regions that are so thick with gas and dust that our vision can't penetrate.
So the next step in the next lecture is to look at what is called the interstellar medium,
that thin, lumpy, terribly complex system of gas and dust
that lies in the space between the stars that give birth to the stars themselves.
After listening to lecture five, a student posed this question to Professor Kaler.
Can you tell me more about how some stars are shot out of their clusters?
Let's listen to the professor's response.
The so-called trapezium systems, the non-hierarchical systems
in multiple stars like you find in this famous Orion nebula are unstable.
The one star can get close to another one and literally be shot out
on an astronomical time scale, of course, be shot out of the system.
A good fraction of the high mass stars in the sky are called runaway stars,
and they have been ejected from other binary systems or tertiary systems,
and in some time in the distant past, the most famous example is a star
in the constellation Oryga, with the constellation lies well above Orion,
called AE Orygi, which is going this way.
Here's Orion, and then another star down here in the constellation Colomba,
which is well below Orion, called Mu Columbi, and the two are going like this,
and if you trace them back, they cross practically in the Orion nebula,
showing that there was some violent interactions going where apparently two...
a little different, where two double stars got too close to each other,
they exchanged companions and two other stars got shot out of the system,
and the same thing can happen in these quartets and quintets.
The one star simply achieves such a high velocity that it hits the escape velocity
of the system and off it goes, leaving it with one less,
and it will keep happening until you get a stable hierarchical system
or nothing but singles or simple doubles.
Thank you.
