Hi. Hello everyone. I'm quite excited to be here and first I'd like just to thank
the organizers for putting together such a great conference. Thanks so much for the
invite. I'd like to start by saying that I'm a philosopher. Okay, so bear with me.
I don't have a lot of formal stuff that you like. This is also a brand new
research. So I'm testing the waters here and see if there's something that I
should carry on doing or not. So let me know. All the feedback is very welcome.
Okay, so having said that, let me start by just saying that what I want to
research here is the impact of action. And I take subjective experience to be in
the action. Okay, so the idea here is to look at our action is what may or may not
allow explaining the neural connectivity in the brain. Okay, so the
presentation will be divided in two parts. One metaphysical, the other one is
neuroanatomy. So first what I'm going to do is I'm going to look at the
fundamental distinction between the metaphysics of inference, between
functional and effective connectivity. These will then allow me to focus on
effective connectivity. And I want to look at particularly on the
ocular motor system as sort of a study case. And I'm going to look at that from
the active inference point of view. Okay, so yeah, we all know from the last three
days at least that the integration of the brain areas is something that is
quite difficult to assess. And one way to do that is by looking to, in terms of
the brain connectivity and our cognition, integrates from that point of view,
which is what motivates me to look at the metaphysics of the connectivity. So
first, I want to just focus on the motivation. Okay, so the idea here is
that there is this operational distinction between functional and
effective connectivity. And this is important because it allows us to
determine the nature of the inferences that can be made about cognitive
integration. And also most importantly, the questions that one should be asking.
And I'm following here, Friston, in doing so. So what I want to do is just
look at the differentiation on the one hand on the causal modeling in
effective connectivity. And on the other hand, as it is opposed to the procedures
used to characterize functional connectivity. Okay, so let me start by
looking at functional connectivity. Just the very basics. The aim is that it is
inferred on the basis of temporal correlations between time series of
different brain regions in a sort of measurements of this modular neural
activity. These connections can then be understood in terms of this causal
asymmetry that is in terms of these probabilities and temporal order. Okay, so
the aim here, and what is more important, is that the aim is that to
identify which are the segregated brain regions that are most likely to
connect in order to carry on a specialized kind of function or for a task
to make. And I think Han and colleagues captured this really well when they say
that the functional specialization and anatomical segregation of neural
networks in the brain imply that it is organized as a distributed hierarchical
network of highly specialized networks of spiking neurons. So the idea is that
there's this time resolved functional connectivity, which is claimed as crucial
to displaying a sort of a balance between on the one hand functional segregation
and on the other hand integration of brain networks. And here is where
modularity networks comes handy and particularly important because it
tends to do just that to find the patterns of correlations between
functionally segregated areas on the one hand and its significant integration on
the other hand and that's where it becomes quite important. On the other hand
we have effective connectivity and here we look at the causal dependencies more
like sort of what motivates the coupling or the direct influence between for
example A and B. This will rest obviously explicitly on a model of that
influence that is called a generative model. These kind of models, generative
models are then compared as the probabilistic strategy is at the heart
of these analysis in effective connectivity. So following Friston it
tells us that effective connectivity explains brains networks by virtue of
accounting for the dynamic activity activity dependent and the dependence on
a model of these interactions. One example of these studies on effective
connectivity can be found for example in Sokolov and colleagues when they look
at visual sensitivity to biological motion that cause changes in the
connectivity and actually how this active interaction relates to behavior. So
this analysis of effective connectivity it can be said that it is both neural
and activity led and it is on this account that these models are carried
by effective connectivity are said to be quite dynamic. So the idea is that they
do not suppose that there are there is this invariant structure that can be
captured anatomically. Okay so just let us just have a look at how we can
just systematize these differences between functional and effective
connectivity which will allow us to then move forward to
effective connectivity. Okay on the one hand we have the functional
connectivity as being a sort of identifying temporal correlations or
covariances and on the other hand effective connectivity as a matter of
explaining these causal dependencies. We have also on functional connectivity the
aim to map from imaging data which is its physiological consequences to its
diagnostic class which is a categorical kind of cause. On the other hand we
have an effective connectivity a sort of a model comparison as we just saw
generative models of coupling among these hidden brain states. Sorry on the
other hand in effective connectivity we have mapping from causes to
consequences so the other way around. So we have on functional connectivity a
sort of a predictive model whereas on effective connectivity it's more of a
model comparison a generative model of coupling among hidden brain states. Okay
good so some people think and come forward to say that well effective
connectivity is more powerful and less ambiguous. Okay and this would be
the idea also followed by Freestyle 2011 when it tells us well this is
the case because it captures both the topological pairwise connections as well
as direct causal influences and we can see that in these graphs in which on the
first one the structural causal modeling we can look at topological
pairwise connections and on the second one with the dynamic causal model
modeling we can see that but we can also see the direct causal influence. So this
is what motivates me to now focus on the effective connectivity and how we can
explain that by looking at the ocular motor system. Okay so what makes the
ocular motor system such an interesting case is that it is a distributed
network composed by the cerebral cortex, basal canglia and the cerebellum and the
idea here is that there are neural messages from these regions that combine
to generate signals to the extra ocular muscles to move the eyes. So to show this
kind of coupling between perception or vision and action I will and the causal
dependencies on this neural connection I will first look at the neuroanatomy and
then I'm going to look at the active inference. Okay so just a very basics I
just want to flesh out just the the saccadic eye so we have the dynamic
integration of vision and action why well because the action takes the form
of the saccadic eye movements that is a series of these discrete fixations and
that are interposed by rapid rapid movements. So while we may select a new
target for fixation it is necessary to apply forces that accelerate the eyes
towards their targets so this is the very basics of it. Now moving at how we could
explain this relation between perception and action through active inference we
can say that well by forming hypothesis this saccades can be deployed as
experiments to adjudicate among alternatives. So in packing this a little
bit objects in the visual field become hypotheses or explanations that take the
form of something like what would I see if I looked there. So Bayesian filtering
equations can be used and implemented to planning as inference which can
generate both saccadic and smooth pursuit eye movements. So importantly the
associated message passing will map pretty well onto the known connectivity
and neuroanatomy of the brain stem which I obviously didn't and don't have time
to explain here. Okay so this is the main point is just that there are these
signals that are carried by each eye to the brain stem and they can be
classified into broad categories and this is what the main point that I
want to stress out here. That's the exteroceptive and the proprioceptive. So
on the exteroceptive as we all know we have the visual signals to the optic
nerve and then on the proprioceptive level there is this extra ocular muscles
into the ocular motor nerves which control the angular position and
velocity of each eye. Okay so in other terms visual signals are then generated
through an identity mapping from the position of the eyes right. So this means
that what the eye sees, what the eye see depends entirely on where they look.
This becomes quite important because then proprioceptive states are what comes to
ensure that this mapping from the hidden states to outcomes and the result of
these outcomes is that then exteroception so vision is dependent in
a probabilistic sense on proprioception which is to say in action. So the idea is
that vision is dependent on action and action will be what explains these
visual connections. Okay this causality between action and perception can be
explained in terms of the free energy principle which is that living systems
must minimize the variational free energy over time and this minimization of the
free energy through action and perception is referred to as active
inference. Active inference very briefly is just this theory that is derived from the
principle that living systems must minimize the dispersion of this state in
order to continue to exist in a sort of a meaningful way. And in order to do that
to find the things that are relevant to their own existence so that they don't die
they draw these predictions about the sensations that they will encounter and actively
sample them in them to reduce these uncertainty or mathematically the expected
Bayesian surprise. Okay now this becomes a form of what Thomas Parr and Carl
Freiston call the active vision and this is the bit that I'm very interested on
working on and building from. So this is the idea that this active vision is a
generative process. These field circles are what gives rise to the sensory data
and then we have on the other hand the generative model which is the unfilled
circles which proposes this data is generated. Now a narrow connecting two variables
indicates that the second variable is conditionally dependent on the first and
is what I'm particularly interested because this means that eyes are conditionally dependent
on target fixation prediction. Okay so this fictive locations then will cause changes in
position in the generative model and which brings us to conclude that then action is part of this
generative process. Okay so then how do we put all of this together? Well these equations can
be implemented by passing messages between populations of neurons, ascending messages,
here are excitatory prediction errors while descending messages are the inhibitory
predictions and it is these patterns that characterizes what we know as a predictive coding.
Now we see on the right hand on the left hand side we got equations that describe this kind
of gradient descent on variational free energy neural message passing and on the right side
we have these equations mapping to the scheme of this generative model. So what happens is
that we have a map of the influences between each population with excitatory and inhibitory connections.
Okay good now bringing this to an end and take a message what I want to say and what I want to
research on building on this is that well first I think there are few quite relevant
and important points to take from here is that exteroceptive vision and proprioception emerge
from a single imperative which is to contextualize each other in the sense that they all are reducing
minimizing the free energy. In effective connectivity terms then what motivates the
specific establishment of certain synaptic connections in visions is the active exploration
and this is the bit that I'm quite interested of the world by focusing on what appear as salient to
a member of a certain phenotype. Now in other times this means that active inference on active
the active dimension of vision is what explains these visual connections so which means that we
are not just simply collecting or picking out what we see in the world there is an active
dimension to it. Now finally the effect of connectivity captures these essential what is
essential to the construction and explanation of the hierarchical process in the visual world.
Okay now coming to the last slide as to future work I just want to say that
it would be quite important and crucial I think to find these links between network topology
and neural dynamics that can address the empirical problem of how the brain adapts
in a dynamic and flexible way and according to the demands of the cognitive interaction
with the environment which I take to be the subjective experience. Now this was not to
talk about subjective experience this doesn't mean that I don't think that there is such thing
as subjective experience I think there is it's in action and by the way I wrote a paper on what it
feels like to prove a mathematical equation so but actually this talk was more about the rule
that subjective experience plays in neural connections or and also neural deployment.
So the question that I think is quite relevant to work on future research is how this subjective
experience acts on the ways that the brain connects and reorganizes to connect
in cognitive terms. So this is me thank you very much for your attention.
