to talk about the semantic web if you're new to this subject and to do so I'm
gonna have to give you a brief history on information and in particular how
information is connected. So if we go back before the internet, before the
worldwide web, what you have is scientists and individuals writing long
freeform documents that had references to other documents and those references
were in the form of citations. Now as a consumer of one of these documents what
you would have to do is read the citation and then send out via mail for a
copy of the document or you'd have to go to your library and this was really
tedious. So from the point of view of the consumer what you really had was a
world where there was tons of documents all over the place some accessible to
you some not accessible to you but that burden was on you in order to follow the
citations. Now the web the great invention was the hyperlink so if I'm
reading a document that has a hyperlink I can just click on that link and boom I
get the next document in the chain of documents right I can go right to the
source of the reference. Now this as a consumer is amazing right it saves a
ton of time. However from a technical perspective there was a lot of things
that had to happen and I'm gonna go through that history in order to enable
you to really appreciate what the semantic web brings to the table on top
of this. So if we go back to the hyperlink and then we say okay tons of
documents are on the internet they're all linked to each other via hyperlinks
what does that look like? Well it looks kind of like this diagram you've got a
bunch of documents and there's arrows between the documents. Underneath in
order to make that happen what you've got is a bunch of computers and the
documents are sitting on the computer so for example technically speaking this
document that I'm reading is sitting on this computer over here and what the
hyperlink does is it basically says there's another document on some other
system somewhere that has this information. So before the web and when
the internet was very new all of these connections had to be done by hand it was
extremely tedious. You had to say well there's other servers residing on this
other network and you've got it and here the user credentials to the other
network and blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah but
eventually you could actually link these things up. The great invention of the
internet early on was that the internet cloud sort of abstracted that whole
connectivity process away from you so that instead of having to worry about
where the other document is physically residing you can just give it a little
address and you've got a hyperlink and that's the way that everything connects.
So the great advantage of web 1.0 is that even though you might have tons of
different servers in this diagram you don't have to think about them as being
servers you could just think about them as being documents you don't care about
the servers. So the real advantage is that the whole mechanism the whole
network structure the physical layer is abstracted away so that you don't have to
think about it and I want you to keep that in mind as we go forward and talk
about the semantic web and how it goes even beyond this. But before that we'll
talk about web 2.0 so web 1.0 was documents web 2.0 is applications you
had LinkedIn at MySpace and Yelp and Gmail and all those things that you
interact with today and they go beyond just the data that you're storing on
the computers. Now the big drawback to these systems is that they don't
interoperate you know so if you ever update your profile on LinkedIn you get
a new job or something like that Facebook doesn't automatically know about it in
fact you've got to double enter you got to go to LinkedIn you got to enter the
data then you got to go to Facebook and then you got to go to the section in
Facebook where you enter your employment information and you got to enter it
there and probably other places as well right because they don't share
information the data is not connected to each other even though you might have a
link here and there between the systems. Now companies have this very same
problem right you've got different databases your financial system your
actual aerial system your HR system within companies that don't really connect
to each other right the data is stored in one system and you've got double
entry problems and it's expensive to do to connect these things up in any
reasonable way. So the whole idea of web 3.0 is to connect the data not just the
documents not just high-level links between applications but to connect the
data at a lower level so that an employment information to go back to
LinkedIn examples stored on LinkedIn would be shareable and connectable in a
way in Facebook that it's not today. So to break that down if we look at back our
web 1.0 and web 2.0 document silos and data silos you get the systems Facebook
and LinkedIn and maybe you get something like New York Times and today
information about Evan Sandhouse who's a prominent semantic web practitioner will
be stored three different times in three different ways and possibly
conflicting on all those systems information like such as his name his
address publications that he's written conferences that he's spoken on stuff
like that. So what we want to do is get beyond just the document we want to get
to the data level so that specific data elements can be referenced between
documents so that there's maybe one source of key Evan Sandhouse data and
Facebook can just reference it and if the data is updated then Facebook
automatically knows that the data is updated. So the idea is that instead of
having URLs between documents you get URLs between facts right and it's in a
lower level than just the document at a lower level than just the application
and in doing so the great advantage is that you no longer have to think about
specific documents you just have to think about data and information. Now this
is extremely powerful right in the same way that web 1.0 enabled you to not have
to think about where the information was sitting you didn't have to think about
the network layer and the machine layer and all this sort of stuff. The semantic
web enables you to not have to think about specific document locations. All
it has all it all it asks you to do is to connect basic information up and once
you do that the whole world from a data perspective makes a lot more sense and
can be kept a lot more organized. So that's the basic idea of the semantic
web is that it represents information at a lower level than documents little
facts and it connects them up. Special thanks goes out to Tim Berners-Lee the
creator of the World Wide Web for the all the images that were used in this
presentation. Thank you.
