Well, now I'd like to talk about the joy of numbers.
Well, numbers.
Here they are.
Here are the first numbers from one through a hundred.
But how did numbers come to be, and why do we write the numbers this way?
Well, we use a system that's based on the number ten, because we have ten fingers.
This is called the Hindu Arabic system.
In the old days, very old days, they would represent numbers like, say, three, by putting
down three stones, and that would represent three stones, three animals, three people.
If you wanted a number like 23, well, then you'd have to put down 23 stones.
That could get pretty clumsy once the numbers start to become pretty large.
So we use the base ten system, where a number like 23, we could think of those 23 stones
as being brought into two layers of ten, followed by a layer of three, right, ten plus ten plus
three is 23.
It's easier to see the 23 that way.
And using this system, it's easier to go on farther.
For instance, a number like 347.
Now if we have ten rows of ten, well, we call that a hundred, that's a group of a hundred.
And so 347 would be three rows of a hundred, four groups of ten, and seven individual stones.
So that would be 300 plus 47.
The number zero also plays an important role as a placeholder when there's nothing.
For instance, a number like 106 would be one group of 100 plus six.
There were no tens to be represented there.
So that's how zero shows up in representing 106 as 106.
But why use ten?
I mean, undoubtedly it's because we have ten fingers, but there are other systems that
could be used as well.
And in some areas of science and mathematics, we do use other systems.
I'll talk a little bit about base eight.
It's been said that base eight is a lot like base ten if you're missing two fingers.
Okay, so if you think of a number like 12, for instance, instead of counting in groups
of ten, we count in groups of eight.
And so I've written here the numbers 12 as one, four, base eight, and 23 as two, seven,
base eight, and so on.
That may look a little cryptic for now.
Let me give you a more visual explanation.
Okay, here's 12 stones.
All right.
Now, normally we would group them as a row of 10 followed by a row of two.
But if you're working in base eight, you group things in rows of eight.
So we have one row of eight and one row of four.
And so 12 when written in base eight would be one, four.
Here let's do another example.
Let's go to 23.
See, 23, I've got 23 stones here.
I have two rows of eight and one row of seven.
And so in base eight, you would write that number as two, seven, base eight.
If you were to go to a much larger number, here I have 63 stones.
Okay, you could count them.
And the way you could count them is you could see I have seven rows of eight followed by
a single row of seven.
And so we write that in base eight as seven, seven, seven rows of eight plus another seven.
Now what would happen if you were to add one more stone to that?
Okay, then you'd have 64.
Now would you write that as eight rows of eight?
Well, unfortunately, when you're working in base eight, you only have the digits zero
through seven.
So you can't say eight rows of eight.
Instead, you just say, I have one large group of 64.
So in base eight, this number would be written as one, zero, zero.
It is I have one squared block of eight at 64 items with no extra eights and no extra
units.
A number like 347 would have five square blocks of eight as five times 64.
Plus three times eight plus three times one.
So an enormous number like 347 would be written as five, three, three, base eight.
Okay, I'm only going to talk about these number systems for a little bit.
We'll be working in base 10 most of the time, but I'd like you to get used to the idea of
other number systems.
Now the binary number system, base two, is used constantly in computers.
Computers, they don't have 10 fingers.
All they can tell is whether a gate is open or closed or whether there's high voltage
or low voltage going through the system.
Here a number like 12, here we work in powers of two.
So for instance, a number like 12, we would say, well, that's eight plus four plus zero
plus zero.
Writing it in terms of powers of two, we have an eight and a four, a zero and a zero.
So it would be written as 1100 base two.
How about a number like 23?
Okay, 23, we say the largest power of two that we can get, that would be 124816.
So I've got one for my 16 and I've got seven left over.
There's no room for eight, but there is room for a four and a two and a one.
And that's why we have 23 being 16 plus four plus two plus one has base two representation,
binary representation, one, zero, one, one, one.
How about a number like 64?
Well this time we're at an entire power of two.
So we get one for the 64 and nothing left over for anything after that.
So we have a one for the 64, but a zero for the 32, 16, eight, four, two and one.
You can go on and on a number like 347, you find the largest power of two, that would
be 256 plus a 64 plus 16, eight, two and one.
We put a one every time we have a power of two.
So there's a 256 has the one, there's nothing for the 128, there's one for the 64, nothing
for the 32, one for the 16, one for the eight, nothing for the four, one for the two and
one for the one.
Okay, let's go to a system that is may seem even stranger to you.
This is called the hexadecimal system.
This is actually used frequently in electrical engineering.
A lot of computer chips use the hexadecimal system.
And now instead of having 10 digits, zero through nine, or two digits, zero and one
in binary, in hexadecimal, we have 16 digits.
These are the digits zero through nine, along with digits A, B, C, D, E and F that represent
the numbers 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15.
So whereas in base 10, if you saw the number 42, you would think of that as four tens and
a two.
But in hexadecimal, when you see the number 42, that means not four tens and a two, but
rather four sixteens and a two.
So that would be four times 16 plus two is 66, okay?
Let's take one of those stranger numbers like two, B, four.
Now the two is representing two 16 squareds and the B is representing an 11, so I've got
11 groups of 16 plus a four.
So when you add all those numbers together, you get the number 692 written in base 10.
Here's a number that looks like a word, right?
Here I've written the word fade, all right?
So I'm taking F times 16 cubed plus A times 16 squared plus D times 16 plus E, which when
written in terms of your base 10 numbers, it's 15 times 16 cubed plus 10 times 16 squared
plus 13 times 16 plus 14 is 64,222.
All right, here's a trick question.
What would 190 in hexadecimal be?
That's actually what we call a self-answering question, because if you take the number 190
and you write it as 11 times 16 plus 14, I have B times 16 plus E, the answer is V,
the last word of the sentence.
We call that a self-answering question, okay?
If you're tired of base two, eight and 16, I promise for the rest of this course, we're
just going to deal with base 10.
But before I do, I want to talk about one other concept that we take for granted now,
but took thousands and thousands of years before people got this straight.
And that's the idea of a negative number.
We take negative numbers for granted now, but can you imagine trying to convince somebody
that there were numbers that were less than zero?
I mean, how can something be less than nothing?
Those numbers seemed impossible.
But now, by thinking of numbers as lying on a number line and thinking of positive numbers
as being to the right of zero and negative numbers as being to the left of zero, then
they don't appear to be as mysterious.
You have things on the right, you have things on the left.
We can think of negative numbers as representing a debt to be paid.
If I owe you $3 today and I owe you $4 on another day, then altogether, I still owe you $7.
That makes a lot of sense today, but that's a concept that took a long time to develop.
Okay, well, this is called the joy of numbers.
Let's really have some fun with them.
Why do I love numbers so much?
Here, once again, are the numbers one through a hundred.
And I'll take you back to the classroom of a great mathematician named Carl Friedrich
Gauss, who, as the story goes, when he was nine or ten years old, a teacher one day asked
the class to add up the numbers one through a hundred.
Probably the teacher wanted to take a coffee break and keep the kids occupied for a while.
And Gauss, being the genius that he was, immediately answered, why, that's $5,050.
And the teacher was astonished and, lo and behold, Gauss was correct.
And let me explain to you how he figured that out and how we can figure out problems like
that ourselves.
So what Gauss noticed was when adding the numbers one through a hundred, he took those
numbers and folded them in half.
So think of the numbers one through 50 and then fold them over and look at the numbers
fifty one through a hundred.
And if you add those numbers in pairs, adding one plus a hundred you get a hundred and one.
Add two plus ninety nine, you get a hundred and one.
Three plus ninety eight, you get a hundred and one.
Going all the way out to fifty plus fifty one, you get one hundred and one.
How many hundred and ones have I added here?
Fifty of them.
So you have fifty times a hundred and one as the answer and that's how you get five thousand
and fifty.
Isn't that brilliant?
Isn't that cute?
We call numbers like five thousand and fifty, by the way, triangular numbers, right?
These are numbers that can be represented in a triangle.
For instance, one plus two is three, so we call three a triangular number.
One plus two plus three is six.
If you look at the row of dots, we have one dot, two dots, three dots, that gives you
six.
One, two, three, four is ten, okay?
Using these pictures for triangular numbers, we can come up with another formula for the
sum of the first n numbers.
That is, we can come up with a formula for the nth triangular number.
For example, imagine I put two of those triangles together of the same shape, okay?
So imagine I took one plus two plus three plus four dots in the form of a triangle and
took another row of one plus two plus three plus four dots as a triangle, but I inverted
the triangle.
So I put those two triangles together to create a rectangle.
Do you see the rectangle?
How many dots are in the rectangle?
Well, our rectangle is four by five, right?
I have four rows of five, and so that says that if I took one plus two plus three plus
four, and I did it twice, I would have 20 dots.
And therefore, if I cut that number in half, I'll have 10 dots for the amount that was
in a single triangle.
Let's see if you can visualize this argument for n dots, okay?
If we took one plus two plus three up through n dots, and we were to invert that triangle
to put those two triangles together to create a rectangle that has n rows of n plus one
dots.
And what that says is that if you take the nth triangular number plus the nth triangular
number, you get n times n plus one.
In other words, the nth triangular number is n times n plus one over two.
You now have a formula for the nth triangular number.
All right, here's another question.
How about what is the sum of the first n even numbers, two plus four plus six, all the way
up to the number two n, okay?
Now, I'm going to use the mathematician's trick of reducing this to a problem that
we already know how to solve.
I can factor out a two from each of those terms, and then I would have two times the
quantity one plus two plus three up through n.
But we know the sum of one plus two plus three up through n.
That's n times n plus one over two.
So my twos cancel, and we have the answer n times n plus one.
So now we know the sum of the first n even numbers is n times n plus one.
All right, how about the sum of the first n odd numbers?
How about that?
Okay, now this one I think is really pretty.
Okay, if we look at the first odd number as one, then one plus three is four.
One plus three plus five, the first three odd numbers add up to nine.
The first four odd numbers add up to 16.
The first five odd numbers add up to 25.
And if you look at those numbers, do you see the pattern?
We have one squared, two squared, three squared, four squared, five squared.
The sum of the first five odd numbers is five squared.
The pattern is unmistakable.
The sum of the first n odd numbers is n squared.
Now we're going to see a lot of different ways of proving this pattern in the course
of these lectures, but let me show you one that I think is especially pretty right now
that makes this pattern not only is it beautiful, but it makes it clear, all right?
Why is the sum of the first five odd numbers five squared?
Well, look here, I've drawn here a square that is a five by five squares, five rows
of five.
If I asked you how many little squares were in this big square, you'd say 25, of course,
five times five.
That's right.
Okay, but now suppose you were to examine those squares one layer at a time.
So I have one square here, and then three over there, and then five here in green, and seven
here in yellow, and nine here in orange.
I have one plus three plus five plus seven plus nine.
So if I asked you how many squares were in this picture, on the one hand, there's five
times five of them.
On the other hand, there's one plus three plus five plus seven plus nine of them.
So which answer is right?
Well, they're both right.
And therefore, five squared is one plus three plus five plus seven plus nine.
And the same picture will show you that the sum of the first n odd numbers is exactly
n squared.
Here's another pretty pattern.
I'm not going to prove this one for you, but I just want you to see it and marvel in
it.
I just think numbers are beautiful, and I hope you will too by the end of this course.
So for instance, now suppose I were to add the odd numbers, but I'm going to first take
one odd number, then the next two odd numbers, then the next three odd numbers, the next
four odd numbers, and so on, and see what those numbers are adding up to.
So for instance, you see that one is one, then the next two odd numbers, three plus
five, adds up to eight.
The next three odd numbers, seven plus nine plus 11, adds up to 27.
The next four odd numbers, 13, 15, 17, and 19, add up to 64.
The next five odd numbers add up to 125.
You see the pattern there, right?
What are those sums?
One cubed, two cubed, three cubed, four cubed, five cubed.
Is that amazing or what?
Speaking of cubes, what if we were to sum the cubes?
What if I were to take one cube plus two cubed plus three cubed and so on?
What does that give us?
Let's see if we can find a pattern here.
All right, one cubed is one.
One cubed plus two cubed is nine.
One cubed plus two cubed plus three cubed is 36.
Look at the next numbers.
The sum of the first four cubes is 100.
The sum of the first five cubes is 225.
Do you notice anything interesting about those numbers?
One, nine, 36, 100, 225.
Well those numbers are perfect squares.
That's one squared, three squared, six squared, ten squared, fifteen squared.
They always seem to be perfect squares.
But they're not just any perfect squares.
You might recognize the numbers one, three, six, ten, and fifteen.
Those were the triangular numbers, right?
One, three, six, ten, fifteen.
That's one plus two plus three plus four plus five dots.
So we have the first triangular number squared.
The second triangular number squared, and so on.
In other words, the sum of the cubes of the first five numbers is equal to the first five
numbers summed then squared.
Let me say that another way.
The sum of the cubes is the square of the sum.
Is that bizarre or what?
Now how would we, how do you know, is this just a coincidence?
Is this just work for these first five numbers and then the pattern breaks down?
No, in fact it holds for all the numbers, but we're not ready to prove that yet, but
we will in a subsequent lecture.
Let's go back now to the multiplication table, okay, a different set of a hundred numbers.
Here I have the multiplication table, one through ten, one through ten.
If you multiply three and eight, well you get the number twenty-four, and there's millions
of patterns that can be discovered just in the multiplication table itself.
Let me start by asking you a question that you probably have not thought about since
you were in elementary school.
Why is three times five equal to five times three, okay?
Why is that?
I mean, probably well we were told that, we memorized that, but what's the reason for
it?
I mean, why should it be that if you had three bags that each contained five coins, that
that would be the same number as if you had five bags that each contained three coins?
You know, it's not obvious why those two numbers should be the same.
I'm now going to convince you why that's the case.
By asking you a simple question here, count the dots.
How many dots are there in this picture?
Well, on the one hand you might look at this and say, I see three rows of five dots.
So the number of dots is three times five.
On the other hand, if you look column by column, you say, I see five columns of three dots.
So it's five times three.
Well, which answer was right?
Three times five or five times three?
Well, they were both right.
And since they were both right, they must be representing the same quantity.
That's why three times five is the same as five times three.
Okay, here's another thing you probably haven't thought about in a long time.
Why is negative three times negative five equal to positive 15?
Why should a negative times a negative equal a positive?
Well, it's all based on something in mathematics we call the distributive law.
There's a property that we want to preserve that says a times b plus c is a times b plus
a times c.
Let me motivate that for a minute.
Why does a distributive law work?
What does that say?
Well, imagine I had a bags of coins and each bag of coins had b silver coins and c
copper coins.
Then if I asked you how many coins do I have altogether, you'd say, well, every bag has
b plus c coins.
I've got a bags and therefore the total number of coins I have is a times b plus c.
On the other hand, how many silver coins do I have?
I have a times b, right, because each bag has b silver coins.
How many copper coins do I have?
I have a times c.
The total number of coins is a times b plus a times c.
The total number of coins is either a times b plus a times c, or we also said it was
a times b plus c.
Which answer is right?
They're both right, and therefore they are equal.
I just convinced you that the distributive law works when all the numbers are positive.
I also want the distributive law to work when the numbers are negative.
Let's start with an obvious statement.
Negative three times zero is zero.
You won't argue with me on that point, right?
Negative three times zero is zero.
Well zero is also equal to negative five plus five.
So I'm going to replace zero with negative five plus five.
Now if I want the distributive law to work for negative numbers, then it better be the
case that negative three times negative five plus negative three times five is zero.
I'm just applying the distributive law to get from this line to that line.
What we know negative three times five is negative fifteen.
And so what we have is that negative three times negative five minus fifteen is zero.
Well there's only one number which, when you subtract fifteen from, gives you zero and
that number is fifteen.
That's why negative three times negative five is positive fifteen.
My last question to see if we have any future gausses out there is this one.
When you add up all the numbers in a ten by ten multiplication table, okay?
So here's the multiplication table and I want to know the sum of all hundred numbers inside
of that multiplication table.
Now before I do that, I'm going to teach you one more skill that we'll prove later,
but I want you to learn how to do it now.
I'm going to teach you how to square any number that ends in five, okay?
Like thirty-five squared, okay?
Thirty-five times thirty-five is one thousand two hundred twenty-five and I'm going to show
you why.
You only have to remember two things.
First of all, if you square a number that ends in five, the answer will always, always
end in twenty-five, okay?
Trust me on that.
How does it begin?
It begins by taking the first digit which is three, multiplying that by the next higher
digit which is four.
Three times four is twelve and that's your answer, twelve twenty-five, one thousand two
hundred twenty-five.
Here you try an example.
Suppose you wanted to square the number sixty-five, okay?
How does it end?
It always ends with twenty-five.
How does it begin?
It begins by taking six times seven.
Six times seven is forty-two and so that's your answer, forty-two twenty-five, four
thousand two hundred twenty-five.
Now what does that have to do with the multiplication table, okay?
So now the question is what's the sum of all the numbers in the multiplication table?
Well, let's look at the first row of the multiplication table, okay?
One through ten, we know, well Gauss would tell us that that would equal fifty-five.
You have five pairs of eleven or the triangular number formula, ten times eleven over two
or just add them up yourself.
The numbers one through ten add up to fifty-five.
Well then what would the second row of the multiplication table add to?
Well, it's two, four, six, eight, ten and so on.
That's just going to be twice the sum of the numbers one, two, three up through ten.
So that row is going to add up to two times fifty-five and the third row is going to add
up to three times fifty-five, right, because it's three times one plus two plus three plus
four and so on.
And the fourth row would be four times fifty-five going all the way down to the tenth row which
would add up to ten times fifty-five, okay?
So if we were to add up all the numbers in the multiplication table, we would have one
times fifty-five plus two times fifty-five plus three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
nine, ten, ten times fifty-five.
And by the distributive law, that's just one plus two plus three plus four plus five
all the way up to ten times fifty-five.
But wait a second, well you know the sum of the numbers one through ten, that's fifty-five.
So if you were to sum all the numbers in the multiplication table, you would get fifty-five
times fifty-five.
And now we go back to the trick that I just taught you.
What's fifty-five times fifty-five?
Well, it ends with a twenty-five.
It begins with five times six which is thirty and therefore fifty-five squared is three thousand
and twenty-five.
And if we have any young gosses in the audience who figure that out, let me know.
Thank you very much.
