Now I'd like to talk about my all time favorite numbers, these are the Fibonacci numbers.
Fibonacci numbers are very easy to understand, they start with the numbers 1 and 1, in fact
they're as easy to understand as 1 plus 1, which is 2.
Next you add 1 plus 2 together to get 3.
Then 2 plus 3 is 5, 3 plus 5 is 8, 5 plus 8 is 13, 8 plus 13 is 21, and so on, 34, 55,
89, 144.
Look at those numbers, get comfortable with those numbers, we're going to see a lot of
those numbers in this lecture.
So first of all, who was Fibonacci?
Fibonacci was probably the most important mathematician of the 12th century.
He wrote a book called Lieber Abachi, which was the book of calculation, which was the
very first book to teach arithmetic to the Western world.
I mean back then they were using Roman numerals and other clunky devices, Fibonacci was the
son of a merchant and he traveled all around Europe and Africa and encountered the Hindu
Arabic system of doing arithmetic and saw that it was so much superior to what was currently
in place that he wrote a textbook that would teach people how to do these mathematical exercises
with this new number system.
And one of the problems from this book had to do with rabbits, and imagine the following
scenario.
You've got rabbits who never die, not a very realistic situation, but you have these rabbits
that never die, they mate every month and they produce a male and a female pair.
After one month, the rabbits are mature and begin mating.
So let me give you a picture of that.
So you start off with one pair of rabbits, okay, see I've got one pair of rabbits there,
and right now they're little baby rabbits, so they don't produce any babies.
The next month they are mature rabbits, they're adults, okay, it doesn't take long for a rabbit
to become an adult, I guess.
The following month those adult rabbits have a pair of baby rabbits, and now we have two
pairs of rabbits.
The next month we have, we'll have three pairs in our system, why do we have three?
Because all the rabbits that were alive are still alive, and the adult rabbits have produced
children.
So we now have two pairs of adults and one child pair, so that's three pairs of rabbits.
Here we have the next month, well all the rabbits that were alive in the fourth month,
all three pairs of rabbits, they are still alive, and the two adult pairs have produced
baby pairs, so we have five pairs of rabbits.
Now how many pairs of rabbits will we have in the next month?
Well, figure it out, we have all five of the rabbits that were, pairs of rabbits that were
alive then, in month five, plus all the rabbits that were alive in month four are going to
have babies now.
And that's why the number of rabbits we'll see in the next month is five plus three,
which is eight.
So the question was, how many rabbits are we going to see after 12 months?
And by continuing this process, you'll see we have one pair, two pair, three, five, eight,
13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144 pairs of rabbits in the 12th month.
Okay, let's take a look at these Fibonacci numbers from a more mathematical standpoint.
Here's how they are defined.
We start off, again it all begins with one plus one.
We define F1 to be the first Fibonacci number, F2 equals one to be the second Fibonacci number,
and then we have what's called a recursive equation that says the nth Fibonacci number
is equal to the n minus first Fibonacci number plus the n minus second Fibonacci number.
So let me ask you a question.
What would you get if you added up all the Fibonacci numbers?
Well, infinity, right, because they go on forever.
Okay, let me ask a better question then.
What would happen if you were to add up all the Fibonacci numbers together and then stop
at some point?
So for instance, we see one plus one is two, and one plus one plus two is four, and one
plus one plus two plus three is seven, one plus one plus two plus three plus five is
twelve, and so on, one plus one plus two plus three plus five plus eight is twenty.
Do you see a pattern with those numbers, one, two, four, seven, twelve, twenty?
May not be obvious yet, but what if I wrote those numbers as two minus one, three minus
one, five minus one, eight minus one, thirteen minus one, twenty one minus one, two, three,
five, eight.
Who do we appreciate?
Fibonacci, of course, right, those are the Fibonacci numbers in disguise.
They were off by one just to confuse you.
Now why, why does this work?
Well one, I think I'll give you two explanations for why this works.
One of them is it works in the beginning and it will keep on working.
How do I know it will keep on working?
Well if I knew, if you see that one plus one plus two, three, five, eight adds up to twenty
one minus one, what's going to happen when you add the next Fibonacci number to that
system?
What's going to happen when you add thirteen to that system?
Well then the twenty one plus the thirteen are going to join forces in a Fibonacci way
and get the next Fibonacci number thirty four.
So twenty one minus one plus thirteen is going to be thirty four minus one and that pattern
will continue forever.
This was actually our first example of what's called a proof by induction and we'll see
more of those in a subsequent lecture.
Here's another argument that I think is a little bit more direct, you might like this
one better yourself.
Alright, I'm going to show you another reason why one plus one plus two plus three plus
five plus eight is twenty one minus one.
You see that first one, let's replace that with two minus one and that second one, let's
replace that with three minus two and then that subsequent two, we'll replace that with
five minus three and then eight minus five and thirteen minus eight and twenty one minus
thirteen.
Okay, so I'm representing each of those numbers as the difference of two Fibonacci numbers
and now look what happens as I add those numbers together.
Two minus one plus three minus two, the twos cancel, I have a positive two and a negative
two and those cancel out and then when I add the five minus three, the threes cancel and
then the eight minus five, the fives cancel and the thirteen minus eight, the eights cancel
and the twenty one minus thirteen, the thirteen's cancel.
We have massive cancellation, annihilation here.
This is what mathematicians call a telescoping sum.
And when the dust settles, what's left of this sum?
All that's left is that twenty one on the right that hasn't been canceled yet and that
little minus one at the beginning that never got canceled.
And so when you add all those numbers together, you're going to get twenty one minus one.
We can write this in a nice formal equation that says actually what mathematicians call
an identity that F1 plus F2 all the way up to Fn, all the way up to the nth Fibonacci
number is Fn plus two minus one.
That is the sum of the first n Fibonacci numbers is equal to the n plus second Fibonacci number
minus one.
All right, here's another question.
What would happen if you were to sum the first n even positioned Fibonacci numbers?
That is, what's F2 plus F4 plus F6 all the way up to F2n?
Well, the first thing we should do is look at the data.
So F2 is one, F4 is three, F6 is eight.
As we add these numbers up, we have one, one plus three is four, one plus three plus eight
is twelve, one plus three plus eight plus twenty one is thirty three.
Do you see the pattern?
Ah, the Fibonacci numbers haven't disguised themselves enough for you yet, right?
Because this time you see it, we have two minus one, five minus one, thirteen minus
one, thirty four minus one, two, five, thirteen, thirty four.
Those are Fibonacci numbers, okay?
But they're every other Fibonacci number.
We have F3 minus one, F5 minus one, F7 minus one, and F9 minus one.
So let's see why that works, okay?
I mean, this is a beautiful pattern, but why does it work?
Well, let's look at the last equation.
One plus three plus eight plus twenty one, we'll leave the one alone, but the three will
replace that as one plus two, and the eight will write that as three plus five, and the
twenty one will write that as eight plus thirteen.
So as I'm adding every other Fibonacci number, what I really have are one plus one plus two
plus three plus five plus eight plus thirteen, which is exactly the same pattern that we
had before.
And so that's thirty four minus one, just like we saw before.
Okay, here's another one.
What if I were to add the sum of the on-position Fibonacci numbers?
That is, what's F1 plus F3 plus F5 all the way up to F2N minus one?
This pattern's even easier to see, no disguise this time, right?
We start with one, and then one plus two, and then one plus two plus five, one plus two
plus five plus thirteen, we see the numbers one, three, eight, and twenty one.
Well, those are just Fibonacci numbers, no disguise this time.
And why does that work?
Well, we'll leave the one alone and do the same thing we did before.
We have two is one plus one, five is two plus three, thirteen is five plus eight, add all
those together.
We have the same Fibonacci sum, except we have an extra one at the beginning, and that
extra one will cancel that minus one, leaving us with a final answer of twenty one.
In general, we have that F1 plus F3 plus F5 up to F2N minus one is equal to F sub 2N
exactly.
All right, here's a different pattern for you to contemplate.
Which Fibonacci numbers are even?
Well, let's look at the data, see what it says.
So let's see, F3 is even, F6 is even, F9 is even, F12 is even.
This seems even easier, a pattern to see, namely every third Fibonacci number appears
to be even, right?
We have odd, odd, even, odd, odd, even.
Why will this pattern continue?
Will this pattern persist?
Well, forget about what the Fibonacci numbers are.
Let's look at the fact that they start off odd, odd, even.
Now what happens when you add an odd number to an even number?
You're going to get an odd number.
And then when you take this even number plus this odd number, you're going to get another
odd number.
And when you add this odd number to this odd number, you're going to get an even number.
Oh, and now we're back to where we started, odd, odd, even.
So that proves that every third Fibonacci number will be even.
And what's more, anything that isn't a third Fibonacci number won't be even.
It will be odd.
Now if you like that pattern, it gets even better.
What if we look at every fourth Fibonacci number?
What do we have here?
We have 3, 21, 144, believe it or not.
Every fourth Fibonacci number is a multiple of 3.
Moreover, the only multiples of 3 among the Fibonacci numbers occur as every fourth Fibonacci
number.
So for instance, F40 is guaranteed to be a multiple of 3.
And F41, F42, and F43 are guaranteed not to be multiples of 3.
It gets even better.
Every fifth Fibonacci number is a multiple of 5.
Every sixth Fibonacci number is a multiple of 8.
And the only multiples of 8 are F6, F12, F18, F24.
I mean, how's this for a beautiful theorem?
The number Fm divides Fn, if and only if, m divides n.
But it gets even better.
Let me ask you this question.
Forget about Fibonacci numbers for one second, but just one second.
What is the largest number that divides 70 and 90?
In other words, what is the greatest common divisor of 70 and 90?
I hear you say 10, exactly.
10 is the largest number dividing 70 and 90.
We'll get this.
What is the largest number that divides F70 and F90?
What's the largest number that divides the 70th Fibonacci number and the 90th Fibonacci
number?
Believe it or not, it's the 10th Fibonacci number.
And in general, the greatest common divisor of Fm and Fn is always a Fibonacci number.
And it's not just any Fibonacci number.
It's the most poetic Fibonacci number you could ask for.
That is to say, the greatest common divisor of Fm and Fn is F of the greatest common divisor
of m and n.
What is the GCD of the Fs is F of the GCDs.
It just doesn't get prettier than that, but I'll try.
Here's another question.
We were talking about prime numbers in a previous lecture.
Which Fibonacci numbers are prime?
Well, if you look on our list, we have a 2, a 3, a 5, a 13, an 89.
It turns out the prime Fibonacci numbers are F3, 4, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17.
There's a pattern there, except for that F4, which we'll ignore.
It looks like we're seeing prime indices.
That is, and in fact, in fact, if your index is composite, except for 4, which is sort
of a special case because it's 2 times 2 and F2 and F1 are both 1.
Except for the case of F4.
If you are F of anything composite, you're guaranteed to be composite.
That's actually a consequence of that m divides n if and only if Fm divides Fn theorem.
But what would be more interesting is, is it the case that every prime index produces
a prime Fibonacci number?
Well, as is often the case with prime numbers, it's hard to pin things down.
And here, if we were to go just a little farther out in the sequence, F19, 19 is prime.
And F19 is 4,181, which might look prime to you, but in fact, it's 113 times 37.
So F19 is not prime.
However, the only places we see primes along the Fibonacci trails is in the fourth position
and in the prime positions.
In fact, an unsolved problem in mathematics is, are there infinitely many prime Fibonacci
numbers?
Nobody knows the answer to that question.
If you could solve that problem, you would achieve immortality.
And very few places in life that you can achieve immortality, right?
I mean, but proving a mathematical theorem and being the first person to prove a mathematical
theorem guarantees that people are going to know what you've accomplished for centuries.
We still know some of the brilliant proofs that were created by the ancient Greeks.
Anyway, here's a, here's another interesting result.
Every prime, even though we don't know if there are an infinite number of prime Fibonacci
numbers, we do know this.
Every prime divides a Fibonacci number.
In fact, if p ends in one or nine, then p divides Fp minus one.
And if p ends in three or seven, then p divides Fp plus one.
So for instance, seven divides F8, 21.
And 11, which ends in one, is going to divide F10, which is 55.
13, which ends in three, is going to divide F14, which is 377, which happens to be 13
times 29.
All right?
We know that if we add consecutive Fibonacci numbers together, we get the next Fibonacci
number.
That's how they are born.
Let's look at the squares of Fibonacci numbers.
I like to square numbers, you know?
Let's see what we have.
So one squared is one, two squared is four, three squared is nine, five squared is 25,
eight squared is 64, 13 squared is 169, 21 squared is 441, and so on.
Look what happens if we were to add one squared plus one squared.
We get two.
Not very profound.
If we take one squared plus two squared, we get five.
Oh, now that's interesting.
If we take two squared plus three squared, four plus nine, we get 13, which is a Fibonacci
number.
If we take three squared plus five squared, nine plus 25, we get 34, which is a Fibonacci
number.
In fact, it looks like the sum of the squares of Fibonacci numbers is always a Fibonacci
number.
Let's say FN squared plus FN plus one squared is F2N plus one.
Here's another pattern.
What would happen if you added up the sums of squares, not of two consecutive Fibonacci
numbers, but all the Fibonacci numbers?
What would you get?
Infinity, right?
Because they go on forever.
Okay, better question.
What if you were to add up all those numbers and then stop at some point?
We have one squared plus one squared is two, and one squared plus one squared plus two
squared is six, and one squared plus one squared plus two squared plus three squared is 15,
and the sum of the squares of the first five Fibonacci numbers is 40.
The sum of the squares of the first six Fibonacci numbers is 104.
Let's look at those numbers, two, six, 15, 40, 104.
They're not Fibonacci numbers, but if you look closely, I claim the Fibonacci numbers
are buried inside of them.
Do you see them?
Look, two is one times two, six is two times three, 15 is three times five, 40 is five
times eight, 104 is eight times 13, two, three, five, eight.
Who do you appreciate?
Fibonacci, of course.
Right?
They are one times two, two times three, F2 times F3, F3 times F4, F4 times F5.
In fact, in general, if you were to take the sum of the squares of the first N Fibonacci
numbers, you get the N Fibonacci number times the N plus first Fibonacci number.
I won't prove this for you.
I'll just revel in its beauty.
Here's another beautiful pattern.
Suppose we were to take, oh, let's fix our attention on one of the Fibonacci numbers,
like let's say F4 here.
If we were to multiply its neighbors, say F3 and F5, then we see that two times five
is 10, which was one away from nine, that is three squared.
If we were to circle, say, the number F5, which is five, and multiply its neighbors,
we get three times eight, which is 24, which is one away from 25.
If we were to take eight squared, multiply its neighbors, five and 13, we get 65, which
is one away from eight squared, 64.
You see the pattern?
It works even with the lower numbers, with F1 times F3 is one away from one squared,
and F2 times F4 is one away from F3 squared.
In general, the pattern seems to be that if you take the N minus first Fibonacci number
times the N plus first Fibonacci number, you get the square of the Nth Fibonacci number
plus or minus one, always one.
In fact, we can say it more precisely that Fn minus one times Fn plus one minus Fn squared
is equal to minus one to the Nth power.
What if we took the neighbors, instead of making them one apart, we made them two apart?
Okay, so let's again, we'll focus here on F3, and if I take its neighbors two to the
left and two to the right, I have one times five, which equals five, which is one away
from four to squared.
Let's do another example.
If I were to take the number three and look two to its left, two to its right, I have
one times eight, which is eight, which is one away from nine from three squared.
If I were to take the number five and look two to its left, two to its right, I have
two times 13 is 26, which is one away from 25.
You see the pattern?
Here, again, we look at the number eight, two to its left, two to its right, three times
21 is 63, that's one away from 64.
And so the general pattern is that Fn minus two times Fn plus two is one away from Fn
squared.
It's either one higher or one lower.
In other words, Fn minus two times Fn plus two minus Fn squared is minus one to the Nth.
What if you were to look three away or four away or five away?
Well, if you look three away, we see the same sort of pattern.
Let's just take, well, let's circle the fifth element this time, right?
If we were to go three away, that would put us at one and three away here would put us
at 21.
This time, it looks like we're four away from 25.
If we were to take this number here, eight, and we were to go three away, that's two,
and three away, that's 34, multiply those two together, we get 68, which is, again, four
away from 64.
In fact, the difference between them is either going to be one, one, four, nine, 25, 64,
we get the squares of the Fibonacci numbers as their difference.
Let's go from looking at multiplication properties to some division properties, okay?
Let's look at the ratios of consecutive Fibonacci numbers.
For instance, one over one is one, no problem, two over one is two, three over two is 1.5,
five over three is 1.666, eight over five is 1.6, exactly, 13 over eight is 1.625, exactly,
and then look what's happening, 21 over 13 is 1.615, dot, dot, dot, there's some more
stuff at the end of that.
And so on, the next ratio, 1.619, 1.617, 1.618, 1.617, these ratios seem to be getting closer
and closer together.
As a matter of fact, if you were to take those ratios and go farther and farther and farther
out in the Fibonacci sequence, then what those numbers are getting closer and closer
to is 1.618, 033, 989, etc., which is one plus the square root of five over two.
This is known as the golden ratio.
It's been said that the golden ratio has all kinds of magical and mystical properties.
It certainly has some beautiful mathematical properties.
Let me say a few words about those.
For instance, if you were to take a rectangle with dimensions one and 1.618, and what I
really mean is one plus the square root of five over two, but we'll abbreviate that
by calling it 1.618.
If you were to take that rectangle and cut out from it a square, a one by one square,
then what you're left with is a rectangle with height of one and of length 0.618.
Take that rectangle.
Now let's turn it 90 degrees.
So now it has height 0.618 and a length of one.
And what you have is a rectangle that's completely proportional, completely similar to the first
rectangle.
Okay?
So that the ratio of 1.618 over one is exactly the same as the ratio of one over 0.618.
It's been said that this rectangle is considered to be the most beautiful rectangle because
it has these properties.
I think, however, when the experiments have been done, when they've actually taken this
to psychology classes, you know, they find that the prettiest rectangle is somewhere
in the neighborhood of 1.6, 1.618, but it might be as low as 1.57 or 1.65.
There's I think a little too much temptation to ascribe any number that's even remotely
close to 1.618 and calling it the golden ratio.
It's been said, for instance, that the human body in the book, the Da Vinci Code, they said
that the human body was a testament to this number, 1.618 Phi.
And they'd say that if you measured yourself from head to toe and you measured yourself
from belly button to toe, that the ratio was always 1.618.
Now I haven't personally done this experiment, but I've heard others have and the answer
is unfortunately no.
So there's an awful lot of myth.
Yes, Fibonacci numbers do show up in nature, but not as often in fine arts and physiology
as has been claimed, at least in my opinion.
Here's another connection between the golden ratio and the Fibonacci numbers.
There's an exact formula for the Nth Fibonacci number.
And so a beautiful formula actually that says that the Nth Fibonacci number is 1 over root
5 times 1 plus root 5 over 2 to the Nth power minus 1 minus root 5 over 2 to the Nth power.
This is called Benet's formula.
I'm amazed that that formula produces whole numbers, much less produces the Fibonacci
numbers.
In fact, the Nth Fibonacci number is exactly what comes out of that formula and that formula
can be used to explain many of the Fibonacci numbers, beautiful properties.
So as I've said, the Fibonacci numbers appear in nature, if you study pineapples, sunflowers,
they actually show up there in computer science, in arts, in crafts, even in poetry.
Poetry I hear you cry.
Let me show you a piece of poetry.
If you ever recited a limerick, how does a limerick meter go?
It says, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, d-dum,
d-dum, d-dum, d-dum, I know it's a dumb limerick.
But if you count the d's and the dums in each line, look at what you get.
If we count each line, look what we have, the total number of d's and dums in the first
line, eight syllables, eight syllables, five syllables, five syllables, and eight syllables.
How many d's in the first line?
Five.
How many dums?
Three.
So we have five and three, five and three, three and two, three and two, five and three.
We're full of Fibonacci numbers.
In fact, the total number of syllables in the limerick is 34, a Fibonacci number.
Number of d's is 21, a Fibonacci number.
The number of dums is 13, a Fibonacci number.
I was so inspired by this fact that I composed myself my own Fibonacci limerick, which I
will end on this note.
I think Fibonacci is fun.
We start with a one and a one, then two, three, five, eight, but don't stop there, mate.
The fun has just barely begun.
