Well now, for lecture number nine, we will talk about the joy of nine.
Let me begin with a magic trick.
I want you to think of a number between one and ten, okay, stop what you're doing and
think of a number between one and ten.
Now take that number and triple it.
Take the number you have now and add six to it, okay.
Take that number and now triple it again.
I'll wait, okay.
Now take your answer, probably a two-digit number, add the digits of your answer.
If you still have a two-digit number, add those digits again.
So now you're thinking of a one-digit number, concentrate, concentrate.
I see it, you got the number nine, right?
Okay, let's see why that works.
It's based on algebra and a little bit more.
When you think of a number between one and ten, I don't know what the number is, I still
don't know what the number is, let's just call it x.
When you triple it, you now have the number three x.
When you add six to it, you now have the number three x plus six.
When you triple that again, that is if you take three times three x plus six, then you
have nine x plus 18.
But look, nine x plus 18, that's nine times the quantity x plus two.
So what you have is guaranteed to be a multiple of nine, right?
Because it's nine times x plus two.
Here let's take a look at the first several multiples of nine that I can put down and
take a look at what they all have in common.
This was shown to you way back in elementary school, right?
That if you look at a number that's a multiple of nine, the digits sum to nine or a multiple
of nine.
That is 18, one plus eight is nine, two plus seven is nine, three plus six is nine.
All those numbers add up to nine.
Well, except for the number 99, 99 adds up to 18, but that's okay because 18, its digits
add up to nine.
So here's the deal, a number is divisible by nine if and only if the sum of the digits
is a multiple of nine.
Let's do an example.
Let's say you're looking at the number three, four, five, six.
Is that a multiple of nine?
Well, one way to determine that is by adding the digits together.
We add the digits, we get 18.
18 is a multiple of nine, and therefore, three, four, five, six is a multiple of nine.
Or if you wanted to, you could take the step of looking at 18, adding its digits, getting
nine and stopping right there.
Let's look at another example.
Say the number one, two, three, four, well, what do those digits add up to?
Those digits add up to 10.
And if we sum the digits of 10 together, we get one.
And therefore, one, two, three, four is not a multiple of nine.
However, that one gives us some extra information.
One is the remainder that we get when we divide one, two, three, four by nine.
In this case, you can see why that's true because one, two, three, three, what do those
digits add up to?
Those digits add up to nine, right?
And so one, two, three, three is a multiple of nine.
If you divided nine into one, two, three, three, you'd get a remainder of zero.
Therefore if you divided nine into one, two, three, four, you'd get a remainder of one.
Let's, so why does this rule work?
Even if this was shown to you way back in elementary school, they probably did not really
explain it to you.
They just said this is a curious pattern of the number nine.
It also works, by the way, for multiples of three also.
That is, a number is divisible by three if and only if the digits add up to a multiple
of three.
Let's look at, back to nines, let's look at the number three, four, five, six, okay?
Three, four, five, six is after all three times a thousand plus four times a hundred
plus five times ten plus six.
Now we can break a thousand into nine hundred ninety nine plus one and we can break a hundred
into ninety nine plus one and ten we can break into nine plus one and six will just stay
as six.
So if we put factors, if we expand on this we see we have three times nine ninety nine
plus four times ninety nine plus five times nine and we're left with a dangling three times
one which is three, four times one which is four, five times one which is five and a six
and you agree that nine ninety nine is a multiple of nine so three times nine ninety nine is
a multiple of nine and four times ninety nine is a multiple nine and five times nine is a
So all those combined to be some multiple of nine plus your three, four, five, six, your three plus four plus five plus six, which is 18.
So three, four, five, six is a multiple of nine plus 18, but adding 18 to a multiple of nine still gives you a multiple of nine.
Whereas if we took something like one, two, three, four, the same idea applies.
We have one times a thousand plus two times a hundred plus three times 10 plus four, expanding the thousand hundred and 10 like we did before.
We have one times 999 plus two times 99 plus three times 99 plus one plus two plus three plus four, which is a multiple of nine plus 10.
But 10 can be broken into nine plus one.
So we have a multiple of nine plus nine, which is still a multiple of nine plus one.
Therefore, as promised, one, two, three, four is one bigger than a multiple of nine.
Now, where this becomes also, I think fun, but also useful, practical, is we can use this idea about nines as a way of checking our numbers.
We can use this to check addition, subtraction, multiplication problems even.
For instance, let's say we wanted to add three, four, five, six plus one, two, three, four.
Okay. Add those together.
If you do it carefully, you get 4,690.
Now, let's check our answer.
Okay. We're going to check our answer by a process that's known as casting out nines.
First we'll do it and then I'll explain it to you.
Okay. What we take are the number three, four, five, six.
All right. And we reduce it by adding all the digits together, giving us 18.
And we reduce the 18 by adding its digits together to give us nine.
Then we take one, two, three, four.
We add its digits to get 10.
We add the digits of 10 to get one.
So our original problem of three, four, five, six plus one, two, three, four, we're going to do the easy problem of nine plus one to give us 10.
And 10 adding its digits together gives us one.
Now, let's check our answer. 4,690. If we did everything right, we should get one at the end of our process.
4,690. What do those digits add up to?
19. 19, its digits add up to 10.
And 10's digits add up to one.
Lo and behold, those numbers match.
We got a one with the big problems.
We got a one with the little problem.
And if those numbers did not match, then you definitely made a mistake somewhere.
But since the numbers match, we have confidence in our answer.
If the answer was correct, then the little numbers, the ones in this case, are guaranteed to match.
But as a warning, just because the ones match doesn't mean that the answer is correct.
But if the numbers were different, like if we got a one in one place and a two in another place, then the answer was definitely wrong.
So why does this work?
Well, if we look at 3456, we know from our earlier calculation that 3456 is a multiple of nine.
It's nine times some number x plus zero.
One, two, three, four is nine times some number plus one.
Therefore, when we add something of the form 9x to 9y plus one, we get 9 times x plus y plus one, which means that in the end, it's going to reduce to the number one.
So that's the underlying proof.
That's the underlying reason why this method works.
Here, let's do another problem.
Let's do a bigger problem just so you get the hang of it.
Let's say we had 91787 plus 42864.
If we add those numbers together correctly, we get 134651.
To check our answer, we take that 134651, add its digits to get 20, right?
And now if we take 20 and add its digits, we get two.
Now to check our answer, we will take 91787, add its digits together.
9 plus one plus seven plus eight plus seven is 32.
Add the digits of 42864 together to get 24.
Simplify those numbers.
32 simplifies to five by adding the digits.
24 turns into a six.
Five plus six is 11 and 11 with the one plus one adds up to two.
So those numbers match as they should, so we have confidence in our answer.
Now this method is prone to making some mistakes.
Like for instance, if you got your answer wrong by mixing up two digits,
like if instead of ending with 651, you ended up with 561,
well then those numbers are still going to add up to the same thing.
That's an error that won't get caught by this method.
But this method will catch a lot of errors.
Let's show that this works also for subtraction problems.
Let's say we took those numbers 91787 minus 42864.
We do our subtraction, we get 48923.
If you add the digits of 48923, we get 26.
Take 26 and add its digits, we get eight.
Now let's check it by casting out nines.
The first number 91787 simplifies to 32.
The second number 42864 simplifies to 24, just like it did in our last example.
32 reduces to five, 24 reduces to six.
Now when you do five minus six, because this is a subtraction problem,
you get negative one.
Now negative one, oh no, what do we do with that?
Well remember, negative one is simply the remainder that you get when you divide it by nine.
You can always change your number by adding or subtracting multiples of nines to things.
So we'll add a nine to that negative one to get the number eight.
Hey, that's great because we have an eight for the first one and an eight for the second one
and therefore we have confidence in our answer.
What's rather surprising, I think, I've always found this to be somewhat magical,
is that this will also work for multiplication problems.
That is, if we took those same numbers, 91787 and 42864,
and we multiplied those together, okay, giving us some huge number, 3,903,357,968.
We want to check our answer.
Well, let's add the digits of that 10-digit number.
We get 57, add the digits of 57 to get 12, add the digits of 12, we get 3.
Okay, let's check our answer.
Well, 91787, as before, reduces to the number five and 42864, just like before, will reduce to the number six.
And since this is a multiplication problem, we take the five and the six and we multiply them.
Five times six is 30 and the digits of 30 add up to three.
Those numbers match.
Don't you find that kind of amazing that those numbers match?
I've always found this to be rather magical.
We have confidence in our answer.
Now, why does this work?
Basically, the line of algebra below explains it.
It says that if you have a number of the form 9x plus 5 and you multiply that by a number of the form 9y plus 6,
then you get the number 9 times 9xy, right?
Because the 9x times the 9y is 81xy, plus 9 times 5x, plus 9 times 6y, plus 5 times 6, 30.
But that first expression is clearly a multiple of 9 because it's 9 times something, plus what's left?
30 is 27 plus 3.
So as promised, the remainder that you get when you divide your answer by 9 is 3.
And that's what both sides of the calculation are checking.
Now, the ideas behind this actually extend beyond the number 9.
So we like to say things like 42864 is 6 plus some multiple of 9.
The notation that we use for that is 42864 is equal to 6 mod 9.
That's just a more compact way of saying the same thing.
So to clarify, we say that A is equal to B mod 9 if A is equal to B plus some multiple of 9.
In other words, A is equal to B plus 9k, where k is some integer, some whole number.
And in general, we say for any integer m, not just the number 9, that A is equal to B mod m if A is equal to B plus some multiple of m.
Another way of saying that is that A is equal to B plus m times k, where k is any integer.
Another way of saying that is that the number m divides the difference, A minus B, m divides A minus B.
Those are all equivalent ways of saying that A is equal to B mod m.
We can do what's called modular arithmetic for any integer m.
For example, using the same logic that we did to demonstrate casting out 9s, we can show that if A is equal to B mod m and C is equal to D mod m.
Let me translate that for you.
It says that if A and B differ by a multiple of m and C and D differ by a multiple of m, then A plus C equals B plus D mod m.
That is A plus C and B plus D will differ by a multiple of m.
Moreover, A times C equals B times D mod m.
And one good multiplication deserves another.
If I take A equals B and multiply it by A equals B, I get A squared equals B squared mod m.
And multiply that by A equals B, you get A cubed equals B cubed, then A to the fourth equals B to the fourth.
And in general, A to the n equals B to the n mod m.
Now, if this is starting to sound a little bit abstract for you, let me convince you that in fact you do modular arithmetic every day of your life.
For instance, if I say a clock reads 12 o'clock right now, then what time will it say in five hours?
Well, you know that.
Five o'clock.
Well, what time will it say in, if it's 12 o'clock now, what time will it say in 17 hours?
Well, you're used to saying, well, 17 hours, that's 12 hours plus five hours.
I ignore the 12, it'll still say five o'clock.
Right? If I say, what will it look like in 29 hours or 41 hours?
You say, well, I'm just adding more multiples of 12.
I can ignore the 12 when I'm looking at the clock.
We're working mod 12.
If I said, what will it look like seven hours in the past?
12 minus seven is five.
All of those are equivalent to saying that the number five is the same as the number 17 mod 12.
Sometimes I'll, for my class, I'll put on my mod 12 glasses like this.
Okay.
The number five and 17, they look the same to me when I look at those numbers, mod 12.
It looks like 29.
It looks like 41.
All those numbers look alike, mod 12.
Okay. Here's another example.
If a clock reads nine o'clock now, what time will it say in eight hours?
Well, nine plus eight is 17.
Mod 12 is five.
Okay. What will the clock look like in 1,202 hours from the nine o'clock time?
Well, let's see.
1,202 mod 12, right?
We go around the clock 100 times plus two.
1,202 is just two mod 12.
So in 1,202 hours, it's going to look like nine plus two, which is 11 o'clock.
Okay. I sense that you'd like to see an even better application of this.
So let me show you one that I use every day of my life.
Okay. I'll start off with what you might call a little bit of a party trick,
but then we'll see how we can really apply this practically.
That is computing the day of the week of any date in history.
Let's take a random birthday like March 19th, 1961.
Okay. I claim that that's a Sunday and July 22nd, 1987.
In my head, I can tell you that that's a Wednesday or when will Christmas be in 2007?
Without having to think about it, I can tell you that that's going to be a Tuesday.
And we're going to figure out why this works in just a moment.
To do this, what we need is to memorize a few things.
Now I'm going to start by showing you a more practical concept,
how to figure out the day of the week of any date, any year.
Okay. And the year that you're seeing this maybe is 2007.
Looking at this at a later date, I'll show you how to figure it out for subsequent years as well very easily.
But let's figure out how to figure out the day of the week for any date in 2007.
Okay. First, we need to memorize a year code and conveniently the year code for 2007 is zero.
So there's literally nothing to remember.
Next, we need to memorize a code for every day of the week.
Okay. So starting with Sunday and going on through Saturday.
So Sunday is one, Monday is two, Tuesday is three, Wednesday is four, Thursday is five, Friday is six, and Saturday is seven or zero.
Okay. By the way, why Saturday is seven or zero is because we're doing this all mod seven.
So when we put on our mod seven glasses, we can't distinguish between seven and zero.
Okay. Next, we need to memorize a code for every month of the year.
Okay. So here are the months January through December.
And I find them easiest to remember this code if you look at them in groups of three.
So for instance, January is February and March is one, four, four, and then zero, two, five, and then zero, three, six, and then one, four, six.
I know you're saying, how am I supposed to memorize that?
Well, if you look at those numbers in groups of three, you'll notice a very curious pattern.
That is the first three numbers, one, four, four.
That looks familiar, right?
One, four, four is also 12 squared.
Hey, 12 months in a year, 12 squared is 144.
Is that a coincidence?
You bet it is, but I'll take advantage of that.
Okay. The next three digits are zero, two, five, which is five squared.
The next three digits are zero, three, six, which is six squared.
And the last three digits are one, four, six, which is 12 squared plus two, almost 12 squared.
Okay. It's cheap, but you'll remember it.
Once you have those month codes memorized, we're in business.
Let's figure out the day of the week of Christmas, 2007.
All right. So December 25, 2007.
Here's all you have to do.
You start with December.
What's the month code for December?
The month code for December is six.
Take the number six.
We add to that the number 25 because it's December 25.
So I'm going to add 25 to that.
And then for 2007, what do we add?
Zero. The year code is zero.
So six plus 25 plus zero is 31.
Now, if you wanted to, you could count one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
and wrap around the calendar, eight, nine, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, until we get to 31.
But we don't have to do that because every seven days, the week repeats.
Right. So day number 31 is going to be the same as 31 minus any multiple of seven.
What's the biggest multiple of seven below 31?
28. Right.
So 31 minus 28 is three.
And day number three, according to our code, is Tuesday.
So Christmas in 2007 will be a Tuesday.
Let's do another example.
We definitely need another example for this to sink in.
Okay. September 9th, 2007.
Now from our chart, we see that the September month code is six.
September 9th.
So we add nine to it.
2007 is zero.
Add those together.
Six plus nine plus zero is 15.
Next, we subtract the biggest multiple of seven that we can.
That would be 14.
15 minus 14 is one.
And so that would be a Sunday.
How about Thanksgiving 2007?
What's that going to be?
Well, we know it's going to be a Thursday.
We know it's in November, but November what?
Well, let's do our calculation.
So November has a month code of four.
By the way, I have a mnemonic for remembering that, right?
November, we have so much to be thankful for is how I remember November's four.
Back to math.
Okay. November what is going to be Thanksgiving?
November, I don't know.
Let's call it X.
2007 has a year code of zero.
So we're going to add four plus X plus zero, and that's going to have to be Thursday.
And Thursday is day number five.
Okay.
So what do I have to add to four in order to get five mod seven?
Well, I have to add one or something equivalent to one, something that differs from one by a multiple of seven.
So X is either going to be one or eight or 15 or 22 or 29, right?
But Thanksgiving occurs on the fourth Thursday of the month.
So the fourth Thursday on that would be the 22nd.
We're going to be able to figure out in our heads that 22 is the date that we need.
In other words, Thanksgiving will be on November 22nd, 2007.
Now, why does this work?
It works based on the fact that what happens to your birthday as you go from one year to the next?
What normally happens?
It usually bumps up by a day, right?
Exactly one day.
Why is that?
That's because that normally there are between your birthdays, there are 365 days that go in between your birthday.
And 364 happens to be a multiple of seven, right?
Seven times 52 is 364.
So if every year had 364 days, then your birthday would be on the same day each year and that would be pretty boring.
And that's why they didn't do it that way.
That's why it's 365 days.
Oh, and something to do with the earth going around the sun.
Okay, so except there is an exception to this madness, right?
That is, if it's a leap year, then there are normally 366 days between your birthdays.
So you have two days between your birthdays, unless you were January and February, since the year hasn't leaped yet.
Putting all that together, what that tells us is 2007, which has a year code of zero.
What does that tell us about 2008?
Well, 2008 is a leap year, right?
It's going to have 366 days.
So when we go from 2007 to 2008, there are going to be 366 days between your birthdays, unless it was January, February, which means that the year code for 2008 should be two.
Except in January, February, we have to subtract one.
The year hasn't leaped yet and the year code would be one.
Okay, ignoring leap year now, because 2008 is a leap year, but 2009 is not.
2009's calendar is going to be one more than 2008's calendar.
So we jump over to the next number, which is three.
So 2009 will have a year code of three.
2010 will have a year code of four.
2011 will have a year code of five.
And 2012, since that's a leap year, we're going to leap over the six to get seven.
And so that's why 2012 will have a year code of seven.
And of course we can reduce seven, mod seven.
That looks just like zero to me when I look at the numbers, mod seven.
So 2012 has a year code of zero.
Okay, incidentally, the year 1900 has a year code of zero.
And now knowing that fact, we can now derive the year codes for every subsequent date.
Like if you remember in my first example, March 19th, 1961.
So how are we going to figure out the year code for 1961?
Well, 1961 is 61 years after 1900.
So the calendar is going to shift 61 times.
Plus it's also going to shift for every one of the leap years between 1900 and 1961.
How many leap years do we have?
Well, we have a leap year every four years.
One quarter of 61 is 15 and change.
So we're going to see 15 leap year shifts.
Therefore, the total number of shifts starting at 1900 that had a year code of zero up to 1961
is going to be 61 plus 15, which is 76.
You could make that the year code for 1961, but don't do that.
It's much simpler to look at that number, mod seven, subtract the biggest multiple of seven that you can.
That would be 70.
76 minus 70 is six.
And that's the year code for 1961.
Once you have that, we can now calculate March 19th, 1961 by taking March, which has a month code of four, 19, right?
For the 19th, 61 has a year code of six.
Add those together to get 29.
Look at that number, mod seven, by subtracting the biggest multiple of seven.
And we get one, which is Sunday.
I sense you would like to see another example.
So here it is, July 22, 1987.
Well, we start by looking at to figure out the year code for 1987.
We take 87, take a quarter of 87.
That's 21 with a remainder of three.
Ignore the remainder of three.
We always ignore the remainder.
87 plus 21 is 108.
And now you have to subtract the biggest multiple of seven.
That's handy to know the big multiples of seven around 70, 77, 84, 91, 98, 105.
Oops, 105.
That's what I want.
108 minus 105 is three.
So that's the year code for 1987.
When I demonstrate this in front of audiences, I will ask for the year first so I can calculate the year code with a three.
And then I say what month?
They say July.
I'll add zero.
July what?
Subtract the biggest multiple of seven we can, 21, and we get four.
And so July 22, 1987 will be day number four, which is a Wednesday.
Okay.
Your final challenge, I insist you bring out a calculator right now.
I'll wait.
Okay.
I want you to pick any four digit number.
Make sure any four digit number as long as the digits aren't all the same.
Okay.
What number do you want?
Your favorite numbers, but you could have picked any number really.
Okay.
Now scramble those numbers so that you get a different number.
Okay.
Whatever you'd like.
8611.
Great.
Subtract the smaller number from the larger number.
What do you get?
Well, I see in this case you have 6993.
Now I want you to take those numbers and the digits.
Six plus nine plus nine plus three is 27.
Okay.
If you have a two digit number, add those digits again so that you have a one digit number.
Now concentrate really hard on your number.
It's coming.
I see it.
You're thinking of the number nine, aren't you?
I thought so.
