So, in this lecture I'd like to talk about the joy of proofs.
One of the great joys of doing mathematics is you can prove things to be true beyond
a shadow of a doubt.
It's also, sometimes surprising to other people, is that you can also prove that certain
things are impossible.
Only in mathematics can we have absolute proof of certainty and impossibility, and I want
to give you a taste of that in this lecture.
Let's start off small with something that we already know to be true, just to give an
example of an easy proof, okay?
I'll take a statement like, when you add an even number plus an even number, you always
get an even number back, okay?
So how would we go about proving that, something that you already presumably believe, okay?
We say that an integer is an even number, let's call that integer a.
If a is equal to 2 times b, where b is any integer, okay, you'll accept that as the definition
of an even number, right, anything that's twice another number.
So here's my theorem.
If x and y are even numbers, then x plus y is also an even number, that's my theorem.
Now to make that a theorem, we have to provide a proof, here's the proof.
Since x is an even number, then x is equal to 2a, where a is an integer.
Since y is an even number, y is equal to 2b, okay, where b is an integer.
Thus x plus y is equal to 2a plus 2b, but that's 2 times the quantity a plus b.
But now a plus b is an integer, right, a was an integer, b was an integer, therefore their
sum is an integer.
So since x plus y is twice an integer, x plus y is even.
And now the way we end a proof, there are a lot of different mathematical conventions
for that.
One of them is a little square or box, sometimes called the homos symbol.
Sometimes you use the letters QED, which stands for quite easily done.
Actually it stands for something in Latin, quad eroth demonstrandum, that which was to
be demonstrated, but I prefer quite easily done.
But if the proof provides you with a certain amount of glee or happiness, then I say you
should end the proof with a good old fashioned smiley face.
Okay, let's do another proof for you.
We say that an integer is an odd number if the number is not even, okay.
A more mathematical way of saying that is an odd number a is the number that's of the
form 2 times b plus 1.
As Shakespeare said, an integer is either of the form 2b or not 2b, but let me not say
that.
Okay, so here's a theorem.
If x and y are odd numbers, then their product is an odd number, okay, with absolute certainty
here.
Why?
Well, if x is an odd number, then x is of the form 2a plus 1.
Y is an odd number, means y is equal to 2b plus 1, where a and b are integers.
Therefore their product, xy, is 2a plus 1 times 2b plus 1.
When you multiply those together, you get 4ab plus 2a plus 2b plus 1.
And those first three terms are all divisible by 2, right?
You see it's 2 times the quantity 2ab plus a plus b, but that 2ab plus a plus b, that's
just another integer.
All of that plus 1.
So xy is twice an integer plus 1, and therefore x times y is an odd number.
All right, let's graduate from numbers that are even and odd to talk about rational numbers.
Those are fractions, which are obtained by taking the quotient of two integers.
Specifically, we say that a number r is rational.
If r is equal to p over q, where p and q are integers, of course q is not allowed to be
zero, because then you'd be dividing by zero, and that's just never allowed.
Okay, theorem.
The average of two rational numbers is always rational.
Let's prove that, okay?
Well, since r1 is a rational number, that's going to be of the form p1 over q1.
Let r2 be a rational number, that'll be of the form p2 over q2.
Then their average is r1 plus r2 over 2.
Let's add them up.
Well, we add the fractions, p1 over q1 plus p2 over q2, we'll divide it by 2.
When we do the adding of fractions, we get p1 q2 plus p2 q1 over 2 q1 q2.
Well, all I can say is that the thing that we have on top is the product and sum of integers,
right?
And the thing we have on the bottom, 2 q1 q2, that's the product of integers.
So we have an integer on the top and an integer on the bottom, and therefore the average of
those two numbers, r1 and r2, is rational.
Now the consequence of that statement is that between any two rational numbers, you can
find another rational number.
If you were to look at the number line, you might believe, as some of the ancient Greeks
once did, that all numbers were rational, that every number out there is equal to some
fraction, right?
Pythagoras had that belief that every number, and because between any two fractions you
can find another fraction, they just seem to be everywhere, right?
So Pythagoras, who would therefore have been surprised that one of the numbers that he
himself almost invented was not a rational number.
If you remember Pythagoras' theorem, which we'll talk about in a later lecture, that
says if in any right triangle with side lengths a and b and hypotenuse c, that a squared plus
b squared is equal to c squared.
So if we were to take the simplest of right triangles with side lengths 1 and 1, then
the hypotenuse would have to have a length of square root of 2, right?
Because 1 squared plus 1 squared is 2, so the hypotenuse would have to have a length
of square root of 2, a very easy and geometrically natural length to be looking at.
Nevertheless, that number, square root of 2, even though we can approximate it with a
decimal expansion, right?
Square root of 2 is 1.414213 and so on, okay?
Even though we can get a very good approximation of it, the number square root of 2 cannot
be written as a fraction exactly.
So for instance, you might say, well, what about 1,414 over 1,000?
Well, that gives you 1.414, but that's not exactly square root of 2.
You might say, well, I know it's not rational because that number you have up there doesn't
repeat.
Well, you say that, but how do you know it doesn't repeat?
Who proved to you that that fraction, that decimal expansion, would never repeat?
I'm going to prove to you now, once and for all, that no matter how hard you try, the
number square root of 2 cannot be written as a fraction.
It's not like we're being lazy or we just haven't been clever enough to find it or that
those numbers are too big.
I'm going to prove to you that square root of 2 is irrational, okay?
And here's how the proof goes.
Suppose square root of 2 were rational.
This is called a proof by contradiction.
I'm going to start by assuming the opposite, that square root of 2 is rational, and that
assumption is going to get me into trouble later on.
So if square root of 2 was rational, then it would be of the form p over q in lowest
terms because we can write all fractions in lowest terms.
I'll use that assumption later, by the way, this lowest terms part.
Now let's take this equation, square root of 2 equals p over q, and let's do the same
thing to both sides.
What should we do to both sides?
Well, what was square root of 2 born to do?
It was born to be squared so it could fulfill its destiny of 2.
So let's square both sides, and now we have on the left side, 2 is equal to p squared
over q squared, all right?
If 2 is p squared over q squared, then we can rewrite that equation as p squared equals
2 times q squared.
But look at what that says.
p squared is 2 times q squared.
That means that p squared is twice a number, which means that p squared is even.
But if p squared is even, I claim that that means that p must be even.
But don't take my word for it, you already proved that if you had an odd number and multiplied
it by another odd number like itself, then the result would be an odd number.
So if p squared is even, then p had to be even, because if p were odd, then its square
would be odd.
Okay, so what does that mean?
That means that the number p must be of the form 2b, because it's an even number.
All right.
Let's go back to our equation, p squared equals 2q squared.
And we're going to replace p with 2b.
When we do that, we have the expression 2b, the quantity squared, equals 2q squared.
But when we square 2b, we get 4b squared, and that's equal to 2q squared.
Now let's divide both sides by 2, and we get the q squared equals 2b squared.
Now we're on the same path as we had before, that says the q squared is an even number.
And if q squared is an even number, that means that q is an even number.
But now we have ourselves a problem.
We just showed that if square root of 2 was a rational number, p over q, then we just
proved that p had to be even and q had to be even.
But the problem with that was we assumed that p over q was in lowest terms.
And if p was even and q was even, then that fraction p over q wasn't in lowest terms.
That's the contradiction.
So if we assume that square root of 2 is rational and in lowest terms, we wind up concluding
that the square root of 2 was not in lowest terms.
Therefore, the only thing we can decide, the only thing we can conclude is that square
root of 2 is not rational.
So we've just shown that the square root of 2 is irrational, but there are other irrational
numbers.
For instance, using a similar logic as we did before, we could show that the square root
of 3 is irrational.
That the square root of 5 is irrational.
That one of my favorite numbers, the golden ratio, 1 plus the square root of 5 over 2,
is irrational.
With a lot more work, we can even show that the number pi, which we'll talk about later,
is irrational.
But now I want to prove what some mathematicians call an existence theorem.
I'm going to prove to you the following statement that says, there exists out there irrational
numbers, A and B, such that A to the B is rational.
That is, I can find an irrational raised to an irrational that gives me a rational.
And what makes this an existence proof is that I'm going to convince you of its truth
without telling you what A and B are that accomplish it.
Sounds impossible, right?
Here's how we do it.
I begin by asking you a simple question.
Is the square root of 2, which after all is the only number that we know to be irrational
at the moment, is the square root of 2 raised to the square root of 2 rational?
What do you say?
Is it rational or is it irrational?
The answer my students usually say is, I don't know.
That's actually the answer I want to hear.
If the square root of 2 raised to the square root of 2 is rational, then we're done, right?
Because then I would have had A could be square root of 2, B would be square root of 2, and
A to the B would be rational, okay?
But what if not?
What if root 2 to the root 2 were irrational?
Fine, no problem.
Then let A be the number root 2 to the root 2, which right now you're assuming is an irrational
number, okay?
So let A be root 2 to the root 2.
Let B be square root of 2, which we've just shown is irrational.
And now A raised to the B power is going to be root 2 to the root 2, that entire quantity
raised to the root 2.
Now the law of exponents says that if you take A to the B and raise that quantity to
the C power, that's the same as A to the B times C.
So when we apply that here, we have square root of 2 raised to the square root of 2 times
the square root of 2.
But that's equal to square root of 2 squared, which is equal to 2.
So in this case, I found an A and a B such that A to the B was 2, which is rational.
Coming up, no matter what the answer to my question was, is root 2 to the root 2 rational?
If the answer was yes, then we're done.
If the answer is no, then by choosing A to be root 2 to the root 2 and B to the root
2, then we're also done.
Either way, whether the answer is yes or no, I was able to find an A and a B. I like that
proof enough that I give that one a smiley face at the end.
Now I want to introduce you to a new kind of proof technique that mathematicians use
all the time.
This is called a proof by induction.
We'll look at a problem that we saw earlier when we were exploring the joy of numbers
in lecture 2.
What is the sum of the first n odd numbers?
So 1 is 1, 1 plus 3 is 4, which is 2 squared, 1 plus 3 plus 5 is 9, which is 3 squared,
1 plus 3 plus 5 plus 7 is 16, which is 4 squared, and so on.
Why is that true?
Will this pattern go on forever?
Well if you believe that 1 plus 3 plus 5 plus 7 plus 9 is 25, which is 5 squared, what
will the sum of the first 6 odd numbers be?
Well, the sixth odd number is 11.
When you add that to your 25, you get a 36, which is 6 squared.
So if you trusted the first 5 results, then the sixth result will follow.
I claim that same sort of thing will happen all the time.
Suppose that you notice that the sum of the first k odd numbers is k squared, okay?
Let's say 1 plus 3 plus 5 up to the kth odd number, that's the number 2k minus 1, is
k squared.
What will the sum of the first k plus 1 odd numbers be?
Well, what is the k plus first odd number?
The k plus first odd number is 2k plus 1.
So when we add that to the sum of the first k odd numbers, when we add that to k squared,
we get k squared plus 2k plus 1.
Well wait a second, k squared plus 2k plus 1 is k plus 1 squared.
In other words, if the sum of the first k odd numbers is k squared, then it's unavoidable
that the sum of the first k plus 1 odd numbers will be k plus 1 squared.
Here's another example of a proof by induction.
We call that the sum of the first n numbers, these we call the triangular numbers, is
equal to n times n plus 1 over 2, okay?
So for instance, 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 is 10, that's equal to 4 times 5 over 2.
If I'm interested in summing the cubes of the first n numbers, right?
1 cubed is 1, 1 cubed plus 2 cubed is 1 plus 8 is 9, 1 cubed plus 2 cubed plus 3 cubed
is 36.
Look at the pattern of numbers, 1, 9, 36, 100, 225.
We see all those numbers are perfect squares and they're not just any perfect squares,
they're the squares of the numbers 1, 3, 6, 10, 15 and so on.
They are the squares of the triangular numbers.
That is, the sum 1 cubed plus 2 cubed all the way up to 5 cubed is equal to 225, which
is 15 squared, which is equal to 1 plus 2 plus 3 plus 4 plus 5 squared, which is equal
to 5 times 6 over 2 squared.
So here's my claim, I claim that the sum of the cubes of the first n numbers is going
to equal the nth triangular number squared.
That is, it's going to equal n squared times n plus 1 squared over 4.
Now to see that, we do this as a proof by induction, which is to say, we start with
a base case.
We see that it works for the number 1, undeniably, 1 cubed is equal to 1 squared, no problem.
Then we state what's called our induction hypothesis.
We say, let's suppose that this works for sum number k.
Suppose the sum of the cubes of the first k numbers is k squared times k plus 1 squared
over 4.
I want to use that fact to show that it will continue to be true when I look at the sum
of the first k plus 1 cubes.
What do I want to see at the end of that?
I want to see at the end, my goal is to see the square of the k plus 1st triangular number.
If I replace k with k plus 1 in the above formula, I want to see k plus 1 squared times
k plus 2 squared over 4, and let's see if that happens.
Well, what is the sum of the first k plus 1 cubes?
Well, it's equal to the sum of the first k cubes plus the number k plus 1 cubed.
But what do we know about the sum of the first k cubes?
That by our induction hypothesis is equal to k squared times k plus 1 squared over 4.
I'm going to add to that the number k plus 1 cubed.
Now, when I add that, I can save myself a lot of messy algebra by factoring out the
number k plus 1 squared, because that divides the first term and it divides the second term.
What I'm left with is k plus 1 squared times the quantity k squared over 4 plus 4 times
k plus 1 over 4.
And then we'd simplify that a little bit further.
We see that k squared plus 4k plus 4 is equal to k plus 2 squared.
And when the dust settles, we're left with k plus 1 squared times k plus 2 squared over
4, which was exactly what we were hoping to get at the end.
Okay, this may have seemed a lot of algebra here.
Let's try a proof that doesn't involve any algebra at all.
Okay, here's a proof of something that requires no algebra or symbol manipulation whatsoever.
Here's an easy question.
Can we cover the checkerboard?
Here's an 8 by 8 checkerboard with these little L-shaped pieces that I call trominos.
A tromino has three little squares on it, shaped in an L.
And could you cover your 8 by 8 checkerboard with non-overlapping trominos?
Well, a little bit of thought says, now hang on a second, that's an 8 by 8 checkerboard.
That's got 64 squares in it.
A tromino takes up three squares, so there's no way you're going to be able to cover that
board of 64 squares with things of length of size 3, because 3 does not go into 64.
Absolutely right.
You've just proved that that's impossible.
Okay, now let's ask a harder question.
Can I cover this checkerboard?
Let's suppose you remove any square at all.
You go ahead, you know, just throw a piece of chalk at the screen if you'd like, okay,
you've got an 8 by 8 checkerboard, delete any square at all.
Okay, you deleted that one.
That's fine.
Okay, now can you cover the rest of the board with these trominos?
Now you're going to say, well, now I have 63 squares to cover up.
So the answer is a definite maybe, right?
Three goes into 63, so it might be possible.
I can't say it's impossible like I did before.
But how do I know that some arrangement of 21 trominos can actually cover this board?
I'm going to prove to you that any 8 by 8 checkerboard, removing any square at all,
the rest of the board is guaranteed to be coverable with these non-overlapping trominos.
In fact, I'm going to prove something a little stronger.
Not only is it true for 8 by 8 checkerboards, but it's also true for 2 by 2 checkerboards,
4 by 4 checkerboards, 8 by 8, 16 by 16, 32 by 32, any power of 2 by power of 2 checkerboard
we're going to be able to cover with these non-overlapping trominos.
Okay, we're going to do this as a proof by induction, but we're not going to do any arithmetic here.
Here we go.
Let's look at a 2 by 2 board.
That's our base case, okay?
A 2 to the 1 by 2 to the 1 board.
Now do you agree that if you take a 2 by 2 board and remove any square from that, any
square at all, then the rest of the board can be covered with a single tromino, right?
You can see that.
So the base case is done, halfway done with our logic.
Now we assume that this is true for any board of size 2 to the k by 2 to the k.
I now want to show that it's true for any board of size 2 to the k plus 1 by 2 to the
k plus 1.
Okay.
Here's a checkerboard in front of you.
It has dimensions 2 to the k plus 1 by 2 to the k plus 1.
How am I going to cover up with non-overlapping trominos?
Well, we know it works when the boards are 2 to the k by 2 to the k, so how do I reduce
this bigger problem to a smaller problem?
Well, if you take that checkerboard and you break it into four quadrants, right, each quadrant
is now of size 2 to the k by 2 to the k, right?
We've got these four quadrants, each of size 2 to the k by 2 to the k.
Let's look at the quadrant that you deleted your square from, okay?
Just look at that quadrant.
We know by the induction hypothesis that the rest of that quadrant can be covered with
non-overlapping trominos.
But how do you cover those other three quadrants?
All right, well, let's look at the quadrant over here on the left.
We know that if we remove any square, any square at all, then the rest of it can be
covered with non-overlapping trominos.
I'm going to choose to remove the square in the lower right corner, okay?
I'm going to remove that square, and now the rest of that quadrant can be covered by our
induction hypothesis by non-overlapping trominos.
Next look at the lower left quadrant there, right?
I can remove any square at all.
Which one do you want to remove?
Don't tell me because I know what I want to remove.
I want to remove that square in the upper right corner.
And now, by induction, the rest of that quadrant can be covered with non-overlapping trominos.
And finally, the fourth quadrant, the one in the lower right, we can remove any square
at all.
Let's remove the upper left corner.
And then the rest of that quadrant can be covered with non-overlapping trominos.
What does that leave us with?
We've covered the entire board, except for those three squares I haven't dealt with.
But those three squares form a tromino themselves.
So when I stick a tromino right there, then we have a, we've, now we've completely covered
our 2 to the k plus 1 by 2 to the k plus 1 board with non-overlapping trominos.
And that proof deserves a smiley face.
What I like about this is that this proof is not only inductive, it's also constructive.
It actually tells us how we can achieve the covering of the 8 by 8 board that we started
with.
For instance, look at that 8 by 8 board, look at that square you removed.
We could go through the procedure that we outlined and systematically cover the rest
of that board.
For instance, that quadrant in the upper right, what do we do?
We break that into four quadrants that are of size 2 by 2.
The upper right quadrant, we can stick a tromino in.
The other three quadrants can have a, have a tromino placed in and then a tromino goes
into that middle area and we've now covered that region.
We do the same sort of thing for the region in the upper left after removing the quadrant,
after removing the square in the lower right and we can cover that and so on and so on.
So the proof is actually very constructive, tells you exactly how to do it.
Okay.
Here's another question.
This is an easier one.
Can you tile an 8 by 8 checkerboard with dominoes?
Dominoes are easier than trominos, right?
They're just have length 2 by 1.
They just cover 2 consecutive squares.
Can you cover an 8 by 8 checkerboard with dominoes?
No problem you say.
Just go 4 dominoes in each row and boom, you're done.
Very easy.
Okay.
Suppose I were to remove a single square from that checkerboard.
Now can you cover that with dominoes?
You say resoundingly, no, that's impossible because now you'd only have 63 squares on
your board and your dominoes cover up 2 squares and 2 does not go into 63.
Great.
So suppose you remove any 2 squares from your checkerboard.
Now can you cover it with dominoes?
Well, maybe, I mean if those 2 squares were together like the one we have in our picture,
we can certainly cover that one with dominoes.
But suppose I remove 2 squares in opposite corners.
I claim that you're not going to be able to cover the rest of the board with dominoes,
that that's impossible no matter how hard you try.
And here's a proof.
I think it's a beautiful proof.
Let's bring color back into the picture.
Look at the checkerboard.
It's got red squares and white squares.
Even though we have 62 squares to be covered, right?
You'd say, well, somehow I should be able to squeeze 31 dominoes on that checkerboard,
right?
Somehow I should be able to do that.
But look, what can you say about any domino that you place on that board?
Any domino is going to have to cover a white square and a red square.
And the 2 squares that you've cut out of the checkerboard have the same color.
They're both red.
So the resulting board has 30 red squares and 32 white squares.
So there's no way you're going to be able to cover it with your 31 dominoes.
I'd like to end this lecture by a proof that I think you'll find interesting.
I'm going to prove to you that all numbers are interesting, OK?
Absolute proof.
For instance, one is the first number, so that's obviously interesting.
Two is the first even number.
Well, no argument that that's an interesting number, too.
Three is the first odd prime number.
Well, that's interesting.
Four is the first and only number that spells itself, right?
F-O-U-R, that's four, right?
That's interesting.
I claim all numbers are interesting, and here's the proof.
Suppose not all numbers were interesting.
Then there'd have to be a first number that wasn't interesting.
But wouldn't that make it an interesting number?
I rest my case.
Thank you very much.
