In this lecture we explore the joy of I, the joy of the square root of negative one.
Now on the surface, that sounds impossible, I mean how could negative one, or any negative
number for that matter, have a square root?
When we've encountered square roots of negative numbers in the past, we just ignore them.
We say well, this is not a real number and we go on.
But it's time for us to overcome that deficiency.
Let's think a little bit about negative numbers, first of all.
I mean the ancient Greeks, for example, refused to even accept the existence of negative numbers.
Can you imagine?
We use negative numbers all the time today, and we can think of it as representing, oh,
a debt that we owe, but they said how in the world could a number be less than zero?
They only believed in numbers that they could measure, and how could something have a negative
measurement?
How could something be less than nothing?
But once you look at numbers from a different point of view, as occupants of a number line,
with zero say in the middle of that line, and to the right of zero we see the positive
numbers, and to the left of zero we see the negative numbers, then all of a sudden negative
numbers don't seem so unnatural or impossible.
If we think about negative numbers, we know how to add them, subtract them, multiply and
divide them.
We know for example that if you take the negative times a negative, you get a positive number.
If you square a negative number, you get a positive number.
If you square a positive number, you get a positive number, and if you square zero,
you get zero.
Well, in none of those cases when you square a number do you get a negative number.
So negative numbers simply don't have square roots in the real world, but let's imagine
that they do.
Okay, let's conduct this thought experiment, and let's suppose that this number, which
we'll call i, satisfies i squared equals negative one.
Okay, then what else would we be able to learn about this imaginary number i?
Well, if we want the usual laws of arithmetic to work, like the commutative law and the
associative law, then if you take two i times two i, then you would combine them to get
four i squared.
But if we agree that i squared equals negative one, then two i times two i would be negative
four.
If you took negative two i times negative two i, then what would you get?
Well negative two times negative two is still positive four, so once again, you get four
i squared, which would give you negative four.
If you were to multiply two i times three i, then you would get six i squared, or negative
six.
If you were to take two i times negative three i, you would get negative six i squared, and
since i squared is still negative one, you have negative six times negative one, which
would give you positive six.
And if you took an imaginary number, like two i, and multiplied it by a real number,
like three, then what would you want it to be?
You just want it to be six i.
In fact, with your experience in algebra, if you just think of i as a variable, two i
times three would be six i, and we would like to keep things working nice and smoothly just
like that.
Okay, so we've looked at multiplication, how about division?
Say six i divided by two i.
What should that be?
Well, just like how you're used to doing it with algebra, that would simply be three.
Your i's would cancel.
As long as you're not dividing by zero, you don't get into trouble.
If you do i divided by i, well then, of course, that's equal to one.
How about one over i?
What would be the reciprocal of this imaginary number?
Well, you can't stop me from taking that number and multiplying it by one, but I'm going to
write one as the fraction i over i.
And when i do, I wind up with i over i squared, and i squared is still negative one, and i
divided by negative one, just like any number divided by negative one, gives you the negative
of that number, that is negative i.
One over two i, no problem.
That's one half times one over i, just multiplying fractions together.
That's one half times negative i, which we just saw was one over i is negative i.
So that's negative i over two.
So we've handled multiplication and division now.
How about addition and subtraction?
Couldn't be easier.
What would you want three i plus two i to be?
Five i, and you're right.
That's how it's defined.
How about three i minus two i?
Well that's one i, or simply i.
Two i minus three i, that would be negative one i, or negative i.
All right, now maybe for the first tricky question.
How about two plus i?
What should that equal?
And the answer is two plus i.
We just leave it as two plus i, in the same way that if I said what's two plus x, you'd
still say well it's two plus x, or if I said what's two plus the square root of two.
Even though you could think of it as a real number, you would just leave it in the form
two plus the square root of two.
We do the same thing with i.
Now a number that's of the form a plus bi, like the last thing we saw, is called complex.
Okay, so for instance, three plus four i is a complex number.
Incidentally, just for the record, a number like four i is also a complex number, but
it's given the term of an imaginary number, because the real part is zero.
Even a number like seven is a complex number, but it also happens to be a real number.
Okay, so seven could be thought of as seven plus zero i.
Oh yeah, that's another rule of arithmetic that we'd like to have, right?
That zero times i, just like zero times anything, ought to be zero.
Okay, let's look at some complex arithmetic, which really isn't all that complex, as you'll see.
For instance, if you took two plus five i and added that to five plus three i, what would you want it to be?
Seven plus eight i. Boy, this feels a lot just like algebra, right?
We could replace i with x, and everything would work out just fine.
How about two plus five i minus five plus three i?
Well, we subtract the real part. Two minus five is negative three,
and then we subtract the complex part, the imaginary part, I should say.
Five i minus three i is two i, so you get negative three plus two i.
When you multiply them, it's just like multiplying polynomials.
Two plus five i times three plus four i, we use our old friend Foyle again, right?
Two times three is six, five i times three is 15 i, two times four i is eight i,
and five i times four i is 20 i squared.
And the only thing new is that we can use the fact that i squared is equal to negative one.
So we have six plus 15 i plus eight i is 23 i minus 20,
which simplifies to negative 14 plus 23 i.
Here, one more. This is an interesting example.
Suppose we were to take three plus four i times the quantity three minus four i.
We call that second quantity the conjugate of the first quantity.
That is, a plus bi has conjugate a minus bi.
Three plus four i times three minus four i.
When we do our Foyle thing again, we see we get nine plus 12 i minus 12 i minus 16 i squared.
The 12 i's cancel. The 16 i squared is a negative 16, but there's a negative sign in front of that,
so that's a positive 16. When added to the nine, we get 25.
So three plus four i times three minus four i is 25.
How about division of complex numbers?
Well, here our conjugates play an important role.
They help make division of complex numbers easier.
For instance, if I notice that if you take any number of the form a plus bi,
and you multiply it by its conjugate a minus bi, then what do you get?
Just like in our last example, we get a squared minus b squared i squared,
but the minus b squared i squared turns into a positive b squared.
So a plus bi times a minus bi is a squared plus b squared.
What that allows us to do is if somebody said, well, what's the reciprocal of the number a plus bi?
One over a plus bi, we simply multiply the top and the bottom by the same thing,
by the conjugate a minus bi.
That gives us the new fraction a minus bi over a squared plus b squared.
Now, you might say to me, well, how is that any nicer than the number you started with?
But notice that the number you now have has in its denominator,
the number a squared plus b squared, which is a real number.
So you never need to have a complex number in your denominator.
You can always get rid of them by multiplying the numerator and the denominator
by the conjugate of the denominator.
So for example, if you wanted to divide 2 plus 5i by 3 plus 4i,
we simply multiply the top and the bottom by 3 minus 4i.
And when you do that multiplication, then on the top, you get 6 plus 59 minus 8i is 7i minus 20i squared.
And in the denominator, you'll get 3 squared plus 4 squared is 25.
And when the dust settles, we get 6 minus a negative 20 becomes 26 plus 7i, all that divided by 25.
Now, we saw that real numbers live on the real line, right, the x-axis.
Where do complex numbers live?
Well, now we have to start thinking two-dimensionally, complex numbers live on the plane,
what's called the complex plane.
You can think of the x-axis and the y-axis like we've been using in geometry.
And let's just look at some examples.
For instance, the number 1 plus i will have a real part of 1, an x-coordinate of 1,
and a y-coordinate of, well, we call it i, it's 1 on the y-axis.
So 1 plus i, you go to the right by 1, and you go up by 1.
Whereas say the number 3 plus i, you go to the right by 3.
And again, since it's plus i, you'd go up by 1.
Think of the y-axis as having the numbers 0 where the two axes meet.
And as you go up, you see 1i, 2i, 3i, 4i, 5i.
As you go down the imaginary axis or the y-axis, you have negative i, negative 2i,
negative 3i, negative 4i, and so on.
Okay, let's do a couple more examples.
Say 2 plus 2i, we go to the right by 2, and we go up by 2.
The number negative 2 plus i, so we go to the left by 2 and up by 1.
And finally say negative 3 minus 2i, here we would go to the left by 3 and down by 2.
So here's the number 2 plus i, right?
It's living in the complex plane.
Go to the right by 2 and up by 1.
What would happen if you were to take 2 plus i and multiply it by a half?
Then you'd have the number 1 plus half i, which would be half way along the line
from 0 to the point 2 plus i.
So when you multiply by a half, then that changes the length of that line by a half.
If similarly, if I were to multiply say by a multiply 2 plus i by 2,
then I'd look at 2 plus i plus another 2 plus i, that would give me 4 plus 2i.
And if I were to draw the line, or vector, that goes from the origin, the 0, 0 point,
to the point 4 plus 2i, that line would be twice as long as it was before.
So when you multiply the moral of this, is that when you multiply a complex number
by a real number, then you expand by a factor of that real number.
The line is still pointing in the same direction if you multiply it by a positive number,
and it's going to expand according to the size of that number.
If you multiply it by a negative number, that line's going to point in the opposite direction.
What happens if you add two complex numbers?
We know how to do that algebraically, but now I'm going to show you how to do it geometrically,
which I think is pretty cool.
That is, if I give you two complex numbers, a plus bi and c plus di,
here's a way of adding them by picture.
Take a look at the line that goes from 0, 0 to a plus bi,
and the line that goes from 0, 0 to c plus di.
Then those two can form the sides of a parallelogram.
Okay, look at that parallelogram and see where the top of that parallelogram is.
Believe it or not, that's the point where the sum of a plus bi and c plus di meet.
In other words, you take a plus bi, and you can add the vector that goes to c plus di,
and that gives you the sum.
Let's look at another example.
Say, here's the point 2 plus i, and here's the point 1 plus 3i.
Draw the parallelogram and look what you get.
At the top of that parallelogram is the point 3 plus 4i, just as predicted.
All right, let's take a look at the point a plus bi again,
and let's look at the line that goes from 0, 0 to the point a plus bi.
If I asked you what's the length of that line, I'm going to define that to be
the length of the complex number.
Well, by the Pythagorean theorem, we have here a nice little triangle,
right, and the base of that triangle has length a.
The height of that triangle has length b.
And so by the Pythagorean theorem, the hypotenuse of that right triangle
will have length square root of a squared plus b squared.
And so we define that to be the length of the complex number, a plus bi.
We also can look at an angle that comes down near the origin of that triangle.
That would be the angle associated with the complex number.
That angle is measured counterclockwise from the x-axis.
So here it looks like the angle looks like oh, somewhere around 30 degrees here.
I told you how to add complex numbers just by looking at their pictures.
I'm now going to show you how to multiply complex numbers just by looking at their pictures.
All you have to remember are these two easy rules.
To multiply complex numbers, you multiply the lengths and you add the angles.
Let's take a look at an illustration here.
Okay, so here's a point a plus bi that has an angle of about 30 degrees and length four.
And there's the point c plus di.
And let's suppose it has an angle of 120 degrees and length two.
Okay, then from what I told you from my two easy rules,
if you wanted to multiply those two complex numbers together,
then what do you do?
You multiply the lengths and you add the angles.
Well, what are the lengths?
The lengths are four and two.
So when we multiply them, we're going to have a length of eight.
Whatever that complex number is, it's going to be eight away from the origin.
What's the angle going to be?
Couldn't be easier.
You just take the angles 30 degrees and 120 degrees, add them together,
and you get 150 degrees.
So if I gave you two points a plus bi and c plus di,
you can add those points by drawing a parallelogram
and you can multiply those points by doing the two easy rules,
namely add the angles and multiply the lengths.
Okay, here's another example.
Let's take, let's use some actual numbers this time.
Here's the point two plus two i and the point negative five plus five i.
Let's multiply them together geometrically.
Okay, well, what's the length of two plus two i?
How far away is that from the origin?
Well, the length of a plus bi is the square root of a squared plus b squared.
So two plus two i will have a length of square root of two squared plus two squared.
That's the square root of eight and five plus five i,
that will have a length of square root of five squared plus five squared.
That's the square root of 50.
When you multiply those lengths together,
you're going to get the square root of 400, which is 20.
Now we're going to add the angles.
What is the angle that cuts that first quadrant exactly in half at the point two plus two i?
That's 45 degrees and the angle for negative five plus five i,
let's see, that's 90 degrees plus 45 degrees.
That's 135 degrees.
So when we add those angles together, we're going to get one 45,
we're going to get 45 degrees plus 135 degrees is going to be 180 degrees.
Incidentally, as I mentioned in my trigonometry lecture,
real mathematicians use radians.
A mathematician would, instead of calling that 45 degrees,
would call that pi over four radians.
And the 135 degrees would be considered three pi over four radians.
And when you add those together, you're going to get four pi over four radians or simply pi radians.
Okay, so back to our featured numbers.
When we multiply those numbers together,
we're going to get something that has a length of 20 and an angle of 180 degrees.
But 180 degrees is just going 180 degrees from the origin.
So you have length of 20 and you are pointing in the negative direction.
So you're going to have negative 20 as your answer.
And if you do the multiplication, if you take those two numbers and you do your foiling,
you'll see that you come out with exactly negative 20.
Now, why does this work?
Why does this beautiful rule of multiply the lengths and add the angles work?
Once again, we have the great mathematician Euler to thank for this.
Here is Euler's phenomenal equation.
E to the i theta equals cosine theta plus i sine theta,
where E is a number that we'll talk about later,
but just think of it as just some special number.
Numerically, it's about 2.718.
But that won't play any role in what we're talking about.
What Euler says is you can look at that picture.
Here's our unit circle again.
And over there, the point at angle theta,
which we would normally call cosine theta sine theta if we were in the xy plane.
Here in the complex plane, we would call that point cosine theta plus i sine theta.
And Euler says you can simplify that into calling it something easier to remember,
namely E to the i theta.
Any complex number on the unit circle is of the form E to the i theta.
It's got to live somewhere on the unit circle.
It's got to have some angle associated with it.
And we can get beyond the unit circle.
That is a point that has angle theta, but has length r instead of 1.
Then that simply is represented by r E to the i theta.
So for example, the number 2 plus 2i has a length of 1.
Of square root of 8, we saw that, and an angle of 45 degrees.
But here, a mathematician would call that pi over 4 radians.
And so to use Euler's equation, we have to work in radians.
2 plus 2i has what mathematicians call polar form square root of 8 times E to the i pi over 4.
Doesn't that look just take a look at that.
Doesn't that look rather pretty?
2 plus 2i is root 8 E to the i pi over 4.
All right.
How about what if we were to stay on the unit circle and we were to go 90 degrees?
OK, that's pi over 2 radians.
Then where do we find ourselves at?
We find ourselves up at the top at that point i.
That is, E to the i pi over 2 is equal to that point i.
What happens if you multiply complex numbers?
Well, if you write those numbers in polar form, that is, let's say our first number was R1 E to the i theta 1.
And our second number was, say, R2 E to the i theta 2.
Then when you multiply those together, you'll get R1 R2 E to the i theta 1 plus theta 2.
You're just using the laws of arithmetic and the law of exponents.
And we're allowing, we're insisting that the law of exponents work even when we have imaginary or complex exponents.
And when you do, you get R1 R2 E to the i theta 1 plus theta 2.
But that's telling us to do exactly what our two simple rules say, namely multiply the lengths and add the angles.
Let's take a moment to look at what Euler would say about i times i.
We said that i was equal to E to the i pi over 2
times E to the i pi over 2. That would give us E to the i pi.
But we also know that i times i is equal to negative 1.
Let's stare at that equation again.
E to the i pi equals negative 1.
That says E to the i times the angle of pi radians, that's 180 degrees,
puts us right there at the real number negative 1.
If we rearrange that equation, it says E to the i pi plus 1 equals 0.
I've heard some people refer to that as God's equation because here in one simple equation,
we have the five most important numbers in mathematics.
We have 0 and 1, the basis of arithmetic.
We have E, which is probably the most important number in calculus,
pi, the most important number in geometry,
and i, which is arguably the most important number in algebra.
And in it, not only do you have the five most important numbers,
we have addition, we have multiplication, we have exponentiation, we have equality,
some of the most important relations in mathematics.
Now, what this profound equation is saying is simply that if you go 180 degrees along the unit
circle, you've lined up at negative 1, which isn't very profound.
But just looking at that equation, you just look at that and say, wow, that's beautiful.
You can use, by the way, Euler's equation to derive a lot of those complicated trigonometric
identities. For instance, we spent an awful lot of time deriving the cosine of the sum of two angles,
the cosine of A plus B, or what is the cosine of 2 theta and the sine of 2 theta.
It turns out, if you just express E to the i theta as cosine theta plus i sine theta,
and multiply it by itself, look at what you get.
You do your foiling, combine the terms, look at the, compare the real parts,
and compare the imaginary parts, then you get that the cosine of 2 theta
is cosine squared minus sine squared of theta, and the sine of 2 theta is 2 sine theta cosine theta.
Complex numbers can actually help you with trigonometry.
They can also help you with algebra. For instance, if I gave you the equation
x squared plus 1 equals 0, then in the past you'd have said, well, there's no solution to that,
but now we're more enlightened. We know that x squared plus 1 equals 0 has at least one solution,
namely i, because i squared is negative 1 plus 1 is 0, but there's another solution to that too,
isn't there? Yes, the number negative i when squared is also negative 1, so that's the equation has
two solutions. Similarly, if I said how about x squared plus 9 equals 0, that has two solutions,
namely 3i and negative 3i, or x squared plus 7 equals 0 has two solutions, square root of 7i,
and negative square root of 7i. All right, how about a more complicated algebraic expression,
like x squared plus 2x plus 5 equals 0? If we used our good friend the quadratic formula,
remember that, the solution would be x equals negative b plus or minus the square root of b
squared minus 4ac over 2a, we've memorized that by now, right? Then when we plug into that formula,
we would get what? x equals negative 2 plus or minus the square root of 2 squared
minus 4 times 1 times 5 over 2, and that's equal to negative 2 plus or minus the square root of
negative 16 over 2, and that's equal to negative 2 plus or minus 4i over 2. In other words, negative
1 plus or minus 2i. Now, earlier we discussed the fundamental theorem of algebra, but we can
express that in a more polished way using complex numbers. The fundamental theorem of algebra
actually says that if p of x is a polynomial with real or complex coefficients, then we
can always factor it in the form p of x is equal to x minus r1 times x minus r2 all the way down
to x minus r sub n. That is, x minus something that can be real or complex times x minus something
else that can be real or complex all the way down to an nth thing that can be real or complex.
We can factor any nth degree polynomial into these n parts, and the equation, the polynomial
equation p of x equals 0, we said before that that polynomial has at most n real solutions.
In fact, we can say it has sort of exactly n solutions, namely r1, r2, r3 all the way up to
r sub n. Now, why did I say sort of exactly? It's because maybe some of those real numbers
were repeated. That's allowed. Let me recap what we've learned so far. In this lecture,
we've seen the definition of imaginary numbers, how to add, subtract, multiply, and divide them,
how to use them algebraically and geometrically. We've seen Euler's beautiful equation and
some of its applications. Some of their applications, by the way, imaginary numbers,
despite having imaginary origin, have very real applications. They're used not only in mathematics
and geometry, differential equations, number theory. They're used in physics, thermodynamics,
electrical engineering, even used in telephone equipment. In fact, a joke that used to circulate
among the engineers was the following recording. We're sorry you have reached an imaginary number.
Please rotate your phone by 90 degrees and try again. And if you understood this lecture,
you'll understand that joke.
