In our previous lecture, we began our study of calculus by calculating the slope of tan
tangent lines for lots of functions leading to many interesting applications. In this lecture, we'll see how this simple idea, slope of
tangent line, has many, many beautiful consequences. In fact, you might say I'll be going off on one tangent after another. In fact, in this
lecture, what we'll learn about is a new technique of differentiation called the chain rule. How to approximate any function by a
polynomial. And since polynomials are the simplest kinds of functions to work with, we know how to differentiate those, for instance,
that's an especially useful tool. How to calculate the square root, at least approximately the square root of numbers in your head. We'll
derive the formula that gives us what we once called God's equation, e to the i pi plus one equals zero. And finally, we'll learn a formula for a
hanging chain. But speaking of chains, see that's my first tangent. Let's talk about the chain rule. Now, the chain rule actually has very little to do with
hanging chains. What it refers to are chains of functions. For instance, we know that the derivative of sine x is cosine x, at least we should. And we know that the
derivative of x cubed is 3x squared. But now suppose I wanted to combine those two functions. Let's say I wanted to calculate the derivative of the sine of
x cubed. What would that derivative be? You might think, maybe it's the cosine of x cubed, or maybe you'd think it's the cosine of 3x
squared. Well, both answers are wrong, but they're close. The actual answer is the cosine of x cubed times 3x squared. Okay. And in general, if you
want to take the sine of, let's say, g of x, all right, and you want to find the derivative of that function, the sine of g of x, then the
answer, the derivative is equal to cosine of g of x times g prime of x. Okay, so it's the cosine of what you had times the derivative of what's inside.
Here, let's do another example. Our favorite function from calculus is e to the x, because its derivative is still e to the x. But what about the derivative of e to the
x cubed? What should that be? Would it still be e to the x cubed? Not quite. The chain rule tells us that the answer is e to the x cubed times the
derivative of what's on top. The derivative of what's on top, the derivative of x cubed is 3x squared. So the derivative that we're looking for is 3x
squared times e to the x cubed. And in general, the chain rule tells us that e to the g of x has derivative e to the g of x times g prime of
x. Or let's take the first differentiation rule that we learned, the power rule. It says that if y is equal to x to the n, then what's the derivative of x to the n? It's nx to the n minus
1. Okay, well what about g of x to the n? Would the derivative of that be n times g of x to the n minus 1? Almost, it's n g of x to the n minus 1 times the derivative of g of x.
Okay, so for instance, if we wanted to calculate, let's say x cubed raised to the fifth power, we want the derivative of that. Then the chain rule would say it's 5x cubed to the fourth
power times the derivative of x cubed, which is 3x squared. Now if you look at that expression, 5x cubed to the fourth power times 3x squared, x cubed to the fourth is the same as x to the 12th.
So when you multiply all that together, you get 15x to the 14th as your derivative. Now we can actually verify this answer because the problem started off as x cubed to the fifth power, which is just an unusual way of saying x to the 15th.
And we know from the power rule that the derivative of x to the 15th is indeed 15x to the 14th power. So that's consistent with what we just saw. In general, the chain rule says that if I have a function of a function.
Okay, I'm looking at the chain of functions here. If y is equal to f of g of x, then the derivative of y, y prime, is equal to f prime of g of x times the derivative of what's inside g prime of x.
We're going to use the chain rule now to solve one of my favorite problems from the subject of calculus. Calculus, yes. So imagine Claudia the cow is one mile north of the x-axis river, which runs east to west, of course.
Her barn is three miles east and one mile north of her current position. She wishes to drink from the x-axis river and then walk to her barn in such a way as to minimize her total amount of walking.
And the calculus question is, where on the river should she stop to get her drink? Okay, so let's call a place, suppose she decides to drink from the point x along the x-axis river. Let's calculate the total amount of walking she'll do when she drinks at x.
Okay, well, if you look at her as she walks from her starting point to x, we create a triangle. We have a right triangle. That is, with one leg equal to one, the base of that triangle equal to x, and then the hypotenuse of that triangle, that's how she's walking, is by the Pythagorean theorem, the length of that hypotenuse is the square root of x squared plus one.
Okay, then she has to walk from her drinking point to her barn. Well, that's another hypotenuse that we're walking, right, where the base has length three minus x. The height of that triangle is two, and therefore the length of the hypotenuse is the square root of three minus x squared plus two squared.
And when you expand that, you have the square root of x squared minus 6x plus 13. Okay, so the total distance, let's call the total distance f of x when she stops at x is equal to x squared plus one to the one half power, I'm saying that instead of square root, plus x squared minus 6x plus 13 to the one half power.
The reason I wrote it as one half power is because now it's in a nice simple form that we can apply the chain rule to. For instance, what's the derivative of x squared plus one to the one half power? Well, by the chain rule, that's going to equal one half times x squared plus one to the negative one half power times the derivative of what's inside.
The derivative of x squared plus one is 2x. By a similar application of the chain rule, the next expression we get one half x squared minus 6x plus 13 to the negative one half power times the derivative of what's inside.
That's the derivative of what's inside is 2x minus 6. Now, remember that's our, that's the, that's f prime of x. We want to find the place where that function f of x is minimized. And we know from our previous lecture that to find such a point, we want to find where the derivative is zero.
So we take that messy expression and set it equal to zero. Now, I know you're looking at that and say, I don't want to solve this. I'll just tell you what the solution is. Let x equal one and that's going to magically turn to zero. Actually, it's not magical. We can verify it right here.
If you set x equal to one, we have one half times two to the negative half times two plus one half. That next expression turns into eight to the negative one half power times negative four. And when you simplify that expression, you have one over root two minus two over root eight.
But root eight is two square root of two. So that's one over root two minus two over two over root two, which thankfully is zero.
Now you might be a little disturbed that I just gave you the solution of x equals one and then we verified it. How could we have derived it? The fact of the matter is this entire problem can be done actually without calculus.
In fact, if you'll pardon the pun, we can solve this problem after just a moment's reflection. Here's what I mean.
Imagine that Claudia, as she walks from her original position to the x-axis river, instead of walking back to her barn located at the coordinates three two, instead she walks to the coordinates three negative two.
That is the reflection of the barn across the river. Now if you look at the picture, we actually have two congruent triangles here. It's the same distance to walk from her drinking point to three two, as it is to walk from her drinking point to three negative two.
Now if she does that, let's look at her path. It's this first line to x and then this other line to the barn's reflected point. Could that have been the shortest distance from the original point to the reflected point?
No, that's not the shortest because the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. So to find the optimal path, we just draw a straight line between the original point located at zero one to the reflected point located at three negative two.
The slope of that line, we can find the change in y over the change in x here. That's negative three over three is negative one. So that line has a slope of negative one. If it starts off at the point zero one, then it's going to hit the x-axis at the point where x equals one.
So indeed, Claudia's optimal drinking point is at x equals one. No calculus or square roots were required. But speaking of square roots, here's my next tangent you see, I'd like to now show you a neat way to approximate the square root of any number in your head.
Our magic tool will be the all-purpose approximation formula. Here it is. Let me say it first and then we'll explain it. This all-purpose formula works for any differentiable function, practically any function you're ever going to experience.
It says f of a plus h is approximately f of a plus h times f prime of a. And the smaller h is, the better the approximation is generally. So f of a plus h is f of a plus h f prime of a.
Now first of all, why should that work? The reason is pretty simple. If you go back to the original definition of the derivative, then f prime of a is approximately equal to f of a plus h minus f of a divided by h. And as h goes to zero, then that approximation becomes exact.
So when h is small, those two quantities are nearly equal. Now if we put f of a plus h on one side of the equation and solve for it, we get f of a plus h is approximately f of a plus h f prime of a. Let's now use this approximation formula to come up with a nice way to calculate square roots in our head.
Okay, so we know the function f of x equals square root of x. We've met that function many times before. And we know that its derivative is equal to 1 over 2 square root of x. In particular, if I plug in the value x equals a, we get that f prime of a is 1 over 2 square roots of a.
For example, let's say we wanted to estimate the square root of 106. 106 is equal to 100 plus 6. So I'll break that number up that way. I'll let a equal 100 and h equals 6. Then our approximation formula tells us that the square root of 106, that is f of 106, is approximately f of 100 plus 6 times f prime of 100.
But f of 100, that's just the square root of 100. We know that. That's 10. That's actually why I chose 100 in the first place. It was a number whose square root I knew. Plus 6 times f prime of 100. Well, that's 1 over 2 square roots of 100. I still know the square root of 100 is 10.
So we get 10 plus 6 over twice 10, 620th. That's equal to 10.3. As it turns out, the exact answer, the square root of 106, is 10.295 and so on. So coming up with 10.3 was pretty darn good.
Let's do another example. In fact, let's streamline the process. This is really how I calculate the square root of numbers in my head. Let's say the problem was the square root of 456. Now, do you know the square root of 400?
What number when squared gives us 400? 20. Right. So your first guess is it's 20 plus my error was 56. 400 was 56 away from 456. So we take 20 plus 56 over twice 20. That's 20 plus 56 over 40. That's 20 plus 1.4. That's 21.4. Not bad.
If you want an even better approximation, if you remember the lecture we had on squaring numbers in the joy of algebra, we learned that 21 squared is 441 using our process. So if you know that 21 squared is 441, now your error is smaller.
Your h is only 15 instead of 56. So in this case, we can calculate the square root of 456 as 21 plus 15 over twice 21. Twice 21 is 42. So we have 21 plus 15 over 42. That's 21 plus 5.14. And if you calculate out 5.14 in your head or not, you get that's 0.357.
So we get 21.357. The exact answer turns out to be 21.354. So that is one heck of an approximation. Speaking of approximations, let's go back to our approximation formula that says f of a plus h is approximately f of a plus h f prime of a.
I'm going to simplify matters a little bit. Let's plug in a equals 0 and let's replace h with x. Now we have a much simpler looking equation. It says f of x is approximately f of 0 plus f prime of 0 times x.
But f of 0 is just a number. Once you have your function f, f of 0 is just a number. f prime of 0 is just a number. So if I say f of x is some number plus some other number times x, what kind of equation am I looking at? That's the equation of a line.
A line with a slope of f prime of 0. And that line goes through the point 0 f of 0. So what we're doing is we're approximating our function f of x with this straight line that goes through the same point 0 f of 0 with the same slope.
For instance, we could take a look at this picture. Here's a graph of what turns out to be y equals e to the x. And near the point 0 1, we have a line, actually it's the line y equals 1 plus x, that looks just like the function e to the x, at least when x is close to 0.
If we want an even better approximation, then we'll find instead of a straight line going through that point, let's look for a parabola, a second degree polynomial, to go through that point.
And since we have one extra degree of freedom, not only will it go through that point with the same slope, with the same first derivative, we'll make it also go through that point with the same second derivative, so it'll fit the curve a little bit nicer.
If you do that, then the magic formula for that is f of x is approximately f of 0 plus f prime of 0 x, that's the same thing as we had before, but now we add this one extra term, f double prime of 0 times x squared over 2.
So now it's a parabola that matches the function with the same first derivative and second derivative.
But why stop there? If you want an even better fit, we can get a third degree approximation, we'll give our function the third degree here, by adding a cubic term.
That cubic term will be f triple prime of 0 times x cubed, not over 3, but over 3 factorial.
And the reason we have the 3 factorial is now that function is going to match the original function through the point 0 f of 0 with the same first derivative, second derivative, and third derivative.
In fact, take a look at our graph here, so here we have y equals e to the x, and here's the function y equals 1 plus x, here is the second degree Taylor polynomial representation, here's the third degree representation.
These things, by the way, are called Taylor polynomials. I think it's because they are Taylor made to fit the function. You can actually bring this function out to even higher degrees with the same kind of formula.
Let me give you an example. Let's take our favorite function from calculus, f of x equals e to the x. We like that because f prime of x, its first derivative, is e to the x.
If you take the derivative of the derivative, you get the second derivative, which is still e to the x, and the third derivative is e to the x.
When you plug those in at 0, f of 0 is 1, f prime of 0 is 1, f double prime of 0 is f triple prime of 0 is 1.
So that tells us that near the point x equals 0, e to the x is approximately 1 plus x plus 1x squared over 2 factorial plus 1x cubed over 3 factorial.
We're taking this important function, e to the x, and approximating it by this cubic polynomial. And as you can see, when we're close to 0, that's a pretty good fit.
If we want to do even better, we can do the nth degree Taylor polynomial. That would be 1 plus x plus x squared over 2 factorial, all the way up to x to the n over n factorial.
And if you let n go all the way out to infinity, then it turns out you get perfect accuracy for all values of x, not just x that are really close to 0, but all values of x.
This is called the Taylor series of e to the x, and this has all kinds of amazing consequences.
Notice, for instance, if we take the Taylor series for e to the x, which is 1 plus x plus x squared over 2 factorial plus x cubed over 3 factorial going out forever.
Look what happens if you differentiate that series one term at a time. The derivative of 1 is, with respect to x, is 0.
The derivative of x is 1. The derivative of x squared over 2, that's equal to x. The derivative of x cubed over 3 factorial, let's see, that's 3x squared over 3 factorial, but the 3's cancel and you're left with x squared over 2 factorial.
Here, one more term. The derivative of x to the 4 over 4 factorial is 4x cubed over 4 factorial, that's x cubed over 3 factorial. We're getting the same function back.
That is when you differentiate the terms of the series for e to the x, you get e to the x again, and that makes sense because the derivative of e to the x is e to the x.
Here are some more important Taylor series, which can be derived in the same way that we derived the e to the x series.
For instance, the sine of x has the following Taylor series, x minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the 5 over 5 factorial minus x to the 7 over 7 factorial plus x to the 9 over 9 factorial, and so on.
It looks just like the odd terms of the e to the x series, except we alternate the sines as we go along the way.
Here, take a look at the graph of y equals sine of x, and let's look at when we approximate it with the function y equals x.
And now let's look at the function x minus x cubed over 3 factorial. That's an even better approximation.
If we go one more, x minus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the 5 over 5 factorial, that's the fifth order Taylor approximation, it fits the function pretty well, at least in the region near zero.
Now, how about the series for cosine of x? Why don't we figure that one out ourselves by differentiating the series for sine of x?
Because we know the derivative of sine of x is cosine x, so if we differentiate the terms of the Taylor series, the derivative of x is 1.
The derivative of x cubed over 3 factorial is x squared over 2 factorial.
The derivative of x to the 5 over 5 factorial is x to the 4 over 4 factorial, and keeping track of the alternating sines, we get 1 minus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to the 4 over 4 factorial minus x to the 6 over 6 factorial, and so on.
We get those even terms of the e to the x series, again with the sines alternating.
Again, you'll notice that by the series is another way of verifying that the derivative of sine is cosine and the derivative of cosine is negative sine.
But let's have some more fun with these functions. Let's say we have e to the x, we know the series for that, and let's look at the series for e to the negative x.
e to the negative x is what you get when you take the e to the x series and replace all the x's with negative x.
So it starts 1, instead of plus x, it's minus x. The next term, instead of being x squared over 2 factorial, is the quantity negative x squared over 2 factorial.
But negative x squared is the same as positive x squared, so that stays the same.
So the e to the negative x series looks like the e to the x series, except the sines are alternating.
Okay, now if you take the e to the x series and you add to that the e to the negative x series, and you divide that by 2, so you take the average of those two functions,
you get what's called the hyperbolic cosine function, sometimes pronounced the cosh function.
The reason it's called a hyperbolic cosine function is look what happens when you add those series together, right?
e to the x plus e to the negative x divided by 2. 1 plus 1 over 2 gives you 1.
The x plus negative x over 2, that gives you 0, it cancels.
The x squared over 2 factorial plus x squared over 2 factorial over 2 stays in x squared over 2 factorial.
And the odd terms cancel, like the x cubed, the even terms stay the same.
So you're left with 1 plus x squared over 2 factorial plus x to the 4 over 4 factorial plus x to the 6 over 6 factorial going on and on.
And the reason it's called hyperbolic cosine is that looks just like the cosine function, except the cosine function had all those little sines alternating.
This one doesn't.
Similarly, if you subtracted those two equations, then you get the odd terms surviving and the even terms going away.
So you're left with x plus x cubed over 3 factorial plus x to the 5 over 5 factorial and so on.
It looks just like the sine function, except it doesn't have those pesky negative sines in the way.
That's why we call it the hyperbolic sine function, or mathematicians will call that the cinch function.
If you look at those two functions, by the way, you'll notice that the derivative of cinch is cosh, and the derivative of cosh is cinch, which is a lot easier.
You don't have any negative sines to worry about.
Personally, I think that's why they call it cinch.
Now, we actually see hyperbolic functions everywhere in our daily life.
For instance, here's a hanging cable or a piece of rope, for instance, always fits a cosh curve.
No matter how I position this rope or chain, we have something.
If I said what curve is this, you might say it looks like a parabola, doesn't it?
But in fact, it's not a parabola.
It is a hyperbolic cosine function.
In fact, every rope or chain or cable satisfies is of the form y equals 1 over a times the cosh of x over a.
Incidentally, if you wanted to differentiate this function, what would you use?
The chain rule, of course.
So I guess chain rule does have something to do with hanging chains.
Incidentally, if you take a cosh curve and you turn it upside down, you get the arch of St. Louis.
The St. Louis arch actually is an inverted cosh curve.
You may ask, what is hyperbolic about the hyperbolic cosine and hyperbolic sine function?
Where does that word come from?
It turns out cosine theta sine theta lives on the unit's circle.
Cosine squared plus sine squared equals 1.
Well, similarly, you can show that cosh squared minus cinch squared equals 1,
which means that cosh theta cinch theta actually lies on the unit hyperbola.
That's why it's called a hyperbolic cosine or hyperbolic sine function.
By the way, another easy property to verify is if you take the cosh of x plus the cinch of x, add those together, you get e to the x.
You could do that by the series or just by the original definition.
We've seen all these parallels between the hyperbolic functions and the trigonometric functions.
If cosh plus cinch equals e to the x, then surely there must be some connection between cosine x, sine x, and e to the x.
There's morally required to be some kind of connection, and here it is.
It's Euler's equation, the equation that we've talked about much in the past in the joy of i and imaginary numbers.
e to the ix equals cosine x plus i sine x.
We may have expressed it in the language of the angle theta.
e to the i theta is cosine theta plus i sine theta,
giving you the point on the unit circle that came with angle theta.
We could prove that simply by taking e to the ix, take the series for e to the x, but replace all those x's with ix's.
And as that i gets raised to different powers, i to the zero is one, i to the first is i, i squared is negative one, i cubed is negative i, i to the fourth is back to one again.
Then the sine pattern is a one, i, negative one, negative i, one, i, negative one, negative i.
And as we look at that pattern and separate the real part from the imaginary part, what we get is the series for the cosine plus i times the series for the sine.
So that's the proof of Euler's equation, that e to the ix is cosine x plus i sine x.
Incidentally, when you let x equal pi, 180 degrees, then that says that e to the i pi is cosine pi plus i sine pi.
But the cosine of pi is negative one and the sine of pi is zero, so it says that e to the i pi is equal to negative one.
That is e to the i pi plus one equals zero, a formula that combines all the most important numbers in mathematics.
But don't take my word for it. In a recent issue of Physics World magazine, in its list of the 20 greatest equations, it listed this one, e to the i pi plus one equals zero, as the number two equation on the list,
beating out such equations as the Pythagorean theorem and e equals mc squared.
Incidentally, at the top of the list were Maxwell's equations, which describe electricity, magnetism and light in terms of integrals.
And integrals are actually the subject of our next lecture.
