I am the Contrary and this is my world.
Hi, my name is Shivam Vezhan. I'm here to take on Rajiv Makhani on his bizarre idea
that social media alienates people rather than brings them together.
You can't see how the man should have followed the pictures.
Technology is a strange beast. It comes bearing gifts with one hand
and it will always stab you in the back with the other.
Now that was supposed to be the cliché saying, every time something in the world of technology
truly takes off, there are many people that will be there to make sure they pull it down.
Is it because it's such an easy hit? Is it because it really paints a big bull's eye
and what's happening with these 20 million people that seem to be resonating
with this Gary Turk guy in the look-up video?
Alright, so we have you here. We've all set to find out from you as to why this is something that keeps coming up.
Our viewpoint is that while it is a cliché at one time, it's made a huge comeback,
not just because it's a video and the 20 million people that watched it,
but because true sense is starting to now dawn on people that using technology all the time
as their primary form of communication could be a serious recipe for disaster.
You obviously don't really believe in that, so a minute, minute and a half all yours to tell me why we're wrong.
Well, you could make a case of social media addictive and you might take it for real-time interaction,
but sooner or later everybody makes friends on social media with particular overlapping interests
and then they decide to meet in person.
Now, I'm meeting you for the first time here, but I might go and add you on Facebook.
I don't even need to go home. I can add you on Facebook right here on my phone.
So many of us who use social media for years, be it in the blogging boom or Twitter, Facebook
or e-groups which are now forgotten, I have made online friends into real-life friends, met them.
You even forget. You become so close that you even forget that you met through Facebook once upon a time.
So I don't think this binary really exists.
That video shows people hurling into a room, but actually now with smartphones,
you're not clustered in a room at all. You're mobile everywhere.
So you're saying that for generations with the way even the human evolution has happened,
which is face-to-face, which is direct eye contact, which is actually a little touch
and everything else that's been the general guards of everything that we've done with evolution,
the pillar blocks of how we all evolved. You're saying it doesn't really matter.
We can move to this new system and there will be absolutely no ripple effect of it.
No, it matters. I'm not saying that everybody should stop meeting each other in sort of person,
but what I'm saying is that this eye contact for instance in person is replicated on the internet
with its own language. Emoticons, for instance, do that.
When you're seeing something sarcastically in your smiley, that smiley is basically replicating the smiley.
This reminds me of the fact that the first time smileys became a big hit,
it was because you kind of thought, okay, was that a little harsh? Let me put a smiley at the back.
So it doesn't actually lead to a lot of contrary viewpoints.
So if I sat here and spoke with you and my level of harshness and sarcasm,
because you're with me, would be far more muted because I would give you some respect.
That respect is usually lost out there because I can just camouflage by using an emoticon.
It's not just emoticons. These days people respond to something on Facebook with a YouTube link.
You remind me of this song, right?
Imagine if that person was to meet, you would sing that song saying,
listen, you remind me of this song. Let me sing it for you.
In person, he might not sing because he might be too embarrassed of his singing skills.
It is now scientifically proven from the psychiatric angle to other angles to do with socializing and everything else
that people that have a larger than life online persona usually are the exact opposite personalities in real life
because suddenly they have this thing where they can be who they are versus who they want to portray.
You know, we all have these concerns, but the internet is a medium that allows you to make whatever you want to make of it.
It's like a clean slate of paper, right?
So there are people who in real life might be reserved and on the internet might appear white, chirpy and chatty,
and you know, I've met those. However, this is not a stereotype that we can stick to.
There are many who are exactly the same on sort of the internet and real life.
There are those abusive trolls on the internet who are real nice people in real life.
I've seen those. There are those real nice people.
So what is this social networking and the internet doing to them?
Why are really good people?
How you represent yourself on Facebook or Twitter or a blog is just one part of your personality.
We are not one human being.
You know, in Hindi there is a saying, there are four human beings in one human being.
That's because of the weight we are all putting on right now.
Well, then I may be. But on the internet you are portraying a part of you and you're consciously...
Are you portraying or you're playing a part?
You're portraying, playing and you're consciously making it.
You're very conscious of what you're presenting of yourself.
There are so many people that live second lives on the internet.
There are so many people that actually have a different name for them.
So there are so many people that portray the exact opposite.
It's the dream that they are living right through.
I dreamt that this is what I would be and therefore I will put that as my image out there.
And portray that personality.
So what's the problem with that?
There's a huge problem with that because when you go out into real life,
when you sit for 45 minutes on your phone and the computer,
you feel larger than life and suddenly life catches up the minute you go out of the door.
You also feel larger than life when you take a foreign holiday.
You also feel larger than life when you become a TV anchor.
Not when the credit card bill comes later, but for sure, absolutely.
So you don't feel larger than life in any way after a foreign holiday.
See, we have a professional life, we have a personal life, we have a family life,
we have a life with our friends.
We connect in a very different way with our school friends, with our college friends.
These are many lives we lead.
Similarly, we have one internet life.
Or actually, we have many internet lives.
Our persona on Facebook is different, our persona on Twitter is different.
So there are many lives even on the internet.
What I'm trying to say here is that the internet allows everybody to be what they want to be
in many ways, in many directions.
It's an expression of humanity.
It's not against humanity.
What the video is trying to say is that the internet takes you away from humanity.
That's not the case at all.
There may be dangers, but those dangers are the same as real life.
They come from real life, they come from our real life selves.
If you are depressed and you close yourself in a room and you're only Facebook
and then you complain that I'm addicted to Facebook, no.
It's actually because you're depressed that you're not treating your real life friends.
Let me just weigh what you've just said.
So you're saying the fact that you can meet a few more people in your life
that have similar interests far outweighs the dangers of alienation,
of having fake personalities and the biggest danger now
that almost everybody is starting to say has become an epidemic,
which is your life seems very inadequate because of the amazing life
that everybody else artificially portrays on Facebook.
There's a new version of feeling envious about your neighbor going for a foreign holiday
and coming back and showing you pictures.
My point is, those things happen in real life as well.
The internet is just a platform, nothing more.
And you do not think that...
Don't blame the medium.
Whenever there's new technology, from the printing press,
to the mobile phone, to the telephone itself, to aviation, to TV, to photography,
anything that is discomfort, humanity doesn't know how to really adapt to it.
It leads to things we had not thought of.
We take some time to adapt to it, to get used to it, to get a hang of it.
The biggest way in which we've done that with the internet is with the mobile phone
because we have mobility, we're not stuck to a machine.
That is the biggest sort of boon we've got that internet is now in our hands.
So you're not stuck to a machine that is in our hand?
Has it needed to us?
Well, you could be walking and you can intermittently keep checking.
I think people are getting used to it.
I think people are getting used to it.
People switch off their...
It's pretty much led to some of the worst things happening
when you actually have real-life conversations
where people are more occupied with their phone than to talk to you.
And that has led to...
Restaurants, movies and other business...
It's gone for a complete six, right?
And that has led to an evolution of etiquette.
Just as in the internet era, we had netiquette.
Now we have smartphone etiquette revolving.
I'm going to do a little quick fire with you.
The last time you actually used your phone when you were out with friends was...
Yesterday evening.
Yes, okay, great.
So, you know, kind of...
The quick fire faster...
But they were doing it as well.
So see, where's the etiquette then?
You spoke about it.
You know, you can throw out the rules.
Who's going to stick to them?
Especially when the seduction of technology is so amazing.
Don't be all multitasked these days.
Exactly.
There we go again.
Do you get usually nervous
if there's a very interesting conversation happening
around a particular topic
which has to do with you and your friends
and you haven't yet participated
because you're a little busy?
You know, this trap he is pulling me into...
So let me ask him questions
and I'll play me into a bigger trap than this.
I have no problem.
How edgy?
First answer mine, then we go into...
You know the answer, next question.
Very edgy, okay, alright.
And the last one has quick fire.
Can you give me a reason why suddenly
the biggest thing that has ever hit the world?
And I'm saying from the time we've evolved as human beings
the Facebook has taken to be the biggest thing
that has got people together.
One billion and counting is suddenly going
with negative growth.
It's only one billion people.
What other medium reaches?
Which TV channel?
Which newspaper?
This is one social networking site.
Facebook.
Facebook will go from one billion
to a few billions much faster.
The negative growth might be right now
but you will see the future will astound you.
The normal conventional wisdom says
that once you lose momentum
you never gain it back
especially when it's true with something like this.
I predict that the fact people are starting to realise
that this could be one of the worst ways of communicating
is starting to dawn on most people.
You of course don't agree
but then that's exactly why we had you here.
Thank you so much.
Fantastic talking to you
and thank you for being part of the quick fire too
even though I didn't get all the answers that I wanted.
So is it really true?
Could social networking, Facebook, media
the way we communicate alienate us
or should we go back to using Facebook
for what it originally was for?
Checking out ex-girlfriends and boyfriends
to see how fat they got.
Well that's a question you can answer.
We'll see you next week on The Contrarian.
Thank you.
Thanks a lot.
I am The Contrarian and this is my world.
Thank you.
