Hello, and welcome to our continued adventure into the phases of materials.
The diagrams that tell us about them and the properties they have.
Today, I'm excited about digging in even more into the properties of phases and phase diagrams.
But first, let's go have some fun with the phase change of water.
In the last lecture, we did a demo where I made a liquid boil and cool at the same time
simply by changing its pressure.
Here, I'll show that even without the ability to control pressure, I can make water boil.
And in fact, I'll do so by cooling it as opposed to heating it.
Let's take a look.
So we know that water boils when we heat it up, but did you also know that it can boil
when we cool it down?
In this flask, I have water that's hot, but it's clearly not hot enough to be boiling
since it's just sitting there, happy to be in the liquid phase.
In this container, I have ice cold water, and what I'm going to do is pour it on top.
Watch what happens to the water inside when I do that.
Now you can see the water inside starts to boil.
You see it'll boil a little bit, it'll slow down, and if I add some more cold water on
top, it'll boil some more.
So what's happening in here?
Well, and you can see the water is still boiling.
How is this possible?
Well, it all has to do with pressure.
I've lowered the temperature of the water vapor inside, so some of it condenses back
down into the liquid.
Less water vapor means lower vapor pressure, which lowers the boiling point of the liquid.
This is a beautiful example of how the phase of materials can be controlled in different
ways, depending on where we are in the phase diagram.
So that was yet another fun example of moving around in a phase diagram.
By pouring cold water over the flask, the water vapor condenses, which leads to a drop
in the pressure of the vapor.
Feeling the lower pressure above it, the water begins to boil.
So we've certainly seen some cool ways and learned how to push across the phase boundary
lines of a phase diagram.
But today, we'll talk about the thermodynamics behind why a curve in a phase diagram goes
a certain way in the first place, and why it has the slope that it has.
Also, for the past two lectures, we've stayed in the realm of single component phase diagrams.
Today, we'll begin with a single component phase diagram, but by the end of the lecture,
we'll be examining our first multi-component phase diagram, one that explains why ice melts
when we sprinkle salt on it.
So a given phase has a set of properties that define its state.
As we learned in the last lecture, depending on how many phases are in equilibrium with
each other, the number of these properties that can vary decreases as the number of phases
in equilibrium increases.
That's the Gibbs phase rule.
We saw that when, for example, water is at its triple point, its temperature and pressure
are fixed for all three phases.
Knowing what the properties of state variables are for a given system allows for the ability
to predict what a given system will do when subjected to a new set of conditions.
In general, the properties of a system change drastically at a phase transition.
For example, the enthalpy is characterized by the latent heat of the phase transformation
and often looks something like this.
The entropy is directly related to the enthalpy.
More ordered systems like solids are much lower in entropy than their fluid forms,
as you can see from this plot.
And for the heat capacity, as we've seen, the local atomic arrangement of species in
a system drastically affects how the system absorbs and releases heat.
And for the volume, more ordered systems tend to have a higher density and thus lower
volume than their fluid forms.
But one very notable exception to this last trend is water.
I already talked about how the fact that ice is less dense than water right around zero
degrees is literally at the heart of why so much aquatic life can survive.
But I didn't tell you why the behavior of water is so different than other materials.
So the question we need to answer is what is it that governs the slope of a phase boundary
on the phase diagram?
For water, the solid-liquid phase boundary, remember we call that a phase coexistence
curve.
That slope of that boundary is negative.
But for most other materials, and I really mean almost every other single component phase
diagram, that solid-liquid coexistence curve has a positive slope.
And it turns out that this negative slope is precisely the reason why you wouldn't
want to leave pipes filled with water during the winter.
If the water isn't moving, then eventually it freezes and you have a massive amount of
pressure from the phase change which can burst the pipe.
If you wanted to calculate the volume change that occurs upon freezing, it's pretty straightforward.
When the water freezes, the initially liquid water is at a density of around 1 gram per
centimeter cubed, which decreases to a density of about 0.92 grams per centimeter cubed once
it becomes ice at zero degrees Celsius.
If you start with a certain number of grams of water and that amount does not change, so
no mass transfer at the boundaries of your system, then the volume increases upon the
phase change.
Let's now tie this back to the pressure-temperature phase diagram.
We've learned that the relationship between thermodynamic variables dictates the shape
of free energy curves.
Similarly, equilibrium relationships have something to say about the shape of coexistence
curves on a phase diagram.
An important relationship in thermodynamics that I'm about to explain provides a link
between the conditions for two-phase equilibrium and the slope of the two-phase line on the
pressure versus temperature diagram.
This relationship is known as the Clausius-Clapeyron equation.
It was derived independently by Emile Clapeyron in 1834 in France and a little bit later in
1850 by Rudolph Clausius in Germany.
So remember the Gibbs phase rule from our last lecture?
Now when we're sitting on a two-phase coexistence curve, there's only one degree of freedom,
which means effectively that the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature must
equal some function of pressure and temperature.
Well, the Clausius-Clapeyron equation gives us that function.
Now, as you know by now, I don't always go around deriving stuff in this course, but
I'd like to do so here since we have a nice simple derivation, and besides, it's always
good once in a while to see what's under the thermo-hood.
So let's begin by considering the differential Gibbs free energy for ice and water at 0 degrees
Celsius.
We'll refer to these phases more properly as solid and liquid.
So with no chemical driving forces, and since we're looking at an equation for the change
in Gibbs free energy for each phase separately, we won't have any change in the number of
moles, so no chemical potential terms.
So in that case, we can write dG for the solid equals minus the entropy S of the solid times
dT plus volume V of the solid times dP.
We can write the same dependence of the change in free energy similarly for the liquid phase.
And now, since we know the two phases are in equilibrium at the phase transition, then
at the transition, this means that their Gibbs free energies must be equal.
So G for the solid phase equals G for the liquid phase, and dG of the solid equals dG of the
liquid.
So equating our two expressions for dG, we have the following.
Minus entropy of the solid times dT plus volume of the solid times dP equals minus entropy
of the liquid times dT plus volume of the liquid times dP.
And this gives us a way to solve for dP divided by dT.
Just group the terms together and divide.
And what we arrive at is the following expression, dP dt at a phase transition.
So one of those coexistence curves in the phase diagram is equal to the change in entropy
divided by the change in volume between the two phases.
By the way, keep in mind that we can always rewrite such expressions in terms of the molar
versions of these variables.
Here, if I divide both the top and bottom by the number of moles, I get that dP dt equals
the change in specific entropy or molar entropy divided by the change in molar volume between
the two phases.
I wanted to remind you of that since often it's this intensive version of the thermodynamic
variables we choose to work with, or that you may find in the tables.
OK, so the volume change doesn't seem too bad, but how do we obtain the change in entropy
during the phase transformation?
It's a hard one to measure directly, but you may remember that something we can measure
quite easily is the latent heat of the phase transformation.
This is the heat energy required to make the phase transition happen, or the enthalpy change
over the phase transformation at constant pressure.
We also know that since delta G equals delta H minus T times delta S, then at the phase
transition, since delta G equals 0, delta H must equal T times delta S. So in the previous
equation for the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature, we can now substitute
delta H divided by temperature in for that delta S term.
This gives us, finally, a really cool expression known as the Clausius-Clapeyron equation.
It gives us that the derivative of pressure with respect to temperature, so dP dt, equals
the latent heat of the phase transition divided by the temperature times the change in volume
of the phase transition.
And there we have it, a way to get the slope of any two-phase coexistence curve on a phase
diagram, brought to you by basic thermodynamics.
So we see now from this relation how the volume change is connected to the Pt diagram.
Let's take a look back at the phase diagram of water.
See if I'm going from the solid to the liquid phase across this boundary, then we know that
the heat of melting must be a positive value, since we're adding heat to the system to go
from the solid to the liquid.
But we also know that ice is more dense at zero degrees as a liquid than a solid, so
the volume change is negative.
Clausius-Clapeyron tells us that this means that the slope of this Pt two-phase coexistence
curve has to be negative.
It's also interesting to point out the verticality of this line.
Why does the solid-liquid boundary line go nearly straight up and down, while the liquid-gas
boundary line is much more flat?
Well, we can understand this by thinking about the change in volume.
While the volume change between solid and liquid for water goes in a funny direction
compared to most materials, it's still a small change.
This is also true for most other materials, regardless of the direction of the volume
change.
It's usually quite small for the solid to liquid transformation.
On the other hand, it's often enormous in going from liquid to gas.
Since that goes in the denominator of the expression, that volume change, the larger
the volume change, the smaller the slope will be of the phase boundary line.
Of course, there's also an interplay of this volume change with the change in enthalpy and
the temperature of the phase transition, as you can see from the equation.
So let's take a look at what happens when we expand our phase diagram to include higher
pressures.
By the way, the graph now goes up to pressures that you have inside the core of a nuclear
bomb.
So this is indeed pretty high.
And it's up here where we see all these other solid phases of water start to appear.
Notice that the slopes of the phase boundaries are in general pretty flat, indicating that
there's likely to be either a large volume change between the phases, or not a lot of
heat energy needed to convert from one phase to another, or a combination of these two
attributes.
And we can see by looking at the different densities of these phases that, in fact, there
is quite a large change in volume among them, with, for example, ice 10 and ice 11 having
densities two and a half times larger than the good old ice we know and love.
And one that we have at atmospheric pressure, which I suppose you could call ice one if
you wanted, or hexagonal ice, or, well, maybe just plain old ice.
But notice that certain phase boundaries, like this one here between what is known as
ice seven and ice eight, are not flat, but rather possess a very high slope, at least
at these pressures.
We know now that this means either that the volume change between these phases is very
small, or that the amount of heat energy it takes to undergo the phase change is very
large.
As we look at all of these different phases and phase boundaries armed with the Clausius-Klapperon
equation, which we just derived, we can admire with renewed appreciation the complexity that's
built into such materials' maps.
Think about all of the different pushes and pulls going on at the atomic scale, about
how heat flows in and out, the changes in crystal structure that results in changes
in volume, and how sensitive this is to pressure and temperature.
In some regions, one phase becomes two, with temperature, while in other regions the phase
stops existing altogether.
And with all of these phases, we also have new triple points, where three different phases
coexist together.
Doing such a triple point in action, as we did for the tert-butyl alcohol in the last
lecture, might not be as exciting in these cases since two or even all three of the phases
are solid.
But still, the material at such singular points in the phase diagram possesses all three phases
at once, which, on the scale of the atom, can mean just as drastic differences as we
saw with the liquid that freezes and boils at the same time.
By the way, I told you that Clausius-Clapeyron would help give us some why for the properties
of phase diagrams, and it does by directly relating the coexistence curves to the temperature
and changes in heat and volume.
But what about the question of why at the atomic scale?
Why does water do what it does in terms of anomalous, solid-to-liquid density change,
and therefore negative DP-DT slope?
Well that's got to do with the very particular type of bonding network that forms between
water molecules.
They interact with one another mainly through what are called hydrogen bonds that are formed
between the hydrogen atoms from one water molecule and the oxygen atoms from another.
So it turns out that this is not a super strong bond, but it's also not super weak.
It's rather sort of somewhere in between.
These hydrogen bonds, they lock the crystal structure into place when it solidifies in
a way that leaves a lot of open space, so much so that it's actually less dense than
the liquid form.
So even though these bonds are weaker, and therefore the average distance between the
molecules is larger in the liquid compared to the solid, the liquid does not leave as
much open space, resulting in overall higher packing.
This is a pretty unusual phenomenon, and it has to do with the particular moderate strength
of these hydrogen bonds, and also the very directional nature of these bonds.
That is the fact that they prefer to have quite distinct angles with respect to one another.
By the way, I keep saying how unique water is in this regard, but there are other materials
that expand upon solidification, for physical reasons similar to what I just described for
water.
For example, bismuth and antimony are other examples of materials that expand when they
solidify.
Now keep in mind that I'm talking about expansion, or lowering of the density, through the phase
change.
This is not the same thing as expansion by heating.
Remember from our lecture on thermal expansion, that expansion by heating is caused by the
asymmetry in the potential energy curve for the atoms in a material.
Before moving on to our first glimpse into what happens when we mix materials together,
there's just one more thing I want to point out on this phase diagram.
It's something you may have noticed before, and it's this point all the way over here
where the two phase coexistence curve between the vapor and the liquid simply stops.
The line just ends in a point.
This is called the critical point.
And beyond this point, out here in this region, we say that the material is super critical.
That's a fancy and, admit it, pretty cool sounding way to say that the material is no
longer one phase or another.
And it's not even a coexistence between two phases.
It really is a new phase of the material that combines the properties of both the vapor
and the liquid phases together.
For a super critical fluid, the solid phase simply disappears.
But the material does not just all of a sudden vaporize to become all gas or condensed to
become entirely a liquid.
Instead, it becomes a new phase of matter, one that has about half the density of the
liquid and can effuse through solids just like a gas.
But also, still dissolves materials just like a liquid.
One of the most commonly used super critical materials is carbon dioxide.
This is because it's a completely non-toxic material, so it can be used as a very efficient
solvent in both medical and food industry applications.
For example, did you know that when you drink decaffeinated coffee, it's very likely because
super critical CO2 was flowed through the originally caffeinated beans?
Because it acts like a gas, it can go right through the bean.
But because it's also like a liquid, it's able to grab onto those caffeine molecules
and extract them out.
So the next time you switch to decaffe since you're already a bit jittery from those first
three regular tall lattes of the morning, just think about the fact that it's yet another
reason why knowing where we are in the phase diagram is extremely important and useful.
Okay.
Now, for the remainder of this lecture, I'd like to move away from just a single component.
Note that when I say single component, I'm not specifying a single atom.
Rather, I'm specifying a species, which could of course be just an atom or, as in the focus
of the last few lectures, it could be a molecule, such as water.
But now, we want to understand what happens to the properties and the phases of a material
when the material itself is comprised of more than one component.
As an example, we'll discuss what happens when salt is added to water.
One component, therefore, is H2O, and another is NACL, or just plain old salt.
Now, first, conceptually, let's look up close at the interface between liquid and solid
water.
On the liquid side, water is moving more quickly and is able to move.
Well, in the solid phase, the molecules can sort of jitter around, but cannot translate
or rotate freely.
So for a water molecule to freeze from the liquid to the solid phase, it has to get organized
into this regular crystalline lattice.
Now, instead of having just water molecules, let's suppose we take a few of those in the
liquid phase and replace them with a salt ion.
What do you think will happen intuitively?
The issue is that because the sodium or chlorine atoms are quite different in their size and
bonding compared to a water molecule, they just aren't going to fit as easily into this
solid matrix.
So they tend to prevent water molecules from crystallizing easily.
Every time the solidification runs into one of these big solute molecules, it frustrates
the whole process since the solid can't accommodate them like the liquid can.
In thermodynamic terms, what we're doing is lowering the free energy of the liquid with
respect to the solid.
In fact, by mixing the solvent, that is water in this example, with a solute particle, we
always lower the free energy to some extent.
Remember our lecture on mixing and osmosis?
In that lecture, we went through a simple lattice model to derive a simple expression
for the change in entropy upon mixing.
And we found that the entropy always increases when we mix a solute into a pure solvent.
Simply put, the system gets more degrees of freedom to play with, and the number of available
microstates for any given macrostate is greater, leading to a positive entropy of mixing.
So remember that we also talked about how the change in chemical potential for a given
process, which is equal to the change in the Gibbs free energy per mole at constant temperature
and pressure, dictates the direction of the process.
So equilibrium is reached for each component in the system when the chemical potentials
of that component are equal across all phases.
This will tend to move from high chemical potential to lower chemical potential until
this equality is reached.
So with our entropy only model, we can deduce that the change in free energy must be negative
as a function of the solute concentration.
Let's plot that here.
The molar free energy is on the y-axis, and the concentration of the solute, in this case
salt, is on the x-axis.
We'll start it here at some value which would correspond to the chemical potential of pure
water in its standard state.
That's a pressure of one atmosphere and a temperature of 25 degrees Celsius, or 298
Kelvin.
Now, as I add salt to the mixture, so x-sub-salt goes from zero up to some fraction, the molar
free energy goes down.
As long as we continue to ignore enthalpy changes, then the entropy of mixing is a maximum
at x-sub-salt equals one-half.
So the chemical potential will have a minimum at that point, and then start to turn back
up.
Finally, on the far right hand side of this graph, we'd have x-sub-salt equals one, so
the chemical potential should arrive at a value equal to that of pure salt at standard state
conditions.
Now, we're going to be seeing a whole lot of these plots in the next lecture, which
is all about phase diagrams of mixtures.
So I wanted to give you a feel for it here, but since our question is about what happens
to the freezing point of water with just a little salt added, we'll focus on the low
salt concentration part of this graph.
In fact, at a certain point, we can't add more salt at this temperature and pressure.
I mean, we can, but it won't dissolve in the liquid anymore.
Rather, it'll just fall to the bottom of the container as salt crystals.
And this is quite easy to see, and you can try it at home.
That point at which we cannot dissolve the solute into the solvent is known as saturation.
And for salt and water at standard conditions, it occurs at a concentration of around 23
percent by weight of salt.
Okay.
So back to our free energy.
Notice that this is the free energy curve for just one phase of the salt water mixture.
We could plot the free energy curves for other phases as well.
Each plot we make on this graph corresponds to a concentration dependence at a given temperature
and pressure.
If we go back to the graphs we made before of the free energy curves versus temperature
for each phase, then remember, it looks something like this.
So what happens when we add some salt to the liquid?
Well, as you can see from the concentration plot, the free energy of the liquid phase
goes down.
So on this plot over here, we can push that curve down with respect to the solid and gas-free
energy curves.
And now notice what magical thing happens when I push that curve down.
You see, the crossing point between the liquid and solid curves moves over to lower temperatures.
The further down we push the liquid-free energy curve, the lower the crossing point temperature.
That is why salt melts ice.
Actually, you can see that further over, this same liquid phase curve also changes its crossing
point with the gas phase curve.
By lowering the free energy of the liquid phase with respect to the gas phase, we increase
the boiling point of the liquid.
The intuitive picture on that end is similar in a way.
The water molecules are a bit more stuck in the liquid phase because of the presence of
the solutes at the surface, so the vapor pressure is in effect lowered, which in turn raises
the boiling point.
And all of this comes from our very simple model for the molar-free energy of mixing.
We'll be building on this type of multi-component phase diagram in the next lecture, where as
you may have guessed, we'll also need to stop ignoring enthalpy.
But for now, I want to make one more cool point about this water-salt phase diagram.
Did you notice that since we ignored interactions, our model is only based on entropy, and therefore
only based on counting states?
That means it doesn't even care what the solute is in the first place.
It tells us that regardless of what we add to water, if we add anything, its freezing
point will go down.
And it turns out to be quite true.
Try adding sugar or alcohol or any other kind of salt to your ice next time you need to
do some de-icing.
You'll get the same effect.
Where there's salt you added, the ice will melt.
That is, of course, if we stay above the new phase transition temperature dictated by how
much the free energy curve is lowered.
So why is it then that we use salt to melt ice?
Well, you probably guessed, simply because it's cheap.
Try sprinkling sugar on your driveway instead.
You get the same results, but have to pay two to five times as much.
And with all this talk of de-icing, I cannot help but end with a story involving MIT and
the mayor of Boston back in 1948.
During the winter of that year, there was an unrelenting amount of snowfall, and the
city had a lot of trouble staying out from under it all.
The mayor at the time, a man by the name of James Curley, began pleading for help from
the MIT president at the time, Carl Compton.
The mayor wrote in a letter, quote, I am very desirous that MIT have a competent group of
engineers make an immediate study as to ways and means of removing the huge accumulation,
be it by the use of flamethrowers or chemicals or otherwise.
The mayor was clearly a bit desperate.
In Compton's response, he recommended that flamethrowers, quote, would neither be practical
nor efficient, but would be hazardous.
And instead, he suggested that the city try salt.
He said, quote, in many sections of the country, salt, usually calcium chloride, is used quite
effectively.
Well, what can I say?
He knew his thermal.
