Hi, and welcome to our very last lecture of this course.
I've had a wonderful time taking you through all of the foundational topics of thermodynamics.
I hope that you have a good sense for why we decided to call this course the Four Laws
that Move the Universe, because the laws of thermodynamics and the variables they govern
ultimately describe how energy moves.
They give us a clear picture of why energy transforms from one form into another, and
how matter is affected during these transformations.
In short, they allow us to understand movement of any kind in any form, whether from matter,
heat, motion, or any other form of energy we know.
This is why the laws that move the universe truly captures the essence of thermodynamics.
Starting from the meaning of temperature itself, we've covered quite a massive amount of scientific
knowledge.
We set forth the crucial variables that allow us to describe any system in any process.
Sometimes these variables felt rather intuitive, like pressure and volume, and sometimes perhaps
not so much, like entropy or the chemical potential.
But either way, we felt the meaning of these crucial variables all the way down to the
scale of the atom, and all the way up to our technologies, our buildings, and the planet
itself.
And we didn't just learn about variables by themselves, we made connections between them.
We saw the ideal gas law in action, one example of a state function, and we developed the
relationship between heat and work.
We learned that internal energy represents a kind of energy that's stored inside of
a material, and that it can tell us how that material holds on to energy from heat and
response to changes in temperature.
And speaking of temperature, we saw that a change in it represents a crucial driving
force for heat to flow.
We felt our oneness with entropy, and learned that it's the missing link between temperature
and thermal energy.
And we saw that the entropy of the universe must increase for any process to occur.
And speaking of processes, we covered all types in this course.
But the ones where temperature and pressure can be controlled, well those are so important
we introduced a new variable, the free energy, to discuss such conditions.
By minimizing the free energy, we learned that it would be possible to find the happy
place for any material, that's also known as equilibrium, and that this place could
be plotted in a phase diagram, which is the ultimate materials map.
Having a phase diagram for a given material is like adding GPS navigation to your car.
It helps show how to get from one point to another in the highly interconnected property,
structure, and performance of the material.
Through these maps, we learned all sorts of beautiful phenomena, like how materials change
their face between gas, liquid, and solid in many different ways, and sometimes even
possess completely new phases, like in the case of a supercritical fluid.
We saw that when two different materials are mixed together, these phase diagrams can take
on immense complexity and show new behaviors, like a dramatic lowering in the melting point,
or a complete separation of the material into two distinct concentrations.
And when things are mixed, we learned that partial molar quantities are the way to describe
them.
We saw that the partial molar value of the free energy is so special that it gets its
own name, the chemical potential, which is the chemical driving force for any change in
the amount of a substance to occur.
We learned about heat engines, which formed the basis of the Industrial Revolution.
We learned that while work can make heat with 100% efficiency, this does not go the
other way.
Heat cannot do work with 100% efficiency.
And the Carnot limit tells us that the absolute best a heat engine can ever achieve is dependent
on a temperature difference.
And we saw how other types of work, like magnetism, surface tension, phase change, and entropy
itself could be used to make things move.
And beyond these highlights, we learned many other foundational thermodynamic concepts,
which are critical pillars of the science and engineering of modern times.
Like eutectic melting, osmotic pressure, the electrochemical cell, and that beautiful moment
for a material where all three phases coexist, called the triple point, along with many,
many other important phenomena.
And speaking of modern times, in the very first lecture, in order to motivate you to
think about the crucial role of thermodynamics in our lives, I asked a question.
I asked you to imagine what would happen if we had to start all over.
What if we had to begin again, to rebuild the world that we know today?
What science would we need?
What variables would matter?
How should we think about these variables in relation to one another?
And perhaps, most importantly, what forms of energy do we have?
And how could we use energy in these different forms to move the variables around and achieve
some desirable function?
Over the past 23 lectures, we've learned the foundational science that answers these questions.
We've learned how to relate heat to motion and to materials and energy in all of its
forms.
We've learned thermodynamics.
Here in this last lecture, I'd like to talk about the topic that's near and dear to my
heart.
That would be energy.
What gets me the most excited about the research that I do, what literally keeps me up at night
sometimes because of how exciting it is, is the fact that technologies we still need to
invent in order to address the world's future energy and water needs.
Those technologies will rely on the design of new materials.
And that can only be done with an intimate knowledge of thermodynamics.
Let's get a sense of what energy means to us.
What is the value of energy?
Well, think about the following comparison.
For about $1 today, I can buy a liter of gasoline in the US.
And that liter of gasoline contains roughly 32 million joules of energy in it.
A typical human can perform work at a rate of about 60 watts sustainably, that is, without
any rest, for at least some number of hours on end.
60 watts means 60 joules per second.
So that means that if a person did some kind of physical labor continuously for eight hours
each day, then it would take four weeks for that person to have worked as much as 32 million
joules.
One liter of gasoline in terms of energy is equivalent to four full 40-hour weeks of
labor from a person.
On the one hand, we paid a dollar for that energy.
Well, for the person, well, it depends, of course, but even at just $10 per hour, we'd
have to have paid that person 1600 times as much as the gasoline.
Now, I love that comparison because I feel that it very clearly and simply illustrates
why fossil fuels, almost free labor when compared to humans, have been able to completely
change the world in essentially every imaginable way.
And in what is by any measure, it's changed that world in an incredibly short time period.
And scientists and engineers have been at the forefront of this revolution, whether
by helping to design new ways to find and extract the energy from the ground or new ways
to use this energy in our factories, in our farms, in our transportation, and in our homes.
When we turn the knob on a lamp or switch on the TV, we rarely think about how the energy
comes to our appliances.
That is, that the power traveling through the wires into our sockets is made possible
because carbonaceous materials, like oil, natural gas, or coal, are being burned hundreds
of miles away.
We may not think about it, yet this ability to burn carbon-based materials is what powers
our industry, our growth, and our comfort.
But all of these massive amounts of ultra-cheap energy have also led our world to quite a
strained position.
What I mean by the word strained here is a collective effect.
It's the culmination of this energy boom that has had, to name only a few examples,
led to wildly rapid population growth, the release into our biosphere of unprecedented
amounts of toxic chemicals, the precarious lack of diversity in our approach to agriculture,
and the many conflicts that have already occurred, and many more that likely will occur due to
the heterogeneous global distribution of this precious resource.
Because of this, we've arrived at quite an interesting point in our world history.
Concerns about sustainability, climate, and national security are requiring that we reexamine
our reliance on carbon burning.
And among the many thought-provoking questions these topics have inspired, one entirely practical
question is critical.
Is the burning of carbonaceous materials the only way in which our planet can be tapped
for energy?
Currently, there's enough ancient sunlight trapped in carbonaceous forms, whether from
conventional or unconventional reservoirs, to last at least another generation, maybe
more.
But as our 200-year blip of seemingly limitless fossil fuel energy begins to decline, we'll
have to rely on alternative and sustainable energy resources.
Fossil fuels are finite.
They may not run out in the next 30 years, or even the next 50, or 100 years.
But eventually, and not too far from now, they will.
It's not just that we need a slightly better version of the materials we already have.
You see, that doesn't capture the challenge we face.
Rather, we need complete game changers.
We need materials that have factors of five or 10 better efficiencies or lower costs compared
to current ones.
And we can't just suddenly make the switch.
The energy we get from fossil fuels is so dense and such a precious resource that it's
a daunting task to even think about how we might someday be able to fully replace it.
So unlike many other revolutions that have occurred, the revolution that must occur in
energy and water over the next century, that revolution will center almost entirely around
our ability to carefully design and manufacture completely new materials.
Now, ironically, it's precisely because of the foundational science and engineering discoveries
enabled, to a large extent by thermodynamics, that we've arrived at the global tipping point
I just described.
The fact that I even asked the question, what if we had to begin again, in that first
lecture speaks volumes in itself.
We have advanced the human civilization so much and changed the world so much and improved
our well-being so much that just that question alone is awe-inspiring to think about.
That's why I asked it.
But now, I want to ask yet another different question.
Now that we are where we are in human civilization, there's no starting over.
We need to look to the future and we need to use the science and technology we've learned
over the past centuries to place humanity in a more sustainable position with respect
to the planet.
So instead of asking what would happen if we had to begin again, I ask, what happens
now that we cannot begin again?
The answer to our first question was the topic of thermodynamics.
Now I want to convey to you now that thermodynamics is also the answer to this second critical
question.
When I launched my research program in clean energy and water, I was well aware that there
was one topic in particular that I absolutely needed to become intimately and truly knowledgeable
about, a topic I needed to know inside and out in such a way that I could make an impact
on energy problems and try to change the game.
You probably guessed it, it was of course the topic of thermodynamics.
We scientists and engineers have used subjects like thermodynamics to harness energy to build
our modern society and we're also the ones who must create a new way to get that energy,
a clean, safe, renewable way that could last not just another 50 or 100 years, but as long
as the sun itself, which by the way is another 7 billion years, give or take.
But here's the catch.
We can't just wake up one day when we need it later on and say, okay, now let's do the
sun powered thing.
It won't work that way because all of the clean energy technologies in place are far
too expensive to be able to scale up to the world's energy needs, which by the way are
continuing to grow without balance.
The work to invent and develop and optimize these alternatives to fossil fuels must be
done now, since it's long term work that may take decades.
Breakthroughs cannot be predicted, but it's easy to predict that if we don't put any
people and resources onto a problem, then no breakthroughs will occur.
We need to work now on this problem so that later we're ready for it.
So let's turn now to the research and to how materials design and thermodynamics can
do something about these challenges.
I'll first give you an example of a new type of fuel we're developing.
It's called a solar thermal fuel.
This is a material that absorbs sunlight really well.
And when it's exposed to the sun, it undergoes a transformation at the molecular level.
Take a look at this illustration.
As light shines on the molecule, it changes the shape going through a kind of twisty turn.
And here's the key.
In that new twisted shape, the molecule is storing energy.
It's kind of energy that can be released later whenever you need it in the form of heat.
And then once the energy is released, the fuel is ready to be recharged by the sun again.
Now remember how we learned that temperature is related to vibrational motion and that
the heat capacity of a material depends on how many internal degrees of freedom are available
to store the energy?
Well, you can think of this case as having a special atomic arrangement where it can
store even much more internal energy.
But it's not taking in thermal energy to get there.
Instead, it's converting sunlight energy into this specially strained internal energy state.
When the molecule is triggered, it goes back to its original position.
And as it does, the motion of the molecule is so intense that it's like a little tiny explosion.
And since, as we know, the motion of atoms is related to temperature, the temperature
of the molecule goes way up and thermal energy is released.
It still all comes down to the thermodynamics of the energy pathways.
In this case, we have sunlight to chemical energy to thermal energy.
One way to think of a solar thermal fuel is that it's like a rechargeable heat battery.
It can be charged over and over again by the sun and deliver heat on demand when needed.
As you can imagine, this type of fuel could completely change the way we make and use energy.
First, unlike fossil fuels, it's a material that operates in a manner that leads to no
byproducts.
The fuel does not combust, but rather simply cycles back and forth between the charged
and uncharged states.
And second, it's chargeable by the sun, so it's based on a resource that's effectively
infinite.
Third, it represents the only way to use the sun's energy in the form of heat that's
distributable and transportable.
That's because other solar thermal technologies don't store the energy indefinitely until
it's purposefully released, but rather simply get hot and then immediately begin losing
that stored heat.
So because of their potential advantages, it's maybe not surprising that solar thermal
fuels are not new.
In fact, they were heavily explored in the 1970s, although widely abandoned by the mid-80s.
Why?
Because the materials under consideration back then simply could not withstand the cycling.
They would degrade a little bit each time they charged.
The result, after a mere 10 or 20 cycles, the amount of useful fuel left was minuscule.
It would be like buying a rechargeable battery that can only charge 10 times.
Not very useful.
Consider the new age of materials design and a solid understanding of thermodynamics.
What we have done in my research group is to reimagine the way a solar thermal fuel can
be made.
You see, there are many, many molecules that undergo some sort of structural change when
light shines on them.
These are in general called photo switches because, well, because they do just that.
They switch when exposed to light.
However, none of these are good energy materials, since they don't store very much energy when
they switch.
And often, they don't even stay in the switch state very long, like for just a few seconds
or minutes.
So that's not a very useful fuel.
But by using the concepts of thermodynamics, we've invented a completely new chemical
platform that turns essentially any photo switch into a good solar thermal fuel.
The trick lies in the fact that we combine these photo switches, these tiny little molecular
solar storage devices, with a separate material that holds them at a fixed distance apart.
To understand why this works, let's consider the thermodynamics at play.
Remember how we learned that temperature is a driving force?
We used the zeroth and then the second laws to show that heat will always flow from hot
to cold.
OK, so for most technologies that absorb sunlight and attempt to use that energy as
thermal energy, like, say, for hot water, this temperature driving force is the single
biggest challenge.
Since a container cannot be made to be perfectly adiabatic, there will always be some loss
of heat from the material.
It turns out that solar hot water heaters made today are pretty good.
But within about 12 hours, the water temperature will usually be back down to that of its surroundings.
But for a solar thermal fuel, we have something quite different.
In this case, the technology allows the material to hold onto all of the heat it absorbs,
until just the point at which it's needed.
That's because it operates much more as a phase change material than just an absorber
of heat.
More specifically, it's a phase change material, but in this case, the phase change is caused
by light instead of heat.
We learned in our lectures on the phases of matter that a lot of thermal energy is needed
to get a material to change from one phase to another, say, a gas to a liquid.
And that this energy, called the latent heat, is released when the material goes back to
the original phase.
For the solar thermal fuel, the two phases correspond not to gas liquid or solid, but
rather to those two different molecular structures.
And the phase change is caused by absorbing light energy as opposed to thermal energy.
Then, as we coax the material to go back to its original state, it gives back all of that
energy it had absorbed from light to phase change, but now it gives it back not as light,
but rather as heat.
That same latent heat that we learned about.
It was from this thermodynamics understanding and perspective that we came up with the idea
to template the molecules onto another material.
What we wanted to do was increase by as much as possible that latent heat stored between
the two phases, while at the same time block the pathways between the two phases.
This way, we increase the storage density while also increasing the lifetime of the
fuel when it's charged.
The hybrid material allows us to do this.
Putting the molecules onto a template opens up completely new chemistries between one
photo switch and another.
Chemistry that's different depending on whether the molecule is in the switch state or not.
And how could we tell whether a particular chemistry would work well or not?
Well, by minimizing that very important thermodynamic variable we've come to know and love throughout
this course, the free energy of the system.
By balancing contributions from our good friends, enthalpy, temperature and entropy, we were
able to develop new, stable and powerful hybrid materials for solar thermal fuels.
This approach led to a tripling of the energy stored per molecule while at the same time
increasing the storage lifetime from seconds to years.
Take a look at this diagram of what's happening at the molecular scale.
On the left, you can see what a single molecule alone would want to do when light shines on
it.
But over here on the right, by packing these molecules in tightly onto a surface, you can
see that the shape and movement of the molecule is now highly constrained.
This constraint leads to a dramatic change in the entropy as well as the internal energy
of the material.
And it's this new constraint that we can take advantage of to do new chemistry that leads
to improved bonding configurations.
That would be the enthalpy term.
In fact, by optimizing the thermodynamic free energy of this system, we have invented an
entirely new platform for making solar thermal fuels.
One that leads to materials that can be recharged over and over again with absolutely no degradation
for tens of thousands of cycles and that have energy densities even higher than the best
performing batteries on the market today.
This represents the first ever sunlight rechargeable thermal fuel that provides safe, recyclable,
high density, transportable, and distributable heat on demand.
And it's entirely possible because of thermodynamics.
One example of how we're using this fuel already is in solar cooking.
Some of you may know this already, but wood-fired stoves, especially in the third world, are
responsible for more deaths than malaria and AIDS combined.
A wood-fired stove inside a home releases the equivalent amount of carcinogens as a
thousand cigarettes being smoked every hour.
And up to seven hours per day and 50% of a family's income in some of the poorest nations
is spent simply on getting the wood to cook with.
Now, solar cookers exist, but a key limitation is that until now, you can only cook with
them when the sun was shining.
This is not when most families want to or in many cases are even able to do the cooking.
With our solar thermal fuels, we've created a new cooker that charges up during the day
by leaving it out in the sun.
And then when you want to cook, you simply flow the charged up fuel the other way and
trigger it to release the stored heat.
A five-hour charge under the sun allows the cooker to provide a 300 Celsius hot plate for
more than an hour.
Many of time to make a nice meal.
Okay, so another example of research we're doing has to do with what you know is one
of my favorite molecules.
That would be water.
Water and energy are intimately related to one another.
That's because producing and transporting fresh water takes massive amounts of energy.
The energy required for purifying, transporting, and treating water accounts for a staggering
30 to 40 percent of energy consumption in municipalities.
And it's not just about energy required to get water, it's about the water required
to get energy.
The energy security of the United States remains precariously reliant on large volumes of fresh
water for cooling.
For example, several power plants in Texas have routinely been forced to shut down lately
due to droughts, causing brownouts and widespread instabilities on the power grid.
One hundred energy cannot be decoupled from one another.
But the biggest challenge with water is in the availability of it.
Even though 70 percent of the planet is covered with water, only less than 3 percent of that
is fresh water.
Most of that is locked up as ice in polar caps and glaciers.
So this leaves less than one percent of all of Earth's water as drinkable.
And today, it's estimated that more than two billion people globally do not have regular
access to clean drinking water.
That number is expected to double to more than four billion before the year 2050.
So this is a huge problem.
Now, one way to solve this challenge would be to invent a way to take the salt out of
ocean water in order to make it drinkable.
That way, there would be plenty of water to start with since about 97 percent of all the
water on Earth is salt water.
This process is called desalination, and there are many ways to do it.
But the problem is that none of these ways is cheap enough to become a global solution
to fresh water, at least not currently.
The most efficient technique we have today is called reverse osmosis, which is based
on massive pumps to push salt water across specialized membranes that, at high enough
pressure, will allow the water to pass, but not the salt.
We saw this firsthand in our lecture on osmosis, where we watched water pass back and forth
across the membrane of the egg.
When the egg was put into salty or sugary water, the water inside the egg had a driving force
to push through the barrier and leave.
When the egg was then placed back in fresh water, the water had a driving force to go
back across the membrane the other way, inside the egg.
We learned that the cause of this driving force was due to the entropy of mixing inside
the water.
When water is mixed with something else, like salt or sugar, its entropy goes way up.
In fact, one of the earliest examples of entropy that I gave was salt dissolving in your soup.
It's not because of energy, but rather entropy that drives that dissolution.
So why is this important?
Well, to desalinate water, we need to overcome this entropy of mixing, which is quite powerful.
That's why we need those massive pumps.
We have to get to pretty high pressures to force water to be unmixed and move to lower
entropy states.
As we learned, this pressure, the one that drives the water to higher entropy, is called
the osmotic pressure.
That's why the process is called reverse osmosis, because literally we're reversing
the natural direction of the osmotic pressure of the water caused by the difference in entropy
between fresh and salt water.
And the cost of the energy required to overcome the osmotic pressure is enormous.
Fully half of the cost of the whole process lies in the energy it takes to drive those
pumps.
Now, the thing is that most of the ancillary processes involved in desalination have already
been intensively optimized over the past several decades.
But the membrane itself, the key material involved in the process, has been based on
the same technology for the past 40 years.
If we want to turn desalination into an environmentally benign and economically affordable solution
for the global water supply, we need to completely rethink the membrane.
Enter the new age of materials design and a solid understanding of thermodynamics.
We've used thermodynamics to design the ultimate membrane for water desalination.
Why do I call it the ultimate membrane?
Well, because it's the thinnest membrane that one could ever possibly make.
It's only a single atom thick.
The material that allows us to make such a membrane is called graphene.
And it's a sheet of carbon atoms that look a lot like a honeycomb lattice.
But as amazing as this single atom thick material is, I cannot desalinate water with it in its
natural form.
For that, I need to make holes in the graphene that are just the right size.
They need to be big enough to let water pass through, but small enough so they block the
salt from going through.
And that's where thermodynamics enters the picture.
You see, what we discovered is that the key to understanding and therefore designing just
the right pores lay in controlling the entropy of the water molecules as they pass through
the pores of the membrane.
Remember, entropy is a measure of the number of possible states that the system can be
in.
Well, as the water molecules pass through the pores in graphene, they can be restricted
in terms of how and what geometry they're allowed to take as they pass through.
It's a combination of the pore size and shape, as well as the specific chemistry around the
pore edge that dictates whether the water has a smaller or larger number of possible
ways it can squeeze through.
The fewer possibilities, the lower the entropy.
The greater the number, the greater the entropy.
So by tailoring the pore in just the right way, we were able to maximize the entropy
of the water while keeping the pore small enough to completely reject the salt.
The result?
A completely new membrane.
In a sense, the ultimate membrane for desalinating water.
One that maintains 100% salt rejection while providing a permeability to water that's 500
times larger than the best RO membranes available today.
Permeability, by the way, is a measure of the volume of water that can pass through
the membrane, per area of the membrane, per time and pressure applied.
And as you can imagine, higher permeability means a lot more throughput is possible for
the same membrane.
Okay.
So there, I just gave you two distinct examples from my own research, where I've used the
basic concepts of thermodynamics that we've learned in this course.
To design new technologies for energy and water.
Whether looking at possible future technologies such as these, or learning about the past
discoveries that allowed for the framework of thermodynamics to be created, I hope that
throughout this course, you've shared in my excitement as we've gone through this wonderful
subject.
Understanding thermodynamics is to understand the interactions and reactions that power
the manufacturing of steel for a building, the development of new medicines designed
to attack a harmful disease, the stars in the universe, or in the plants that grow.
It's the principles of thermodynamics that make it possible for us to understand some
of the greatest processes in the world.
That last phrase, greatest processes of the world, is a wonderful place to close this
lecture and this course.
Because by learning thermodynamics, we've learned how to understand, describe, predict,
and design the greatest processes of the world.
Many of these processes we've already learned, understood, and mastered to build the world
we live in today.
And many more of these processes are still to be discovered as we build the world of
our future.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
Thank you very much.
