So by now, we've nailed the single-component pressure-temperature phase diagram stuff pretty
well.
In the last lecture, I introduced our first binary phase diagram.
That would be a multi-component phase diagram with two components.
In this lecture, we're continuing our journey into what happens to phases of materials as
they're mixed together.
When I talked about mixing salt with water, I mentioned that at a certain point, if we
keep adding salt to water, it will saturate and no longer form a mixed solution with the
water.
Instead, after we've already added about 23% by weight salt, any additional salt will
just sink to the bottom as pure salt crystals.
We've all heard and seen that oil and water don't mix, but is that always true?
And do, say, ethanol and water always mix?
What is it that dictates how much of one thing can mix with another thing in a given phase?
In this lecture, we're going to look at the thermodynamic conditions under which mixing
is more or less likely.
And that's crucial to know not just for salt water, mixed drinks, and salad dressing, but
for any situation in which the material you're making is composed of more than one component.
Along the way, we'll discover there's something called a miscibility gap.
And depending upon the particular mixture and application we're going for, such a gap
could either offer opportunities or present difficulties.
So to mix or not to mix, that is our question.
I'm going to start by bringing to life a little thermo mixology.
Check it out.
In this demo, we're going to talk about how different liquids mix or don't mix, and sometimes
a little bit of both.
Now we're comfortable with the idea that some liquids don't mix.
What's an example?
How about oil and water?
Let's take a look at that right now.
Here I have some oil, and I'm going to pour it into this beaker.
And I think most of us have a good sense that if I pour the water in on top, it's going
to want to separate.
So you can see it kind of mixed a little bit there for just a brief minute, a brief second
really, and then it phase separated.
So you've really got a layer of water, followed by a layer of oil on top.
Now oil and water is an example of two different liquids that always separate, at least at
room temperature, no matter how much we have of either one in the mixture, and no matter
how much I try to shake it.
It's always going to go back to that phase separated state.
But in other cases, as we'll learn in this lecture, liquids are mixable, but only to
a certain concentration.
Let's take a look at that case.
So over here, I have acetic acid mixed with a little bit of water, and I've dyed it blue
so that you can see it very clearly.
And that's because I want to contrast it with this, which is ethyl acetate, and I'm going
to mix these two together.
Now notice that when I pour a little bit of ethyl acetate into the acetic acid, you can
see that it's still completely mixable.
So we see that it's just a blue liquid, and I can take a look at it here and see that
it's completely mixed.
But now I'm going to add a little bit more ethyl acetate to the mixture.
And what you see is that as I added more ethyl acetate, so I changed the concentration of
the ethyl acetate, now something interesting is starting to happen.
Now if I look at it, I can see that the two liquids are starting to separate.
Let me give a little more ethyl acetate so you can see it really clearly.
And you can see that now there's a really clear separation between the acetic acid,
which is blue, and the ethyl acetate, which is clear.
So you see for this mixture, unlike oil and water, there's a clear range of concentrations
where the two liquids are completely mixable.
And then there's also a clear miscibility gap in the phase diagram where when I add
a little bit more concentration, they completely phase separate and become unmixable.
So there we had some very different examples of mixing at room temperature and atmospheric
pressure.
How can we explain these different behaviors?
We're comfortable with the idea that some things mix, like salt and water, at least
for low concentrations of salt.
We showed the reason for that in the last lecture with a simple entropy of mixing argument
that leads to lowering of the free energy upon mixing.
We're also comfortable with the idea that some liquids don't mix, like oil and water.
I can shake it up enough so that it looks like it's mixed, but then given a little time
it reciprocates.
This can also be understood from an entropic argument, although for oil and water it's
not a simple entropy of mixing argument as we learned earlier, which would have implied
spontaneous mixing, but rather it has to do with the specific bonding structure of the
water molecules and the lower entropy shape they would have to take in order to work their
way around the oil molecules.
The mixing here is still dominated by entropy, but in this case it goes the other way, driving
the mix not to take place.
I'll come back to this example a bit later since it's a little bit complicated, but it's
an important point.
So what was going on in that demo, where we seemed to have a bit of both mixing and not
mixing.
Two liquids mixing together that are in between these two cases, mixable, but only to a certain
concentration.
Starting with the colored acid water mixture, I added ethyl acetate and it was fully mixable.
That means it can be mixed, but as I added more, it eventually became unmixable.
Now here's the cool part about this.
It's not like the salt water mixture.
It's not that I kept adding ethyl acetate and initially it mixed fully, but then after
a certain concentration the ethyl acetate saturated and just started separating.
No, that's not actually what's going on here.
Instead, what's happening is that the solution went from being fully mixable to being fully
unmixable with complete phase separation.
What's strange about it is that the unmixability occurs just by varying the concentration.
The more technically correct term in thermodynamics for mixability, by the way, is miscibility.
So how can we explain that case?
Yes, you know what I'm going to say.
You can feel it.
Of course, it's all understandable through the Gibbs free energy.
Let's turn to our thermo now to help us figure out what's happening.
Consider two generic components.
Call them component A and component B. Suppose I make powders out of these pure components
and each powder has its own molar free energy, mu naught A and mu naught B.
Now these powders may seem pretty finely ground like your morning coffee grounds, but at that
size they would still be very large chunks of pure material.
Just for reference, the typical size of a ground up particle of coffee is somewhere
between about a quarter of a millimeter in diameter for espresso to a bit over one millimeter
for the French press.
And just for fun, a cubic millimeter of coffee weighs about one half of a milligram.
And how much of that is caffeine?
Well, it varies, but somewhere around one and a half percent of a coffee bean is caffeine
by weight.
That means that each little tiny ground up particle of coffee contains about .0075 milligrams.
That sounds like just a tiny bit, but that still leaves us with a whopping 10 to the
sixteenth number of caffeine molecules in each grain of coffee.
Think about that the next time you make a nice fresh cup.
So the point is I'm mixing these two components the size of coffee grounds, which means massively
large compared to the atoms and molecules that make them.
In this case, if we assume that the A and B atoms don't feel each other through some
kind of interatomic forces between them, then the average free energy of such a mixture
is simply the fraction of component A times its chemical potential plus the fraction of
component B times its chemical potential.
And remember, we use the variable X to represent these fractions.
So if X is how much we have of B, then 1 minus X is how much we have of A. Then we write
the free energy as 1 minus X times mu naught A plus X times mu naught B. This is called
a mechanical mixture, and the molar free energy plot for such a mixture would look like the
following.
As a function of the concentration of component B, on the left we have just pure A, and the
curve starts at the chemical potential of pure A. And on the right we have pure B and
the chemical potential of pure component B. And in between, for a mechanical mixture,
we simply have a straight line.
The free energy at any point is just a weighted mean of the components.
But a solution is different from a mechanical mixture.
It's taken to describe a mixture of atoms or molecules.
Of course, that's what we had in our demo, but I wanted to build up our free energy plots
from that simplest case of the mechanical mixture.
You can see that there are two properties we need to account for in a solution.
First enthalpy change, which is due to the change in the strength and type of interactions
between components.
We've completely ignored it thus far.
And second, there is entropy change, which is due to a higher number of arrangements
of the two different components.
That is the simplest type of entropy of mixing change we covered last time, and it always
increases upon mixing.
So the change in enthalpy upon mixing could be zero, especially if what's being mixed
has similar size, shape, and bonding type.
But enthalpy change could also be positive or negative, which means it can either increase
the free energy of mixing, making mixing less favorable, or it can decrease the free energy,
making the mixing more favorable.
On the other hand, the simple entropy contribution, the one based on counting states, always ensures
a reduction in the free energy of mixing, as we discussed in the last lecture.
The key point here is that, as you can see, it is the relative contributions between these
two quantities, the enthalpy and the entropy, that determines whether mixing is favorable
or not.
For any given concentration, the difference between the true free energy of the solution
and the free energy of the mechanical mixture is known as the free energy of mixing.
This quantity is equal to the enthalpy of mixing minus temperature times the entropy of mixing.
Now we know already that the molar entropy of mixing for an ideal solution can be approximated
by minus r times the sum over the two components of the mole fraction times the natural log
of that mole fraction.
Remember that r is the ideal gas constant.
Also, if the solution is ideal, that means, just as for an ideal gas, we do not consider
interactions.
But now we want to see what happens when we do consider interactions, which for most
materials and systems are pretty important.
One of the simplest ways to include enthalpy into the game is to think about the two components
randomly mixed together on a lattice, like you see here.
Starting with a simple lattice like this is the same way we built a model for the entropy
of mixing.
For the enthalpy, what we're interested in is how the A and B components bond together
differently compared to how A components bond with A and B components bond with B.
This difference is the mixing energy and it can be approximated by the following.
The molar energy of mixing component A with component B is equal to the energy change
per AB contact relative to the pure AA or BB contacts times the number of AB contacts.
This is called a nearest neighbor model in the sense that it only considers the change
in bonding due to the immediate surroundings of each component.
What's nice about this model is that it once again just comes down to counting.
In this case, what we need to know is how often an A will be next to a B.
Now I won't go into probability theory here or anything like that, but I'll just tell
you the answer.
The probability of A being in contact with a B is proportional to the fraction of component
A times the fraction of component B.
So taken together, this simple picture leads to the following expression for the molar
free energy of mixing.
The molar delta G of mixing equals some constant times the fraction of A or X of A times the
fraction of B or X of B plus R times T times the sum of XA log XA plus XB log XB.
This second term is the entropy of mixing term we derived earlier.
With the interaction term set to zero, this is the ideal solution model.
Including that interaction term in this simple framework, we call this the regular solution
model.
The approximation that the atoms are randomly distributed is retained, so the entropy of
mixing is the same as the ideal solution, but enthalpy of mixing is not necessarily zero.
Let's take a look at what this does to the free energy of mixing as a function of concentration.
So here's that plot we had before, showing the mechanical free energy of mixing curve,
or really I should say straight line, as well as the lower free energy of mixing from entropy
in the ideal solution.
Now, when we add this enthalpy term to get the regular solution model, we have several
possibilities.
First, suppose the mixing interaction parameter is a negative number.
That means that the two components really like each other, even more than they like
themselves.
This will lower the free energy curve even more upon mixing.
Actually, it also means that even for very low temperatures, or even in the extreme case
of T equals zero, where the entropy contribution is minimal, the free energy will still favor
mixing, in this case, driven by interactions.
Next, suppose that the mixing interaction parameter is a positive number.
In that case, it means that the two components don't bond together as strongly as they bond
with themselves, and it will counter the entropy term in this model.
If the interaction term is positive but small, then the free energy of mixing will still
go down, but may soften a bit, as you can see here.
If on the other hand, the interaction parameter is a large positive number, then this can
completely change the nature of the free energy of mixing, leading to a net increase overall
as a function of concentration, as you see here.
But let's take a closer look at this case of strong interactions, where the interaction
parameter is strongly positive.
So that means the components either really like themselves, or they really don't like
each other, or both.
If we look closely, the enthalpy term from the regular solution model takes on a maximum
value right at a concentration of 50-50, which is the same concentration where entropy of
mixing takes on a minimum value.
However, the shapes of these curves are different, since one is based on a logarithm, while
the other is a simple multiplication.
This means that under certain conditions, the free energy of mixing may actually start
out by going negative, for say, low concentrations, but then turn up and become positive for intermediate
concentrations.
And then at even higher concentrations, it goes back down to become negative again, as
you can see here.
Now that's quite an interesting result, since it seems related to that miscibility experiment
I did in the demo.
Notice that in general, temperature plays a very important role here.
It moderates the relative importance of the two mixing terms.
So here's a plot showing the molar free energy of mixing versus concentration for the case
of a large positive interaction parameter.
Each of these curves corresponds to a different temperature.
At lower temperatures, the enthalpy contribution to mixing plays a more important role regardless
of its sign, although in this case, since it's positive, no mixing is possible.
While at higher temperature, entropy tends to dominate, and mixing is always favored.
So there is this range in the middle where neither term dominates.
And that's where we can have both a net decrease and increase of the free energy of mixing
as a function of concentration.
So how does that explain the miscibility behavior we observed in the demo?
Well, once we have the behavior of the free energy, then we know we can get to a phase
diagram.
So let's do that now.
Here on this side, I'm showing you that same molar energy of mixing versus temperature
for the case of positive interaction energy.
So the components don't like each other as much as they like themselves.
This is the high temperature plot where entropy dominates.
On the other side over here, I'll construct our phase diagram where I'm plotting the phases
on a temperature versus concentration plot.
By the way, this is a standard way to look at multi-component phase diagrams.
That is, by plotting the temperature versus concentration while holding pressure fixed
at some value, often standard atmospheric pressure.
OK, so on our phase diagram so far, we have that this higher temperature region corresponds
to a fully mixed phase of A and B at any concentration of B.
So we just write A plus B in solution.
But now, back to the free energy plot.
As we lower the temperature, the molar free energy curve gets more and more shallow until
eventually at some critical temperature, it no longer has a distinct minimum point.
That means any little bit cooler and the free energy is going to start going back up.
So it seems like an important moment in temperature space.
Well, I also called it a critical temperature, so that may have given it away.
But let's draw a line on our phase diagram at that temperature and then mark a point
at the concentration of B where the free energy curve went flat.
OK, now as we lower the temperature further, the free energy tends up in the middle here,
just like we saw before.
Since for those concentrations, the interaction starts to dominate over the entropy.
That means that there are two points at which the molar free energy takes on a minimum value,
and it goes up in between as well as on each side of these minima.
On the phase diagram, that means that there will be two special concentration values,
one over here and the other over there.
And as you can see, if we continue lowering the temperature and plotting these concentrations
that correspond to minimum points in the free energy diagram, then we get a very nice curve
on the phase diagram plot.
This curve marks a critical boundary between phases.
Above it, as we mentioned, components A and B are fully miscible.
To either side of this boundary, at lower temperatures, you can see that the free energy
of mixing goes down, so the components are also miscible.
Although, pretty quickly, we find ourselves in regions where the solution is mostly one
phase or the other.
Since at low concentration of component B, it's dominated by A, and at high concentrations,
it's dominated by B.
So, what's going on inside of this boundary?
That corresponds to this region here on the free energy plot.
Now, here's the key.
You would think that the free energy is simply equal to whatever this curve gives us.
Ah, you would think that.
Nature is much smarter than that, because there are two minima on this plot, so we can
draw a line in between them.
This is called a tangent line, because, well, because it's a tangent to both of those points.
The point here is that this line, which is reminiscent of the mechanical mixture, straight
line, gives the system a way to lower its overall free energy, and that's exactly what
it chooses to do.
And we know from the second law that it has no choice in the matter.
It will always lower its free energy if it can.
And here's why it can.
If we look to the regions outside of these minima in the free energy curve, mixing is
favored because unmixing would take us back up to that mechanical mixing line, which is
much higher in free energy.
On the other hand, in between the minima, if the liquid unmixes in a way that gets
it over these two minima, then it can lower its free energy.
You can see this just visually by noting the following.
At any concentration point in between the minima, the free energy of the solution where
the two components are fully mixed together at the given concentration is given by the
curve drawn.
However, there's another possibility.
The free energy of a mechanical mixture comprised of two separate solutions is lower than the
free energy corresponding to the fully mixed state.
If we take one solution with a concentration of one of those minimum points and another
solution with a concentration of the other minimum point, then the free energy corresponding
to a mechanical mixture of the two distinct solutions will be on the line connecting those
two minima points.
And this is indeed what nature does.
In this in-between region, the system can always find its lowest possible free energy
by being comprised of exclusively the two distinct solutions, one at each of the concentration
points corresponding to those two minima.
That means that the system in this region is always unmixable.
We cannot ask the material to mix together into a solution at any concentration since
the system will always go to just these two concentration points and nowhere else in between.
Since the region here is unmixable, we call this part of the phase diagram a miscibility
gap.
Here inside this boundary, we have both components A and B, but they're not able to mix freely.
I can pick any point in here, and if I draw a horizontal line out to the boundary lines,
then those points where the line intersects the boundary give us the fixed concentration
values for that temperature.
This is pretty profound if you think about it.
And I know it's also a bit strange and unintuitive, but it's really important in thermodynamics.
So let's be sure we understand this whole thing as best we can.
Let me give a few examples using this phase diagram I've just constructed.
Suppose I'm at a temperature of 300 degrees Celsius.
Well, then I'm up here in the phase diagram.
And as you can see, anywhere I travel from left to right along the 300 degrees Celsius
sign shows that the two components A and B are fully mixed in a solution.
If I add together equal amounts by mole fraction, remember, since that's how we're plotting
the horizontal axis.
If I add together equal amounts of A and B, then I'm going to get a solution of 50-50
A and B. But now let's come down in temperature to 100 degrees Celsius.
Down here, when I draw a line across, it's a different picture.
At this temperature, up until a mole fraction of 10% of component B, I can specify any concentration
of B, and the two components will mix into a solution.
If I specify that same 50-50 concentration, I will not get it.
Instead, I get a mixture of two different materials.
One is comprised of 10% mole fraction of B mixed with 90% A, and the other is made of
90% of B with 10% of A.
These two solutions are the only two materials I can have inside of this region at this temperature.
As I move along on the concentration axis, I change the relative amounts of the two solutions,
but I do not change their composition.
This is exactly what happened in our demo.
We started miscible, then I added enough of one of the components to go into the miscibility
gap, where the mixture immediately fades separated into two distinct solutions.
Then if I go to very high concentrations of component B, higher than 90% mole fraction,
well, then I'm back to being fully miscible, and we'll get a solution comprised of exactly
the concentrations that I mixed together.
So, to mix or not to mix, that is the ultimate question.
And now you know, the answer lies in the free energy, in a competition between enthalpy
and entropy, with temperature playing a key role.
Now, the regular solution model is a very simple way to incorporate interactions.
It was introduced in 1927 by a chemist named Joel Hildebrand, and it's a very nice, simple
way to understand the behavior of mixtures that show an ideal entropy of mixing, but
have a non-zero interaction energy.
And it helped us understand a whole lot about the behavior of mixtures.
However, it's not so easy to obtain all of those interaction parameters for a wide range
of different materials.
Also, this is a pretty simple model of interaction, since it only accounts for nearest neighbors.
And finally, we're still using that same ideal solution model for the entropy.
In some cases, the regular solution model does break down.
And this reminds me that I had wanted to return to the example of oil and water.
This is a mixture we all know quite well, and it's one that cannot be described by the
regular solution model.
You see, oil is a hydrophobic substance that does not bond to water, since it doesn't form
hydrogen bonds.
Remember, those are the bonds that form between the hydrogen atoms of one molecule and the
oxygen atoms of another in water.
A mixture of oil and water is a clear-cut case where component A does not like component
B as much as A and B like themselves.
Yet, because the oil molecules occupy space in the water solution, the water molecules
have to rearrange their hydrogen bonds around the oil.
And what ends up happening is that the water molecules which are trying to hydrogen bond
with each other form open, cage-like structures around the non-hydrogen-bonding oil molecules.
This cage-like structure is quite ordered in nature, since the water molecules at the
oil-water interface are much more restricted in their movement.
In this mixture, what we have is a system that wants to minimize the amount of oil-water
interface, because it means anywhere we have that kind of interface, we take away microstates,
which reduces entropy, which, as we know from the second law, is not the direction systems
like to go.
And the best way for the system to minimize the surface area of the oil-water interface
is to keep all the oil together so that the volume-to-surface area ratio is maximized.
So, in the oil-water mixture, we do not have the typical entropy of mixing argument, but
rather something more complicated.
The entropy increase associated with mixing the two components together is completely
sacrificed in favor of gaining more entropy by not allowing those open-cage-like structures
to form.
The whole thing happens in a way because of the bonding nature of hydrogen bonds and
the networks they like to form.
However, this has led to a common misconception among many students and even quite well-known
scientists.
The reason oil and water do not mix is not because of the enthalpy term.
As we've just seen, it's because of the entropy term that drives these two fluids to separate.
So, there we have it.
By adding interactions, we have been able to see how complicated mixing can be and how
to go back and forth between the molar-free energy curves and the phase diagram.
In the next lecture, we're going to take this further as we explore even more complicated
types of mixing, ones that involve the mixing of different phases of materials.
The miscibility gap here was just a warm-up.
Wait until you see what a eutectic does to a phase diagram.
