In the last lecture, we talked about how different materials, or even just different phases of
the same material, can absorb heat quite differently from one another. The heat capacity,
as we discussed, is a measure of how much heat a material absorbs or loses for degree
of temperature increase or decrease. It gives us a crucial way to correlate energy flow
with temperature, and we understood it from the point of view of degrees of freedom of
the atoms and molecules that make up the material. So, that's all nice and good. Thermal energy
flow and temperature are nice and connected now. But, what about thermal energy flow
and volume? When heat flows in or out of a material, how does it expand or contract
in response? How does that depend on the type or phase of the material, or its temperature?
That will be the topic of this lecture. Now, we've already touched upon thermal expansion
in earlier lectures. For example, when we discussed thermometers, we saw how the expansion
of a gas-liquid or solid, all corresponding to different types of thermometers, can lead
to an accurate temperature measurement. But, in this lecture, we're going to dig deeper
into how and why the volume of a material changes with changes in temperature.
I'll start with a question. One of the buildings on MIT's campus happens to be quite tall,
and similarly rectangular, on all sides, going straight up to a height of around 50 meters.
This building also happens to face exactly in line with the sun's trajectory, so that
in the morning, fully one side of the building is exposed to the sun, while the other side
is dark. While in the afternoon, it's the opposite. Now, sadly, in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
we don't get all that much sun overall, but in the summer time, we can get as much as
five hours per day. And the peak of that nice warm sunshine comes right around 2 p.m. during
the summer. So, I have the following question. At 2 p.m. on a hot summer day at MIT, what
is the shape of this building? As you may have surmised, the building has changed, because
at midday, the sun gave quite a bit of thermal energy to only one side of the building, not
the other. One side is quite hot, the other side is still cold, and because of thermal
expansion, the building is literally lopsided. Not by all that much, but still, one side
is taller and wider than the other. We'll calculate just how much a bit later in the
lecture. Okay, enough warming up. No pun intended, I swear. Let's dive into some thermal to
help us understand the concept of thermal expansion. In order to begin to understand
how materials expand with heat, just as with the heat capacity, we head all the way down
to the scale of the atom. As you may recall, temperature is related to the average translational
kinetic energy of the atoms, or molecules that make up the material, or one half mass
times average velocity squared. At this microscopic scale, temperature is intimately connected
to the motions of the particles. Now, in our last lecture on heat capacity, I discussed
the three types of degrees of freedom, translational, rotational, and vibrational. For monatomic
ideal gases, it's all about translational motion, since that's the only kind of motion
possible. And temperature is therefore entirely determined by the kinetic energy from translation
of the atoms. Now, during this lecture, I'll be focusing on liquids and solids. And I'd
like to begin with solids, since in that case, there's only one possible degree of freedom
for the atoms or molecules, namely that of vibration. Rotation and translation are not
possible in a solid. Let's think about a solid as consisting of atoms in a lattice held together
by springs. These springs are a simple but helpful way to represent the bonding that occurs
between the atoms, which we can describe as interacting through some interatomic potential.
Now, this potential is such that when the atoms are far apart, the forces tend to be
attractive. And when they're very close together, the forces tend to be repulsive. The attractive
and repulsive forces compensate each other at an equilibrium distance that represents
the lowest potential energy point and stable equilibrium of the system. So you can kind
of see why springs are a good analogy for what holds atoms together in a solid. This
picture encourages us to think of the atoms vibrating back and forth as soon as they have
any sort of thermal energy. By the way, how fast are the atoms vibrating on average in
a solid? And how far do they travel during the vibration? Well, the atomic scale is set
at the scale of the angstrom, or 10 to the minus 10 meters. And a typical bond distance
between atoms is around a few angstroms, depending on the material. When the atoms vibrate at
a given temperature, they typically don't move as far as a full bond distance, but rather
on the order of one-tenth that distance. So the distance an atom actually travels during
its vibration is roughly on the order of 10 to the minus 11 meters, or a tenth of an
angstrom. And the speed of the atoms during these vibrations? Remember that for a gas
at modest temperatures, the atoms or molecules are kicking around at very high speeds, thousands
of miles per hour. In a solid, you might first think the atoms are moving much slower since
they're not as free. But if the springs are stiff, that is, if the bonding is strong, which
is the case for most solids, then motion is actually extremely fast. In a typical solid,
even at just room temperature, the atoms are vibrating at a frequency of 10 to the 13th
hertz. That means it stretches out and in 10 trillion times each and every second. That's
fast. Okay, let's consider the simplest case of just two atoms held together by a spring.
In this case, they would oscillate back and forth around some central point, the point
at which no force is pushing or pulling on them, and the spring has no tension on it.
You may have learned this in an introductory physics course. When we have a spring system
like the one shown here, the motion of the atoms back and forth is called harmonic. That
means that if I draw a plot of the kinetic energy versus the distance between the atoms,
I'd get a picture that looks like this. It's a relationship that goes as y equals x squared,
and it's the basic kinetic and potential energy functions for a spring. So that means if
I'm approximating the vibrations of atoms in a solid as connected to springs, then I
can think of these vibrations as being roughly harmonic in nature. No tension, no force pushing
or pulling. Let's take this picture and incorporate temperature into it. If I'm at zero temperature,
then the atoms wouldn't be moving at all. So they just sit still in that equilibrium
position where the spring likes to be when it has no tension. As I slowly heat up this
harmonic oscillator, the atoms move together and apart, together and apart, oscillating
about that same equilibrium position as they trade back and forth kinetic and potential
energy. As I continue to increase the temperature, the total energy increases and the atoms will
vibrate now very quickly, stretching out farther and farther and traveling with more
speed, still about that same equilibrium point. But wait a minute, I thought this model was
going to tell me something about thermal expansion. If I look at what's happening, the higher
the temperature, the faster the vibrations. But the center of the vibration is the same.
That means that on average, these atoms are not going to be any further apart from one
another. So on average, the material cannot have expanded with the temperature. What
does this mean? Well, it means that the simple model of atoms vibrating as if attached by
springs is not good enough to explain thermal expansion. If we plot the potential energy
of those two atoms undergoing harmonic motion on a spring, we would see that y equals x
squared dependence. And actually, it turns out that this is a pretty good description
of real materials, but only when the atoms are very, very close to their equilibrium
position. Instead, the potential energy of atoms in a real material looks something like
this. See, at the minimum of the potential, it's pretty harmonic looking. But as soon
as we move into closer distances, the potential shoots up very quickly. And as we move out
to farther distances, it goes up much, much more slowly. So the key point here is that
the potential energy between atoms in a real material is asymmetric about the equilibrium
point. And that is what causes thermal expansion. If I now go back to zero temperature, we see
that once again, we'd be at the same equilibrium point and have no motion. But now, as I increase
the temperature, just as before, the atoms move both more quickly as well as farther
apart with each oscillation. But now notice what's happening. As temperature increases,
the oscillations lead to much more change in how far apart the atoms can get compared
to how close they can get, which changes very little. The equilibrium distance shifts as
the atoms spend more time at distances greater than the original spacing. The repulsion at
short distances is greater than the corresponding attraction at far distances. So the average
position of the oscillating atoms increases as the oscillations become larger. This is
the atomic scale picture of thermal expansion. And as you can see, it occurs only because
of the asymmetry in the way atoms interact with one another. Okay. Now that we've spent
some time hanging out with the atoms in a solid to understand the fundamental basis for thermal
expansion, let's move on to some quantifying. I want you to get an appreciation for how
important thermal expansion is in our daily lives. It may not seem like a material is
expanding very much compared to its original size, but especially for non-elastic materials
like steel, concrete, and bricks. That would be much of the stuff we use to build things.
Building just a small expansion can cause massive changes. That's why when buildings
are designed, so-called thermal expansion joints must be used. And the same for concrete
highways, railroad tracks, most types of walls and bridges, just to name a few important examples.
So how do we quantify and calculate the thermal expansion of materials? Well, we've understood
why it happens, and now how do we incorporate it into our thermodynamic world?
First off, it's such an important property that we give it its own variable, called the
thermal expansion coefficient. For many situations, to a good approximation, the thermal expansion
along any dimension of an object is linearly proportional to the temperature change.
If an object has an initial length L along some direction at some temperature T, then
that length increases by an amount delta L, when the temperature changes to T plus delta T.
The coefficient of linear expansion we call alpha, and it's defined as delta L divided by L over
delta T. It's the fractional change in length per change in temperature. Often we'll see this
written in terms of the change in length, so we have delta L equals alpha times L times delta T.
In many experiments, we observe that alpha is only weakly dependent on temperature,
at least for small changes in temperature. So often alpha is just taken as a constant for a
given phase of a given material. I'll come back to this point in a bit. In many cases,
we're only interested in the net volume change of the material, as opposed to its change in each
direction. So similar to the linear expansion coefficient, we write a volume expansion coefficient,
and we write that with the variable beta. Beta equals the fractional change in volume
divided by the change in temperature. The change in volume can then be written as beta times the
initial volume V times the change in temperature. For a solid, the average coefficient of volume
expansion is roughly three times the average linear expansion coefficient, so beta equals three times
alpha. This assumes that the average coefficient of linear expansion of the solid is the same in
all directions, or as I just discussed, that the material is isotropic. Okay, but regardless of
this relation between linear and volumetric thermal expansion, if we're talking about only very small
changes, then we can write our expression as a differential. So the volumetric thermal expansion
coefficient is defined as 1 over volume times the partial derivative of volume with respect to
temperature. And it's a partial derivative since we take it while holding other thermodynamic
variables like pressure or number of moles fixed. Now, holding these other variables fixed makes
sense if you think about it. Take pressure, for example. It would become quite complicated if the
definition I just showed you included effects like increased pressure upon heating, which would in
turn act to prevent the material from expanding as much. But from this definition of thermal expansion
as a derivative, you can see that it's simply equal to the slope at any given point of a plot
of the volume versus temperature of a material. And it's now easy to take into account any
temperature dependence of beta since the way we would compute the volume change is by integrating
this expression over the temperature change. Let's take a look at the molar volume versus
temperature plot for a given material. Remember that when I say molar volume, it's just the volume
per mole of the material. In this case, we're looking at a polymer known as polyethylene.
It is the most basic plastic in the world today, with global production closing in
on 100 million tons of the SUF per year. As we look at the volume versus temperature plot for
polyethylene, first of all, notice that there's a huge jump in volume that's right at the temperature
where the material melts. Or if you think of it as going from right to left, it's where it freezes.
This is the temperature point at which the material undergoes a phase transition. A topic
we'll be turning to in detail in our next several lectures. But for now, just note that a large
volume change such as this often occurs at a phase transition. Remember how we said that the
thermal expansion coefficient is equal to the slope of this curve? Well, one thing you can see
is that at a phase transition, the thermal expansion coefficient is simply not well defined.
Since the slope tends towards infinity. So we like to use expansion coefficients to understand
changes in the given phase of a material rather than during phase changes. And within one particular
phase, either the solid or liquid, you can see that indeed the volume is changing with respect
to temperature. But the expansion coefficient is pretty close to constant, since the curves
are quite close to linear in each regime. When the curve is linear, then the slope of that curve,
which is the thermal expansion coefficient, is of course a constant. Now the last point I'll make
about this plot of molar volume versus temperature is that as you can see, not only is the volume
higher for the liquid than for the solid, but the slope is higher as well. Indicating that the
expansion coefficient is larger for the liquid than for the solid. In fact, the difference is often
as much as a factor of 10 or even 100 times larger for the liquid. We can understand this
difference by thinking back to our atoms and degrees of freedom. In the liquid, unlike the solid,
we now have accessible all three types of degrees of freedom, vibration, rotation, and translation.
As the temperature of the liquid increases, all of these degrees of freedom increase in energy,
and in particular the presence of the translational motion leads to larger average volume expansion.
Okay, before moving on to a few example problems, I want to mention another important
thermodynamic property that's quite similar in spirit to thermal expansion, namely compressibility.
Remember that we said we wanted to hold pressure fixed in order to understand the effects of
increasing temperature on volume, but what is the effect of increasing pressure? Intuitively,
we feel that if we squeeze on something, it'll compress, and indeed mathematically,
we can define this effect in the same manner as the expansion coefficient. The isothermal
compressibility is defined as minus 1 over the volume times the partial derivative of the volume
with respect to pressure, holding everything else like temperature and number of moles fixed.
The compressibility of a material is its fractional decrease in volume
that occurs with pressure at constant temperature. That means that if we plot the volume versus
pressure for a material, the compressibility is equal to the slope of that curve, just as
thermal expansion was the slope of volume versus temperature. Now, I won't dwell on compressibility
since I think you can understand it pretty easily now that we've worked through thermal
expansion, but one point I'll mention is that the compressibility of materials often tends to be
quite small, something we can understand by looking back at our potential energy plot
for the oscillating two atoms. It's going to take a lot more energy to push these atoms closer
together than it is to pull them apart. Now, what we've talked about so far regarding expansion
with temperature corresponds to the typical behavior of materials, but I couldn't possibly
go through a whole lecture on thermal expansion without at least mentioning one highly unusual
case. That would be the stuff that we humans as well as the Earth's surface are mostly made of,
namely water. As I mentioned, liquids generally increase in volume with increasing temperature,
and they have coefficients of volume expansion that are at least 10 times greater than those of
the solids. The liquid water near its freezing point is an exception. Take a look at a plot
of the density versus temperature for water, and notice that there's a peak in the plot around
4 degrees Celsius. That means that as the temperature of water goes from 0 to 4 degrees,
it actually contracts, leading to the density increase you see here. After 4 degrees, water
then expands with temperature, and the density starts to decrease. This behavior of the density
of water near its freezing point is extremely unusual, and it has to do with the way in which
water molecules bond together. The particular type of bonding that occurs from one molecule to another
for water is known as hydrogen bonds, and combined with the shape of the water molecule,
that makes it so that the molecules can pack in more closely as a liquid than as a solid
at these near-freezing temperatures. This is in contrast to most other materials that exist.
But the weird thermal expansion behavior of water is nothing less than essential to life as we know
it. Think about the way in which water in a pond freezes. We know that it freezes from the top
first to the bottom. This is why for so many marine life environments, life can survive
during the winter. The surface freezes over, but in many cases underneath, an ice layer remains
liquid water, so those fishies don't turn into blocks of ice. But why is this the case? Well,
we can use the unusual thermal expansion behavior of water to understand it.
When the temperature outside drops from, say, 7 to 6 degrees Celsius, the surface water also
cools. But due to the density profile of water, the density increases during this cooling, which
in turn makes the surface water more dense than the water below it. As a result, the surface water
sinks, and warmer water from below comes up to the surface to be cooled next. When the temperature
outside goes to 4 degrees Celsius, the density of the surface water is at a maximum. But then,
as the outside temperature goes from 4 degrees down to 0 degrees Celsius, the density starts to
decrease, making the surface water expand as it cools. Eventually, the mixing of top layer with
deeper layers stops, and the surface water freezes into ice. However, the ice remains on the surface
because ice is less dense than water. Once a nice strong surface ice layer is formed,
it serves as a fantastic thermal insulator from cold air, which dramatically slows down
any subsequent cooling of the water. Meanwhile, the water near the bottom remains at a toasty
4 degrees Celsius, since that's the maximum density, a thermodynamic fact that makes the
fish quite happy. So, in the last minutes of this lecture, I'd like to show you a little
thermal expansion, and then we'll come back to that problem of the of the building on MIT's campus,
as well as see some last examples of thermal expansion in our daily lives.
Let's look first hand at how heat can change the physical volume of a material. What happens
when we add heat to a material? Let's take a look. Here, I have a ring and I have a ball,
and at room temperature, which is where we are right now, the ball can easily slide through
the ring back and forth. Now, let's heat up the ball and see what happens. So, I'm going to hold
the ball above a flame like this, and so we're raising the temperature of the material that
makes up the ball, probably not by a whole lot, maybe by 50 degrees Celsius overall. So, now I'm
going to take the same ring and I'm going to try to put the ball through it, and you can see very
clearly that it simply doesn't fit. I cannot put it through the same hoop. The volume of the ball
has expanded. Now, that was a single material. So, that's one material that undergoes thermal
expansion, but what if we had two materials stuck together? Well, that's exactly what I have here.
I have two different metals bonded together to form this strip here. This is called a bimetal
strip. Simply two different metals stuck together, but the key here is that they have two different
thermal expansion coefficients. So, when heat enters into this material, they try to expand at
different rates, and the combined strip that's bonded together will bend. Let's take a look.
Okay, so now you can see that when I add heat into this material, it doesn't just expand uniformly,
but instead the whole material wants to bend. That's because of the different thermal expansion
coefficients of the two different materials, and as soon as the heat is taken away, you can see
that it wants to start to bend back. Now, we can use this kind of bending that happens in bimetal
strips to actually do useful things, like for example, measure the temperature in a thermostat
or make a system oscillate back and forth. Take a look at this switch that I've built
using simply the same technology, a bimetal strip that reacts to heat and bends when it's heated.
So, I'm going to plug this in, and the light will go on, and the light is emitting heat,
and that heat is going to make this bimetal strip bend just so slightly, which then turns off the
circuit and turns off the light. Then, when the light is turned off, the heat isn't present,
the bimetal strip cools back down, and it will reconnect with the circuit, and the light will
go back on. So, you can see now the bimetal strip is just barely making contact, closing the circuit,
opening the circuit, and what we have is a switch that reacts to heat. That's what's in
a lot of thermostats in a lot of homes around the world. So, there you have it. What we're
seeing is at the atomic scale, how when you have an asymmetry in the way atoms see each other,
the way atoms are bonded together, that causes an expansion of the material when heat is added,
and we've seen that with several different examples, a single material and two different
materials bonded together. Let's put some numbers to that problem about the rectangular
building on MIT's campus that I mentioned in the beginning of the lecture. Well,
that's actually pretty easy, since it's about the steel. For a temperature change of, say,
25 degrees Celsius, the thermal expansion of the side of the building facing the sun
will be about 1.5 centimeters. That may not sound like much, but it would be plenty to
crack open the building if it's not constructed with thermal expansion in mind. And there are so
many other examples that we experience all the time, but perhaps are not aware of. An airplane
can expand by 10 to 20 centimeters during flight because of the heating it undergoes
due to the friction with the air. Running hot water over a tight metal lid on a glass jar
makes it easier to open, because the thermal expansion coefficient of the metal
is larger than that of the glass. And here's a fun one. The old-fashioned pendulum clocks,
which back in the day were all the rage, that would be the day as in hundreds of years ago,
does a pendulum clock in Phoenix run slower or faster than the exact same pendulum clock in
Boston? I'll let you work that one out on your own. Or how about this one that most of us have
heard? Never fill your gas tank up all the way, especially on a hot day. But why not? It's because
of thermal expansion, of course. When the cold gasoline is pumped into the car's tank, it first
cools the steel of the tank's container. But then, both the container and the gas inside
quickly heat up to the outside air temperature. Both expand, but the thermal expansion coefficient
of gasoline is much larger than that of the steel tank. So, it expands much more and overflows if
the tank is full. Thermal expansion is also why the reliability of the gasoline gauge itself
can vary from summer to winter. When you see that fateful gasoline light and hear the beep in your
car, it means you only have a little bit left. But the gauge reads the volume of the tank,
and in the summer, the same mass of gasoline will take up a lot more volume due to thermal expansion
compared to the winter. So, when you see the light come on, you've probably got a lot less time
until you're stranded in the summer than in the winter. So, those are just some of the many examples
of thermal expansion in our lives. And it's even more literally in our lives when we consider
medical technology. Most hip or knee implants need to be replaced after some time, partly because
the metal doesn't bond well enough with the bone. A lot of research is going on to try to find
better materials that could coat the metal and provide a stronger bond to the bone. However,
a major challenge in this research is to find coatings that also have a thermal expansion
coefficient similar to the metal. If not, the coating will crack, and the whole implant would
crack off of the bone and fail. And of course, then there's one of the greatest places to see
material science in action, the dentist. Fillings for your teeth have different thermal expansion
coefficients than your natural tooth enamel, which can cause pain or cracks when eating foods with
low or high temperatures. That's why nowadays it's much more common to get porcelain fillings
as opposed to gold or silver, as they have coefficients of expansion much closer to that of
your teeth. So, whether we're talking about your house, your car, your teeth, or your hip replacement,
I hope you've got a nice appreciation for how materials expand when heated. It's an essential
component of life and a key ingredient in thermodynamics.
