Hello, and welcome to our lecture on heat engines and the ultimate limit of efficiency
in making heat do work. This will bring us back to the earlier lectures, especially lectures
5, 6 and 7, where we learned about the ideal gas, the first law, and the equivalence of
work and heat. We also learned in our lecture on the second law that one way to state the
second law is that we can never fully convert heat into work. In this lecture, we'll dig
deeper into this statement and show, by way of what is known as the Carnot Limit, the fact
that the efficiency limit of this conversion is set not by temperature of the heat we
put into the engine, but rather by the temperature difference between the heat we put in and
the cold side somewhere else. It's a pretty cool concept when you think about it, and
it's a bit counterintuitive. Heat alone cannot do any work. It has to be in the context of
a temperature difference. We'll learn all about why that's the case in this lecture.
Now, you may be wondering, why didn't I do this heat engine stuff back when I covered
the first law and work heat equivalence? Well, I wanted to cover engines this late in the
course because this lecture is focused on heat engines, but the next lecture will be
all about how we can get work out of materials in other ways. And, you may have guessed it,
if we want to put materials to work, we really need to know what their properties are, which,
in case you've skipped to this point in the course, has been the topic of the last five
lectures. So, why is the heat engine so important? Well, if you ever have been in a car, a train,
or a plane, or for that matter plugged anything into an outlet to use electricity, or turned
on a light, just to name a few examples, well then you've used a heat engine. In fact, heat
engines are the foundation of the Industrial Revolution. And because they're so important,
they're also a big reason for the existence of the entire field of thermodynamics itself.
I mean, the heat engine is about as literal as we can get to heat in motion, the very definition
of thermodynamics. Humans mastered fire a million years ago. Give or take a half million. So, we've
known how to make heat for a very long time. But, it wasn't until just 500 years ago that we really
began to understand how to harness that heat to do mechanical work in an engine. Explosive heat,
such as that from gunpowder, was used in weapons much earlier. But for the purpose of today's
discussion, I'm talking here about continuous, repeatable mechanical work, as opposed to an
explosion. So, trying to figure out how to get the most value out of heat to do the most work
has been a major topic of enormous importance for centuries. Let's take a moment to check out
our very own heat engine. So, in this demo, we're going to talk about the Sterling engine.
This is a good example of different thermodynamic processes acting on a material. In this case,
the material is simply air. With a temperature gradient, work can be extracted. Now, here is a
Sterling engine and the working fluid inside is the air inside of this container. And what I'm
going to do is I'm going to put the Sterling engine on top of a cup of hot water. And now,
what's happening is that the steam from the water is touching the bottom of this container. So,
we have the bottom side that's getting hot while the top side stays at roughly room temperature.
So, the bottom side is getting close to 100 degrees Celsius, whereas the top side is room
temperature, which is about 25 degrees Celsius. That's the temperature difference of 75 degrees
Celsius. So, let's see if it's gotten hot enough. And I'm going to give it a little start.
And you can see that it keeps going. This is an engine that's turning heat, or really,
I should say, a temperature difference into mechanical motion. Now, what if we wanted this
engine to go faster? What would we do? Well, one thing we can do is we can make the hot
hotter, because, again, it's all about how big of a difference in temperature we have.
But in this case, this Sterling engine would actually, some of the parts inside would start
to break if I got the hot part above 100 degrees Celsius. So, instead, I can make it go faster
by making the cold side colder. Let's take a look at what happens when I put a little bit of ice
on top of the engine.
Notice that with just a little bit of ice on top, it's actually spinning
a lot faster. So, I made it colder, and I got more work out of it. Why? Because I just made
one side colder. And so, the temperature difference is closer to 100 degrees Celsius,
since ice is 0 degrees Celsius, than 75 degrees Celsius. I've increased the temperature difference,
and that's what matters in terms of how much work I can get out of a heat engine.
Now, the Sterling engine is an example of a thermodynamic cycle, where the pressure
and volume and temperature are all changing in the phase diagram. There are different ways
to do this, though, in order to extract work, mechanical work, from heat. There are many
different kinds of thermodynamic cycles that can be used to do that. So, here I have an example
of two different fuels that are used in two very different cycles to make your cargo. First,
I have ethanol, and I'm going to take a little bit of ethanol and put it on top of this piece of
metal, and I'll show you that if I light this now on fire, you see the ethanol lights on fire.
You can see the flame there that's burning the ethanol. That's what's happening in gasoline car
engines. That's how the heat is coming into the system. However, if I take a different kind of
fuel, so, let's take biodiesel, and I'm going to put some drops of biodiesel onto this piece of
metal, now you see if I try to light that on fire, it simply doesn't light. It's not flammable.
However, if I take this piece of metal with the biodiesel on it, and I raise its temperature,
okay, I'm going to put it on this hot plate, and I'm going to leave it there for a little bit,
just to raise its temperature, then what we're doing is by raising its temperature,
we're bringing it into a different part of pressure versus temperature phase space.
So it's in a different part of the phase diagram when I raise the temperature.
I'm going to put it down here, and notice what happens if I change its pressure.
That's biodiesel. So there was a piston doing mechanical work by moving up and down
once I applied heat to the bottom of it. Now, I could have added more heat,
and it might have run a little faster, but it's also limited by the fact that that little piece
of foam can't take high temperatures. So instead what I did is I put something colder on the top,
and then you saw that it got a lot faster. Same amount of heat was put in just a bigger temperature
difference across the engine. As I mentioned, even though we intuitively feel that hotter must be
better, it's this difference that turns out to be the key in the efficiency of a heat engine.
So making the cold side colder was just as effective. Let's now dig into some thermo
to figure out what's happening under the hood. No pun intended, I swear, in this heat engine.
First, let's define more clearly what we mean by heat engine. This is important since the term
heat engine is pretty generic, and as we'll see, there are a wide variety of heat engines,
from the ideal case of Carnot, to the sterling engine we just saw in the demo,
to the Otto cycle that's commonly used in your car engine. In general, the term heat engine refers
simply to the conversion of thermal energy into useful work. The heat could come from a wide
variety of sources, like gasoline, electricity, or the sun, to name just a few. And the work is done
for us by what is often called a working fluid. This could be an ideal gas, as in the cases
we'll talk about today, but it could also be many other materials as well, like water, for example.
In general, for a heat engine, we assume that there is an operating cycle. That means that the
operation of the engine can be sustained, and that the working substance, such as our gas,
must be able to follow a cycle that can be repeated over and over again.
Now, in a real engine, that would be, well, all the ones ever made in this world that do useful
work for us, the processes are non-ideal. As you may recall from other lectures, this means that
they are irreversible. This means that for any engine, we always expect dissipated forces to be present.
Now, the reason I'm telling you this is because I want to first talk about the very non-real case
of an ideal engine. In this case, we assume that all processes are reversible, so there are no
dissipated forces whatsoever. And just as we've done before, by first understanding the ideal case,
we take our first step towards building the knowledge and formalism we'll need to understand
the real case. Such an ideal engine is called a Carnot engine. Here's the basic cycle of a
Carnot engine, shown here in this image. First, we have some source of heat, which we call the hot
reservoir. You can think of this as some vast resource of thermal energy. In the car, it comes
from making fire by burning gasoline. In the demo, it came from the hot plate that was plugged into
the wall. This hot reservoir is held at some temperature, say T sub H, and it's in contact
with the working substance. For the demo, this temperature was set by setting the dial on the
hot plate. As a result of being in contact with a thermal reservoir, the working substance absorbs
some amount of heat. As I mentioned in my examples for the rest of today, I'll use an ideal gas as
our working substance. So, let's call the amount of heat energy absorbed by the gas in a cycle Q
sub H, since it comes from the hot reservoir. Then, that ideal gas converts a part of the heat
absorbed into useful work. Let's call that amount of work W. Any unused heat, that is the heat that
did not get converted into work, goes into the cold reservoir. Let's call that unused or rejected
heat Q sub C, since it goes to a thermal reservoir at a lower temperature. And yes,
in our brilliant labeling scheme, we'll let the temperature of the cold reservoir be called
T sub C. So, I'd like you to notice something really important here. How did I know that heat
would flow from the hot reservoir to the to the working fluid, and that any unused heat would
flow to the cold reservoir? Well, if you've put on your second law hat, then you've got it, because
we know from the second law that heat can only flow from a hot body to a cold body,
and not the other way around. The thermal efficiency of a heat engine can now be defined
based on the simple process we just put forth. The efficiency will be the ratio of the network
done by the engine during one cycle to the energy input at the higher temperature during the cycle.
So, efficiency equals W divided by Q sub H. But we also already said that Q sub C is whatever
heat was not used for work. So that means that W by definition is equal to Q sub H minus Q sub C.
That means the efficiency is equal to Q sub H minus Q sub C divided by Q sub H, which we can
rewrite as 1 minus Q sub C over Q sub H. So, the efficiency of a heat engine is simply the ratio
of what we gain, which is the work done by the engine, to what we give, which is the energy
transfer at the higher temperature. It turns out that this ratio is typically a lot less than 1.
So, most heat engines operate at much, much lower efficiencies than 100%.
Did you know that your car engine only operates at an efficiency of about 25%? That means that
from all of that precious ancient sunlight that we're extracting from the ground to put into our
cars and trucks, we're only using a measly one fourth of it to make them move. The other three
fourths is simply wasted as extra heat that's not used for anything. Notice from our efficiency
equation that in order to truly get to an efficiency of 100%, we would need for Q sub C to be zero.
This implies that a perfect engine cannot expel any energy whatsoever to the cold side and all
of the input energy would be converted to work and the image would look more like this.
But as I mentioned, this is not at all possible. In order to see why we need to get a little bit
more concrete here, beyond the abstract image of T's and Q's I've used so far. But anyway,
by now I hope that you're just itching to get this process up onto a PV diagram. I know I am,
especially since our working fluid is an ideal gas. And in order to make this all more concrete,
I'll also bring back our piston from lecture five. Remember how much fun we had with that?
Where we placed and removed the little pebbles on top to get a sense of the reversible mechanical
work done by the gas inside? Well, here it is, back in all of its glory. Remember, our system here
is a cylinder fitted with a movable piston at one end, where the cylinder walls and the piston
are thermally non-conducting. But the bottom of the cylinder allows for thermal energy to transfer.
Now, in equilibrium, the gas is exerting some pressure on the walls of the container,
including on the piston. And the downward force from the weight of those pebbles exactly cancels
this force from the gas pressure, leaving the piston at some given position. But this is not
an engine yet. For that, we need a temperature difference. So let's take a look at what happens
when we bring our two thermal reservoirs at temperatures Th and Tc into contact with this
system. Now, there are four key processes that we need to consider for the Carnot cycle.
Two of them involve an isothermal path. So they occur at constant temperature.
And the other two are adiabatic. So they occur with no heat transfer.
Since this is the ideal case, we assume here that all processes are reversible.
So, we start at point A on the PV diagram. Remember, this diagram is telling us what's
happening to our ideal gas, or the working fluid of our engine. The piston at this point
might look something like this. Now, we contact the gas from the bottom by our hot reservoir
held at temperature Th. And what happens is that an amount of energy QH is transferred to the gas.
This is a process that makes the gas expand to a new volume since we've raised its temperature,
in turn, causing the piston to move upwards, as you can see in our drawing,
and bringing us over to point B on the phase diagram. So what's going on in the process,
A to B? Well, for one thing, it's isothermal, since the gas is in contact with the hot reservoir
at a fixed temperature Th. That means the gas is at this fixed temperature during the process.
Also, during this process, the gas does work on the piston, since its volume increases when
the temperature increases. And what about the internal energy? Well, it's a good time to recall
from our lecture on ideal gases that the internal energy of an ideal gas is only a function of
the temperature, well, and the number of molecules, but certainly not a function of the volume and
the pressure. And since we said this process is isothermal, and we're also assuming here that no
gas escapes from the container, then we know that the internal energy does not change in going from
A to B. That's pretty cool, since from the first law, we also know that the change in internal
energy of a given process is equal to the heat plus work done by the system during that process,
or delta U equals Q plus W. Let's remind ourselves of the sign convention we use. Work done to the
system is positive, and heat added to the system is positive. In this case, we have work being done
by the system and heat added to the system, so Q will have a positive value and W will have a
negative value. And since delta U is zero for this process, that means that for this process,
for this part of our ideal engine cycle, the amount of heat added to the piston is exactly
equal to the amount of work done by the system, since they must sum to zero. And as a reminder,
the work done by the process is also equal to the area under this PV curve.
Okay, so that was the first step. Now let's see what happens next. To get from point B to what we'll
call point C, the base of the cylinder is removed from the hot thermal reservoir. And once it's
removed, let's suppose that the bottom is made to be thermally insulating, just like we're assuming
for the rest of the cylinder. Now what happens is that the gas keeps expanding, but now it expands
adiabatically, since no thermal energy is allowed to enter or leave the system. So we have Q equals
zero, since it's an adiabatic process. You can think of this process as one in which the gas is
still hot, and we're removing little pebbles one at a time. And as we do, the hot gas can do work
on the piston, increasing its volume while lowering both its pressure and temperature.
In effect, what is happening in this idealized adiabatic process is that internal energy from the
gas is being converted into mechanical work. As a result, more work is done by the gas,
and the temperature goes down, let's say to Tc. And next, we do the first process, but in reverse.
Of course, we have to compress the piston back if we want this cycle to be a cyclic process.
So we're going to do this compression along another isotherm, in this case at the lower
temperature Tc. So we go back up the PV diagram over to what I'll call point D. Notice that for
this process, since I want the temperature to be constant, I'll need to put back a reservoir in
contact with the bottom. But this is a different reservoir than in the first case, since it's at
a lower temperature. Again, you can think of the compression as happening by adding pebbles one at
a time. So we can picture the process as being slow and reversible. During this C to D part of the
path, the bottom is no longer an insulator, but rather in contact with a reservoir. So once again,
the gas can either give heat or take heat to and from the reservoir. Since we're compressing the gas,
it would have wanted to heat up, but instead that thermal energy, we call it Qc, is given over to
the reservoir. The work in this case is not done by the gas, but rather to the gas by the piston,
and it's equal to the area under this curve. And finally, to get D back to A, once again,
we imagine the base of the cylinder being replaced by a thermally insulating wall.
The gas is compressed further, but now it's compressed adiabatically,
meaning there's no heat flow out or into the system. The temperature of the gas therefore
increases back to T sub H, and along the way, again, work is done to the gas by the piston,
pushing down on it. Again, think about continuing to put those pebbles on to compress it,
just up until the point when we're back to our original isotherm at T H.
So we made it through the Carnot cycle. And what does this get us? Well, here's the reason we're
doing it. This is the absolute best we can ever do. It's an ideal heat engine that starts and ends
in the same place. It's based on a reversible process, and it gives us a total amount of work
equal to the area enclosed by the path from A to B to C to D. The change in internal energy
is zero for the full cycle. Remember, internal energy is a state function. So if we return
to the same place in PV space, it must have the same value. And since the internal energy
change is zero, the network done by the gas over one cycle must equal the net energy transferred
into the system, which is the difference Q H minus Q C. But the beauty of the Carnot cycle
is that since we now have a set of concrete processes, as I outlined above, we can actually
compute these cues for each of the processes. And as a result, we can arrive at a very important
result from here. I won't go through all the math, but you've already learned what you need to know
since it just comes down to integrating the PDV state functions over each process in order to
find the work term. Remember that the logarithm of the ratio of initial and final volumes that we
found for the isothermal expansion way back in lecture five? Well, that comes back among a few
other things. But the point is that by computing explicitly the work and heat terms for each process,
we find that for this cycle, the ratio of Q H over Q C is equal to the ratio of T H over T C.
And that means that the efficiency of a heat engine, which remember we wrote down as one minus Q
C over Q H, can be written for a Carnot engine as one minus T C over T H. Now that is pretty cool.
The efficiency of the ultimate ideal case heat engine is only dependent on the temperature
difference between hot and cold reservoirs. Notice that if the temperature difference is zero,
then we have one minus one, which is an efficiency of zero. We can understand this intuitively.
No temperature difference means there cannot be heat flow. And if there's no heat flow,
well, then basically nothing can happen. On the other hand, we can approach an efficiency of exactly
one, or in other words, a perfect engine if the temperature of the hot side tends towards infinity
or the cold side tends towards zero. But you can see that neither of these limits is actually possible.
In our demo, the temperature difference was at first about 100 degrees Celsius from the hot plate
minus, say, 25 degrees Celsius for the air temperature. Of course, as we know,
this is not the scale we should use when solving a thermal problem. For that, we have to use Kelvin.
That gives us an efficiency limit of one minus 298 over 373, or around 20%.
Now, the sterling engine in the demo is not quite as efficient as a Carnot engine,
for reasons I won't go into here. But I encourage you to go ahead and search for all the different
types of engine cycles, and basically the amount to variations of the four stages on the PV path,
which you're now well equipped to understand. But what Carnot does tell, does, is it tells us
that absolute theoretical limit to the efficiency of making heat do work. At first, this value is 20%.
When I put ice on the top side, I lowered TC down from 298 to below 273 Kelvin.
So the theoretical limit of the heat engine just went up. That's why it's sped up. The actual engine,
though, didn't operate anywhere near the sufficiency since it's in no way an ideal case.
Now, in most cases, like in our car or in a power plant, TC is near room temperature.
It would be highly impractical to maintain a cold reservoir of ice in real applications,
because that alone would require enormous amounts of energy. So, since the cold side is stuck around
300 Kelvin for most cases, it's usually the goal in such engines to increase the efficiency by
increasing TH. Now, there are many, many losses in real engines. So I want to re-emphasize that the
Carnot limit, based only on temperature difference, is often not the actual operating efficiency
of a heat engine. For example, in a real engine, say the one in your car, there's a very short
time interval for each cycle. I mean, at 1,000 RPMs, those pistons are firing more than 16 times
per second. The result is that the gas inside of them, which for a car engine is simply air,
doesn't quite make it all the way up to that high temperature of the hot reservoir.
And similarly, there's not enough time for it to get all the way back down to the low temperature
of the cold reservoir. That's just one example of the complications that arise when we move from
the ideal case of Carnot to a real working engine. So, in terms of how heat can be converted to
work, we've made our way from perfect to ideal to real. And I hope that in this lecture, you've
gotten a good sense of one of the single most important thermodynamic cycles of human history.
There are only a few other points I'd like to make here as I wrap up. First of all, I didn't
have time to go into the details of heat pumps, which are different than the heat engines we
talked about today. But as you might imagine, a heat pump effectively works in the reverse
of a heat engine. Instead of putting heat, instead of putting in heat to do work, we put in work
to move heat. And second, and this is really important, I want to be sure that there's no
confusion over the first and second laws and how they apply to this problem. The first law is a
statement of energy conservation. Delta u equals q plus w. The change in the internal energy of a
system occurs because of energy transferred to or from the system by heat or by work or by both.
Notice that the first law does not make any distinction between whatever happens because
of heat or whatever happens because of work. Either heat or work can cause a change in the
internal energy. But here in this lecture, which is devoted to one of the most practical
applications possible of thermodynamics, we find that there is a crucial distinction between heat
and work, one that is not at all evident from the first law. In order to see the distinction,
we needed the second law of thermodynamics. From the point of view of engineering and practical
applications, perhaps the single most important implication of the second law is the limited
efficiency of heat engines. The second law states that a machine that operates in a cycle,
taking in energy by heat and putting out an equal amount of energy by work, cannot be constructed.
