So we've been talking about what happens when two components are mixed together in a binary
phase diagram.
Last time, we really focused on whether a material will form a solution or not, and
we did that by examining the free energy of the system.
Here we're going to continue our obsession with binary mixtures and the free energy.
After all, it is the thermodynamic property that tells us when a system is in its own
happy place, otherwise known as equilibrium.
But we'll also continue to focus on the properties of these mixtures, and in particular, we're
going to take a look at what happens for the phase transitions of mixtures.
Does a mixture of two different components melt in the same way a pure component does?
For example, let's take tin and bismuth.
Tin melts at around 230 degrees Celsius, while bismuth melts at about 271 degrees Celsius.
Now naively, we might think that if we mix tin and bismuth together, the melting temperature
will be somewhere in between those two values, but that's not at all the case.
Let's cook up some of these mixtures now to see what really happens.
So let's say I go to the store and I buy a piece of metal.
Well, I might get something like this.
This is one single element, one pure metal.
But I could take a piece of this and combine it with another metal.
That would be called an alloy.
What I want to show you today is what happens when you mix two pieces of metals together
to make an alloy, what happens to the melting point?
So here I have a piece of metal.
I have a piece of pure tin, and here I have another metal.
This is pure bismuth, and I'm going to put them on a hot plate.
And what you can see when I put them down is that not much happens.
In fact, that's because the temperature of this griddle is about 200 degrees Celsius,
and the temperature of melting for tin is around 230 degrees Celsius, and the temperature
for melting of bismuth is around 270 degrees Celsius.
So you can see that if I try to move them around, they're not melting at all.
They're not leaving any liquid tracks.
But now here I've got a piece of a mixture, I've got two pieces in here that are different
mixtures of these two metals.
This is 40% tin and 60% bismuth, and this is 40% bismuth and 60% tin.
So when I put them down on the hot plate, let's take a look at what happens.
So it's the same temperature, and you can see that these guys on the end, the pure metals,
they're still not melted, but in the mixture, you've actually got the metal completely melting
going through a phase transition and becoming a liquid.
These are the same two pure elements that are not melting at all, but you can see that
at just the right composition, at just the right composition, you have a much lower melting
point.
And the lowest melting point for any mixture of two different metals, that's the tectic
point.
So there you saw that we can lower the melting point considerably below that of either of
the two pure elements, simply by mixing them together.
The lowest melting point in this case occurs at a lowly 139 degrees Celsius.
That's nearly half of the average of tin and bismuth melting temperatures on their own,
and lower than tins melting temperature by almost 100 degrees.
How can we understand this surprising result?
Well, you know what I'm about to say.
It will all become clear as we look at some free energy curves.
Those curves in turn allow us to construct the phase diagram for this mixture.
And that special point with the lowest melting temperature, that has a special name as well.
It's called a eutectic point.
But I'm getting a little ahead of myself here, because first I want to go back to the free
energy curves for a mixture of two different materials.
Now, in the last lecture, we were concerned with whether or not two components would mix.
And we said that in an ideal solution, they always would because of entropy.
But if we start including the effects of interactions, they may mix sometimes, and they may not
other times.
But there's something we have left out thus far, whether in the case of ideal, regular,
or general solution models.
And that would be what happens to the phase change in a mixture upon mixing.
Let's take a look at that right now.
So we return to our phase diagram, happy place.
That would be, of course, a molar free energy versus concentration curve.
We're mixing two components together, a and b, with the x-axis corresponding to the mole
fraction of component b.
Don't get confused by the term mole fraction, that's still just a measure of the concentration
of b in the mixture.
It's just written in terms of the moles of b divided by the total number of moles.
And by the way, that means, of course, that we also have the concentration of a at that
point, since x sub a equals 1 minus x sub b.
On the left, the curve joins up at the molar free energy of pure a, while on the right,
we have the molar free energy of pure b.
As a reminder, the molar free energy is also equal to the chemical potential for constant
temperature and pressure.
These values on this plot at xb equals 0 or 1 are equal to the chemical potentials of
the pure, unmixed components.
In between, at mixed concentrations, the free energy curve may go down like this.
If this had been an ideal solution, then you know that the curve would have to go down,
since the only contribution we have to the free energy of mixing in an ideal solution
is from entropy.
There are simply more possible ways to arrange the components when they mix together.
The number of microstates increases, and so in turn, does the entropy.
But in this case, the solution is non-ideal, since you can see that while it does go down,
it has a little bit of a shape to it, and the minimum is not at 50%, but rather over
here at 25%.
That means that interactions are playing a role here, but it doesn't stop the two components
from mixing at all concentrations.
Now, in this mixed region, the chemical potentials of the two components are changing.
They're not the same as the values they have for the pure components.
But don't despair, we can still obtain the chemical potentials in the mixed region in
the following manner.
We draw a tangent line to the free energy curve, and the values at which that line intersects
the y-axis at xb equals 0 and at xb equals 1.
Those values are equal to the chemical potentials of the components for that concentration.
Let's walk through that carefully.
Suppose my molar free energy plot looks like this.
Over here and here are the chemical potentials of the pure components.
Now say I pick a concentration on this graph of xb equals 25%.
At that point, I draw a line tangent to the molar free energy curve.
Now that tangent line hits the y-axis up here at xb equals 0, so I can read off the value
of the molar free energy there, and that will give me the chemical potential of component
A at this concentration.
Similarly, the tangent line intersects the y-axis at xb equals 1 over here.
So the molar free energy value at that point is exactly equal to the chemical potential
of component B at concentration of xb equals 25%.
So if you want to know the chemical potentials of mixtures, you now have a nice, simple,
and fun way to get them.
Okay, now let's see what happens when we check out different phases of this mixture.
Suppose the free energy curve I just showed you is for the liquid phase of these components.
Let's not worry about mixing or not right now, but just assume that the system mixes
these components in a nice solution at all concentrations.
Let's now consider a free energy curve corresponding to the solid phase of these mixtures.
I've decided that this one has a minimum at a different concentration than the liquid
at xb equals 75%, so the curve starts up here.
Notice the way these curves are drawn.
The liquid phase is lower in free energy at every concentration than the solid phase.
What does that mean?
Well, it means that we must be at a temperature such that the material is always a liquid.
If I were to lower the temperature by a lot, then these two curves may switch places.
We'd have the solid phase free energy curve lower than the liquid phase at all concentration
values.
This indicates that at the lower temperature, the material would always be a solid at any
mixture.
Now here's where it gets interesting.
What happens at intermediate temperatures?
In that case, the two free energy curves will intersect at some point along the concentration
axis, like you see here.
This crossing point could be anywhere, and it will depend on temperature, but for this
example I've designed these curves such that they cross at xb equals 50%.
So a 50-50 mix in terms of the mole fraction of component A and component B.
But here's the thing.
As we learned in the lecture for the miscibility gap, when the free energy of the system can
find a way to go lower, it does.
So we would think that the free energy of the system is simply a trace along the lowest
possible free energy path.
In this case, that trace would look like you see here, where for concentrations of xb
less than 50%, we're nice and happy on the liquid curve, and at concentrations greater
than xb equals 50%, we move over onto this solid curve since it's lower in energy.
It would mean that while maintaining this temperature, as I increase the concentration
of component B, the mixture stays a liquid until I get to 50% concentration, at which
point it undergoes a phase change and becomes a solid.
But as you may have picked up on, this is not what actually happens.
We can understand this by remembering from the last lecture what happens when the free
energy curve shows two separate minima along the concentration axis.
In that case, in between those minima, something very special happens.
As in the case of immiscibility, which we examined last time, here again the actual free energy
of the system will not follow one of these two curves.
That's because the system has a means to go even lower in its free energy by separating
into a mixture of what lies at those two minima.
So last time, those two minima corresponded to two different solutions made up of different
ratios of component A and B. In this case, the two minima actually correspond to different
phases of the system.
But the same thing happens.
Namely, in between these two points in concentration, we get a combination of two different phases
of the material.
Some of the material is a liquid, and some of it is a solid.
And the free energy?
Well, once again, we can find that by drawing a tangent line between these two minima.
For concentrations in between them, the free energy of the system will lie on this straight
line.
Now, have you noticed that I like to draw tangent lines on such plots?
That's because, being based on derivatives and all, there's some good thermal packed
into them.
And I always like it when I can learn something graphically.
Speaking of learning something graphically, there is something else I can get from this
tangent line.
And that is the answer to how much?
You can imagine that as we come across the x-axis here as a happy liquid only phase first,
and then reach the minimum of the liquid free energy curve, that at that point, we're still
pretty much all liquid.
And that's true.
Same thing goes for the solid side.
At the beginning of the two phase region coming over from the right, it's essentially all
in the solid phase.
As I move in from these boundaries, the system takes on both phases.
The amount is simply given by the amount along this line we've traveled, divided by the full
length of the line.
So if I say here at xB equals 30%, then if I want to know how much of the material is
a liquid, I can take the distance from there to the minimum of the solid phase curve and
divide by the total length.
By the way, this type of graphical approach, drawing a tangent line on the free energy
curve to figure out where there's a phase separation and by how much, that's so important
it gets its own name in thermodynamics.
It's called the common tangent construction.
Okay, so I know that was a whole lot of fun.
I mean, honestly, when is it not fun to think about free energy curves?
But as you know, the fun gets even greater once we use such curves to draw a phase diagram.
So let's do that now for the example I just showed you.
For the phase diagram, we plot the temperature on the y-axis versus the concentration on
the x-axis, still in terms of the mole fraction of component B. That means that we need to
examine what happens with these free energy curves as I change the temperature.
Well, I already kind of discussed the extremes where one free energy curve is always either
above or below the other.
Let's work our way down in temperature starting up here.
In that case, the liquid free energy curve is always lower than the solid free energy
curve, so I can write up here the word liquid on my phase diagram.
Now as I lower the temperature, the solid curve goes down since it's more and more favorable.
By the way, it can also change shape as I change the temperature, but I'm ignoring
that for now.
Let's stop at the temperature for which the two curves first begin to cross.
As you can see, for this case, that's going to be all the way over here for xB equals
1.
So we'll put a point on the phase diagram at that temperature and that concentration.
Now as I lower the temperature a little more, the two curves cross at a slightly lower concentration.
What we have now is a region in the free energy curve where I can draw a line tangent to the
two free energy curves, and in between those two tangent points, the free energy is along
the line, not on either the liquid or solid curve.
Notice here that the tangent is not between two minima as I showed before, just to help
make it easier to see, but that's fine.
The same exact behavior occurs, and for all the same reasons, as long as I can draw a
tangent line between the two free energy curves, and here, as you can see, I can.
For our phase diagram, we're going to track these tangent points.
Let's use red for the first tangent, where it comes to the liquid phase curve, and blue
for the second tangent point, where it comes to the solid phase curve.
Okay, I've got three points on my phase diagram so far.
Isn't this fun?
Let's keep going.
As I lower the temperature further, the solid free energy curve continues to go down in
energy.
That is, it's becoming more favorable to be a solid, and the tangent points occur at
different concentrations.
Here I'm continuing to track those tangent points with the same red and blue dots.
And finally, when I get to low enough temperatures, the free energy curves once again intersect
only at a single point, this time over here at XB equals zero.
For temperatures below that, it's all solid all the time.
So I'll write the word solid over down here on the phase diagram.
And all we need to do is connect these dots together with curves, and here we have our
completed phase diagram.
This is one of the simplest types of phase diagrams we can get, but it's packed with
information.
Now, the naming of this was not exactly done in a moment of originality since this type
of phase diagram is known as a lens phase diagram.
In any case, as you can see, inside the lens shape, I've got both the liquid and solid
phases coexisting together.
So I'll write solid plus liquid inside.
At any point in this lens, I can determine how much of each phase I have and what their
compositions are.
For example, if I'm at this point here, then I look for the phase boundaries at that same
temperature by simply drawing a horizontal line.
Over on this phase boundary, which is called the liquidous phase boundary since it separates
the two phase region from the liquid, the point where that line intersects gives me
the composition of the liquid.
Over on the other side, we intersect the solidous phase boundary at a point representing the
composition of the solid.
In this lens region of the phase diagram, once again, as in the case of the miscibility
gap, we find that the material will not take on any arbitrary composition and remain fully
mixed.
Instead, it will phase separate into liquid and solid, but at fixed compositions dictated
by the phase boundary lines at the given temperature.
I know this can seem a little bit confusing, especially if it's your first time seeing
it.
So let me take a stroll through this lens phase diagram by picking a concentration, starting
at high temperature and virtually cooling down the material.
Let's start with a concentration that's right in the middle of the phase diagram at 50%,
and I'll start up here at high temperatures.
Now at this temperature, I know that the system can fully mix at any concentration, so I have
a liquid made up of 0.5 mole fraction of component B and 0.5 mole fraction of component A.
As I cool it, I hit this top part of the lens in the phase diagram.
Immediately what happens is that the system can no longer have the 50-50 composition.
That's because it can lower its free energy by phase separating, which is exactly what
it does.
After the system becomes a solid, a small part, since I'm just entering the two phase
region from the liquid side, and that solid phase will not have a 50-50 mix of components
A and B. Instead, it'll have a mix dictated by this point over here on the lens boundary,
which looks more like 95% B and 5% A.
Meanwhile the liquid phase, which remember just a degree ago, used to have a 50-50 mixture
of A and B, now has a different composition, one with less of component B in it, say a
mix of 45% B and 55% A.
As I lower the temperature to continue freezing this mixture, more and more of the mixture
becomes a solid, although each time I lower the temperature, the composition of that solid
phase changes.
As you can see, it gets more and more of component A into it, although it's still dominated by
component B for this example.
The liquid phase, which is getting less and less in terms of amount, is also changing
its composition with each degree change.
For the liquid, as I lower the temperature, it takes the composition with more and more
of component A in it and less of component B, and this continues on in this way until
I reach the bottom of the lens.
At that point, my solid has come back to the original composition that I started with,
seemingly 50-50.
My liquid is essentially gone, although if there were a minuscule amount of it left,
it would have a composition given by the intersection all the way over here.
So there you have a completely different way of undergoing a phase transition than for
a pure component.
Notice that the phase transition for the pure components is actually on this same plot.
It's simply the points on each end where the lens connects to the y-axis.
Here is the melting temperature of pure A, and here is the melting temperature of pure
B.
But you see, these are just points.
There's, of course, no two-phase regions since there are not two phases, and the material
simply melts or freezes or whatever.
But with a mixture of components, we have the more intricate behavior I just described.
And why would we want to know all of this?
Well, it turns out that most of the time we have mixtures of materials.
Steel is not pure iron, but rather a mixture of iron and a little bit of carbon.
How the fact that we have a mixture impacts the phase diagram is of enormous importance.
Now, I mentioned that the lens is one of the simplest things that can happen between phases
in a two-component phase diagram.
There are all sorts of other fun things that happen, leading to really complicated phase
boundary lines and behaviors of materials.
Just take a look at some of these binary phase diagrams.
Look at all of the wonderful lines between phases that occur.
And while you're thinking about that, I hope you're also thinking about other stuff like
how some of these lines separate liquid and solid, while others separate two different
solids.
About how different the different boundaries are.
Some going vertical, while others with small slopes, or even horizontal.
And about how in each region on this diagram, there's a corresponding set of free energy
curves, with some of them lower than others, leading to the identification of equilibrium.
For the rest of this lecture, I'm going to tell you about one of the most common other
occurrences in a phase diagram, something that also has a whole lot of important applications.
Free materials are highly miscible in the liquid state, but have very limited miscibility
in the solid state.
This means that much of the phase diagram at low temperatures is dominated by a two-phase
region of two different solid structures.
One that's highly enriched in, say, component A, and one that's highly enriched in component
B. These binary systems with unlimited liquid state miscibility and low or negligible solid
state miscibility are referred to as eutectic systems.
There's a point on such phase diagrams where the system melts at a certain composition,
called the eutectic point.
And in fact, I'll bet that a number of you have already done or at least seen some eutectic
melting in your lives.
That is, if you've done any soldering at all, you'd be passing right along through the eutectic
point of a phase diagram.
And this returns us to the very beginning, where I talked about tin and bismuth, and
where in the demo I showed you how the melting temperature of a mixture of the two can be
much lower than that of either one of these by itself.
So here we have the phase diagram for these two components.
On the left is 100% tin, while on the right is 100% bismuth, with the melting temperatures
of each in their pure phases indicated on the axes.
Up here in this region, we're at temperatures where it's a fully miscible liquid.
Let's freeze a solid from this liquid from two different concentrations.
First at 5% mole fraction of bismuth mixed in with tin.
We're going to be cooling down along this vertical line here.
When I cross this liquidous phase boundary, the material phase separates, just as we saw
in the lens phase diagram before.
Once I've cooled enough to be in this two phase region, I'll have a combination of
liquid and solid phases.
The liquid will have a composition of bismuth and tin as given from this point on the liquidous
curve, while the solid will have a composition given by this boundary over here.
Now as I continue to cool, I enter into the solid only phase.
It's a single phase on this phase diagram, which means that it can take on the concentration
that is given, which in this case is 5%.
But as we continue to cool down, we pass below this next boundary line and enter yet another
two phase region.
Unlike our previous two phase regions, this one is comprised of two solid phases, a solid
phase of mostly tin and a solid phase of mostly bismuth.
But that doesn't change anything that we discussed before.
When we cool down into this two phase region on a phase diagram, the system separates into
two different solid phases, with concentrations dictated by the phase boundaries.
As I cool further, this doesn't really change, although the amount of the tin rich and bismuth
rich phases varies as does their precise compositions.
But let's now do another experiment.
Let's cool down at a concentration of XB equals 20%.
In this case, the first phase boundary I cross is just as before, although notice that now
at this composition, the solidification begins at a lower temperature.
But now the system does not enter the solid tin rich phase as before.
Instead, the next boundary we cross upon further cooling is this horizontal line here.
Once I cross that line, all of the material that is in the liquid phase becomes a combination
of these two solids.
One tin rich and the other nearly pure bismuth.
The system is then comprised of these solids that come from the liquid freezing, plus all
the solid particles that it formed up in this lens type region here, which have a composition
of this point over here.
And finally, we'll cool down through the eutectic point.
For tin and bismuth, this point occurs at a mixture of around 57% by weight of bismuth.
Notice that as we cool down through this point, we do not enter a lens-like shape by crossing
a liquidous curve.
Rather, we go directly from liquid to solid at a single temperature.
That's just like the freezing behavior of a pure component.
But at the eutectic point, things are a little different.
We do in fact freeze completely as we cool from one side of this point to the other.
But when frozen, the solid consists of two different phases, one tin rich and one bismuth
rich, as you see here by drawing the line across.
That actually leads to some very interesting structure, since the solidification of the
two phases happens all at once.
Take a look at this image of the eutectic structure of this material.
You can see that it consists of alternating very thin layers of each of the two solid
phases that forms when solidification occurs.
As you can imagine, a material with this type of structure has all sorts of differences
in terms of its properties compared to a pure material, or for that matter, one with a homogeneous
mixture of the two components.
The eutectic point offers also the lowest possible melting temperature.
So it's extremely useful in soldering and other industrial applications.
Very cool example of materials mixology.
In the next lecture, we're going to turn our attention to non-phase diagram related thermo
stuff.
We're going to be talking about heat engines.
But over the last five lectures, I do hope that you've gained a solid appreciation, along
with some good understanding of what phase diagrams mean, how they can be used, and how
important they are to the study of thermodynamics.
