Hi, and welcome to our second lecture on engines.
Actually, I'm not quite comfortable calling what we'll be talking about today engines.
Since when I use that word, most of us think about cars, trains, or planes.
That type of engine, where we first make heat and then convert that heat directly into mechanical energy,
that was the subject of the last lecture.
Here in this lecture, I want to discuss other ways in which we can produce mechanical energy.
Ways that are not so direct.
Now, there are many different ways to do this, as you might imagine,
since there are so many different kinds of thermodynamic forces.
But in this lecture, I'll focus in on a few specific examples,
ones that help us see different types of thermodynamic work.
In some cases, the work being done is not likely to have much industrial relevance,
although it demonstrates a wonderful example of the transformation of energy to motion,
like for the entropy and surface tension engines that I'll show you today.
In other cases, like for the phase change engine, which I'll discuss in a little bit,
there's a great excitement in the potential for future advances and applications.
So, I suppose the first question I should address in a lecture on engines other than heat engines
should be, why would I want to make any other types of engines in the first place?
I mean, the engines we have based on heat are nothing less than the foundation of all of our modern technological society.
They provide us with nearly all of our electricity, all of our transportation,
and do almost all of our work.
Just keep feeding them heat, and they will keep on working for us in all of these ways.
Why even think about changing this all-encompassing heat-to-mechanical work framework?
Well, one thing that we know is that the conversion of heat into work is not that efficient.
Remember the Carnot limit?
That tells us that the ultimate limit of efficiency possible in converting heat into work
is set by the temperature difference we're able to apply to the engine.
And as we saw, given that in most practical applications,
we're stuck with the cold side being around 300 Kelvin, that's room temperature,
and the hot side is limited both by how hot we can actually make it,
as well as the limit of the materials being used to build the engine and transfer the heat.
This latter point is extremely important.
If I build a piston for an engine out of aluminum, then the maximum temperature possible is 659 degrees Celsius,
since at that point aluminum melts.
Whereas if I build it out of bronze, I can get up to 913 degrees Celsius,
and nickel takes me up to 1452 degrees Celsius.
And actually, the real operating temperature of an engine is typically far below the engine material's melting points
to avoid any risk of the material's instability.
So the need for a large temperature difference in order to get high efficiency can be challenging.
And even with a large temperature difference, Carnot tells us that the efficiency limit is still not very high.
A car engine typically runs at about 25% efficiency.
But in this lecture, I will still be talking about starting with some form of heat,
and then making something move in the end.
So the Carnot limit still applies to everything I'll be telling you.
However, an important point is that at least with fossil fuels,
we've been able to create large enough temperature differences that we do pretty well.
Power plants do, after all, operate at around 50% efficiency.
But the thing is, this ridiculously cheap source of high temperature heat will someday be not too far from now,
be seen as a precious blip in our world's history.
Our current ability to make seemingly endless and incredibly cheap heat will not last forever.
Nearly all of the heat we generate comes from burning fossil fuels,
either coal or oil or natural gas.
I like to call these resources ancient sunlight,
since their origins all lie in biomass that grew from the sun's energy
and accumulated over many thousands of years and then got buried for millions of years more.
But such resources are quite finite.
I know there are a lot of arguments around how much more oil we have
or how much more natural gas we can crack out of rocks miles underground.
But to me, this is a very small point.
In the long-term picture, it just doesn't matter.
All that matters is that these resources will run out.
It may be 50 years or it may be 150 years.
But at some point in the future, engines of the world may not run on high heat,
once we cannot produce heat at such high temperatures so easily.
So it's worth thinking about the following question.
What other ways can we use heat to do useful work?
What ways can we use non-fossil fuel-based temperature differences?
To take a look, let's run a few examples of some other types of engines,
ones that are based on the unique properties of materials in different ways.
First, we'll make a magnetic engine, but perhaps not the kind you're used to.
Magnetism is a special kind of configurational work that's very important in modern society.
From data storage and computer hard drives to solenoids and car engines to various electric generators,
magnetism helps the world run.
And the physical origin of magnetism arises from a combination of a particular type of interaction
between electrons that's called spin and the induced magnetism that can come from external fields.
There are different types of magnetism, but the one I want to focus on here is called ferromagnetism.
These are the materials you probably think of as magnets from everyday existence.
The key is that ferromagnets maintain a magnetization in the absence of an externally applied magnetic field,
so they can be magnetized.
Very few ferromagnetic materials exist, and most of them contain either iron, cobalt, or nickel.
By the way, as few elements as there are that are ferromagnetic, they are extremely important.
I'm sure you've seen all sorts of examples of these materials,
not to mention the fact that the inner core of the earth itself consists primarily of a liquid of iron and nickel.
But a key point is that if a ferromagnet gets hot enough, then it will lose the magnetism that it had.
The alignment of all those spins goes away, and the material becomes what is called paramagnetic.
This transition temperature between ferromagnetic and paramagnetic is called the curie temperature for any given magnetic material.
Now, here's the thing. We can actually take advantage of the temperature dependence of the magnetism of a material.
You guessed it, to do mechanical work. Let's take a look.
As we learn in the lecture, a ferromagnet has what is called a curie temperature.
That's a phase transition where the material goes from being magnetic to non-magnetic above a certain temperature.
In the setup I have here, there's a ferromagnet, that's this little loop right here sitting above the candle, and that's attached to a wire.
There's a permanent magnet over here sitting on the edge, so that's drawing this loop over.
You see how the permanent magnet is drawing the ferromagnet over, so it's attracted to that permanent magnet.
But when I light the candle, the fire is going to heat up the ferromagnet and get it above the curie temperature.
Let's watch what happens.
You can see that it comes away from the magnet because once the fire gets that ferromagnet, the little loop at the end, hot enough.
It goes above the curie temperature and completely loses its ability to be magnetized.
So it's no longer going to be attracted to the permanent magnet on the end.
But what's cool is that it also, when it starts cooling down because it's away from the fire, it goes back below the curie point.
And so it can be magnetized again.
And that's why it goes back and forth the way that you see here.
This is an engine that takes heat and makes mechanical motion.
It's not exactly an efficient heat engine, but it's a really cool example of magnetic work and phases of materials.
So there you had a system that uses heat to create a change in a property, in this case magnetism, in order to perform mechanical work.
In order to understand such a system from its thermodynamic viewpoint, we must write the work term due to magnetism.
And that is as follows.
Squiggly dw for magnetism equals the volume v of a material times the external magnetic field, written as h, times the change in the internal magnetic induced field, written as db.
So the external magnetic field is our thermodynamic force, and the change in the induced field inside the material is the thermodynamic displacement.
The experiment that I showed you just now can be understood as follows.
If we had a piece of iron initially at room temperature with an internal magnetic induction of b equals zero Tesla, those by the way are the units of magnetism,
an external field is then applied to the system, say with a field strength large enough to result in an induction in the material of b equals a half Tesla.
The magnet is then heated to 750 degrees Celsius using the candle, which makes it lose its magnetism, since it went above the Curie temperature.
So in that case, once it goes above that point, b goes back to zero.
That in turn made it not attracted to the permanent magnet that was close by, which takes it away from the heat source.
And that in turn allows the magnetism to return since it cools down.
So it's once again attracted to the permanent magnet, and so the mechanical work cycle continues.
And that experiment shows an example of how we can take advantage of the temperature dependent properties of a material to make something move.
It's both similar to and different from the PVT work of a typical heat engine.
Similar because for PVT, the temperature dependence of a property, in that case pressure, is also used.
But very different because in the case of magnetism, the temperature dependent property is an on off state rather than a continuously changing variable.
Now in much the same on or off way, there's another type of engine we can build that relies on materials that change state abruptly depending on the temperature.
These types of materials are called phase change materials, and they're really cool.
Of course, right away you may be thinking, but aren't all materials phase change in the sense that they can exist in a number of different phases according to their phase diagram?
Well, absolutely that's the case.
But for phase change materials, the actual shape of the material itself can be molded and memorized in two different phases.
So that when the material goes from one phase to the other, its shape changes as well.
And that's why we also call these materials shape memory alloys.
Let's take a look.
So in this demo, we're going to make something move using a phase change.
Nightnail was first discovered in 1962, and it has fascinating mechanical behavior.
It's a shape memory alloy, like we discussed in the lecture.
That means that it can be trained to take a certain shape, and when it goes through a phase transformation, it goes back to that shape.
Here, we'll use this concept again to make something move.
So what I have here is a single nightnal wire that has been trained to have a high tension state and a low tension state depending on its temperature.
So it's got two phases, one that has a higher tension than the other.
Now, the wire is wrapped around these pulleys here, but it's just one single wire.
So the two phases happen right above and right below room temperature, which means that if one side is placed in hot water and the other side in cold water,
part of the wire contracts pulling on the wire, but as it rotates out of the cold side, it goes through a phase change and loosens.
Well, the new part of the wire that rotates into the cold contracts, and it continues in this way to power an engine.
Let's give it a shot. I'm going to pour some hot water into this container.
So that's hot water, and I'm going to pour some cold water into this side.
Okay.
And when I put this nightnal wire wrapped around these pulleys inside this middle part here, and I give it a little kickstart,
and get it going, you can see that it starts running right on its own.
It's because the wire is undergoing a phase change depending on whether it's on the hot side or the cold side.
Now, you notice that it's starting to slow down, and I bet you might be able to guess why.
It's because the wire is heating the cold water as it brings hot water over to that side,
and it's cooling the hot water as it brings the cold water onto the hot side.
Eventually, the water is simply close enough to the same temperature that we no longer have enough of a temperature differential or a temperature gradient,
which we know that we need in order to keep doing mechanical work.
So there we had a moderate temperature difference of, say, 50 Kelvin, and with that, we were able to make this motor spin.
There was no volume expansion of a gas or pressure change, rather just a material that changes its shape back and forth with temperature.
This particular phase change material is known as nightnal, and it's an alloy of nickel and tin.
Take a look at the phase diagram for these two materials.
Hey, hold on a second. Let's just take in the fact that I just said that, and you knew what I meant.
It's pretty cool to be able to read such a materials map, so I wanted to be sure to call that out, and this one in particular is pretty complicated.
Notice that over here, we have full miscibility between nickel and tin.
While past about 3% tin, the alloy tends to phase separate into one of several different very stable, distinct nickel to tin ratios.
The reason I wanted you to check out the phase diagram of nickel and tin is because you can get a sense from this for how difficult it would be
to precisely control the composition and phase of an alloy made from these elements.
It's really only since the 1990s that nightnal, which is a mixture of about 50% tin and 50% nickel by atomic percent, can be made fairly routinely.
The amazing thing about nightnal is that it can be trained to remember a shape by heat treatment under specific circumstances.
After such training has occurred, the material can be bent, twisted and pulled to any deformation, and it will return to its original shape when heated to its transformation temperature.
The reason? Well, because it undergoes a phase transformation, and in the higher temperature phase, it always returns to its original shape.
And the cool thing is that this transformation temperature can be tuned to be just a few degrees above room temperature.
The other cool thing is that the material is extremely elastic, so it can be deformed quite a lot with very little effort, and all the while being able to snap back to its original trained shape by a slight temperature increase.
And that is how the nightnal engine I just showed you works.
On the one side, we have cold water, so the part of the wire immersed there can stretch into form.
While on the other side, we have hot water, which causes that part of the wire to snap back to its original, more top shape.
The result is a single wire that is constantly exerting attention from one side, causing it to pull and turn, releasing the hot wire into the cold, allowing it to give, while at the same time, bringing in more wire to the hot bath, which then goes through a phase change and pulls and so forth.
What we have in the end is a pretty efficient metallic single piece solid state engine that could run theoretically without maintenance for long periods of time.
Okay, so there we have yet another way to leverage a sharp change in the property of a material with temperature.
It's not pressure as in a traditional heat engine, and it's not a type of magnetism as in the magnetic heat engine I showed a few minutes ago.
In this case, the power comes from the material changing its phase from one solid form into another solid form, back and forth with temperature.
Okay, so I've got two more engines to show you today.
Our last engine based on heat, and then one that doesn't involve any heat at all.
Now this next one is cool because it works entirely on the fact that entropy is changing in the material.
It's in fact an example of an entropy engine.
In the entropy wheel, the spokes are replaced by rubber bands.
If only one of the sides of the wheel is heated, the rubber bands in the proximity contract and pull the rim closer to the center.
This in turn causes a shift in the center of mass and gravity of the wheel, which causes the wheel to rotate.
And now the rubber bands on either side swap positions.
Those originally heated rubber bands now cool down, and the other set of rubber bands gets heated up, so the same contraction happens and the wheel continues to rotate.
The entire driving force for the rotation arises from a change in entropy.
Now I know that you might be thinking, that sure did spin pretty slowly, and you're right.
I wouldn't exactly win any awards if I were to race a car running on an entropy engine.
Still, it's fascinating to consider the thermodynamics at play in this case.
Let's start with a rubber band.
You can do this at home.
Take the rubber band and hold it up against your skin, right above your upper lip.
This is a good place because it's pretty sensitive to temperature.
Now, while holding the rubber band in contact with your skin, stretch it quickly.
You'll notice that it gets hotter when it's stretched.
And now, starting it in the stretch position, and again, while maintaining contact with your skin, allow it to contract back to its starting point.
In that case, you'll notice that the rubber band gets colder.
You can feel the cold pretty clearly on your lip.
Stretching makes it warm, and recoiling makes it cold.
Why is that the case?
Well, in order to understand this, we turn to our good friend, the free energy.
Remember that the free energy G is equal to the enthalpy H minus the temperature times the entropy, or T times S.
What are called entropic effects are whatever contributions to the free energy come from the TS term, since that is what has the entropy in it.
And as we've discussed in previous lectures, these entropic contributions to the free energy will carry more weight the larger the temperature.
I mean, that's kind of obvious since it's got a factor of T in front of it.
But at room temperatures, for many, many materials that we know and love, like metals, glasses, ceramics, for example, it's the term due to the enthalpy that entirely dominates the free energy.
But then there are polymers.
And well, these are different.
A rubber band is made out of polymers.
Polymers are long little strands of some repeating molecular sequence.
And often, when they come together, the result is a kind of spaghetti of these strands.
This is where we can see the role of entropy.
Take a look at these three different states of a single polymer strand.
On the left, it's all tangled up into a ball.
Well, on the right, it's fully stretched out into a straight line.
And in the middle, it's somewhere in between.
Now, remember our statistical definition of entropy.
It's a function of possible microstates for a given macrostate.
So in the case on the right, where the strand is fully stretched out in a line, how many different ways can we arrange it to be that way?
The answer is only one.
Only one possible microstate gives us this arrangement.
On the other hand, when the strand is all tangled up, like on the left here, there are many, many different ways the tangling could occur and give the exact same energy.
That means that there are many different microstates that represent the same macrostate.
So in that case, the entropy is very high.
In fact, since these spaghetti strands are quite weakly bonded together in a rubber band, we can ignore the enthalpy term.
And at least at room temperature, changes in the free energy are entirely dominated by changes in entropy.
When the rubber band is stretched, the strands straighten out and the entropy goes way down.
While when it is unstretched, the strands are coiled around and the entropy skyrockets up again.
So that gives us the connection we need.
Turning back to our free energy expression, since I already told you that entropy dominates over enthalpy,
the change in free energy can be written as approximately just the change in minus Ts.
And for a larger temperature, the effect of entropy is larger, which makes the system even more strongly want to be in the higher entropy state.
That is the state where the rubber band is fully unstretched.
So in effect, what happens when we put heat onto the rubber band is that it makes the rubber band have a strong force of contraction.
If you think about it, that's actually pretty cool, since it's counterintuitive.
Usually when we apply heat to something, it tends to get more elastic or more flexible.
Somehow, our intuition tells us that hotter stuff is looser in general.
But in this case, with entropy in the driver's seat, the opposite is true.
Higher temperature leads to a stronger, not weaker tension in the rubber band.
So there we had three different ways to make something move using heat, all covering different aspects of thermodynamics.
In the original heat engine I discussed in the last lecture, the increase of pressure from heat did the trick.
Here, so far, we've seen that we can also get mechanical motion from the temperature dependence of the magnetic properties of a material,
from the temperature dependence of the phase of a material, and just now from the temperature dependence of the role of entropy in a material.
There are indeed many more ways to make motion, and of course, not just from heat.
One way that you'll all be aware of is to use an electricity to turn on a motor.
I mean, this is in fact another form of magnetic work, and it's the kind we use all the time,
whether in a blender, a fan, a remote-controlled helicopter, or an electric car.
But I'll bet that in the category of making things move in a way that doesn't use heat, one approach you may not have encountered is the one based on surface tension.
Here, let's take a look.
So here we're going to make something move using another kind of force, that is, surface tension.
When there's a change in the surface tension, it pulls the surface to the region of greater surface tension, and this can be used to make something move.
So let's take a look.
First, we're going to sprinkle some oregano onto some water, okay?
And what you can see is that the oregano floats on the top.
So the oregano pieces are very strongly connected to the surface of the water.
Now, watch what happens when I dip my finger into the water.
You can see, really, not much of anything.
But now, I'm going to put my finger in some soap.
So I've got some soap here, and I'm going to put my finger in the soap like that, and I'm going to dip it into the water again.
And now you can see when I did that, the oregano moved away from my finger.
Why?
Well, because the soap in the water makes the water have a different surface tension than the water without the soap.
And so you have a different surface tension on one side of the oregano compared to the other side, and that makes it move.
We can have a little more fun with this if we want by making little tiny boats and doing the same thing.
So here I've got a whole lot of little boats that I've 3D printed, and they're floating on top of water.
And watch what happens when I put some alcohol into the little chamber in the boat.
So there's a little chamber inside each boat, and when I put some alcohol in it, you see that it starts to move.
Why?
Because as the alcohol leaves the back of the boat, it creates a change in the surface tension between the back of the boat and the front of the boat.
Activate a bunch of these by dripping alcohol into those chambers.
And so we have a surface tension difference between the front and backs of these boats that makes them move around on the surface of the water.
And that is another kind of thermodynamic force that allows us to make something move.
Surface tension.
So how exactly did that work?
How can I make something actually move using only the concept of surface tension?
Well, it's yet another form of thermodynamic work, and for this one, we use the symbol gamma.
That is called the surface energy, and it's defined as the energy associated with the creation of a unit area of surface.
Similar to our PV work term, PVV, the work term associated with creating, or for that matter, removing, surface by some amount dA would be equal to gamma times dA.
As you can see, the units for the surface energy gamma are joules per meter squared.
So how should we even think about this thing I just defined for you, the surface energy?
Well, first of all, what is a surface?
For the case of a drop of water and air, it would be defined as the interface between the water and the air.
And that's the key word, interface.
It turns out that in thermodynamics, we can classify different types of surfaces based on the type of interface involved.
Often, this is between two different phases, like a liquid and a solid, or a solid and a gas.
Or, it's a boundary between two different phases, like two different solids, within the same material.
In all cases, the key point is that the presence of a surface requires energy in order to form.
That is, it takes energy to introduce an interface into what would have otherwise been a pure and continuous material phase.
This extra energy is called surface energy.
From an atomistic viewpoint, atoms in the bulk phase of a material, that means just within the part of the material where there are no interfaces,
those atoms are bonded in all directions and remain stable.
However, the atoms at the surface are not ideally bonded in all directions, since as you can see, the bonds on one side have simply been cut away.
This makes those atoms unstable, and as a result, they try to find a happier place, often by moving around in some way to lower their energy.
And this rearrangement of the atoms upon formation of a surface is called reconstruction.
And it's what determines the shape at those surfaces.
But as hard as those atoms try to be happy, their bonding energy is still not going to be as strong as it was when they were hanging out there in the bulk region.
And that energy penalty, that's our gamma term, our surface energy.
Now, the result of having a surface energy is that if this energy is changed along some appropriate displacement, then the thermodynamic work is performed.
And in this case, the displacement is area, which makes sense since we are after all talking about a surface.
And gamma can then be thought of as our thermodynamic force.
Why is it that you can fill a glass of water ever so slightly above the top of the glass, and it won't spill out?
Well, it's all due precisely to that force.
Any change leading to an increase in the surface free energy is resisted by the surface, and this resisting force is called the surface tension.
It's the same thing as gamma.
Now, the value for this surface tension depends on a whole lot of things.
For a solid, it depends on the type of material as well as what particular orientation the surface cut was made.
In a liquid, the orientation doesn't matter, but the material itself can have very different values for gamma.
That's how the oregano magically floated away and how those boats zipped around.
In the case of the oregano, when I introduced a soapy liquid into the water with my finger, that soapy stuff immediately started diffusing outward.
But the soap water has a much lower surface tension than just pure water.
As a result, the little flakes of oregano felt a different surface tension on one side, the side where the soap was, than on the other side, where the soap hadn't reached yet in its diffusion outward.
And this difference in surface tension led to a net force pushing the oregano out in a wave.
The same thing happened for the boats.
The alcohol inside has a very different surface tension than the water.
So as it trickled out the back, a net force formed due to the difference in surface tensions between the front and back sides of the boat.
The boat rode along because of this net force.
And of course, this isn't something we could use to power a real large-sized boat.
I mean, unless you carry thousands of gallons of alcohol with you.
So powering the world with surface tension differences may not be a very practical direction.
But still, you see in this example yet another way of making something go, and how the thermodynamic work term is associated with it.
In this case, it had nothing to do with heat.
So where did the energy come from?
Well, one way to think of it is that it took energy to get the chemicals that had different surface tensions in the first place.
Notice that once the alcohol and water are mixed together, it's pretty hard to reuse that liquid.
I could keep adding alcohol to those boats, and eventually they wouldn't run anymore,
since the liquid they're sitting in would be a mixture of water and alcohol with too similar of a surface tension to make any difference.
So there you have it.
Four other engines that run on four quite different concepts and materials properties.
And as I said, there are many, many more examples I could give.
Just consider that I haven't even included in today's discussion any force or work terms involving light or electricity.
But today I just wanted to show you a few examples, which I hope gave you a sense of how we can take advantage of materials in different ways to do work.
The possibilities and numbers of work terms in thermodynamics is incredibly vast.
Thank you.
