Today, we're going to talk about chemical reactions, and we'll learn how the concepts
of thermodynamics can be used to tell us when a reaction will occur and when it will not.
And why am I so excited?
Well, because chemical reactions are fundamentally part of everything we do.
And I'm not just talking about the candle example I discussed in an earlier lecture,
where we learned about the chemical potential.
I'm talking about understanding what particular process is going to make a set of materials
do precisely what we want.
Or how to get the most energy out of a given type of combustion process.
And for that matter, what our bodies do with the food we eat to literally maintain life
itself.
And these are examples of processes that are different in a crucial way compared to some
of the other types of processes we've covered in this class, like a gas expanding to do
mechanical work, or a dye diffusing into a liquid to create a new mixture.
Or for that matter, magnetic, surface tension, electric, or entropic work.
In those cases, work is done, systems change, lots of fun stuff happens.
However, nothing happens to the inherent building blocks of the system.
I could make a mixture of water and ethanol, and as we know, the volume is not simply equal
to the original volumes of each one separately.
So an interesting thing is happening due to the fact that I made a mixture.
And we talked about that in lecture nine, and how it can be described by the concept
of partial molar quantities.
However, in that case, nothing changed about the inherent amount of components in the system.
If I started with one mole of water, and one mole of ethanol, then I ended with six times
ten to the 23rd molecules of water, and six times ten to the 23rd molecules of ethanol.
That is, the same number.
In other words, nothing was consumed or altered chemically at the level of the component itself
during the process.
That kind of process is not a chemical reaction.
In the examples I first mentioned, like combustion for energy conversion, materials chemistry,
and well, life itself, among so many other processes, there is work being done.
And it's a direct result of substances changing their nature.
This is called chemical work.
And it's based on a process wherein the number of moles of a component in the system changes.
And we've already learned about this type of thermodynamic work.
Remember how we learned about the chemical potential in lecture nine?
Well, as a reminder, that chemical potential can be considered the thermodynamic force
in a chemical reaction.
And the change in number of moles is the thermodynamic displacement.
We showed back then that a candle burning is undergoing a chemical reaction, one that
turns paraffin wax plus oxygen in the air into CO2 plus water.
And I mentioned that a reaction will always occur in the direction from high chemical
potential to low chemical potential.
Our thermodynamic analysis showed that this reaction is heavily directed towards the candle
burning.
Now, as we set the stage to go deeper into the thermodynamics of chemical reactions,
we're also how I discussed the fact that thermo only tells us which way a chemical reaction
wants to go.
It does not tell us whether it can go.
For that, we need to understand the kinetics of the problem.
And remember that thermodynamics only tells us about the equilibrium properties of materials.
We take an eventually it will happen approach to the world.
So for the case of the candle burning, this point is illustrated by the fact that as badly
as that reaction wants to happen, and our thermodynamic analysis tells us that it will,
it doesn't happen, not until we light it with an external source of heat.
This is the kinetic part of the problem.
Sure, the reaction is very favorable, but there's a barrier for it to occur.
Without some heat input into the system, it cannot get over that barrier, and so it remains
stuck in what we call a metastable state.
That means there's a more stable state it wants to be in, in this case, CO2 plus H2O,
but it's separated from that state by a barrier.
Again, I'll repeat that because it's so important.
Thermodynamics does not speak to such barriers.
It only tells us how to find equilibrium states, not what the road looks like along the way.
It's also embedded in the very concept of state functions, which remember have no dependence
on the path taken.
Okay, so enough setting the stage.
Let's do a really fun chemical reaction.
Have you ever mixed vinegar with baking soda?
What you'll find is that you can get quite a bit of bubbles forming when these two chemicals
are mixed.
In fact, many kids throughout time have built play volcanoes, where the eruption that occurs
is made from this reaction.
Sodium bicarbonate reacts with acetic acid to form sodium acetate plus carbonic acid,
which then decomposes into water plus CO2, and it's all that CO2 that causes the bubbles.
I like this particular reaction so much that I wanted to take it to another level here
for you.
Let's take a look.
So here we're going to see a really fun reaction.
In this bowl, we're going to watch a reaction of hydrogen peroxide, which has the formula
H2O2, decompose into O2 gas plus water.
Now I'm going to add a little bit of sodium iodide to help the reaction go more quickly,
and it's a pretty fast reaction, so I'm going to make sure I wear my safety goggles.
So here's the sodium iodide, and I'm going to add this to the H2O2.
You can see a whole lot of fizzling happened, which is all of that O2 molecules, all those
oxygen bubbles getting released.
And also, you might have noticed that this container got really hot.
A lot of steam actually came out, and that's because the reaction is highly exothermic.
It really wants to go forward as it releases a whole lot of heat as it goes downhill in
the reaction.
Now, the chemical energy is stored in the hydrogen peroxide, and it's really on display
as you see it dissolve into O2 plus H2O.
But now, let's do this again.
Only this time, I've added a little bit of liquid detergent to the mix.
So I've gotten here sodium iodide plus some liquid detergent.
That way, when the O2 gas forms from the reaction, it's going to be trapped inside of bubbles
because it's soapy now, instead of just being released into the air.
So here I have the same hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, in this flask, and I'm going to add
the sodium iodide into it.
Now that was fun, and it's a great example of the strength of the driving force for
this reaction to occur.
Another way of thinking about it is that what we just witnessed is a very large chemical
potential difference for a reaction, which is the fundamental thermodynamics going on
inside of that flask.
Now that was a lot of fun.
In that reaction, we had hydrogen peroxide mixing with sodium iodide, and as you could
see, it was a very favorable reaction.
Notice another point here.
Unlike the example of a candle burning, in this case, there was no barrier to the reaction
occurring.
The second I mixed the two chemicals together, the reaction went forward.
I did not need any added heat, and in fact, a whole lot of heat came out during the reaction.
I'll come back to this heat thing in a moment, but first, let's turn to one of our favorite
things to do, and that is to find important terms.
So for starters, let's put forth a basic definition for what I mean by a chemical reaction.
Chemical reactions happen when through some process, a set of one or more chemical species
become a set of one or more different chemical species that was not in the original state.
Chemical reactions come in a variety of forms, including, first, decomposition.
In this case, a single chemical species becomes two or more species upon the reaction occurring.
Second, synthesis.
Here two or more chemical species become a single species upon the reaction occurring.
And third, displacement.
In this case, the same number of chemical species is found before and after the reaction,
but the atomic species and the chemicals switch.
Okay, so let's see.
For case one, decomposition, an example could be the reaction of water to form hydrogen
and oxygen, or 2H2O goes to 2H2 plus O2.
For case two, synthesis, an example could be the formation of carbon dioxide.
So C plus O2 goes to CO2.
And for case three, displacement, how about Cl2 plus 2NABR goes to BR2 plus 2NACL, which
is a simple way to form pure bromine from its naturally occurring salt form.
In writing these examples down, you may have noticed that the numbers all work out so that
the reactions are balanced.
I'll come back to that in just a little bit.
Now in addition to these basic categories, a really important one relates back to the
heat I just mentioned.
Formally, we say that chemical reactions can be either exothermic or endothermic.
In general, an endothermic reaction is one in which energy input is required for the
reaction to occur, while an exothermic reaction is one that releases heat energy upon reacting.
Now there's a very important point here related to that barrier concept.
Endothermic and exothermic refer to the process of the reaction itself.
They do not refer to any energy required to overcome a barrier to get it going.
For example, I just mentioned a few moments ago that burning a candle requires heat to
start the reaction.
So you may be tempted to consider that an endothermic process since energy input was needed.
That's not how we should think about the use of the word endothermic here, since that refers
only to the reaction barrier, not to the thermodynamic process of the reaction itself.
For that, as we know, by just putting our finger near the flame, the burning of a candle
is clearly exothermic.
A few examples of endothermic reactions would be melting an ice cube or evaporating water
or baking bread or cooking pretty much anything, melting a solid, a chemical ice pack like
in a first aid kit, and plants growing, while the photosynthesis part anyway.
A few exothermic reaction examples would be, well, in addition to the burning candle, it
could be making an ice cube from water, rusting iron, a chemical hot pack, burning gas on
your stove, and sure, let's just throw in for good measure, nuclear fission.
Now the first and really most important topic of interest in terms of thermodynamics is
to find an answer to the simple question.
Which direction will a chemical reaction occur?
This of course depends upon the current equilibrium conditions of the system.
For standard chemical reactions in a lab, the control variables are typically temperature
and pressure, and I hope as I say that, that you're getting an idea, or at least having
a good dose of deja vu.
You see, when we have those conditions of constant temperature and pressure, there's
a particular thermodynamic variable, a potential energy variable, that's extremely useful,
and it will be the one we use to analyze reactions.
Yes, you knew it was coming, it's the Gibbs free energy.
Now as a reminder, the Gibbs free energy is equal to the internal energy minus temperature
times entropy plus pressure times volume.
So g equals u minus ts plus pv.
Or if you're a fan of enthalpy, this can also be written as g equals h minus ts.
And as we saw back in lectures 10 and 11, by considering the first law and our definition
of entropy in a reversible process, the differential form of the Gibbs free energy can be written
as follows.
Dg equals minus s times dt plus v times dp plus a sum over all the components of the
chemical potential of each component times the change in number of moles of that component.
Remember this type of equation is called a fundamental equation, because such an equation
completely specifies all changes that can occur in the given thermodynamic system.
Fundamental equations form the basis for applying the second law of thermodynamics to identify
the equilibrium state of a given system, and that's what we'll do now for the case of a
system undergoing chemical work, or more simply put for the case of reactions.
So if a chemical reaction occurs at constant temperature and pressure, the change in the
Gibbs free energy in a chemical reaction will tell us whether a reaction will go in
the forward or in the reverse direction.
If the change in g for a given reaction, or delta g sub rxn as we'd like to write it,
if this is less than zero, then the forward reaction is favored.
If it's equal to zero, then the reaction is in equilibrium.
If it's greater than zero, then the reverse reaction is favored.
I won't go through the detailed math for how those definitions come about, but it's quite
straightforward by considering the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the
entropy of the universe for any spontaneous process must increase, and the definition
for the change in the Gibbs free energy that I just wrote down for you.
So from this equation for the change in the Gibbs free energy, you can see that for a
system at constant temperature and pressure, we can write dg as equal to a sum over all
the components in the system of the chemical potential of that component times its change
in number of moles.
And as I mentioned, we already saw back in lecture nine that the chemical potential dictates
mass flow.
It's what we consider to understand how molecules in a reaction are driven from one phase into
another in closed systems, or how the addition or subtraction of molecules occurs in open
systems.
Remember, I used the analogy of a seesaw where we add up the chemical potentials of each
side and the heavier side that is the side with the largest chemical potential wins.
That means that that's the side that pushes the seesaw down and the side that we can consider
to be the reactants.
Now suppose that we want to find the equilibrium condition for a given reaction.
Well, the way we find equilibrium for any process is to find the point at which the change
in the Gibbs free energy is zero.
So where does dg equal zero?
For a given reaction, this will equal the sum over those chemical potentials times number
of moles where we use a positive sign for the species on the right and a negative sign
for the ones on the left.
This gives us the net change in G for that possible process.
But there's another really important point here, namely that we cannot simply create
something out of nothing.
So we have to make sure that the reaction is balanced.
Now as an aside, in processes such as nuclear fusion, it does in fact seem that we're creating
something completely new.
But that's a bit more complicated case that we're not going to go into in this course.
And even in nuclear reactions, if we count all of the atoms and electrons and energy
involved in the process correctly, we'll find that nothing is created or destroyed.
But in any case, for the cases that we're interested in thermodynamics, while chemical
species may change from one form to another in a given reaction, the total number of atoms
is conserved.
So I have to balance the two sides of the reaction.
As an example, I couldn't write down H2O goes to H2 plus O2 even though I know the two diatomic
molecules are what form.
Instead, to find the balance, I would write this as 2H2O goes to 2H2 plus O2.
And there you see that the number of hydrogen and oxygen molecules, although they've taken
on a new meaning by decomposing, is fully conserved.
Those coefficients that wind up balancing the reaction, and we'd like to use integers
here instead of fractions, those are called the stoichiometric coefficients of the reaction.
And if you think about it for a bit, you can see that these numbers are in fact very important.
That's because if I feed a reaction with a certain number of moles of reactant, then
the stoichiometric coefficient tells me something about how many moles of product I'll get.
Actually, it's even more than that.
It tells me how many moles of what needs to be mixed with how many moles of something
else in the first place.
For what is arguably the single most important reaction developed in human history, we have
N2 plus 3H2 goes to 2NH3.
Notice that this is balanced.
You'll notice that we have produced ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen.
So why is this so important?
Well, because it was the first time humans could make nitrogen in a way that plants like.
And as you can guess, that ability led to a new way of growing food, leading to nothing
less than the industrial revolution of food itself.
Nitrogen is a crucial ingredient in plant growth.
And you might think, well, but air is 78% nitrogen, so what's the big deal?
Well, the thing is nitrogen in the air is not suitable for plants because it's in the
form of N2, which is two nitrogen atoms connected by a triple bond.
This is one of the strongest bonds in nature, and plants simply cannot break it.
So to them, this type of nitrogen is useless.
Of course, carbon and oxygen are also crucial for plants, but unlike nitrogen, these are
easily obtained by the plants from soil and air.
So what the Haber, or sometimes as it's known, the Haber-Bosch process does is it takes nitrogen
from that unusable form and makes it usable in the form of ammonia.
This process is called fixing the nitrogen, which just means converting it into some bio-friendly
form.
Fritz Haber developed the process in this reaction in the early 1900s, and it completely
changed the world.
If you want to get a sense of just how much, consider this.
Today, 500 million tons of nitrogen for fertilizer is produced this way each year, and about half
of the protein in all human beings on this planet comes from nitrogen that was fixed by
this process.
Take a look at this human population curve, and notice where the Haber reaction was developed.
It's no accident that after that process, the population was able to, and did, grow at
a much faster pace.
OK, so that's the background.
Now let's go back to the thermodynamics of the reaction itself.
What if I were to start this reaction with a mole of N2 and a mole of H2?
What would I get?
Well, in that case, since the stoichiometric coefficients are 3H2 per N2, then you can
see that for each N2, I need 3H2 to react.
So I would consume the full mole of H2, but only one-third of a mole of N2 in the process.
And in the end, I'd get out two-thirds of a mole of NH3.
If I'd wanted to consume all of the N2 to begin with, I should have started with a number
of moles of each reactant in line with the stoichiometric coefficients.
So in this case, one mole of N2 and three moles of H2 would have been good, and I would
have wound up with two moles of ammonia.
Now, there are two important things we do to quantify this aspect of reactions.
First, we want to know the change in free energy per mole of reaction.
Second, we only really want to know this for the amount of the reaction that has occurred
to completion.
Or as it's often called for the extent of the reaction.
This extent concept can be understood as considering the reaction occurring in terms of the change
in number of moles of a given species divided by the stoichiometric coefficient for that
species.
The change in free energy for the reaction is then divided by this scaled change in
number of moles, which leads to what we want, namely the change in the Gibbs free energy
per mole of reaction that actually occurs.
Don't worry if that's a little confusing at first.
The main point is that this version of the change in free energy is the one we want for
a reaction.
Since it combines all that stuff I just mentioned about how much each species is able to react
dictated by those stoichiometric coefficients.
In the end, our expression for delta G sub rxn per mole is equal to a sum over the number
of components in the reaction of the chemical potential of the component times the stoichiometric
coefficient of that component.
And the same conditions as before apply, but now since it's per mole, remember that we
need to write a bar on top of the variable as per our convention.
So for the Haber reaction, we have that delta G with a bar on top for the reaction is equal
to two times the chemical potential of NH3 minus three times the chemical potential of
H2 minus one times the chemical potential of N2.
And as before, if this quantity is less than zero, the reaction occurs spontaneously in
the forward direction.
Equal to zero means it's in equilibrium and greater than zero means it occurs spontaneously
in the reverse direction.
OK, now for standard temperature and pressure conditions and for the given phases of these
materials, all gas phases in this case, we can look up the tabulated values for the chemical
potentials.
And what we find is that the change in free energy for this reaction at standard conditions,
so that's temperature equals 298 Kelvin and pressure is one atmosphere, that's equal to
minus 33 kilojoules.
As a reminder, when we're talking about standard state conditions, we usually put a little
not symbol above the variable to specify this.
And by the way, the actual absolute value for the chemical potential is not important,
and it would be a real pain to work with absolute values.
I mean, after all, we don't measure mountain peaks by their distance to the center of the
earth, but rather only by something more meaningful to us, namely their distance from sea level.
For chemical potentials, all that we care about is their difference from one side of
the reaction to another.
So it makes no difference how we define them as long as we're consistent.
As a matter of practice, the convention is to take the chemical potential of each element
as zero for reference.
This implies that the state of matter in which substances are decomposed into the elements
under standard conditions for the scale of the chemical potential represents our analogy
to sea level for elevations.
Here are just a few examples of standard state chemical potentials.
Notice that the pure elements are zero, and also that the chemical potential of a pure
substance depends on its state and crystal structure.
For example, liquid water and water vapor have different chemical potentials at the same
temperature and pressure.
Okay, so let's go back to our reaction.
Now we just derived the fact that this reaction has a tendency to go from the point of view
of its free energy per mole of reaction.
But that was only at standard conditions.
How do we predict what happens when these conditions vary?
Well, first, what about temperature?
In so many cases of industrial importance, we know that the temperature of a given reaction
is considerably higher than the standard 298 Kelvin, or in other words, room temperature.
Car engines run at temperatures more like 500 Kelvin.
A natural gas-fired power plant runs above 900 Kelvin.
Steel is made over a range of temperatures from 1200 to 2000 Kelvin.
And glass is made at a whopping 2700 Kelvin.
Just to name a few examples.
So how do we take into account the role of temperature in a reaction?
Well, in order to answer that question, we can go back to our original definition of
the change in molar Gibbs free energy for a reaction, namely that it's equal to the
change in molar enthalpy minus temperature times the change in molar entropy.
And here we see the role of temperature.
The simplest thing to do is just fix the delta H and delta S at their values for standard
conditions, and then see that the effects of temperature from the T delta S term.
Let's take a look at how this works for the Haber reaction.
The change in enthalpy for this reaction at standard conditions, which we write as delta
H with the little knot symbol up there, is equal to negative 92.38 kilojoules.
That means that if the reaction were to occur at zero temperature, then 92.38 kilojoules
of energy would be released in the form of heat by the reaction as it occurs from left
to right.
Remember that at constant pressure, enthalpy change is in fact equal to heat.
But what about entropy?
Well, it turns out that for this reaction, the entropy change at standard conditions
decreases as we form ammonia from N2 and H2.
This actually makes sense.
Remember, the entropy is equal to the number of degrees of freedom that the system has
available to it.
If we reduce the number of gas molecules that make up the system, we can see how the number
of degrees of freedom would also reduce, and therefore the entropy.
In this particular case, delta S0 equals minus 198.3 joules per Kelvin.
So indeed, that's quite a negative value.
Now at room temperature, delta G0 equals negative 92.38 kilojoules minus 298 Kelvin
times minus 198.3 joules per Kelvin, which equals about minus 33 kilojoules, just what
we had before from our analysis of the chemical potentials.
This tells us the reaction is spontaneous at room temperature.
But now let's increase the temperature.
So for example, at 500 Celsius or 773 Kelvin, the value for delta G0 now becomes plus 61
kilojoules.
So the reaction no longer occurs spontaneously.
Now this is perhaps counterintuitive, since we're kind of used to thinking of reactions
happening more favorably the higher the temperature.
But that is simply not the case for a reaction where entropy decreases.
OK, now a reaction can also deviate from the case of standard conditions in ways that
don't just involve temperature.
This gets a bit more complicated, and it's beyond the level of detail I'll be going
into for this lecture.
But I'll tell you the punchline in case you're interested.
For reactions that occur under non-standard state conditions, we simply write the change
in molar free energy of the reaction is equal to the change in molar free energy under standard
conditions plus the ideal gas constant R times the temperature times the natural logarithm
of what is called the reaction quotient.
Again, I won't go into detail here, but that reaction quotient is related to the partial
pressure if it's a gas or the concentrations if it's a liquid or solid.
Now let me conclude by going back to the concept of kinetics.
As I mentioned, a thermodynamic analysis of reactions only tells us about the equilibrium
case, that is, eventually what the reaction will do given enough time.
That means that if we apply our analysis to diamond, it tells us that it should in fact
all react to graphite, but we know that this doesn't happen, at least not within any time
frame we're living in.
So the ideas of metastability or of barriers to reactions occurring and of the time scale
over which a reaction occurs do not come from our thermodynamic analysis.
In fact, for the Haber reaction, the key discovery was not that the reaction occurs, but rather
how to make it occur much more efficiently by introducing catalysts that create intermediate
processes and by varying the pressure to allow for large scales, high output and low costs.
Still, even without all of the kinetics, the simple question is, will a reaction occur
or not, given that the system can find a way to its happy place?
That question is crucial, since it forms the basis of even how to think about ultimately
what can be made from what.
