You
You
Your lecture is Professor Jeffrey C. Grossman. Dr. Grossman is a professor in the Department of
Material Science and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Recognized for his
cutting-edge research and innovative interdisciplinary teaching methods, Professor Grossman has appeared
on PBS and the Discovery Channel's Science Channel. His current research focuses on developing energy
sources for the future.
Hello and welcome to our first lecture on thermodynamics. In this lecture I hope to share with you my
excitement and passion for this topic and to convey to you why the subject of thermodynamics is so
crucial. I started out studying theoretical physics and I got both my bachelor's and PhD degrees in
that subject. Now I'm a material scientist and engineer and for me it's the connection of fundamental
understanding to actual working relevant devices and technologies that strikes at the heart of my
passion. What drives my work is the connection between the science of materials and the technology
those materials can influence. And that is what the discipline of material science and engineering
is. It is at its core the study of what makes the material behave the way it does. What's under
the hood of a given material? And once I know that, how can I engineer it to be something better
or to do something different? And I'm excited to teach you this course because it's always some
aspect of thermodynamics that is in fact under that hood. I'm learning to be sure to get across
the excitement of real problems that we can interact with and see that relate the key concepts
directly to experiments. To accomplish this this course will be demo driven meaning that in nearly
every lecture at some point or another I'll take a break put on my lab coat and goggles and go and
smash break light on fire or otherwise convert energy from one form into another. I'll pour water
into a bowl that looks just like regular water but becomes ice as soon as it hits the bowl.
I'll light a hundred dollar bill on fire without it charring a single bit. I'll break the bottom
of a glass bottle cleanly off by striking it at the top and I'll boil water by cooling it
instead of heating it. I'll show you what is perhaps the world's simplest motor involving a
battery a magnet and a single wire and I'll give many other examples of mechanical work.
We'll light a piece of cotton on fire using a hammer and the laws of the ideal gas
and I'll show you how to make a balloon not pop even when you light it on fire.
I'll demonstrate that matter can exist in all three phases at the same time gas liquid and solid.
We'll run all sorts of engines from ones you may know about already that run on heat to ones
that are less common like those that run on surface tension or none other than entropy itself.
And of course this list wouldn't be complete if I didn't tell you that I'll also use a very
simple chemical reaction to create a massive 10-foot-high eruption.
Consider the following question. You've probably heard of the periodic table of the elements.
The 118 of them exist officially but there are around a hundred elements that are stable
and found naturally. So how many of those hundred elements do you think there are in your cell
phone? It's quite remarkable to think about. My cell phone has 64 different elements in it.
How do we do that? How do we take around two-thirds of all of the known stable elements
and make them perform all of the different functions that a cell phone does?
We literally dug up chunks of the earth's crust, extracted out this broad range of elements
and then processed them in a whole bunch of particular ways. And voila, I can shoot a high
definition video and text it anywhere on the globe, check sports scores, the weather or movie times,
listen to millions of songs or simply make a phone call. All because I figured out how to coax
those 64 different elements into just the right positions and combinations.
But how is this actually done? It has to do with the way materials interact with each other
and how they respond to processing conditions. If you've ever cooked a meal then you know what
I'm talking about. Let's think of the elements in my cell phone as the ingredients we're using to
cook with. The processing conditions for those chocolate chip cookies might be a temperature of
375 degrees Fahrenheit and a time of 10 minutes. But for the brownies, it's a temperature of 300
degrees Fahrenheit and 45 minutes of cook time. And the oven is not under any extra pressure,
so those are both examples of cooking at the same pressure as the rest of the kitchen. But if you've
ever used a pressure cooker then you know that pressure is another way to change the processing
to change the processing conditions. And just like temperature, changing the pressure makes a big
difference. So we have some initial set of raw materials, the flour, vanilla extract, eggs,
sugar and so on. And when we mix them together in just the right proportions and then process them
under just the right conditions, then we can achieve a certain desired outcome. It's the same
thing with elements and material science and engineering. We start with our initial ingredients,
which correspond to the elements of the periodic table. We process them in just the right ways
and we get a material that has just the right properties for some desired application.
At the heart of this example is the fundamental nature of energy and all of its forms. I put
mechanical energy into the eggs when I beat them. Chemical energy is rearranged when sugar is dissolved
and heat energy is inserted when the food is baked. One of the key questions you're answering when you
cook a meal is how does energy in all of its different forms change the nature of a material?
And how can we understand these energy flows so that we can control them to make materials take
on certain properties or behave in a certain way? Taking this a bit further, how can we become
master chefs of not just food, but of all known elements? This in essence is the topic of thermodynamics
and it's absolutely essential in science and technology. And thermodynamics is not just a
foundational topic for material science and engineering. It's also at the core of many other
disciplines like chemical and mechanical engineering or biology and chemistry and physics.
Each discipline may take a different view of thermodynamics, some emphasizing more how it
applies to engines while others delving more into the theoretical statistical nature of the subject.
But in the end they all place this topic at the top of their academic food chain.
And it's for very good reason. As Einstein famously said about thermodynamics,
it is the only physical theory of universal content that within the framework of applicability
of its basic concepts will never be overthrown. Now that's a powerful statement given that he
had literally just overthrown the laws of classical physics by helping to develop the quantum theory.
Thermodynamics is a subject that connects deep and fundamental insights from the atomic scale of
the world all the way to the highly applied. And it's a topic that has been pivotal for the
technologies that have completely revolutionized the world as we know it over the past 500 years.
And perhaps the single most important differentiator for this subject and the aspect that makes
thermodynamics so incredibly important to my own research and energy is that very word
thermo itself. It's the fundamental understanding of heat and temperature and ultimately entropy
that separates this subject from all others. Thermodynamics means literally heat in motion.
And without an understanding of heat, our ability to make science practical is extremely limited.
Heat is of course everywhere and putting heat into motion, well that alone is at the core of
the industrial revolution in the beginning of our modern age. The transformation of energy of all
forms into and from heat is at the core of the energy revolution and fundamentally what makes
human civilization thrive today. So in answer to the question of why thermodynamics is such a
pivotal topic, let's pose another question. What if we had to start all over? What if the
buildings were leveled, the cars and roads were gone, hospitals disappeared and electricity
was only found in lightning strikes? Basically what if nothing were here? How would we rebuild
our world? What would the challenges be? What tools would we need? What knowledge would we need?
The place to start in order to answer such a question is to ask what the variables are
in the first place. What are the givens? That is what are the things that we know about,
the things that we have? What are the things that we may not have but need to know about?
These are the variables and as you can imagine these would be the ingredients at our disposal
as well as what our kitchen can do. In the example of cooking a meal it would come down
to different plants and animals and different ways to process those ingredients.
In our effort to rebuild the world we make this more general. We ask what raw materials we could
find. Plus the different forms of energy we would be able to harness to manipulate those
ingredients. These energies could include heat or mechanical forces or chemical reactions as examples.
And once we knew what the variables were next we'd need to know how those variables
interact with one another. In other words how do materials respond to their environment?
How does one form of energy change when another form of energy is introduced?
What is the interplay between energy of all forms and matter?
The answers to these questions can be found in thermodynamics. Thermodynamics is the subject
that holds the key to understanding how energy in all of its forms including heat
changes the nature of the materials that make up the world.
Without understanding these relationships we could not rebuild our world. We would not be able to
make an engine that turns heat into mechanical work. We would not be able to make electricity from
spinning turbines and then use that electricity to perform useful tasks like produce light or
communicate across great distances. We would have no understanding of what ingredients to mix
in what proportions and at what temperatures to make steel strong enough to build buildings
and airplanes and we would certainly not be able to make those airplanes fly. How would we begin?
Well first we need to get a sense of what the variables are that we can control. I mentioned a
few already but let's list them all together here. There would be temperature and pressure since I
could make fire to control heat and squeezing or banging on a material applies a force or pressure
to it. I could also control the volume or mass of a substance simply by changing the amount
and I can think about controlling at least in some cases the phase of the material.
This means working with the material as a gas liquid or a solid which as you probably already
know is going to be a function of the temperature and then there would be the chemistry itself
which goes back to those raw ingredients and how I mix different relative amounts together.
Then I'd start varying the properties with respect to one another to see what happens.
I'd try to vary just a few variables at a time while holding as many of the other ones fixed.
For example I change the temperature and see if the volume changes or hold the temperature fixed
and add more material and see if the pressure changes and so on. And this is exactly what
scientists and engineers did to lay the foundations of thermodynamics and it's what we'll do
in the early lectures of this course. We'll develop a strong sense for each of these crucial
variables and we'll learn the relationships between them. We'll build our knowledge starting
with the properties of materials when they're in a single phase like a gas and then we'll learn how
and why materials can change phase as a function of their environment.
And since heat is one of the single most important kinds of energy we'll begin our course
in the very next lecture with the way in which thermal energy is measured. That would be temperature.
But just knowing the variables is not enough to build something useful. It would be like
knowing all of the ingredients in a chocolate chip cookie recipe but not knowing how much of each
one to use or how to cook them. And even more importantly we'd have to figure out how one
cooking process is related to another. Would I achieve the same results by baking in an oven
frying on a pan or boiling in water? That's why once we have a solid understanding of the
different variables of thermodynamics we'll move on to learn about the laws that bind them all together.
The first law of thermodynamics is a statement of conservation of energy and it covers all of the
different forms of energy possible including thermal energy. At that stage of our knowledge needed in
our attempt to rebuild the world we would have a fantastic grasp of the different ways in which
energy can flow into or out of a material. By taking a look under the hood of materials
and peering across vast length and time scales we'll learn that at the fundamental level
for the energy stored in the material itself all energy flows are equivalent. We'd see that
performing work like say applying a pressure or initiating a reaction is entirely equivalent
to adding heat. This is one of the fundamental pillars of thermodynamics and it's captured
in the first law. And armed with that knowledge we would learn that there are many ways to
manipulate the properties of materials and that we can adapt our processing techniques
to whatever is most convenient given the tools we have on hand. We would also be able to experiment
with the trading back and forth between heat and work. We'd see that vast amounts of heat
can be generated not just by lighting fire but also by other means like the friction
of two pieces of metal rubbing together. As chefs we're learning that there are more
ways to process our ingredients than we might have originally thought. And by playing with
the relationships between those basic variables pressure temperature volume and mass we'd start
to figure out how to make heat go the other way and convert into some form of useful work.
For example taking advantage of the fact that heat makes a gas expand which in turn can be used to
push on a piston we'd be able to make our very first engine. Now at this point in terms of our
rebuilding process we could do a whole lot and we'd be able to make an efficient form of concrete
that pours easily and dries quickly since we'd have learned what temperatures are needed to make
the calcium silicate particles of just the right composition and size. We'd probably have figured
out that the properties of steel depend very closely not just on how much carbon is added to iron
but also on how rapidly the molten metal is cooled into a solid. We'd then be able to take
advantage of that knowledge to make the different types of steels needed whether for buildings,
railroad tracks or plumbing pipes. And we'd be making some of our very first combustion engines
turning the heat from fire into mechanical motion. In short with the topics of thermodynamics I've
described to you so far we'd be able to re-enter the industrial revolution.
And yet it would be hard to move past this point. Yes we've put back some of the basic
building blocks of the world but there would still remain enormous gaps like the ability to
make and control many more kinds of materials like plastics or the development of modern medicine
or the ability to create highly tailored chemistries or for that matter the entire information
technology revolution to name just a few examples. You see in terms of the knowledge we'd need we
would have a thorough sense of the different driving forces in nature and how to control them to
change the variables we care about. Put energy into a system and that system will respond.
This is the nature of a thermodynamic driving force. It's a way to push or pull on a material
with any type of energy. Apply a pressure and see the volume change. Increase the temperature
and watch the material melt. A force is applied and a response is observed.
But the driving force and corresponding response alone do not tell the whole story. For that we
need something else. We need to know what it is that governs when and why the system stops being
driven. In other words we need to understand why a system comes to equilibrium. This means
that given any set of external conditions like temperature pressure and volume on average the
system no longer undergoes any changes. This concept of equilibrium is so important in thermodynamics
that I'll spend a good amount of time discussing it in the early lectures of the course but it's
not until our lecture on entropy and the second law of thermodynamics that we find the missing
knowledge I just described. Consider an analogy of a ball rolling down a track. If the track points
down then we know the ball will experience a driving force due to gravity in this case
to go down the track. So that's the driving force and the response but we still have the crucial
question of where the ball will come to rest. Of course we have an intuitive sense here that it
will stop where there's some sort of minimum point in the track. At that point the ball might go back
and forth for a while but if there's a little friction so it loses a little energy as it goes
eventually it'll come to rest there. That's the equilibrium point. The second law of thermodynamics
allows us to understand and predict this minimum point for any set of processes involving any
type of energy transfer including thermal energy. By combining the first and second laws of thermodynamics
we can predict the equilibrium point for a system under any conditions. That's pretty powerful stuff.
And the thing is that at least at first it's not as intuitive as a simple ball rolling on a track
example. That's because there are a whole lot more possible forms of energy that may be present than
just gravitational energy. For example there's the mechanical energy which I already mentioned
and it's due to pressure times a change in volume. There's chemical energy which can lead to changes
in the material composition itself and many other forms like energy due to magnetism, surface tension
and electric fields to name just a few. So the track of thermodynamics can get pretty complicated.
But there's one particular kind of energy that leads to the biggest departure from an intuitive
picture and that would be thermal energy. Thermodynamics is the subject that treats this
energy on an equal footing with all of the other terms and the reason it's able to do so has to
do with another variable called entropy. We'll be talking a lot about entropy throughout this
course because it's of absolutely fundamental importance to our subject. Entropy gives us
the crucial link between temperature and thermal energy. It's a way to quantify how many different
ways there are to distribute energy and as we'll see it's the foundation for the second law of
thermodynamics. By understanding entropy we will learn how to determine when and why a system reaches
equilibrium. We'll gain an intuitive sense for the connectedness of thermal energy to all other forms
of energy and we'll understand why a perpetual motion machine can never exist. Entropy gives us
nothing less than the arrow of time since it's the thermodynamic variable that provides a means
to predict which direction all processes will occur. It tells us how to find where the minimum
of the track is not just for a ball and gravity but for any set of materials in any kind of energy
terms. So armed with entropy and the second law we'll have filled the knowledge gap we needed to
tackle the next step in our effort to rebuild the world. We'll be able to gain a deeper understanding
of how materials both hold on to thermal energy as well as how they respond to it,
something that we'll discuss in our lectures on heat capacity and thermal expansion. Our attempt
to rebuild the world will involve a constant transformation of energy and heat will always
be in the mix during these transformations. And what we'll need to do with this energy very often
is to create order from disorder. We'll make a car move by blowing up little carbonaceous
molecules in an engine. We'll make chemicals pure from their raw mixed up natural sources.
We'll make computer chips out of sand and turn limestone into liquid to make roads and houses.
Our bodies themselves are continuously taking energy from food to maintain ordered arrangements
of trillions of cells and we would begin to understand these processes more deeply.
At this stage we'll understand why it takes energy to create order and why things don't just sometimes
become ordered on their own. The concept of entropy answers these questions as it provides a crucial
bridge between heat and temperature and as we'll see unlike energy entropy is not conserved and yet
it does play a key role in energy conservation since entropy allows us to bring heat into our
energy. We will tightly connect the first and second laws together to make the most use of
our thermodynamic understanding as we rebuild. And by doing so we'll be in a position to create
maps of materials, maps that tell us precisely what a material will do for any given set of
conditions. These maps are called phase diagrams and they represent one of the single most important
outcomes of thermodynamics. They can be constructed from the knowledge of the first and second laws
for any material. With phase diagrams we unlock the behavior of a given material or
mixture of materials in a manner that lets us dial in just the right processing conditions
to achieve just the right behavior. With this type of control we can begin making again the
materials needed for electronics. We can dictate precisely when reactions will happen and in which
direction allowing us to make many more materials as well as control over chemistry accurate enough
to lead to modern biotechnology and medicine. With phase diagrams we're able to make lighter
machines, more efficient engines, myriad new materials and completely new ways to convert
and store energy itself. Because of how important they are we'll spend five whole lectures to fully
cover phase diagrams and after that we'll talk about a number of practical examples of how the
knowledge of thermodynamics leads to crucial technologies. We'll fill in the gaps and learn
key elements that it would take to put the world back. Fundamentally at the core of this subject
is the knowledge of what makes a material behave the way it does under any circumstances.
And along the way as we gain this core knowledge of thermodynamics we'll see countless examples
of how it impacts our lives. Back to the analogy of cooking in the kitchen we'll see why you might
burn your mouth on the cheese rather than the crust of a piece of pizza. That's the heat capacity
and it tells us how and why materials can hold on to different amounts of heat.
When we learn about phase transitions in latent heat we'll see how much energy it takes to make a
material transition from one phase like a solid into another like a liquid. We'll see why ice
floats rather than sinks and how pressure plays a role in determining what phase a material takes on.
We'll learn why it's possible to both boil and freeze a liquid at exactly the same time.
And we'll learn what governs the behavior of mixtures of materials. We'll learn about the limits
of making heat do mechanical work like in a car engine and we'll also explore a number of other
ways that materials can be used to make things move. We'll learn about electrochemistry and the
basic principles of a battery and we'll put to rest once and for all the question of whether a
potato can really power a clock. And through it all the underlying processes will involve some form
of an energy transfer either to from or within a given material from one form to another and to
another still. Thermodynamics is the subject that governs all possible forms of energy transfer and
tells us how to predict the behavior of materials as a result of these energy ebbs and flows.
Thermodynamics is crucially important to our understanding of the world and it lies at the
core of our understanding of materials and yet it's perhaps the least intuitive introductory
subject of them all. When we see a ball bounce or not we immediately feel the physics concepts of
gravity or energy and momentum. But when we add a dash of salt into our soup does the increase in
the salt's configurational entropy which is after all what makes it dissolve does that come to us
with the same intuition? The answer is in my experience that the same basic intuition is
missing from thermodynamics. A number of textbooks and now many websites do a fantastic job at
teaching the key concepts like entropy, temperature, heat, phases, the conversion of energy from one
form into another and the seemingly endless permutations of fundamental equations and possible
thermodynamic work terms and of course the four laws that form the basis of the theory of thermodynamics.
Those are the ones Einstein said will never be overturned. But you see all these concepts
often become stuck in many students minds as either only sets of mathematical operations
or else ideas that only apply to highly contrived examples as opposed to real life problems.
The concepts of thermodynamics badly need to be brought to life. I want to bring thermodynamics to
that same level as other subjects where intuition is more natural to get you to feel that that same
kind of intuition for the key concepts which at first can appear quite a bit more elusive.
Entropy I'm talking to you. Now I don't plan to make this a course with a whole lot of derivations
but I won't shy away from the math either. To learn thermodynamics means learning some of the
basic math as needed so that you can go back and forth between the key concepts and the variables
and relationships that represent them. It would be a disservice to the topic if I didn't get into
some of the math in order to show you how the important relationships between thermodynamics
can be quantified. That is after all what engineers would need to do to rebuild the world.
But I will always strive for a balance never getting too far away from the key conceptual
pictures. I'll be giving many analogies and many comparisons along the way and as much as possible
I'll ground our discussions in real problems. By the end of this course you'll be a master chef
of materials who possesses not just the recipes but a deep understanding of why a recipe gives the
results it does. You may not be able to combine 64 elements to make a cell phone but you'll have the
knowledge that it takes to see how such materials could be processed in just the right ways to do
so. You'll learn about the most important variables and how they depend on one another
and you'll gain the knowledge of the laws of thermodynamics,
four laws that govern the behavior of these variables. These are the four laws that move
the universe. So what are we waiting for? Let's get started.
