We come now to the fourth major alternative of the Project of Modernity in Ethics, the
appeal to a social contract, the contractarian alternative.
The idea of a social contract was known, of course, to the ancients.
There is a theory of this sort mentioned in Plato's Republic, for example.
But I said in lecture three that the idea of a social contract took on a special urgency
in the modern era of thought.
In the wake of religious conflicts racking Europe after the Reformation, it seemed like
a fruitful way of finding common ethical and political ground in the midst of disagreement.
The first influential social contract theory of the modern era was put forward by Thomas
Hobbes in the middle of the 17th century.
A little later in the century, another one by John Locke, which was very influential.
And then in the 18th, a third famous social contract theory by the French thinker Jean-Jacques
Rousseau.
The influence of these thinkers is very well known, of course, especially Locke and Rousseau
on the French revolutions and the American revolution, and on subsequent political thought
as well.
Perhaps less well known is the fact that there has been a revival of social contract thinking
in the last half of the 20th century, in which social contract theories have been championed
as a basis for not only politics, but ethics as well, as they were by some of the original
social contract thinkers like Hobbes.
And I think the reason for this revival is a theme we've been pursuing throughout this
lecture series, and that is that to many modern thinkers, the social contract seems a way
to find common ground in ethics in the wake of pluralism and uncertainty.
This recent revival of social contract thinking actually began in ethics and politics in the
1960s, I would say, somewhere in there.
But it really took a quantum leap forward in 1971 with the publication of a book entitled
A Theory of Justice by Harvard philosopher and political theorist John Rawls.
We are going to be looking at Rawls' work later in this lecture because it has transformed
modern ethical theory and gotten people to think more about social contract in both ethics
and politics.
But first I want to say something about the founders of modern social contract theory,
and especially I want to distinguish two branches of it that have flowed from the 17th
century into the 20th, because they raise different kinds of problems.
One of the branches comes from Thomas Hobbes, and it is called, just to be simple, Hobbesian
contract theory, but that's what many people nowadays call it in any case.
The other branch stems from Locke and Rousseau, and it's often called, and we can call it
I think very justly, ideal social contract theory.
Now each of these is quite different from the other, and each raises a whole host of
different kinds of problems and is related to different things in modern thought, so
I want to treat them separately.
Let's begin with the Hobbesian branch of social contract theory.
Thomas Hobbes was a contemporary of Descartes, early 17th century, and he introduced into
modern political and social theory the idea of a state of nature.
By this Hobbes meant the natural state humans live in before they ever found governments
or civil societies, if you will.
What was that state for Hobbes?
He said it was, as you are perhaps familiar, a continual state of warfare.
I think we could think about this fruitfully in a number of ways.
One way is to think of it as something like a tribal existence, which probably did antedate
the founding of civilization.
Tribal groups, since they have to fight for their territory and for everything, their
watering holes and whatnot, cannot trust rival tribes.
So the state of nature, Hobbes says, will be one of continual warfare, a state in which
the life of man in a very famous phrase, he says, will be poor, nasty, brutish, and short.
I think a nice model for Hobbes' state of nature is provided by that once popular novel
called Lord of the Flies by William Goldman, that some of you may know about, in which
a bunch of English schoolboys suddenly find themselves shipwrecked and stranded on an
isolated island, and soon they degenerate into factions, losing all of the masks of
civilization and fighting with one another.
Usually we think of humans rising from a Hobbesian state of nature to a higher state.
In this case, they degenerated when left to themselves.
There are other real world analogies, however, to Hobbes' state of nature.
I think a good one is the situation of rival gangs or rival drug lords that has reduced
some of our inner cities into a Hobbesian state of nature.
Inner city gangs remind us that without education, as H.G. Wells once said, the human race is
one generation away from barbarism.
Some people have often also described the state of international relations as one of
a Hobbesian state of nature.
And it is so, to the degree, that there is no effective power to enforce international
law so that war ends up being the only option between nations, there being no government
above them.
Well, having defined this state of nature, Hobbes argued that rational persons and groups
in such a state, out of a desire for their own security and their own well-being, would
be motivated to make a social contract, or a covenant, as he sometimes says using the
biblical term, with their rivals.
Acting in their own self-interest, they would see the benefits of cooperation over continual
warfare.
But Hobbes saw that such a contract would be useless if it were not enforced, just as
international law tends to be useless if it is not enforced.
So he felt that the social contractors would have to agree to submit themselves entirely
to a sovereign who had power to enforce the contract.
Now there are a number of modern ethical thinkers, very good ones, who follow Hobbes very closely.
Two of them of some importance are Kurt Baier and David Gautier.
Now these modern Hobbesians, they agree that Hobbes is on the right track in his reasoning
here, except for the last step, where he introduces the notion of an absolute sovereign.
This step they don't agree with.
They say that the social contractors can agree to different forms of government, even a constitutional
democracy.
We don't have to end up, as Hobbes did, with an absolute sovereign.
The key thing is that the contractors be willing to submit to the government enforcement of
laws, whatever the government should be.
And so the modern Hobbesians have made that little change.
Another theme of modern Hobbesians, who try to develop his theory in the 20th century,
is that the social contract should be the basis of ethics as well as politics.
And here they follow Hobbes also.
Because Hobbes held that there's no moral right or wrong in the state of nature.
It's just self-interest in what you can get, total warfare.
Those of right or wrong he held are actually created by the contract itself.
In sum, we define what's right or wrong by our promises and mutual commitments, the ones
we make to one another, hence no right or wrong in the state of nature.
This is the way we get, in effect, a theory here that can be the basis of ethics as well
as politics.
In this regard, there's a definite connection between modern Hobbesian theories and certain
ideas about ethics that have surfaced in modern biology since 1960, in new fields such as
sociobiology and evolutionary psychology.
Now I want to pause here and say a little bit about these new fields in biology because
they're very closely related to Hobbes' theory and eventually will come back to Hobbes'
theory.
And you'll see the connection.
But let me digress a bit here and talk about sociobiology and evolutionary psychology because
Hobbes' ideas are very close to them.
One main problem at issue in these new fields or disciplines is the problem of altruism
in evolution.
Now, you know, originally in the theory of evolution, Darwin emphasized the so-called
survival of the fittest, the struggle for survival.
And that seemed to leave no room for altruism or sacrificing oneself for the good of others
in evolution.
At the turn of the last century, in fact, there was a doctrine you may have heard of
called social Darwinism, which exploited this idea of survival of the fittest.
In fact, it argued, it extended the idea of survival of the fittest into economic theory
in support of the idea that unfettered economic competition was a natural extension to economics
of Darwin's survival of the fittest.
The economically fittest would survive and prosper while the losers in the economic gain
would fall by the wayside, something like a Hobbesian state of nature.
Well, social Darwinism is now pretty much a discredited doctrine, at least by name, though
the idea keeps cropping up, as you know, in all sorts of guises, in modern thought.
It, after all, does boggle the mind to think of a rich overweight sedentary banker as the
end product of evolution.
But the deeper problem with social Darwinism is the too hasty transference of ideas of
fitness and biology over to economics and society, you see.
The key idea of evolutionary fitness, after all, is adaptability to one's environment.
But when it comes to human social environments, they are not just given to us by nature.
We're capable of shaping and changing our social environments.
Now we have to ask two questions when it comes to human survival and human environments.
We first have to ask, what kind of a person is most fit for a given social environment?
But then we also have to ask, what kind of social environment do we want to have?
Because we have a choice about that.
It's surely true that a highly competitive business-oriented person will thrive in a
freewheeling market economy.
But that same person might be absolutely miserable in a communal society, like a kibbutz for
example, or a monastery, and vice versa, for the communally-oriented person.
You know, there was a medieval thinker, the most famous in the early part of the Middle
Ages, the Dark Ages, by the name of Spodus Origina, a very original thinker indeed, because
in the midst of the Middle Ages, and he was himself friar, he said, there was no hell.
He said, sinners go to heaven too, but they hate it.
And there's a similar story, by the way, about the Victorian poet Matthew Arnold.
Samuel Butler said when Matthew Arnold died, poor Matt, he won't like God.
So the point is, you see, that the fittest depends on what kind of society you want to
have.
Some are fit for one kind of society, some are fit for another.
So biology and evolution don't answer the questions of social and political philosophy.
They lead us to those questions, where we have to ask those questions, and about ethics
as well.
For such reasons, the consensus is that social Darwinism was too simplistic, too simplistic
an extension of evolutionary theory to social life.
And in addition, even more important, social Darwinists missed a fundamental point, that
evolution proceeds as much by cooperation between groups, and even between species as
by competition.
This is a point made by sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists today.
E. O. Wilson, the founder of sociobiology, is a Harvard entomologist.
He studies bugs.
And in his classic 1975 work, Sociobiology, he showed how throughout the insect world,
ants, termites, bees, etc., individuals sacrificing for others was common, and obviously served
a function in the survival of the group and species.
And we know that throughout nature, whole species cooperate with one another for survival,
from the bees and the flowers to the benign bacteria on our skins that protect us from
harmful bacteria.
We can kill any number of these by just rubbing our arm.
There was a fellow who wrote a marvelous book about this, all the various kinds of bacteria
and other that are on our bodies.
He called the book Life on Man.
And turning to humans, sociobiologists like Wilson have argued that altruism or concern
for others also plays a more significant role in evolution than was previously supposed.
Now there are two aspects of this role for altruism.
The first was called, that is called nowadays, kin selection.
That is, individual humans assisting or sacrificing for their relatives, because relatives share
some of the same genetic material.
No helping to raise a niece, finding a brother, a job, or protecting or sacrificing one's
well-being or even one's life, a family, kin, tribe, or clan.
That's kin selection.
In a recent work by biologists and philosophers of science, this line of argument is taken
further to argue that group selection, where people cooperate and the whole group survives,
actually plays a greater role in evolution than we supposed.
All these changes are now going about in evolutionary theory.
Of course, we humans have a choice about sacrificing ourselves, but the tendency is there and plays
an evolutionary role.
But of course, kin selection, even broadened to extended kin, can't be the whole story
of altruism and human behavior, clearly.
Why would an unrelated people help each other?
Well, the answer offered by sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists is to add a
second element here in cooperation to kin selection.
And this is what they call reciprocal altruism.
And here is where we start to get a connection with Hobbes and modern Hobbesian social contract
theory.
Reciprocal altruism.
If we aid our neighbors and neighboring groups when they are in need, then even if they are
not related to us, they are likely to aid us when we are in need.
Reciprocal altruism, I'll scratch my back, if you scratch mine, I'll scratch your back
if you scratch mine.
I kind of prefer Yogi Berra's version of this.
He said, if you don't go to other people's funerals, they won't go to yours.
But you get the idea, anyway, about reciprocal altruism in many, many different forms.
And here's the interesting point.
Such reciprocal altruism is now widely viewed by evolutionists and others as the main mechanism
by which cooperation evolves in the human species.
But here's an even more startling point.
It's been realized in the last 40 years that Hobbes, way back there in the 17th century,
had already anticipated this idea of reciprocal altruism in his notion of the social contract.
After all, people living in a state of nature, in a state of continual war with one another,
realize the need for cooperating with others, making a contract rather than fighting with
them.
I mean, what people realize today is that Hobbes' social contract theory is another version
of the idea of reciprocal altruism in biology.
They are very, very similar and closely related, and Hobbes had anticipated all that.
But of course, this connection to biological theories of reciprocal altruism and Hobbesian
social contract theories points up some limitations in the Hobbesian theories.
Because as you can see, the underlying motivation for entering into a Hobbesian social contract
is enlightened self-interest.
There's no reason for a strong or powerful tribe or an individual or nation to make a
social contract with its less powerful or poorer neighbors.
The neighbors can't help them or hurt them in return.
Consider those poor Indians of lecture three of Central America that Bartolomé de Lescasse's
tried to help out.
Hobbesian principles do not rule out marginalizing or exploiting the weaker.
Only those that can help you in return.
Weaker parties may also, in fact, enforce a bad bargain on the weaker partners, creating
a social contract in which the others have subordinate status.
The bargaining procedure may not be between equals at all.
In addition, there would seem to be nothing wrong with trying to be a free rider in a
social contract, the person who will make the contract but cheat whenever he can get
away with it for his own benefit.
Nothing in Hobbes' theory rules this out as well, after all, if we are seeking self-interest.
One might say, well, you cheat, you'll get caught, but that's a political legal matter,
not necessarily an ethical one.
So there's a bit of a problem here for the Hobbesians as well.
It would seem therefore that biological ideas of reciprocal altruism and Hobbesian theories
of the social contract, which are closely related, they take us somewhere towards ethics
and cooperation among humans, but not all the way to ethics, it would seem.
They certainly show that evolution is far less the dog-eat-dog survival of the fittest
thing that was thought to be in the 19th century.
And I think most people are coming to agree to that idea.
That evolution tends to favor cooperation, at least, as much, if not more, than competition.
And this is an important advance, I think, in modern thought.
In fact, Darwin would be very pleased, because we know, as I said in an earlier lecture, that
he worried very much about the implications of his evolutionary theory for ethics and
the appeal to Jungian principles of sympathy and benevolence and so on.
And yet, it all seems to still fall short of what we want in ethics, however far it
may go.
But I said that there were two branches of modern social contract theory, both of which
have been revived in the last half of the 20th century.
The first branch we have been discussing is the Hobbesian.
The second branch which we're now going to turn to, and we will carry it into the next
lecture, is the ideal social contract theory, which takes its cue not from Hobbes, but from
the other two great traditional social contract theorists, namely Locke and Rousseau.
These thinkers, unlike Hobbes, were more inspired by and did also inspire the idealistic spirit
of the Enlightenment.
And the most influential representative of ideal contract theory in modern times is John
Rawls, who I mentioned earlier, whose book in 1971, A Theory of Justice, actually revived
the whole new tradition of modern contract social thinking in ethics and politics.
Now, the key difference in these ideal theories of Locke and Rousseau, and also in Rawls,
is that the social contract is constrained from the start by ideal requirements of justice
or equality to make it fair, requirements that go beyond mere enlightened self-interest,
hence the title ideal social contract theory.
You can think of this as a way to overcome some of the difficulties we were just discussing
with the Hobbesian theories.
I think that should be very clear, and hence the reason for the ideal title.
This is if we were going to sit down to make a contract, but accepted certain requirements
from the start to ensure that the agreement would be fair, that the more powerful people
wouldn't put it to us, so to speak, and so on, thus avoiding the possible unfairness
and inequality in the Hobbesian contract.
In other words, the ideal theorists think, maybe we can save this idea of the social
contract, but we've got to find ways to make it fair so that when we contract, we come
up with a fair or a just result.
This Hobbes imagines a group of hypothetical social contractors who have come together
to design a basic set of principles to govern society.
So we imagine, as all social contractors do, let's suppose that we all gathered different
peoples and so on, and we came in here together, and we were going to sit down and put down
a social contract we could all sign on to that was going to give us the basic rules to
govern society.
Now, Raul's original and provocative idea here, which has had such a profound influence
on modern thought, is to place the hypothetical contractors in an original position behind
what he calls a veil of ignorance, so that they wouldn't know what their actual place
in society was going to be when the veil was lifted and the agreement was made.
They would not know, for example, whether they would be rich or poor, doctor or mechanic,
lawyer or trash collector, company executive or day laborer, male or female, black or white,
socially advantaged or disadvantages.
Nor would they know what their particular conception of the good or plan of life might
be.
The idea here is that without such knowledge, they would choose fair principles that would
benefit everybody in case they were at the bottom.
That's the idea.
Raul's thus called his view justice as fairness.
Now it's no use to complain here that this is a highly artificial situation that no one
has ever been in.
When discussing social contract theories, persons often object, wait a minute, I don't
remember signing this contract.
That's the famous phrase all my students use all the time.
Hey, wait a minute, I don't remember signing this contract.
They especially used it during the Vietnam War and the question was whether they would
go to fight.
But again, no social contract theories, no one of them, including Hobbes, ever supposed
that the signing of the contract was some actual historical event.
No, rather it was supposed to be something we all could reasonably be committed to and
therefore the basis for a possible agreement.
That's the idea.
If we could get that, then it would be something reasonable for humans to do and we would get
some ethical results out of reason.
It doesn't matter whether or not it really was a contract, in fact.
And then Raul's adds the idea of the original position behind a veil of ignorance to ensure
that if the positions of choice are fair, then supposedly all parties could reasonably
agree to it.
That's the idea.
We did, but we all could because it's reasonable.
This was Raul's highly original way of capturing Rousseau's idea of the general will.
You have probably heard of Rousseau's idea of the general will.
This is the will of all parties to a contract that's to be directed at the common good for
all of them, not at their individual interests.
Rousseau's idea of the general will has always fascinated people, but no one had any idea
nor did Rousseau say much about how it could be realized in large societies.
You might think of Raul's veil of ignorance and his contract as a way of trying to make
more sense of Rousseau's general will, how it could be arrived at, how we could get people
to think of the common good rather than their own individual good.
Well, what actual principles did Raul's arrive at by setting up his contractors behind this
veil of ignorance?
Raul's argued that the contractors behind a veil of ignorance would choose two principles
of justice.
I'm going to state them one at a time and say something about them.
The first principle of justice is by far the easiest and the simplest to understand.
Each person is to have a right to the most extensive basic liberty compatible with the
similar liberty of others.
This is a very basic principle for a free society, something like Jefferson's rights
to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
By basic liberties, Raul's means such things as freedom of conscience, freedom of expression
and speech, freedom of religion, freedom to vote and participate in the political process
and so on.
Such basic liberties as are embodied in our Bill of Rights, his first principle of justice.
Now Raul's argues that persons would choose these basic liberties behind a veil of ignorance
because while they wouldn't know what their position was going to be in society, nor would
they know what their particular conception of the good might be, they would nonetheless
reason that these basic freedoms would be necessary to pursue their conception of the
good whatever it might be consistent with the equal liberty of others, of course.
It's with his second principle of justice that Raul's however is most innovative and
most controversial I should add.
This is what the second principle of justice says.
Social and economic inequalities, and by this he means of course inequalities of status,
prestige, wealth, income, such things.
Social and economic inequalities are to be arranged so that they are both to the greatest
benefit of the least advantaged and attached to offices and positions open to all under
conditions of fair equality of opportunity.
Now the first part of this second principle, Raul's calls the difference principle.
Let's take a closer look at it.
Contractors behind the veil of ignorance would choose it Raul's thinks and by the way it
says of course that social and economic inequalities, wealth and income and such things should
be arranged so that they are the benefit of the least advantaged.
Raul's thinks contractors behind the veil of ignorance would choose this because people
would not know where they would be in society and they might themselves be among the unlucky
in the advantage so they would want any inequalities to be such that they benefit everybody even
themselves if they happen to be down at the bottom.
Yet at the same time they would see the advantages in society as a whole of allowing some disparities
of income, wealth and power.
For example, physicians might earn more than other people if thereby more competent people
entered the medical profession and then the quality of care would be better for everyone.
That's assuming of course that it did get spread around, right?
So we could see the benefit to all of society of paying doctors more.
They work hard, they go to school for a long time, we want to get the best people, right?
Similarly with entrepreneurs, an entrepreneur might get rich, get more money than other
people if they produce a product and provide a social service that everybody wants.
No problem.
Raul's is no socialist.
He doesn't want everybody to have equal amounts of income and status and so on but he does
in fact feel that there should be differences of income of this kind.
But the second principle, the difference principle says in effect that these differences
should be limited so that we should make sure that if we pay doctors more then somehow that
will benefit everybody in society with better medical care, not just those at the top.
And if entrepreneurs get a lot of money then we want to take a little bit back from them
in terms of taxes to help out the poor and the less fortunate in society.
And the contractors would see this because they would fear that if they were at the bottom
this is what they would want as a share of things if they happened to be unlucky.
So Raul's is allowing for disparities of wealth and income here in his second principle
but insisting that there be a safety net if you will so everybody will be better off as
a result and he thinks that's what contractors would also choose.
Well we have to break off here in the middle of our discussion of Raul's and pick it up
in the next lecture where I'll say more about his theory and then I'll start to discuss
some of the ideological debates about liberty and equality and distribution of income and
wealth to which Raul's very interesting ideas have given rise in modern thought.
Thank you.
