Lecture 14 Wisdom, Ancient and Modern
In the last lecture I argued that starting with openness and objectivity towards all points of view and ways of life,
the very ideals, mind you, that work so well in the natural sciences in the search for objective truth about nature.
Starting with those very modern attitudes, we do not arrive at a vulgar relativism which says that no view is any better than any other,
but rather we arrive at the result that some ways of life are less worthy of respect than others.
And those less worthy ones, of course, include the assailant and the pirates, the thieves, murderers, ruthless dictators,
anyone who breaks the moral sphere and makes it impossible for us to treat them and everyone else with the same kind of respect.
Openness is thus a starting point in the search for truth, but not the resting point.
What leads to ethical insight is the search or quest for the truth about values.
Namely, openness leads us to ethical insight, if you will, as part of a quest which seeks the most objective perspective possible.
Now in this lecture what I want to do is relate this search to ancient ethical wisdom such as the Golden Rule and the Mosaic Commandments
and also some modern wisdom that we have discussed in earlier lectures such as Kant's Categorical Imperative and a number of other ideas as well.
But first we have to look at an objection that has to be addressed before we get started because it may have troubled you as you were listening to the last lecture.
Recall that when someone like the assailant or the pirates breaks the moral sphere, the sphere in which every way of life can be respected,
we can't treat everyone with respect no matter what we do. In the alley case we have to choose between the two people.
So we can't treat everyone with respect no matter what we do. We have to intervene to stop them in order to restore the sphere.
But do we always have to wait till someone actually breaks the moral sphere and shows themselves less worthy before we intervene?
That's the objection I said we have to consider before we go any further because this would obviously be impractical and would lead to horrible consequences.
Well the answer is no if you understand the principles of the argument I developed last time because you may recall that respect for the ideal
requires not only restoring the moral sphere when it's broken down but also preserving it from breakdown in the future.
The reason is that both tasks restoring and preserving that moral sphere are results of trying to follow the ideal of openness or respect for all to the degree possible where you can't follow it to the letter.
In other words it's by persistently striving to maintain that ideal of openness and objectivity as the scientists do in their own domain to try to realize it to the ideal possible that we go about seeking the objective truth about value.
That's my idea here that it's by trying to maintain that ideal of openness as much as we can to the degree possible that we go seeking the objective truth about value.
What's true beyond ourselves not just for ourselves but for everyone.
And so when the moral sphere breaks down we try to stay as close to it and persist in reconstructing it restoring it and preserving it to the degree that we can.
And we would not be respecting the ideal to the degree possible if we fail to take reasonable steps to forestall future breakdowns as well as restoring it when it's already broken down.
For example that's why we punish criminals not only to stop them here and now which is to restore the moral sphere but to deter them and others from committing similar acts in the future to preserve the sphere over the long run.
Likewise we can act preemptively if we see that the moral sphere is about to be broken we don't have to wait all again in the interests of respecting the ideal to the degree possible.
Those who read Hitler's Mein Kampf for example could see that his life plan was a moral spear breaker if you will and they had every right to intervene by force if they saw he was going to carry it out.
We couldn't treat him with respect than those he was about to harm no matter what we did.
Unfortunately we know that too many of Hitler's contemporaries could not believe he meant what he said.
Consider pacifism the view that violence is never ethically justified.
I would say it's the correct view within the moral sphere where violence is not justified and everyone can be respected.
But it fails when the moral sphere breaks down.
Sometimes force is required to restore and preserve the very ideal that normally prohibits force.
So if we have a distinction between the inside the moral sphere and outside then we can get our bearings on this whole issue of violence.
There's a joke that was common among the Quakers with whom I talked for a while in the Philadelphia area that tells the whole story of this ambiguous feeling we have to pacifism.
Namely that it seems to be the ideal inside the moral sphere but is it the ideal always.
By the way I did teach at a Quaker college in Philadelphia area in the late 60s and they were really wonderful people among the nicest and the finest that I have ever met.
And of course that was a period of the Vietnam War 67 to 70 and they were all pacifists anyway so it was easy for them to be against the war and most people were on their side in that one.
But they had, and this is many of the faculty and others and my friends, they had real trouble with World War II of course because that seemed like a pretty justified war.
And as it turned out most of the older faculty had served in World War II but they had served as medical orderlies as is common with the Quakers.
And they frankly told me they were glad there were other people willing to do the fighting as you might guess.
But the story is quite revealing that they like to tell and they like to tell a whole lot of jokes about themselves the way the Russians do as well.
It's a joke about a Quaker farmer who found a thief in his chicken coop and aiming his shotgun at the thief he said,
Sir I do not want to hurt you but I advise you to run because you are standing where I am about to shoot.
Perfectly expressing their ambiguity here about the whole question of pacifism in special cases where we have someone like a Hitler.
Now in addition to showing that relativism fails in practice the above line of reasoning shows something else of enormous importance to ethics.
It shows why there are exceptions to many traditional moral commandments.
Thou shalt not kill or lie or steal or cheat for example self-defense and just wars are often regarded as exceptions to the rule against killing.
Well you know the existence of exceptions to traditional moral commandments are recognized even of course in most of the religious traditions.
It's another source of confusion that there are exceptions is another source of confusion about values in the modern world along with relativism.
Because the thought is this that if moral commandments have exceptions they can't be universal or absolute.
And you know I don't know if you ever saw that Mel Brooks history of the world where he had Moses coming down from the mountain with three tablets.
And he says God has given us these fifteen and he dropped one. God has given us these ten commandments.
And maybe the exceptions were on the other tablet I don't know but they aren't always necessarily listed in the biblical context.
But the commandments are certainly there.
On the other hand the above line of reasoning that we've undertaken in the last lecture shows that exceptions to moral rules can be dealt with in exactly the way that relativism are.
Exceptions and relativism both cause us problems in thinking about these questions and they can be solved in the same way.
For the exceptions to the rules arise at just the point where relativism fails where the moral sphere breaks down.
Violence and force are not usually allowed inside the moral sphere but when the moral sphere breaks down as in the case of the assaults of the warfare violence and force are needed to restore it.
Take another traditional commandment thou shalt not lie. Lying usually means treating others with respect using, not treating others with respect, using them as means to your own ends.
But there are exceptions. A test case often used by teachers of ethics is this. You're in Nazi Germany on a farm and the Gestapo arrive at your door and ask whether you're hiding a Jewish family on your farm.
Well let's say you are in fact hiding a family. But should you tell a lie? Here's a case where most people think that an exception to the rule against lying may be in order.
But if so, why?
Well notice that this case is structurally similar to the assault in the alley. The moral sphere is clearly broken down because you, the farm owner, can't treat everyone with respect for their purposes or their desires.
If you tell the truth to the Gestapo, you are choosing to favor their purposes over the Jewish families. If you lie, you respect the Jewish families' purposes but not the Gestapo's.
Again, you can't have it both ways. The only question is, who will be treated as less worthy of respect? Somebody must be.
And so that's the question. Not whether but who. And it's pretty clear in this case, just as in the assault case, that it be the person who broke the moral sphere and made it impossible for you to respect both.
That is the Gestapo. You should lie. It's not that lying is merely permissible in this case. Lying is the right thing to do.
The very same ideal, which tells you that lying is usually wrong inside the moral sphere, tells you that it can be the right thing to do when the moral sphere breaks down.
And so it would be also if someone forced you to play a game of cards and threatened to kill your children if you lost. I'd say, cheat! Do anything you could.
The moral sphere is broken down. The regular rules simply do not work here. It's a question of who you treat, whose way of life you do not respect.
And it would be the one who broke the sphere and forced the situation upon you. In such ways, then, this line of reasoning supports many of the traditional ethical commandments endorsed by the major world religions,
against killing and lying and stealing and cheating, and many of the commonly recognized exceptions to these commandments as well.
And note the exceptions are not arbitrarily added. They follow naturally from the principles themselves.
You could also argue that the above line of reasoning leads to the Golden Rule. Do unto others as you would have them do unto you in one of its most plausible traditional readings.
That is, respecting others' ways of life as you want your own way of life to be respected, up to the point, of course, of moral sphere breakdown.
And of special note also, from our American perspective, one can also derive from these same principles the Jeffersonian writes to life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness, on which our Constitution rests.
To respect others' ways of life is to respect their right to live and pursue happiness as they wish, up to the point again, of moral sphere breakdown.
This is another way of arriving at Rawls' first principle of justice. Everyone is to be accorded maximal liberty consistent with the liberty of others.
Well, these are, I think, remarkable results.
Starting with openness and objectivity to all points of view and ways of life.
The very ideals that work so well in the natural sciences in the search for objective truth about nature.
Starting with these modern attitudes, we do not arrive at relativism or indifference, but rather at ethical principles like the Golden Rule and the Mosaic Commandments that are deeply embedded in most of the major religious and wisdom traditions of the past.
We also arrive at ideals of universal human rights, to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, which underlie modern free and democratic societies from the very same principles.
A remarkable confluence of ancient and modern wisdom of which I spoke.
And note, it comes from a quest to take the widest and most objective view possible, the very goal of the quest for wisdom discussed in lecture two when we dealt with Aristotle.
In his classic treatise on liberty, the utilitarian philosopher John Stuart Mill, who we talked about in an earlier lecture, expressed the belief that by maintaining a condition of openness and allowing all points of view to be heard, the truth would emerge.
This was, of course, Mill's now classic defense of freedom of speech.
But the preceding argument gives Mill's argument a new twist by being initially open to all points of view and persisting in the spirit of this openness.
The ethical truth emerges that some ways of life are more worthy of respect than others and some less worthy by anyone who's willing to be open enough to the possibility.
Nearly a decade ago in Chicago, and I don't know why this happened in Chicago, but nearly a decade ago in Chicago, the exile Dalai Lama.
You know the Dalai Lama's been exiled, of course, from Tibet because the Chinese are there and he's been living in Europe and sometimes he's in the U.S.
Well, the Dalai Lama was about 1990, I believe, in Chicago. He convened a convention of representatives of 139 of the world's religions to see if they could discern a common ethic, a global ethic, in their diverse beliefs.
Well, they did come up with a basic set of principles that the religions they are representing, both East and West, all agreed on as part of the ethical basis of their traditions.
And they set one of the theologians there, the Swiss Catholic theologian Hans Kung, to write an initial draft of this global ethic, much as Jefferson had written an initial draft of the declaration.
And then they all worked on it, so to speak, and changed this and changed that until they could all ultimately sign on, which they did.
And what were the principles involved?
They were the four mosaic commandments, thou shalt not murder, lie, steal, and cheat, the latter including, of course, adultery, and the golden rule.
Just the ones we arrived at from our modern premises of openness with the exceptions thrown in.
Let me say a little more about one of these pieces of ancient wisdom, the golden rule.
Some version of it is stated in virtually all the major religious traditions, many of which go back to the original axial period.
For example, Confucius in his Anilex says, do not do unto others what you would not have them do unto you.
This is a negative formulation of the rule, sometimes called the silver rule, but it really comes to that, really comes to the same thing.
This is Confucius in the Anilex.
This was Confucius' expression of the notion of ren, as you recall, the virtue of humanity that we discussed in Lecture 6.
The central or unifying virtue for Mencius, Confucius' follower, and the whole Confucian tradition, and we compared it to Jung's notion of humanity as well, sympathy and benevolence and so on.
But we don't get it here, the golden rule, that is, merely by sentiment, as Mencius and Jung did.
We get it by questing for the objective truth and looking for the objective truth about values, by this kind of quest I described.
The golden rule also plays a role in the other great Chinese tradition of Taoism, which I mentioned in the first lecture when we were dealing with the axial period.
One of the Taoist classics says, regard your neighbor's gain as your own gain, and your neighbor's loss as your own loss.
Go over now from China to India in the ancient axial period, and we discover the following quote from the Mahabharata of Hinduism.
This is, of course, the great epic poem of Hinduism, which is the longest poem in human history.
It's 20 times longer than the Bible.
I don't know how long it would take to read it through, which contains, as one of its parts, one of its chapters, the Bhagavad Gita, the so-called Song of God, which I have mentioned earlier.
Well, the Gita says this, this is the sum of duty.
Do not unto others which would cause you pain if done unto you.
The golden rule, once again, is the sum of duty.
Moving to Buddhism in India, the Yudhānavāga of Buddhism says, hurt not others in ways that you yourself would find hurtful.
And a little more over to the Middle East in the axial period, to the prophet Zoroastra, who I mentioned also earlier.
The main text of the Zoroastrians says the following, that nature alone is good, which refrains from doing unto another whatsoever is not good for itself.
And, of course, we're especially familiar with the versions of the golden rule stated in Christianity, Judaism, and Islam.
Jesus says in Matthew 7.12, all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets.
The Talmud of Judaism says the following, what is hateful to you do not do to your fellow men, this is the entire law, the rest is commentary.
This is a statement of Rabbi Hillel, who gave it as a statement when he was challenged to state the whole Torah while standing on one foot.
You may have heard that little story.
And in the Bible, of course, there was much more in the Jewish tradition lending them in this direction, because there is the saying, of course, that goes like this,
No ye the heart of the stranger, says the Old Testament, for you yourselves were strangers in the land of Egypt.
And the son of Islam says, no one of you is a believer until he desires for his brother that which he desires for himself.
Well, as I said, the negative formulations are sometimes called the silver rule, but they pretty much come to the same thing.
And what's most interesting here is the number of these statements like the Hindu, the Christian, the Jewish that say, this is the sum of duty, this is the law and the prophets, this is the entire law, all the rest is commentary.
If the point at which we have arrived by way of a quest for the objective truth through openness does express the golden rule in a familiar form, respecting other ways of life as you want your own way of life to be respected,
then there's a convergence here of ancient and modern wisdom as well.
But now it's worth mentioning that the golden rule has several interpretations down through history, not just one.
And they have wound their way, if you will, down through history causing a good deal of confusion and a good deal of argument and conflict.
The difference between the two is not entirely well understood, but I think it ought to be.
Of course, we know there are all these numerous versions of the golden rule that you have probably heard at various times, like do unto others as they would do unto you, but do it first.
And he who has the gold rules, nowadays I think it goes mostly the other way around, he who rules eventually gets the gold.
But in any case, there are these two legitimate versions that have come down to us through history, and it's worth taking, I think, a close look at them.
One of them, which might be called the narrow version of the golden rule, of doing unto others as you would have them do unto you,
means allowing them to pursue their values and purposes so long as they share your values, or so long as they have the right values as you see it.
If one tribe believes, for example, that it's right to plant corn but not hunt buffalo, well, they will allow their neighbors to plant corn but not hunt buffalo,
which is not a whole lot of love and respect if their neighbors are buffalo hunters.
This narrow version of the rule will satisfy others only if they share your values.
In other words, if they're also corn planters, you will.
Otherwise, it's a recipe, obviously, for conflict and war, a Hobbesian state of nature.
By contrast, a second or a wider version of the golden rule says that if you want to be allowed to pursue your values and purposes by other people,
then you should allow them to pursue this even if their values are different from yours.
This version does amount to the principle of respect for all that we have arrived at,
so long as we had, of course, that they may pursue their values only up to the point where of moral sphere breakdown.
Now, framers of the golden rule did not also add exceptions any more than for the Mosaic commandments,
but I think they must if they are going to make it consistent.
The golden rule is one of the products, the great products of that period of spiritual enlightenment,
and it's aftermath that we have been calling the Axial Period.
It is one piece of ancient wisdom that we should not abandon, I think.
But even as we retain it, we must be aware of two competing versions, the narrower and the wider,
and exercise some modern wisdom, I think, in interpreting it.
We can guess that the narrower version was not that intended by most of those who stated originally the golden rule,
since it would lead to war and hate, not the peace and love they intended.
The best expression I've ever heard of the wider version of the golden rule from a tradition that's totally different than any mentioned so far.
And this expression of it is from the Sue Indian chief, Sitting Bull.
Sitting Bull is best known, as you know, for his confrontation with General Custer at Big Horn.
He and Crazy Horse, Crazy Horse did most of the fighting.
Sitting Bull, I guess, was the thinker of the group, although quite a fighter himself.
But Sitting Bull is reputed to have said to U.S. government agents in 1883, and listen to this, quote, unquote,
If the great spirit had desired me to be a white man, he would have made me so in the first place.
He put into your heart certain wishes and plans.
In my heart, he put other and different desires.
Each man is good in his sight.
It is not necessary for eagles to be crows.
That is indeed a perfect expression of the idea.
I have been relating our reasoning about the moral sphere to the collective ancient wisdom embodied in the Mosaic Commandments and the Golden Rule.
But how about some modern connections and some modern wisdom here?
Many of you will have also recognized the connection between the ideal of respect for others at which we have arrived and which we've been talking about,
and the second formulation of Kant's categorical imperative, which says,
Act so that you always use humanity in your own person as well as in the person of every other, never merely as a means, but at the same time as an end.
In other words, more simply expressed, treat all persons including yourself in every situation as ends in themselves and never as mere means to the ends of others.
Let's call this for short Kant's ends principle, or just the ends principle.
What does it mean?
Well, note that if we interpret treating others as ends in themselves the way Kant seems to have intended,
as allowing them to pursue their purposes, desires, and images of happiness as they choose,
and not using them as a means to our purposes,
then this amounts to our ideal of respect for all, up to the point, of course, of moralcy or breakdown.
And this is, in fact, what Kant means by this curious expression, an end in itself.
Something is not an end in itself, but merely a means to something else, if it is to be used for that something else.
So when we treat somebody else as a means to our own ends, we use them for our purposes.
We may lie to them, we may cheat them, we may assault them or whatever.
We use them in a certain sense for our own purposes.
To treat someone as an end in themselves in Kant's language is to recognize that they can't be so treated, they're not a means to our end.
They are themselves an end.
They make their own purposes and their own desires, and those desires and purposes deserve to be respected,
and not subordinated to ours, made a means to ours.
I would suggest, therefore, that the ideal of respect for all that we arrived at through openness,
in addition to expressing the central Mosaic commandments in the Golden Rule,
and the Jeffersonian rights to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,
can also be viewed as expressing this ends-principle version of Kant's categorical imperative.
The moral sphere which was defined, therefore, as one in which everyone could be respected,
could also alternatively be defined in terms of Kant's ends-principle.
Namely, it's a sphere in which everyone can be treated as an end, and not as a means.
Kant had a name, actually, for this sphere. He called it the Kingdom of Ends.
But this leads me to mention something that's extremely important here.
While we've arrived at an ends-principle, like one version of Kant's categorical imperative,
it's not exactly his principle, nor have we derived it in his way,
and this, I think, is a very, very important thing to consider.
Recall that Kant's imperative allows no exceptions to acts like lying,
whereas our formulation does.
You remember with Kant, he had this strong upbringing, this strong, pietistic upbringing.
His parents, his father, the honest-maker, had taught him that lying was always wrong,
and they were very stern, and they were very good about that matter.
And Kant held on to that idea so strongly, in fact,
that he would not allow any exceptions to the moral rules arrived at by his categorical imperative,
or, indeed, in his own life, even lying under any circumstances to save an innocent person.
So his imperative, or his ends-principle, which says, in effect,
treat everyone as an end and not a means, allows no exceptions, whereas ours does.
And what's the reason for this?
Well, I think it's connected to the fact that we have derived them in different ways.
The important difference is connected to the fact that Kant tried to prove his categorical imperative
by rational argument alone from the presuppositions of practical reason.
Everybody who reasoned practically in a certain way would have to come to the conclusion that his imperative was right.
Well, we saw that that's a very, very difficult claim to make,
and, in fact, historically, philosophers over and over have claimed that Kant's argument for this falls short.
Proof is very, very hard to get in ethical matters, as Aristotle told us long ago.
And so Kant, by trying to get an absolute proof for his categorical imperative,
also came up with an absolute imperative that allowed no exceptions.
We have proceeded quite differently.
Rather than arriving at the ends-principle at the end of a proof,
we treat it as a first step in the search or quest for the ethical truth, not the final step.
The ends-principle is an expression of the idea of openness.
Respect all other ways of life.
Don't impose yourself upon them.
Let them be lived.
Treat them as ends in themselves, not as means to your ends.
If openness was our starting point, then Kant's ends-principle is our starting point.
It's not the end of a conclusion of an argument.
It's the starting point in the search or quest for truth is what I'm suggesting.
So we can borrow a great deal of wisdom here from Kant
if we don't try to put this into some kind of abstract proof.
But we think of it as part of a search for truth.
Let it be the ends-principle, an expression of an attitude of openness to all ways of life
in order to find out which of them is objectively right and worthy.
And then it will turn out that you should not treat everyone with equal respect
because, of course, some will break the moral sphere and make themselves less worthy.
So it will turn out that the ends-principle does not, in fact, apply.
It, in fact, breaks down at a certain point.
It does hold unqualifiedly inside the moral sphere in an ideal world,
but the world is not always ideal, so sometimes it breaks down.
So it was Kant's attempt to get this very, very important and significant principle
by reason alone, by some kind of argument that would absolutely convince people that failed.
But the principle he was after, it seems to me, is a great, important principle
that is an expression of some modern wisdom we do not want to give up either.
Thank you.
