In the next three lectures, I want to turn to a host of controversial, ethical and social
problems of the day that trouble many people and contribute to moral confusions and disagreements
about values.
And let's see what light some of the reflections of the past 13, 14 lectures or so will throw
on these matters.
In the lectures following this one, I'll focus on domestic issues that cause divisions in
modern pluralist societies, what some people like to refer to as our modern culture wars.
In this lecture, I'm going to start with equally divisive issues today of violence and nonviolence,
guilt and innocence, war and peace, both globally and domestically.
Let's begin with two extreme positions on violence and nonviolence that were in fact
known and discussed in the axial period and are still with us.
One view is pacifism, briefly mentioned in the last lecture, that violence is always
wrong as a solution to moral conflict.
The opposite view, at the opposite extreme, is the doctrine that might makes right.
Right and wrong are determined by those who have the power to enforce laws.
Both these views, these extreme views, have resurfaced in modernity.
Might makes right we have seen in the views of Thomas Hobbes' theory of the state.
But debates over both views, pacifism on the one hand and might makes right on the other,
go back at least as far as the original axial period.
In China, for example, pacifism was actually imputed to a group of thinkers known as the
Moes, followers of Moetze, who lived in the middle of the 5th century B.C., right in the
middle of the axial period.
Moetze preached a form of universal love, and though all Moes weren't pacifists, they
leaned in that direction.
Pacifist tendencies were also evident in China in Daoism, reputedly founded by Lao Tse in
the 6th century B.C., who called for a return to nature without the corruptions of civilization.
Opposed to these schools in China, there was a school of thinkers known as realists who
argued that force was necessary in human affairs and came close to advocating might makes right
doctrines.
Now Confucius, who lived in the 6th century B.C., reacted to both of these extreme doctrines.
He lived at a time of warring kingdoms in China, and he tried, Confucius that is, tried
to find a middle way between the realists on the one hand and the pacifists on the other,
violence used sparingly but sometimes needed.
Indian civilization of the first axial period also wrestled with questions of violence and
non-violence, war and peace.
Both Buddhism and Jainism, two religious doctrines born in the axial period that I mentioned in
the first lecture, preached pacifist views.
The Bhagavad Gita of Hinduism, often mentioned in these lectures, begins with a discourse
between King Arjuna and his charioteer, who happens to be the Hindu god incarnate, Krishna.
And the dispute here is on whether war against kinsmen can be justified in under what circumstances.
Arjuna has to go to war against his kinsmen, and he really worries about this.
Krishna seems to allow that it might sometimes be necessary but without an evil heart to
do what you have to do, but keep your heart pure here and do it for the right reasons.
In the 20th century, Mohandas Gandhi, as we well know, borrowed from his Jain roots and
also from Buddhism and other Indian traditions, founding his movement of non-violence, which
by the way Gandhi tellingly called satyagraha, which is, means in a Sanskrit, the force of
truth.
We'll return to Gandhi's satyagraha movement later in this lecture, for it has much to
tell us about the themes of this whole lecture series, in fact.
Western civilization itself also began wrestling with issues about violence in the axial period.
The might makes right doctrine was held by some of the sophists in 5th century Greece,
for example.
Plato, in his republic, imputes it to a sophist, the simicus, and Plato's Socrates and that
doctrine tries to, in fact, refute the might makes right doctrine.
Now Christ's injunction to turn the other cheek, and of course the Christian sermon
on the mount, are often regarded as expressions of pacifist views, as they are indeed to some
extent.
Yet subsequent Christian thinkers, notably in the medieval period, evolved sophisticated
doctrines of just war, just war theories, which have still have relevance today, as we
will see.
This views also arose in the modern period in the West, for example, among the Sosinians,
an unorthodox Christian movement in Italy and Poland in the 16th century, and later,
of course, among the Quakers of the Society of Friends, as they are officially known.
Pacifism is a noble view, undoubtedly, despite the difficulties we found with it last lecture.
It has inspired non-violence movements of the 20th century, not only of Gandhi's, but
also of Martin Luther King.
And herein lies, by the way, a very, very interesting story.
Martin Luther King expressly acknowledged that he was inspired in his own non-violence
movement in the U.S. by Gandhi.
And Gandhi, in turn, interestingly enough, acknowledged that his own ideas about non-violence
and his own Satyagraha movement was partly inspired by an American thinker, namely Henry
David Thoreau, author of Walden, Walden being a pawn not only a few miles from where I grew
up.
My grandfather had a farm that went down the hill to White's Pawn, not far from Walden.
We did a lot of illegal swimming there late at night when I was in high school, I remember.
But that is quite an interesting story when you think about it.
When an American thinker Thoreau influences Gandhi and, in turn, Gandhi repays the debt
back to us for our non-violence movement with Martin Luther King.
Another significant fact is that these two non-violence movements of Gandhi and Martin
Luther King are, in fact, related to two of the most important stories of the whole 20th
century, namely the end of Western colonialism with Gandhi and the worldwide movement for
civil rights for minorities with Martin Luther King.
I think when the story of the 20th century is told, we'll look back and we'll say these
were two of the most important facts of the whole century, that colonialism basically
went down the tube and that minorities all over the world began to rise up and demand
their rights.
But pacifism, though it has inspired these historic non-violence movements, can also
be the source of moral confusion, as we found in the last lecture.
The reason is that pacifism would seem to be correct inside the moral sphere.
And one might reason, therefore, as follows.
Since the moral sphere is the ideal sphere and pacifism is right in the ideal sphere,
it must therefore be the right doctrine.
But beware now of a trap here of thinking, well, if it's the ideal doctrine, then it
must be true in all circumstances.
Because of course, as we know, it's true in an ideal world, but the world is not always
ideal.
There are situations in which you simply can't treat everyone with respect no matter what
you do.
And non-violent persuasion may have removed the British from India, but I doubt if it
would work with, say, a Hitler or a Stalin or a Pol Pot or an Idi Amin or a Saddam Hussein
or perhaps even a Slobodan Milosevic.
So the fact that the world sometimes turns rotten and pacifism in the ends principle
no longer can be applied is no argument against the principles or the ideals.
It's an argument against the world.
Make it better.
But there is a lesson in non-violence movements, by the way, I believe, and that is what they
teach us is don't jump too quickly to the conclusion that the moral sphere is broken
down.
Frequently, we can solve problems by persuasion rather than by coercion, and we might not
have guessed it.
We might have had a violent revolution in India, but Gandhi saved it from us.
What's happening there then?
What's happening is if you can find that you can solve problems peacefully by non-violence
instead of by using violence, you have, in fact, expanded the moral sphere because the
moral sphere is the sphere of persuasion and beyond it is the sphere of coercion and force.
And if you can find through non-violence that we can solve problems that otherwise we would
have to use violence for non-violently, we've expanded the moral sphere.
We've expanded the sphere of things we can resolve peacefully and as a consequence do
not have to use force.
So in a way, non-violence movements are a way of expanding the moral sphere in this
world, of making it more cases seem like those that we can resolve by persuasion rather
than coercion.
And that is a tremendous thing because I would define moral progress as expanding the moral
sphere so that more difficulties and conflicts and arguments and so on in life can be solved
by persuasion rather than force.
But if pacifism and non-violence have limits now, which they clearly do, does it follow
when these limits are breached that we go all the way to the might-makes-right doctrine,
to the other extreme?
You know, it's a moral sphere makes no, anything goes, if you will.
When we suddenly thrust into a Hobbesian state of nature where there are no rules, well no.
The clue here once again resides in the idea that I have been pressing of staying as close
to the ideal of respect for all as possible, even when, and especially when that ideal can't
be followed to the letter, Montaigne's ideas of staying, trying to follow and guide yourself
by the ideal, even when you can't attain it completely.
We've already encountered one requirement that results from this.
When the moral sphere breaks down, get the guilty party, not the innocent.
Now that may seem obvious, but it is a rule that follows from staying as close to the
ideal as possible.
We would not be doing much to serve the ideal to the degree possible in a bad world if we
punished the innocent and not those who broke the moral sphere.
Innocent women and not pirates, Jewish families and not the Gestapo, nations unjustly attacked
and not their attackers.
We would hardly be doing much to preserve the sphere if we proceeded so.
But there's also another rule, besides get the guilty, not the innocent, there's another
rule which also follows from the same reasoning.
When the moral sphere breaks down, use minimum force necessary to restore it.
The assailant in the alley must be restrained, he's the guilty party.
But neither the passers-by nor the police have the right to shoot him through the heart
if he can be subdued in a lesser way, handcuffed or whatever and so on.
What's the rationale here?
Use minimum force necessary to restore the sphere.
What's the rationale for that?
By using minimum force, we accord to the guilty as much residual respect as we can consistent
with the fact that we must restrain him.
So we stay as close to respecting everybody as we can, even though we can't completely
respect him.
The same principle holds, by the way, with prisoners in jail.
We can't completely respect them with others, but they deserve as much respect as we can
give them consistent with our need to restore the moral sphere and deter others from doing
it.
Again, the principle is always staying as close to the ideal as you can, even though almost
always you never can reach it.
So when the moral sphere breaks down, it's not the case that we're thrown immediately
into a Hobbesian state of nature where might makes right.
There are still rules that result from trying to stay as close to the ideal as possible
in a bad situation.
Now what's interesting about these rules, and we've got two simple rules here.
Get the guilty, not the innocent, and use minimum force to restore the sphere.
What's interesting about them is that they turn out to be related to traditional and
even ancient ideas about just and unjust warfare.
Certain traditions in Western culture and in other cultures have allowed for just wars
under certain conditions.
For example, the two clearest cases are self-defense and coming to the aid of another nation that
has been unjustly aggressed against.
These are common to the just war theories of the Middle Ages I mentioned earlier.
Medieval philosophers such as St. Thomas Aquinas in the West developed theories along
these lines, and they are still very influential today by people among people of all persuasions
But in these just war traditions, there were rules of warfare.
Once you had to go to war because of self-defense or helping another nation, it was not the
case that anything goes.
There were rules of warfare.
Now the moral constraints on warfare are embodied today, as you well know, in certain international
conventions called the Hague and Geneva Conventions.
These remarkable conventions were formulated after World War I.
The bloodiest war till it's time in human history, and they've had an important impact
on the 20th century ever since.
For instance, one of the conventions, by the way, is against chemical and biological warfare,
which was followed pretty consistently throughout this century.
It's only been violated very, very few times, possibly by Saddam Hussein, possibly by the
Japanese in China during the Second World War, but very, very rarely.
So these conventions have not, by any means, been of the kind that have not had any effect.
And if now one considers the rules of warfare embedded and embodied in these Hague and Geneva
Conventions, I think you can see that operating behind them are these two rules.
Get the guilty and not the innocent, and use a minimum force to restore the sphere.
For example, the conventions, rules against harming innocent non-combatants in warfare
in the Geneva Conventions, women and children against indiscriminate saturation-bombering
of civilian populations, for example.
All these indicate get the guilty, not the innocent, those engaged in the warfare.
While laws and conventions in Geneva and Hague are for protecting prisoners of war, mandating
medical care for captured enemy soldiers that can no longer be any harm to you, and so on.
All these reflect using minimum force to restore the sphere.
Both rules follow the principle of striving to sustain the ideal of respect to all, to
the degree possible, in adverse circumstances, when obviously you can't, you have to go to
war.
Innocent non-combatants are to be treated with respect, and combatants are to be treated
with as much residual respect as is consistent with the needs of battle.
Is it always so easy to determine who's the guilty party, and what force is enough when
the moral sphere breaks down?
No, I've been pretending so far, I think, that it's always sort of easy, and I've been
giving you the easy cases.
In ethics, by the way, it's always wise to start with the easy cases, just like we do
in physics and other places, right?
But it obviously gets hotter, as you can well imagine, and often very, very difficult to
tell when the moral sphere breaks down.
In fact, in most cases in life, even the simple ones, the line between whether it is or it
isn't is sometimes hard to know.
Remember when our taciturn President Calvin Coolidge died, Dorothy Parker said, how can
they tell?
So there are difficulties here, but warfare is an especially interesting case, of course,
in which there are plenty of examples where it's not easy to tell when the breakdown has
occurred.
One has only to read, for example, a classic work like Michael Walzer's Just and Unjust
Wars to see how many are the ambiguities in trying to decide these things down through
history.
World War II was comparatively easy for us.
The Nazis and Japanese were aggressors and easily identified.
Get the guilty, easy to identify, if you will.
But for Americans, Vietnam, for example, was a more complicated matter.
And why?
Well, for one thing, it was difficult to determine just who the enemy was.
Was it a war between North and South or a civil war in which many in the South were
the enemy?
And even on the battlefront, here was the most difficult case, where women and children
in the villages are noncombatants when they might be carrying hand grenades.
This is a difficulty.
The question of how much force was an ever-present problem for the generals to the average soldier
who had to decide whether the civilian was carrying a grenade.
The lesson for the U.S. here, moral consensus can be reached in a nation about what is a
just war.
When aggression is obvious, when it's possible to identify the guilty without ambiguity,
and reasonably clear how to proceed to restore the moral sphere, that's what our rules of
getting the guilty and using minimum force would tell us, right?
By contrast, when some of these things are ambiguous and hotly debated, moral consensus
is going to be hard to attain on warfare.
Some will fight, others will not, and many who do so will do so uneasily.
The lesson, I think, is beware of fighting ambiguous wars.
They will tend to tear your nation asunder.
That lesson of Vietnam.
Now how about the cases of dropping the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki?
They raised further issues about minimum force, right?
The decision to drop the bomb was a highly complex one, as we know.
Many considerations were involved.
And above all was the crucial fact that the Japanese High Command would likely fight to
the death as they had done on the islands of the Pacific, even if it meant millions
of their own people slaughtered along with millions of others.
One had to weigh several hundred thousand killed by the bombs against many millions
killed on both sides if the Allies had to take the Japanese islands themselves.
I don't mean to suggest that these were the only considerations, but they were definitely
considerations.
Now such calculations of numbers, two million say versus two hundred thousand or something
like that, are grotesque.
We resist them, they revolt us in a way.
Isn't that just what was wrong with the utilitarian principle of the greatest happiness to the
greatest number, right?
Of using some people as means to some others' ends and innocent victims?
Well, that's true.
But I think we can perhaps learn something here about utilitarianism itself, that it
might have a role to play.
The utilitarian principle I think of greatest happiness of the greatest number doesn't work
inside the moral sphere where every individual is worthy of respect and has what you might
call infinite worth.
You can't count in there because counting infinities doesn't quite work.
But it's quite another matter when the moral sphere has badly broken down, as it clearly
had in the Second World War.
So badly that many innocents will die no matter what you do.
And don't forget, even taking the islands, there would be many, many innocents as well
would die.
In sum, I want to suggest to you that while the utilitarian principle of the greatest happiness
of the greatest number is flawed as a general principle of ethics, where it doesn't apply
in a real world moral sphere situation where everyone has equal worth and should be taken
into account, that it may have to come into play in many instances in life where the moral
sphere is badly broken down and many innocents will be hurt one way or the other, then you
may have to start counting than the greatest good.
And indeed, in many public policy issues, that's why I think utilitarianism has a role
to play in public policy issues.
Take medical care, for example.
When you have various kinds of policies, social policies of this kind, you often have to make
choices about the greatest good or the greatest number.
In these cases, it's not always possible that everybody will be exactly treated equally.
So you have to figure out somehow how to get the greatest good out of this situation.
So I feel that the utilitarian principle is very useful, but it only comes into play in
situations where the moral sphere has already pretty seriously broken down and you may have
to start counting in such situations.
Now these issues of just warfare lead to general questions about guilt and innocence in everyday
life where it's also not easy to identify the guilty party and moral dilemmas.
Indeed, must there always be a guilty party when the moral sphere is broken down?
Well the answer is no.
There may simply be conflicts of interest in which all parties cannot have all their interests
or purposes fulfilled.
One man wants to practice the trumpet all afternoon while his neighbor wants to sleep.
Two nations claim the same piece of land.
A husband would like to play golf while his wife would like him to mow the lawn.
The purposes and plans of both parties can't be realized in these cases.
They both can't be respected in their purposes and wishes.
But the moral sphere hasn't yet broken down because no one's guilty and no one's guilty
if no one has so far tried to force their will on the other one.
This is implied by respect for life plans of all parties in such cases, thereby preserving
the moral sphere to the degree possible.
Well ideally I think you can see it would mean trying to reach a compromise in which
all parties could knowingly and non-coercively consent.
Thus the two nations might agree to a negotiated settlement.
The trumpeter might practice only in certain hours when his neighbor is not sleeping and
the husband might agree to mow the lawn if he doesn't have to visit his wife's mother
that week.
But we know that many real world conflicts are not so easily resolved.
Often it's not possible to split the difference in disputed objects like pieces of land or
pieces of a pie, right?
And we know this from the biblical story of King Solomon and the baby that was claimed
by two different women.
In fact that's one of the lessons of that particularly striking story where the baby
could obviously not be cut in half.
In addition the parties often can't resolve conflicts face to face, emotions run deep
or suspicions exist that other parties are not bargaining in good faith.
In such cases we usually resort to second best strategies for resolving conflicts.
Consider party arbitrators, judges, juries, majority vote, maybe choosing by lot and other
procedural methods, private, legal, political.
This is where these sorts of things get into the ethical equation here.
Resolving disputes of this kind when there's no easy way to resolve the idea of everybody
getting equal respect.
These second best strategies will often produce less than ideal solutions.
So the question to be asked is what justifies them when they're justified?
Well I suggest to you the answer is the same that yielded the rules for get the guilty
and use minimum force.
When a guilty party can't be identified we strive to stay as close as possible to the
ideal of respect for all when this ideal can't be perfectly realized.
So we try to find some method of respecting everyone to the degree we can even though
we know that not everyone is going to be equally respected.
Take majority vote for example.
Majority vote will produce an unhappy minority which does not get its way.
No question about it.
Conflict situations because sort of a moral sphere breakdown because in the moral sphere
everybody gets their way so to speak.
But nonetheless second best strategy, majority vote is sometimes the most we can do to respect
every party by giving everyone at least a vote even though somebody is going to lose.
And again staying as close as possible to the original ideal even in a situation.
So there you have an argument for majority vote in certain circumstances and for democracy
by the way.
And it's an ethical argument I think, it's an ethical argument.
I mean there are things to be said for and against democracy.
Winston Churchill said it's the worst form of government except for all the others as
you know.
And in this case of course that's second best strategy if you will.
Here is another revealing conflict of interest example that often comes up in ethical discussions.
What is sometimes called lifeboat scenarios.
I like the one about an airplane that's going down let's say and there are five people
in it and four parachutes.
The moral sphere has badly broken down here because not everybody's purposes and desires
are going to get fulfilled and yet nobody is guilty.
There's another case of a moral sphere break down without guilt so far anyway.
No one's guilty at least the world's just simply turned rotten.
Now of course what are they going to do?
Well one of the things they can obviously do is fight it out of course and then the stronger
or the more cunning we'll win.
But we're looking here for the ethical solution.
And fighting it out using force obviously is not the one or is there anything short
of that?
Someone might say right away as a first move let's suppose we ask for volunteers.
Anybody want to volunteer?
Someone may heroically choose to die and save the others.
These are my friends I'll do it for you.
Why would this be favorable as a solution?
Because by such an act of heroism the moral sphere is immediately restored.
Why?
Because now everybody's purposes would be treated with respect.
The people that are saved obviously but the one who chose heroically will have done it
of his own free will.
And so his desires would be respected too.
Heroism is more than ethical duty requires but it serves the ethical ideal by restoring
the moral sphere.
Let's make the case hotter however.
No one volunteers and no other easy solution presents itself what then?
Again they may fight it out and the stronger may win but how to preserve a smidgen of the
ethical in this very bad situation.
The suggestion of drawing lots sooner or later arises at this point.
Probably occurred to you.
But again why?
Well I think the answer is that drawing lots in this case would be a way to go because
it comes as close to respecting everybody equally in a bad situation when everybody's desires
can't be respected no matter what you do.
In other words we can at least respect everybody in the method we use that everyone gets treated
equally in the method of choosing even though everybody can't get treated well in the end.
I suggest this is the rationale for second best strategies of all kinds including majority
vote, drawing by lot, and political and legal procedures for resolving conflicts of interest.
Ask yourself now however one further question.
What if you draw lots and the loser refuses to abide by the result?
Okay what are your options then?
I think your only option now is to use force if he resists, right?
Well he goes and you say well that's horrible.
Well but you see we have exhausted every means, every other ethical means now.
Finally you get to a sphere out there when you really are in a Hobbesian state of nature.
But the idea is you don't get there until you've tried every other option then you're
justified in doing.
You're not justified in throwing him out from the beginning.
So that's the idea.
In fact I would, we have a little diagram that will be in the booklet now and is on
the screen in which I put three concentric circles.
And I put a number one in the middle circle and that number one inside represents the
moral sphere.
That's where everybody can be treated with respect.
You move up to the second circle number two and that's where the moral sphere is broken
down but there's a guilty party.
Now in that sphere you've got two rules.
Get the guilty not the innocent, use minimum force.
Go one step further, it gets a little more difficult.
You have a conflict of interest, no guilty party, that's level three if you will.
And then the rule is try to find a negotiated compromise.
If that fails try to stay as close to the sphere as possible and find some uniform way
of solving the problem by choosing lots, majority vote or whatever.
Because as you get further away you try to stay as close as possible to the original
as you can, you see, keeping the ideal in a bad world.
And then of course in three you draw lots let's say and there's a loser.
He loses, now we move up to four.
And four, there's no circle around four, that's the end of the line.
That's the Hobbesian state of nature if you will, we have no choice.
But notice what we have here then.
We have pacifism at one end.
When the moral sphere pacifism is true, out there in sphere four might make writers true.
But the point is that when the moral sphere breaks down we don't automatically zoom out
here and anything goes.
There are rules in between.
There are subtleties here that are expressed in the Geneva Conventions and elsewhere for
just warfare and so on.
The ethical life's a lot more complicated and complex and subtle than just no violence
or all violence.
There are degrees going up the line.
All right, next time we're going to turn to some domestic issues and some cultural wars.
See you then.
