Welcome.
In the last lecture, I made the point that agricultural societies utilize a smaller number
of plant species than did their hunting, gathering predecessors.
What is even more surprising is the degree to which that already small number fall into
an even smaller number of plant families or groups.
Therefore, I've titled this lecture the oligarchy of the garden patch to signify that a few
prominent families occupy much of the space in our gardens or supermarkets.
The fact that I can cover a very large percentage of all the plant food, except for the tree
fruit and the nuts, found in the fresh produce section of a typical grocery store in a single
lecture should highlight the fact that we rely upon a fairly small group of domesticated
plants for our food.
Each of these foods has a special history and a surprising tidbit or two.
Many of them you or family members of yours may have actually cultivated in a family garden.
None are particularly difficult to grow with some focused effort on soil quality, pest
control and watering, and in some cases, like for example, cauliflower, a little bit of light
management.
There are literally thousands of wild plants that have the potential to be domesticated.
Hutter gatherers in fertile regions often used many dozens of these plants without domesticating
them.
Some people who practiced forest grazing or some who are interested in survival techniques
still utilize some of these plant sources that can be quite nutritious and add variety
and valuable nutrition to the diet.
But after the Neolithic Revolution and the widespread domestication of plants, human
beings came to rely on a much, much smaller number of highly productive and relatively
easily cultivatable domesticated plants.
Many of these plants are rather closely related and come from a limited number of plant families.
They account for a large percentage of the plants currently under cultivation for food
outside those grain staples that we talked about before.
Of course, the grains, as you know, provide a major portion of the caloric intake for
the majority of the world's people.
But these plants we'll talk about today fill a lot of other gaps.
Let's talk first about the legume family, which is composed of dichotolidinous plants.
They have two cotyledons that open up when the seeds germinate that typically carry their
seeds in some kind of a pod, like pea pods or bean pods, something of that sort.
So what are these plants?
Soybean, peanut, the common beans, cowpea are major sources of dietary protein and calories
for human consumption in much of the world, but interestingly, not so much in the United
States.
Most, but of course by no means all Americans, still get much of their dietary protein from
animal sources, meat, milk and other dairy products, fish and shellfish.
But in much of the world those things are not so readily available.
Carbonized remains suggest that peas, lentils and chickpeas were domesticated in the Near
East and were cultivated with the cereals as early as about 9,000 years ago, and of
course those things are still in the diets of people from those regions.
From there it's assumed that peas spread to the cool, temperate areas of central and
northern Europe, and from there we're introduced into the western hemisphere soon after Columbus
reached the New World, and we'll be talking about that in detail later.
Many members of this group are capable of mutualistic symbiotic relationship with the
nodule forming bacterium rhizobium, which results in nitrogen fixation that is a really
important concept to grasp.
So we're going to talk just a little bit about this special property that the legumes
have in association with a bacterium called rhizobium to carry out the process of nitrogen
fixation.
It's important to actually take a few minutes and talk about that because it is so critical
to nutrition, to agronomy, and to the health of the world's population and the health of
our soils.
It's also a very interesting story because it shows a great interplay between two unrelated
organisms for mutual benefit.
So let's start with the concept of nitrogen.
Nitrogen is an important element in the molecules that make up the bodies of plants and animals.
For example, DNA is rich in nitrogen, proteins are rich in nitrogen, a number of vitamins
contain nitrogen.
So it's an important element.
It's not too surprising because why?
We live on planet Earth, we have an atmosphere which has a load of nitrogen in it.
We are walking around in a veritable sea of nitrogen.
But remember from your early chemistry, probably in high school, that when you were told about
nitrogen you were told that it was an inert gas.
And for all intents and purposes, it is inert to us.
If you have a nitrogen deficiency, don't bother trying to resolve it by breathing deeply.
You cannot utilize the molecular nitrogen in the atmosphere.
That might not surprise you, but this probably will.
No eukaryotic organism can use that nitrogen in the atmosphere directly.
Eukaryotes have lost the capacity to do that.
So all plants and all animals that are eukaryotes, the macroscopic creatures with which we are
so familiar, have to have a source of reduced or fixed nitrogen.
And the reservoir for nitrogen in the planet is that atmosphere.
So how do we get nitrogen into the food chain?
Well, we're pretty clever creatures.
We figured out how to do it in our advanced civilization.
We have something called the Haber process.
We can take nitrogen gas, put it in a strong tank, exert tremendous pressure, and heat
it to a very high temperature, and voila, we can produce ammonia.
The Haber process, very energy-expensive, but it produces a lot of our nitrogen fertilizers.
But biological symbiotic nitrogen fixation carried out by the legumes and their partners,
the rhizobium bacterium, do this at ambient temperature and pressure.
It's quite a trick.
So all of the nitrogen coming out of the reservoir in the atmosphere into the food chain, into
the biome, if you will, has to come by way of the action of prokaryotes, microorganisms,
creatures that don't have true nuclei.
You talk about being an interconnected and interdependent planet.
We're on it.
Now how does this process work?
The prokaryotes are living free in the soil, the rhizobium.
You plant the legume and its roots go down and little root hairs extend out, and when
they contact a rhizobium, the rhizobium infects.
It goes into the root hairs.
The plant responds.
It walls off the invading, if you will, rhizobium.
It builds this little nodule.
The rhizobium can live in the atmosphere, but to fix nitrogen, it has to be in an anaerobic,
oxygen-free environment.
The plant, not the bacterium, the plant then makes this protein called leg hemoglobin.
It's much like our own hemoglobin, only it's made by a plant, and like our hemoglobin,
it binds oxygen.
It goes down into the nodules, and it soaks up the oxygen, making the nodule anaerobic.
The rhizobium then begins to fix nitrogen, that's of course diffused down into the soil
from the atmosphere, and it begins to produce reduced nitrogen, which nourishes the plant.
The plant now has all the nitrogen it needs.
It doesn't need fertilizer, okay?
This is an effective enough process that extra nitrogen actually leaks out of the plant,
and enriches the soil around it, and can be used by other plants that aren't legumes
and aren't doing this kind of symbiotic nitrogen fixation.
It also, not surprisingly, leads to the production of seeds in the legumes, which are rather
rich in nitrogen compounds.
So it's quite a process.
It can often be more economical for a farmer to intercede or crop rotate with the legume
to fix nitrogen than it is to pay for a nitrogen fertilizer, often made with something like
the Haber process.
In my own case, I intercede my own pastures, which virtually eliminates the need to use
commercial fertilizers in a system like mine where the animals range free and deposit
their waste on the pasture.
Now if I were in a production system, and not in a breeding system, and I was taking
large numbers of animals off the pasture every year to go to make lamb chops, then
I would be exporting a lot of nitrogen that started in the atmosphere, got fixed by the
legumes, got put into the sheep when they ate it.
I would be exporting it out to my customers that would eat the lamb.
And so when that happens, you do have to fertilize, but in my case, I take only a few animals
off, and so I can leave the pasture as it is, and that allows things to remain enriched
for nitrogen without having to add fertilizer.
The ability of legumes then to fix nitrogen can save us money, it can reduce our dependence
on petroleum products, and it improves the soil and the water quality.
As I mentioned, the consequence of this nitrogen fixation process is that many of these plants
produce seeds that have a rather high protein content.
In areas where meat is scarce, members of this group are often referred to as poor man's
meat.
Why?
Because they're supplying nitrogen.
And when we eat meat, that's one of the things we primarily want to get, are the nitrogen
compounds out of the meat.
We want the amino acids to build our own proteins.
So legumes play a vital role in vegetarian diets for that same reason.
Legumes that are commonly eaten are all the beans and peas, soybeans, of course, peanuts,
chickpeas, and lentils.
Some of these plants can be made into secondary products like peanut butter, a number of different
kinds of candy, hummus, tofu, and in addition to tofu, a wide range of other products and
additives made from soy, some of which are found actually in the dairy aisle or in the
processed food aisle and even in various canned foods.
So you don't always find this stuff in the produce section.
Protein content in the field pea, chickpea, and lentil is roughly 20%.
These legumes are popular in the Near East and North Africa.
They remain stay in the Indian subcontinent and especially where religious preferences
forbid eating meat.
It should be noted, if you're a vegetarian or a vegan, that there are no plant proteins
even from these wonderful legumes that are what we call complete proteins.
So it is very important to be sure if you've taken animal products out of your diet to
eat an appropriate balance of these legumes and other high protein plants so that in combination
you get the equivalent of eating complete proteins like you would get from eating animal
products.
Now the Solonaceae family of plants has long been known to herbalists and agriculturalists.
It includes more than 3,000 species.
Many evolved in South America and the center of diversity is very near the equator.
Several species were therefore undisturbed when those ice sheets came down during the
ice ages and when they receded and the plants moved that way with them, they had time to
accumulate adaptive genetic variation for extreme conditions.
The Solonaceae is a very important plant family economically.
It includes a number of things, potatoes, tomatoes, eggplant and peppers and it's actually
closely allied to coffee but we won't put coffee into this lecture, we're not going
to call it a member of the Solonaceae.
All of these plants tend to have thick fleshy stems.
It's commonly known as the nightshade family and it also includes some poisonous weeds and
shrubs and some pharmaceutically very important plants.
Belladonna is a plant well known to European herbalists and it's resemblance in growth
mode to other members of the Solonaceae has resulted in some members of the family actually
being viewed with suspicion as food plants by people who know the other properties of
some of the other Solonaceae.
Belladonna is the source of the drug atropine which is a poison if taken in high dose but
which is very important medically and a couple of its uses are to combat convulsions and to
dilate the pupil of the eye so many of us have encountered atropine.
The progenitors of tomatoes came from South America but they were not domesticated there.
There we go again.
This is yet another exception to the Vaviloff biological approach that we discussed earlier.
It's thought that birds carried tomato seeds in their guts and deposited them in the fields
prepared for maize and gourds by Amerindian farmers in Mexico.
Another example of something we mentioned earlier and that is a plant dispersing its
seeds by wrapping them in an attractive food source that an animal will eat and then carry
the seeds away for dispersal.
Then in Mexico they grew as weeds until some of those early Amerindian farmers appreciated
their value and began to domesticate them through selective breeding and artificial selection.
In North America the tomato was believed to be poisonous until the mid-1800s that was
grown often as an ornamental plant well before that for the nice look of the plant and the
fruits.
The potato is another member of the Solanaceae plant family.
Potatoes were first domesticated in the Andes but now are also common in North America and
in much of Europe.
They're a good source for vodka for example in some parts of Eastern Europe.
The potato was first cultivated in South America between three and seven thousand years ago
though scientists believe they probably grew wild in that region as long as thirteen thousand
years ago.
The Incas had learned to preserve the potato for storage by actually dehydrating and mashing
potatoes into a substance that could be stored at room temperature for up to ten years thus
providing a really excellent insurance against possible crop failures.
Potatoes were first introduced to the colonies in the 1620s but they did not become widely
accepted until they received an aristocratic seal of approval from none other than Thomas
Jefferson who served them to guests in the White House.
They come in a very wide variety of sizes, shapes, colors and textures.
They're the waxy ones, the mealy ones, the yellow ones, the purple ones but these tubers
are not closely related to either sweet potatoes or yams which are not members of the Solan
A.C.E. at all.
Now eggplant is also a member of that family and it has an old world origin while of course
tomatoes are new world plants.
Eggplant was probably first domesticated in the Indo-Burma region.
The earliest record of domesticated eggplant goes back to the first century B.C.
World production of this plant exceeds 31 million tons a year and the leading producers
are China, India, Egypt, Turkey all quite reasonable given where it was first domesticated but
also Japan and Italy.
Both countries were at figures prominently in the local or regional cuisines.
The word eggplant dates to the British occupation of India where that variety of eggplant that
is white and sort of egg shaped was popular.
So the English colonials began to call it eggplant but ironically when you go to England
today what we call eggplant they called aborigines.
So there is a certain irony there because we get the eggplant name from the Raj in India.
Another member of this Solan A.C.E. family the peppers or capsicum group are one of the
most diverse plant groups on the whole planet.
There are literally hundreds of different types of peppers under cultivation.
You think about it you can name a bunch yourself.
There's green ones and red ones and yellow ones and orange ones but there's also jalapeno
peppers and ancho peppers and habaneros and banana peppers.
In the cuisines of most every region in the world you find peppers.
Imagine Hungarian cuisine without paprika which of course is a pepper.
They have been a part of the human diet for over 9,000 years.
Columbus has given credit for introducing the chili to Europe and subsequently to Africa
and Asia.
On his first voyage he had covered a plant whose fruit mimicked the pungency of the black
pepper and remember that's what Columbus was looking for.
So Columbus called it red pepper because the pods were red.
Materials isolated from peppers are now being used as pharmaceuticals of all things pain
control because they do burn but they can of course fool the nerve endings in some kinds
of chronic pain and can bring some relief.
One of the compounds capsicum can now actually be purchased over the counter and derivatives
of this same chemical are the active ingredient in pepper spray can be used for personal protection
or in crowd control.
Now tobacco is also another member of this Solanaceae family but we will discuss its
special role in a later lecture.
The Kohl family is the next group of domesticated plants we'll discuss and a few of its members
are the result of both natural and artificial selection favoring one part or the other of
the same plant to provide a specialized vegetable.
They are part of the genus Brassica and this group we find such important plants as oil
seed rape of course in America we can't say that so we call it canola or turnips or Chinese
cabbage or bok choy, rutabaga, black mustard, brown mustard and Ethiopian mustard.
Cabbage and kales probably originated in western Europe and were the first kohl's to be domesticated.
Before being cultivated for food however they were probably used for medicinal purposes
because all of these plants have a fairly high sulfur content which early herbalists
might have found interesting.
Gardeners and plant breeders have been able to use artificial selection to produce cabbage,
kohlrabi, cauliflower, kale, broccoli and brussel sprouts from a single species of this
group Brassica oleraceae.
What they essentially did was find mutants that favor one part or the other of the plant
either the sprout or the flower or the stem or the leaf and that's the way you get these
different vegetables it's essentially one plant pulled in different directions genetically.
A number of secondary products are made from members of this family significant quantities
of of course canola oil are produced from oil seed rape.
There is a rich selection of prepared mustards available from a number of different cultures
and food traditions and several important fermented secondary products such as sauerkraut
and kimchi are produced from the various cabbages and these of course have long shelf lives.
I'd like to point out that we've discussed just three main groups now the legumes the
solanaceae and the kohl's but consider the variety of edible materials we've just discussed.
Now the last group in our domesticated plant families in this particular lecture are going
to be the cucubrits the cucubrits come in a variety of different types but can be usefully
described as squash, melons, gourds, pumpkins or cucumbers.
There's evidence that many of these plants have been under domestication for many millennia
in the new world and of course in fact one member of this group the bottle gourd is likely
the very first plant domesticate predating the actual neolithic revolution by several
millennia.
It was not domesticated as a food plant as we mentioned as much as it was as an item of
convenience well suited to carrying water and other materials that could have been invaluable
to hunter gatherers as they moved out of Africa.
Gourds were probably first domesticated in India and gourds were first cultivated in
Africa but as we said spread rapidly to other locations where they've been under cultivation
for many thousands of years.
The wild origins of these plants are known in some cases but it is a complicated group
with a very wide geographic distribution and obvious utility making the provenance of some
of the modern cultivars extremely difficult to determine.
Now by way of an informal review of these lectures on the grains and the garden patch
let's now do one of our little mind experiments.
Let's take a imaginary trip around our neighborhood supermarket and take a look around at what's
there.
For now let's focus only on the plant materials we'll leave the animal products alone we're
just going to focus on the plant materials available for purchase.
Now when you enter this supermarket what's your first impression?
It's immediately one of almost bewildering array of different products providing an amazing
choice to satisfy our modern hunter shopper tendencies.
We want to be shopper gatherers I guess when we go in those places.
As you look at the produce section you recognize a number of the plants we've covered in this
lecture?
I think so.
Let's just kind of look at that imaginary produce section.
You walk in and what are you going to see?
You're going to see cabbages probably a couple of different kinds.
You're going to see plain old regular cabbage and you're probably going to see something
called Savoy cabbage and if you're in a real gourmet store you might even see an orange
colored cabbage they do exist.
You're going to see the color flowers and they may come in a variety of colors now.
And you're going to see coal Robbie and you're going to see kale and you're going to see
Brussels sprouts.
All of those things out of the coal family and you move a little bit farther along and
you'll see things from the Solanaceae.
You're going to see tomatoes probably a variety of different kinds.
You're going to see potatoes and not just one kind.
There's going to be Yukon golds and there are going to be Russets and there are going
to be several different things and again if it's a fancy store you may see some purple
ones and you may see some long kind of misinformed looking things.
There are lots and lots of new kinds of potatoes coming into this country.
They're really old cultivars from Latin America but they're coming in here now because people
have interest in these kind of interesting foods.
Then you're going to see lots of legumes.
You're going to see chickpeas, you're going to see snow peas, you're going to see green
beans, you're going to see common peas.
You might see some fava beans.
You can see all that sort of stuff.
So the produce section is going to be heavily influenced by a number of these things in
this oligarchy of the garden patch that we just talked about.
But is that where you're going to end up seeing the plants?
If you were talking about these plants and the grains, I think not.
Let's move into the center of the aisles and start looking at some of the labels.
First of all, let's go into the breakfast cereal aisle.
Okay, well that's no big surprise.
What's in there?
Grains.
Grains on top of grains on top of grains.
Let's go into the snack aisle.
What do we got in there?
We got peanuts.
We've got potato chips.
We've got corn puffs.
We've got all kinds of things in bags with all kinds of flavoring stuff on them but they're
coming from two, three kinds of plants by and large.
So let's go over to the dairy case.
You're going to look in there and you're going to see tofu in there.
You're going to see something in a bottle that looks like milk, okay, but it's going
to be soy.
For people who have trouble with milk proteins, you can now get something that tastes and
acts and functions like milk but it's made out of soy protein.
You're going to go over to where you've got some canned things and some bottles of stuff
and what are you going to see?
You're going to see pickles that are cucubrits.
You're going to see all sorts of stuff like sauerkraut.
You might even see some kimchi.
So that stuff is all in this relatively small group and you say, well, all right, I'm tired
of that.
I'm just going to go over to the soft drink aisle.
That'll take care of it.
I'll just go to the soft drink aisle and you go over there and of course you've got rows
and rows and rows of carbonated soft drinks and all of them that aren't made with aspartame
or some of the diet stuff are going to be sweetened with corn sweeteners.
So you run over to the refrigerated section and you start looking at the prepared foods
and if you start reading the labels, corn sweetener, corn sweetener, corn sweetener,
corn sweetener and of course you go to the shortening and there's going to be canola
oil and all that sort of stuff.
So it's a small number of plants, processed different ways, prepared different ways,
packaged different ways, giving, if you will, almost the illusion of great variety.
Our diet is not as varied as we think it is and this is an important and too many a surprising
fact.
We will return to this point in later lectures.
In the next lecture, we'll discuss food preservation and storage, paying particular attention to
plants that are easily and effectively stored.
This was of great importance before the development of modern food preserving techniques such
as canning, freezing and freeze drying.
Our food choices were even more limited in the days before modern food preservation and
transport made it possible to enjoy a varied diet year round by being able to enjoy foods
out of season.
We'll see you then.
