Hello, and welcome back.
As we saw in the last lecture, the Columbian Exchange opened opportunities for growing
and raising plants and animals far from their points of origin, with enormous economic and
social consequences.
These organisms often proved to have major significance in regions and on people distant
from their site of domestication.
This phenomenon was a major factor in the development of a growing global food system
which would ultimately provide the bulk of the nourishment for the entire world population.
The four plants we will discuss in this lecture, coffee, tea, tobacco, and cocoa, are different
from those that supply food or fiber, but the demand for them has been no less than
that for the more nutritive domesticates.
Now that can in part be due to the addictive properties that products of each of these
plants possesses.
They are all to one degree or another stimulants and mildly to strongly addictive.
But another shared aspect to all of them is the degree to which these products generate
and enhance social interaction, which is not an insignificant trait in a world that was
bringing together more and more peoples from diverse areas of the world.
So coffee, tea, cocoa, and tobacco are not used for nourishment, for fiber, for decoration,
but primarily for the taste sensations, stimulation, or the calming effects that they can provide.
So these plants do not constitute a genetically related group, nor were they domesticated
in the same places or by the same peoples.
We will consider them together because they all have had and continue to have a major
place in the societies that have adopted their use and they've become woven into the social
fabric of their host regions in ways different from most food sources.
Now the origins of coffee are shrouded in legend and mystery.
Not surprising.
This is a drink that's been with us a long time.
There is a story, of course, about an Ethiopian goat herder, Caldi by name.
Notice this goat's dancing.
That's what he said, dancing.
You could probably say frolicking or frisking, after eating some red berries off a low bush.
When he tried the bitter fruits himself, he actually wanted to join the dance.
So the story goes.
The legend then states that he picked some of the fruits and in an excited state took
some of the red berries back to a monastery near his home, hoping to learn from the monks
there what these berries were.
When the monks saw the state that Caldi was in, they took the berries and threw them in
the fire, declaring them the work of the devil.
But the wonderful smell emanating from the roasting berries was said to have changed the
monks' assessment of the whole situation and they later pronounced the berries a divine
gift.
Who knows.
But what is not legend is that coffee was first discovered.
It discovered, is the right word, I think, in the Kofa province of Ethiopia in about
the sixth century AD.
So it's something that has not been used that far back.
Apparently at that time, it was not consumed as a beverage, but rather, as awful as this
sounds, the berries were ground and mixed with sheep or goat tallow and consumed as
a kind of energy booster.
And a little bit similar to some of these modern energy drinks.
In other words, lots of calories and a stimulant popped together.
Has an effect, okay?
Caffeine, the stimulant in coffee, works on our brain, our kidneys, and our cardiovascular
system.
It can cause the heart to beat more strongly.
It can increase blood flow and increase the metabolic and respiratory rates.
Coffee was later, after its initial discovery in Ethiopia, dispersed throughout the Middle
East by Arab traders who worked in that area.
And it was after coffee actually reached Yemen that it began to be consumed primarily
as a beverage, an infusion in hot water.
We also know that by the 17th century, the people of Venice were familiar with coffee.
There are records of coffee drinking in Venice, and its use spread from Italy into much of
the rest of Europe.
And though drinking coffee quickly became popular in Italy and other places, there was
pressure against drinking what some considered to be a heathen or foreign concoction.
That problem was remedied, and I think this is again another wonderful legend.
That problem was supposedly remedied when Pope Clement VIII supposedly baptized coffee.
Now other accounts are probably more accurate.
They say he blessed coffee, and that's less fun, but it's probably more accurate.
And the drink then made it, or it made the drink essentially appropriate for consumption
by good Christians.
The spread of coffee through Europe was accompanied by the establishment of a whole network of
coffee houses, places where coffee was dispensed, that took on a strong regional characteristic
wherever these places settled.
The coffee houses became important meeting places where people gathered to discuss things
like politics, trade, philosophy, fashion, or just to gossip.
And of course there's a word that we hear occasionally about a coffee clutch, which
was a term used to describe gossiping in a coffee house, usually by a group of German
women.
Some of these coffee houses were also called penny universities, because for a penny the
cost of a serving of coffee in some of these places, you could be treated to all sorts
of lofty and learned discourse.
These were really places where people talked.
Lloyd's in London was one of these coffee houses, and it's probably worth spending a
second or two talking about the impact of that establishment on our culture.
Because people with like interests often chose the same coffee house, so they'd have like
minded people to talk with, and they could discuss issues of common importance.
Lloyd's was popular as a gathering place for persons interested in ensuring sailing ships
and their cargoes.
Clearly a big issue at that time, because it was a risky business, sending a sailing
ship out, and people tried to insure the cargoes, and these insurers of merchant ships and their
cargoes would frequently gather at Lloyd's, converse, discuss these issues, and they ultimately
merged and consolidated into what for a long time was the world's largest insurance company,
Lloyd's of London, named for the coffee house where the customers got together and talked
about this.
Lloyd's was also a very crowded place, and ordinary folks usually had to wait for some
considerable amount of time before they could get a seat, so Lloyd's had a way of solving
that problem.
They took a metal dish that would make a sound if you tossed a metal coin into it, and they
put that dish out where people could see it, and they put a sign on it, and it said, to
insure prompt service.
So if you wanted to sit quickly, you came in, tossed your coin in there, made a clink,
some serving person came, got you, took you to a seat.
They later abbreviated that sign to T-I-P-S, to insure prompt service.
It became known as TIPS, and that cultural practice of giving a small gratuity to a serving
person for better service, again, began at Lloyd's in London.
The value of coffee to these venues may well have been in its stimulant properties, which
kept hardworking people awake and socially engaged, much as it does for us today.
Caffeine stimulates us, makes us more attentive, gives us a good boost of energy and enthusiasm,
and causes people to think faster.
That's really true.
For those of us who drink it, it gives us a happy lift.
It's also possible to become mildly addicted to coffee, and to the lift it offers, which
no doubt contributed somewhat to its popularity.
I have a favorite sign from a coffee house that I occasionally frequent, and it says,
drink coffee, think fast, talk fast.
You'll have plenty of time to sleep when you're dead.
Europeans quickly tired of the Arabian monopoly on coffee production, and in the late 1700s,
the Dutch smuggled some beans out of the Arab port of Mocha, and took them to Ceylon,
now Sri Lanka, where they were established as a profitable monoculture, and again, how
many times have you heard me use that word?
I'm going to use it more.
They planted a monoculture of coffee in Sri Lanka, or Ceylon, until the plants were destroyed
by a fungal infection.
So there really is a lesson in that, and I think the lesson is not, thou shalt not smuggle.
The lesson is, monocultures are potentially dangerous because they are vulnerable to the
spread of diseases, in this case, a fungus, which wiped out the entire industry.
Note also the name of the port from which the coffee beans were taken to Sri Lanka,
You keep seeing these names associated with coffee popping up even today, and it'll happen
here in a moment when I talk about a bizarre series of events in 1720 that allowed a young
French naval officer, a very entrepreneurial kind of person, to spirit some cuttings of
a coffee plant away from France, and you might say, well, what's coffee doing in France if
France is not in the coffee business?
The issue was that the Dutch had given, as a kind of peace gift, a plant to the king
of France.
It turned out to be a coffee plant without realizing that that could be a source for
the French to get into this industry and be a competitor.
This young officer recognized that possibility, went to the crown, asked for permission to
take cuttings.
He was denied.
So in a sort of daring plot, he broke into the royal garden, made his cuttings, and
whisked them off to Martinique, establishing the French Java industry.
So we have Java and we have mocha associated with these early years when coffee is being
moved around the world and grown by different countries and different people.
By 1800, Brazil was in the coffee growing business and good growing conditions, favorable
government practices, and an advantageous location in the New World permitted Brazil to
soon become the world's largest coffee producer.
So what have we got?
We have a case of an old world plant becoming a New World cultivar producing products with
a worldwide distribution.
Coffee is now a popular drink around the entire world and in some years it is actually the
second most actively traded commodity on world markets after crude oil.
It's a major success story, the establishment of coffee.
The exact origins of the use of tea are no better really understood than those legends
around the first use of coffee.
But as with coffee, there are legends purporting to describe the discovery of this plant as
a source for a new brood beverage.
There's a legend that almost 5,000 years ago, Shen Nng, emperor of China, accidentally
discovered the benefits of tea when a dried leaf supposedly fell into a cup of hot water
he was preparing to drink.
Now knowing what we all do about how carefully Chinese emperors were cared for at that time,
I think this is a pretty unlikely story that a dried leaf fell into the emperor's cup.
But legends are legends.
What we do know with a great deal more certainty is that the people of China, India, Tibet,
and Burma have been drinking tea for millennia and reaching back at least to the time purported
in that legend to be the discovery of tea.
Tea is carefully grown and maintained as a cultivar in all those regions where it's
been drunk for a long time.
But it is not entirely clear that it really fits our working definition of a domesticate
since it may not be genetically different from its wild progenitors.
It just may be a long time careful cultivar.
Near the end of the 6th century, both tea, the beverage, and Buddhism, the philosophy
crossed the waters from China to Japan.
And the Japanese, more than anyone, elevated tea growing and tea consuming to a high art
form.
The Japanese tea ceremonies are true works of art and they do celebrate the importance
of tea in that culture.
Tea reached Europe later than coffee.
There was coffee already in Europe when tea was first introduced, but the spread of tea
throughout Europe was facilitated by the existence of that network of coffee houses
that I mentioned were already in place.
In some countries, such as England, the popularity of tea was actually greater than that of coffee.
But there can be lots of reasons for that beyond just genetic preference for one taste
or another.
This often had to do with availability and that had to do with trade, with taxation,
with relationships between different nations who had controls of these various crops.
But for whatever reasons, the British became accustomed to the use of tea and it became
extremely important to them at that time more important than coffee which they had been
exposed to earlier.
As mentioned before, the Dutch coffee venture in Ceylon or Sri Lanka was terminated after
the coffee plants were damaged by a fungal infection.
However the Dutch made a very nice financial recovery by introducing tea to the plantations
that had formerly produced coffee.
So after a few years, it took a while for the tea plants to grow, but the Dutch managed
to get back into that business.
In 1664, the English entered the tea business through the activities of the British East
India Company, which you'll recall was a private company but also was tightly tied to national
interests and to the crown.
And by 1690, the British East India Company began selling tea in the Massachusetts colony
and by the middle of the 1700s, tea was the most popular beverage in the American colonies.
The Boston Tea Party in 1773 was one of the precipitating events for the American Revolution.
American Revolutionists dumped tea bearing an unpopular tax into the sea that night and
then went back to drinking coffee.
And that American preference for coffee over tea in general continues to this day.
Just to illustrate the degree to which tea affected the way people did things, the American
clippership industry, which was the pride of American shipbuilding, came into being
simply to allow America to get into the tea trade.
From the foregoing recitation of milestones in tea and coffee industries, it should be
abundantly clear that both of these plants had social, political, cultural, and economic
impact far beyond what one would predict based on their contributions to the human diet.
By that time, civilization had reached the point where the provision of these non-nutritive
materials, luxuries in a sense, derived from domesticates were in significant demand in
many cultures and across all spectra of the populations, and they were becoming rivals
to food staples as essentials in the minds of many people.
As we discussed last time, the Columbian Exchange facilitated the transport of products from
the old world to the new world and from the new to the old.
The indigenous peoples of the new world had been using tobacco as a stimulant and a curative
for thousands of years before the arrival of the Europeans.
Tobacco, like tea and coffee in the old world, served to facilitate social interaction and
often brought disparate peoples together to form new fellowships and to promote peaceful
social interaction among them, think for example of the Native Americans sitting down
together to smoke the peace pipe.
Tobacco contains the stimulant nicotine, which, like caffeine, produces a pleasurable lift
and mood and attention.
Nicotine constricts blood vessels, or I should say the use of nicotine constricts blood vessels,
and can cause the heart to speed up.
The effect of nicotine on the brain is particularly interesting in that it apparently simultaneously
invigorates us and relaxes us.
That's its appeal.
However, the balance between these two conflicting things, these two poles, seems to depend on
how much and how often nicotine is used.
But think about people that you see that are jangled and they'll take a deep drag on a
cigarette and they'll sort of relax, but then also think about people who are wanting
to get going and they'll light a cigarette and they'll sort of get invigorated, so it
has those dual effects.
It also stimulates adrenaline output, and that's why I said it's the use of tobacco
that speeds the heart, because it's really the adrenaline that speeds the heart rate,
increases blood pressure, and makes breathing faster and more shallow.
It was the Spaniards that introduced the plant and its various uses to Europe, and in a very
short time thousands of people in Europe were addicted.
Just tobacco became one of the leading exports from the Americas to the Old World.
Its popularity was undoubtedly enhanced by the addictive nature of the nicotine absorbed
when people used tobacco products in virtually any form.
The use of tobacco became fashionable and popular throughout Europe, and its addictive
properties virtually ensured its growing demand.
Different cultures tended to favor different approaches to the use of this addictive plant.
The French favored snuff used in the traditional way.
They'd put it on the back of their hand and sniff it, or they'd put some up their nose.
They did not slip it under their lip as rodeo riders and affected American teenagers often
do.
The British liked pipes, either clay or later briar pipes, and the Spanish preferred, as
parts of Spanish America still do, cigars.
After the Crimean War, the use of cigarettes spread quickly because, of course, they didn't
require much accoutrement to use them, and that caused much of the world's population
to become addicted to this potentially dangerous habit.
Unfortunately, a large portion of the world's population now appears to be addicted to one
form or other of tobacco use.
The health costs to society brought on by that drug are truly significant.
I must mention one more new world product that many claim is also addictive, and that,
of course, is cocoa, the product from which chocolate is made.
It's been used as both a spice and a confection, and contains a small amount of caffeine which
may explain in part its vast appeal.
Columbus may have been the first European to ever taste cocoa.
Cortez probably also encountered it in his conquest of the Aztecs.
It was brought back to Spain by these adventurers, where confectioners and cooks put it to many
different uses.
It was actually in Europe that cocoa butter was added back to cocoa powder to make chocolate.
And for that reason alone, some of us would not argue with the plant's reputation as the
food of the gods.
It was known that Mesoamericans employed it in their religious ceremonies for about 3,000
years before the arrival of Europeans.
Oh, chocolate, something more than a food and less than a drug.
OK, in review, we can see that these four plants that provide little nutritive value
are not decorative and don't produce useful fibers have had enormous impact on the lives
of billions of people around the world.
And I mean literally billions, if you think of the history of this and if you think of
how many people use these products now, we're talking about enormous numbers of people.
Many folks cannot face the day without their cup of coffee or tea.
And when they try to abstain from its use, they do experience true withdrawal symptoms.
They can complain of headaches, irritability, lack of focus, and a general malaise that
can last for something in the neighborhood of a month.
So caffeine is addictive.
And we think about it as being addictive, of course, in coffee and tea.
But remember that we also derive some of our American soft drinks using cocoa plants
as well, some of the colas, and of course there's caffeine in those.
And so some of the same things we've been saying about caffeine in coffee and tea would
naturally apply to these carbonated soft drinks as well.
Now those addicted to tobacco use often nurture a sort of love-hate relationship with that
plant that they know is probably killing them, but which brings them so much short-term pleasure.
I know that there was a lot of discussion in the United States at one point about whether
or not smoking cigarettes was actually dangerous, and whether we should settle for warnings
or whatever.
But I think it's worth noting that cigarettes carried the nickname coffin nails back in
the First World War, so I think people have not really been kidding themselves that much.
People know that cigarette smoking is dangerous, and they've probably always known it.
The media are filled with ads urging people to quit and touting products and programs,
ranging from hypnotism and therapy programs to nicotine patches and nicotine chewing gum.
Clearly smoking cessation is no easy matter.
Mark Twain may have said it best when he claimed quitting smoking was easy.
He knew because he'd done it dozens of times.
Finally, we have to wonder how great a role derivatives of cocoa play in the increasing
waste sizes of people in the developed countries as we struggle with this now clearly recognized
epidemic of obesity.
So these well-traveled plants that we considered in this lecture, again coffee, tea, tobacco,
and cocoa, compel our special interest because unlike the domesticates discussed so far,
they really don't have any nutritive value.
They're not really essential for clothing or shelter and they don't provide any motive
power.
Their sole purpose seems to lie in their stimulant effect and the consequent ability to give
pleasure and to facilitate social interaction in bonding.
In an earlier lecture, I mentioned that after the discovery of the New World, there was
an uneven and gradual increase in acceptance of new ways of thinking and new ways of perceiving
the world.
That trend, of course, continued and may have reached its zenith in the so-called age of
reason when people across the socio-political economic spectrum, including a number of persons
of privilege and high standing, turned their attention and interest to the issues of the
day with a new kind of unbounded optimism in what?
In mankind's ability to make this a better world.
Among these issues was the practice of food production and agriculture, which of course
lay right at the heart of sustaining the people and the industry of any country.
It was clear that the enterprise needed a new, focused, disciplined and scientific approach
in order to keep it strong and healthy.
So next time, we'll discuss how the scientific approach began and we will discuss how it
began to impact the practice of agriculture.
We will see you then.
