Welcome. As we saw in the last lecture, the mid-19th to the mid-20th century was a period
that saw great advances in systematic and true scientific plant breeding. It was also
a process in progress in food handling and food preparation that, taken together, greatly
improved the diets of people in the developed countries. There were many new varieties and
some new species produced during this time. Many people contributed to these advances,
but in this lecture we will use, by way of example, just four very different individuals
from three countries and with very widely divergent backgrounds, to demonstrate some
of the successes that had the furthest ranging impact. Hugo de Vries was a Dutch scientist.
He was born in 1848 into a prominent, well-to-do and intellectually very connected family in
Harlem. He was the beneficiary of a first-rate European university education. He enrolled
first at Leiden University as a botany major in 1866. While in university, he was greatly
taken with Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection, despite the fact that many
of his better-known professors were very skeptical of those ideas. In fact, in his dissertation,
he quoted several passages from Darwin that clearly provoked his professors, but nonetheless
he graduated successfully from Leiden in 1870. Following graduation, he expanded his education
into chemistry, studying at Heidelberg University with one of the preeminent botanists of the
day, Wilhelm Hofmeister. He later took a teaching post in Amsterdam and set about to study
pangenesis, the genetic theory, you recall, that was stubbornly held by Darwin to explain
some of his results. In the process of that work, he rediscovered and confirmed the work
of Gregor Mendel, helping, along with Galton and others, to put an end, finally, to the
pangenesis theory. And that's interesting because DeVries himself did publish a variant
of the pangenesis theory, but his work really did help put it to rest. His rediscovery of
Mendel's work was a great contribution in its own right, since it made Mendel's discoveries
known to the wider scientific community, and DeVries' connection to that wider scientific
community really put him in an optimum position to do that. In genetic studies on the evening
primrose, he demonstrated the relative ease with which new varieties can be formed by
crossing known types. In his lifetime, he was the recipient of several prestigious scientific
awards and prizes. He retired from university life in 1918 and took up residence in his
estate, de Bachhorst, where he conducted his studies on the evening primrose and the construction
of new platforms until his death in 1935. He's an excellent example of the sort of gentrified
academic scientist devoted to his work and tightly connected to the highest intellectual
circles of the day. It could be argued that Mendel's work probably would have eventually
been rediscovered without his contributions, but his total body of work moved the field
of scientifically-blased plant genetics forward at a more rapid pace than we had seen in the
past several centuries. Luther Burbank, another of these plant geneticists, was born in 1849
in Lancaster, Massachusetts. This is wonderful, I think. Maybe we should be talking more about
his mother than him, but he was the 13th of 18 children living on a small farm in Massachusetts.
It was there that he became intensely interested in plants. He really didn't have much formal
education, but he was a very keen observer and a clever and insightful plant breeder.
He actually became something of a legend in his own time when he was described as the
wizard of horticulture. He really wasn't a scientist in the strictest sense because
he did not collect data, analyze it, and publish it in the usual accepted way, but he was wonderfully
intuitive in mixing, selecting, and then, as we say, fixing genetic traits with just
outstanding results. He's credited with developing over 800 new strains of fruits, nuts, ornamentals,
grains, and vegetables. One of his best known achievements was the production of a plant called
the Burbank Russet Potato. It's the most widely cultivated potato in the entire world, and it's
the plant that provides the raw material for the bulk of McDonald's French fries. Interestingly,
in 1874 he sold the rights to that Burbank Russet for $150. He used that sum of money to buy a small
plot of land in Santa Rosa, California, and in reality it was probably a good move because there
he established his nursery on six acres. It was on that ground that he did most of his crosses and
developed the many varieties for which he became famous. Burbank was something of a phenomenon and
a celebrity, as I mentioned, in his own day. He was even the subject of a fascinating surrealistic
painting by the renowned Mexican artist Frida Kahlo. I just blundered on it the other day when
visiting a museum and looking at Frida's work, and I saw this rather familiar looking man planted
in the ground from the waist up. I mean it's surreal, and it's clearly Burbank, and you look at the
attribution on the painting, and it says portrait of Luther Burbank, but it's surreal and there's a
cutaway of the soil, and instead of legs you see plant roots going down from Burbank. It's quite
an interesting statement and it may have something to do with Kahlo's idea of Burbank's connection to
those who came before and his commitment that he was really, really a botanist and a horticulturist.
By all accounts, Burbank was a gentle man and a person greatly respected in his lifetime. He was
interested in the improvement of mankind as well as the improvement of plant species.
To that point, it should be noted that in 1907 he published an essay on childrearing called,
and I quote, the training of the human plant. Though I'm sure it was well intended, it does
give one a little shudder, doesn't it? George Washington Carver, another American, was born
into slavery in 1864 in Missouri. Must have been a dreadful way to start life because he and his
mother were kidnapped by Confederate nightriders and whisked away to Arkansas. His former master,
whose name was Carver, Carver took his former master's name. His former master actually went to
Arkansas and recovered him and his mother, essentially as lost property after the war and took
them back. Carver attended a one-room schoolhouse and that one-room schoolhouse was naturally,
in that time in America, segregated by race. He struggled to get a formal education, but of
course as an African American living at the end of the 19th century, there were very few
educational or professional paths open to him. He attended college by first going to Simpson
College, a small private liberal arts college in Iowa, and though he was really interested in
science and wanted to learn about science, at Simpson he studied piano and art because there
was no science curriculum at all at Simpson at that time. He then went to what is now Iowa State
University in Ames, Iowa. Iowa State, of course, later became America's first land grant college
and has a strong agricultural orientation. Its predecessor institution, which is the place
that Carver went, was clearly on the path to becoming such an institution and was doing research,
being done there in what today we would call agronomy and botany and microbiology and soil
chemistry and a number of those sort of applied scientific courses that would deal with issues
like plant productivity and plant genetics. At Iowa State, he received a BS and an MS in bacterial
botany, which I think today we would simply probably call soil microbiology or maybe a
microbial ecology. Bacteriology used to be subsumed into departments of botany because
people thought bacteria were more plant-like than animal-like. We no longer make that distinction,
but that's why Carver ended up in that department. After completion of his master's degree, he actually
joined the faculty at Ames, but he shortly left there at the request of another prominent man
of the time, Booker T. Washington. He left at Washington's request for Tuskegee Normal
and Industrial Institute, where Carver remained for the rest of his very, very productive life.
For many years, he was the sole science faculty member at that traditionally black institution.
While at Tuskegee, he worked on developing agricultural products and agricultural crops,
as well as new systems of fertilization and soil management. He's credited with making
major contributions to the conversion of what was once called the one crop south to the more
diversified and fertile agriculture region that it is today. Now, one really, really can't escape
the irony of that, because it was a series of land-use decisions by prominent American leaders,
among them, people as august as Thomas Jefferson, that resulted in the depletion and degradation
of the soil of the south through a slave-based agricultural monoculture system that eventually
led to the war between the states. And then, really, only one generation after that war,
not even a complete generation, a former slave was the leading figure in repairing the damage
done to the land. I think that's quite a story. He created over 325 products from peanuts and
over 100 products from sweet potatoes. We talked in an earlier lecture about the Colombian exchange,
and it's an interesting note here that peanuts went to Africa from South America and then made
their way to America, North America, later most likely traveling with populations of Africans
who were transported to North America as slaves. We pointed out in that Colombian
exchange discussion just what entanglements there were among peoples and plants and what an
ecological, agricultural, and cultural impact that exchange had, and here's yet another example of it.
In addition, while yams came from Africa, sweet potatoes also came from South America
and made their way up to North America during the period of exploration and colonization.
Carver's work on these plants, both the peanut and the yam, in turn made them more useful for
cultures not only in America, but also around the world. Americans alone eat about 2.4 billion
peanuts every year, primarily in the form of peanut butter. You recall that peanuts are a legume,
and you remember when we talked about the various plant families and we talked at some
length about peanuts, we pointed out that these legumes are engaged in symbiotic nitrogen fixation.
Peanuts are not only packed with protein, but they're nitrogen fixing organisms that can deposit
significant amounts of nitrogen in the soil, which is why Carver suggested southern farmers
rotate them with their cotton crops, thus greatly increasing the productivity of the soil in the
region. Besides his remarkable work with plants, Carver also made contributions to the dye industry
and held a number of U.S. patents. In his years at Tuskegee, he was virtually the science faculty.
He taught all kinds of courses. He taught courses in chemistry, botany, microbiology,
and agronomy on a regular basis. And if I know about universities or colleges, they probably had him
teaching some other things in his off minutes. His remarkable scientific achievements did not
go unnoticed. Not only could he carry that big teaching load, not only could he work with lots
of students, not only did he do enormously productive work, but that work was noticed.
And at one point, he was offered a position to leave Tuskegee and to go to work in industry
at a job that would have paid over $100,000 a year. That's an absolutely astronomical
sum of money at that time, substantially more than a million-dollar salary would be today.
What did Carver do? He chose to stay at his beloved Tuskegee, where he continued to work
with his students, he continued to work on his research, and he did it all on a very meager salary.
The epitaph on his grave reads, and I'll quote,
he could have added fortune to fame, but caring for neither, he found happiness and honor in
being helpful to the world. I think that's a wonderful way to sum up a truly remarkable
American life and the life of a really exceptional scientist.
Now, Nikolai Vavilov, a Russian, is already no stranger to you in this course. Vavilov was born
in Moscow, and he studied botany under the direction of George Bateson, who was a leading
botanist of the time, and he went to London in order to do that. So early on, we get the idea that
Vavilov is as much a world citizen as he is a Russian, okay? He may have been a Muscovite,
but early on he was traveling to London to expand his education and so on. His research interests
were many, and his achievements were significant. He was generally considered to be one of the truly
leading botanists and plant geneticists of his time. He's credited with developing
what we've been calling throughout this course, the biological approach to the study of plant
domestication. We've discussed this throughout, we found a number of exceptions to it, but we do
understand not only the practical impact of that work, but we know the intellectual contribution
that it made. In his work on this project, he visited over 40 countries and collected over 80,000
plant specimens, and well over a third of those plant specimens were various forms of wheat.
So you begin to see the impact that Vavilov had on the understanding of the origins of agriculture
in the Near East. He was collecting all these samples, he was looking at the genetic variants,
as we said before, he was mapping them, he was looking for centers of genetic heterogeneity,
and he was trying to localize or pinpoint the places on the map where he thinks
initial domestications were taking place.
Politics and culture were changing, of course, around him in Russia, which became the Soviet Union,
and in the Stalinist era, Vavilov, who had a significant international reputation, was
essentially called upon to modernize the vast Soviet agricultural system. When I say vast,
I mean vast, because now the Soviet Union not only included Russia, but included the Ukraine,
it included really the bread basket of Europe. This was a part of Europe that could feed not
only itself, but it could feed much of the rest of Europe as well. So it was a huge resource,
a huge asset to the Soviet Union, and it was a distinction for Vavilov to be appointed
as the person to modernize this system. He established a large number of agronomic
institutes in order to do that. When I say a large number, I don't mean hundreds, I mean dozens,
but this is a large number of institutes. He made sweeping reforms in Soviet agricultural
practices, and he was very clever in that he set up these institutes. They were not only
research places, but he focused heavily on education and training, feeling that that was
the way to most effectively in that environment, bring about positive change and continue that
change into the future. In the process of doing that, and also on the basis of his earlier work,
he developed a truly stellar international reputation within the scientific community.
However, and this is a sad story, his reputation was substantially less illustrious within the
workings of the Soviet scientific establishment, which cared a great deal less for intellectual
recognition than for party ideology. Vavilov was a modern geneticist, but he was challenged
in his work by a man named Trofim Lysenko, a kind of party hack and director of genetics for the
state. Now, Vavilov was a modern geneticist. He knew about mentalism, he knew about population
genetics, he'd made contributions to that. He knew about the relationships between genes
and the genome, and of course, the phenotype, things that we've talked about in the past,
and he realized that information flowed from the genes and essentially helped create the phenotype
with influences from the environment. But Lysenko went back to a much older kind of idea, an idea,
by the way, that's very hard to kill in biology, an idea that suggests that acquired traits can be
inherited. That somehow, if in my younger days, I had gone to the gymnasium and lifted weights
religiously for weeks and built gigantic biceps and then decided to find a partner and reproduce
that that child would be likely to have gigantic biceps. Well, we know, we absolutely know,
there's no discussion about this, that's absolutely false, it's absolutely completely
incorrect, but you know what? That kind of idea fit very nicely with party ideology,
which did believe in a kind of social engineering, that if you changed environment,
you could actually change the nature and substance of people. And so Lysenko
remained popular and powerful, and he got crosswise, okay, with Vavilov and Lysenko got crosswise
with each other, and it led to a serious dust up. So the nature-nurture debate, which we talked
about with Galton, really came to rest right here on the Lysenko and Vavilov controversy,
with Vavilov believing that you could not inherit acquired traits, Lysenko thinking you could,
hence Vavilov coming down a little bit more on the side of nature and Lysenko coming down a
little bit more on the side of nurture, and that was a dangerous place, literally a dangerous
place intellectually and socially and politically for Vavilov to find himself, okay.
This ultimately came to a head because the party leadership was increasingly favoring Lysenko,
Lysenko wanted to be rid of Vavilov, and think about the timing here, think about a person of my
age, think about what's going on there, think about the connecting or intervening generation,
and I've had the interesting experience of chatting with a geneticist, a practicing scientist,
who actually was in the field with Vavilov on the day when a large black car pulled up,
men in suits got out, approached the great professor, surrounded by students, punched him,
dragged him to the car, threw him in the back seat, and he was not seen again.
A victim of quackery and inappropriate intrusion of political dogma into science.
Vavilov really a true martyr to science.
Though the lives of all four of these men overlapped each other, there's no evidence that any of them
ever met any of the others. I've presented their stories here to illustrate the many different
sorts of people that contribute to science, and how when their work is viewed collectively,
we get some appreciation for the way science was beginning to find its place in the ancient
traditions of tending and modifying plants. One point to consider as we wrap up this topic
is how long plant modification took at first. With the early domestication of plants beginning
around 10,000 years ago and taking thousands of years to develop into today's hybridized forms,
that looks like quite a long period of time. Now I don't want you to get confused about the
speed at which things happen. Early on in this course, I talked about how relatively quickly
some plants could be brought under domestication because only one or two gene changes needed to
occur in order for a significant trait to appear that allowed these plants to move toward domestication.
But that was 10,000 years ago. So one might speculate that this rather stately pace of change
could have enabled civilizations to modify gradually in the same way that the plants were
modifying gradually, expanding civilizations and expanding as the plants improved and creating
that positive feedback loop that we talk about with the food people nexus. That's that sort of
necessity for always having more food when you have more mouths to feed. That positive feedback
loop might be slowed down somewhat in its pace by this ever improving pace of agricultural
development. Although we know that there were times of explosive population growth as well as
some stunning setbacks in population die-offs, we might note that the general pace is still
forward toward more advanced civilization and a greater interdependence between our
domesticates and ourselves. We do know that there were side shoots and dead end
passages. We talked earlier about the ancient Greeks who moved from Anatolia into Greece,
overgrazed the land and saw their their fertile fields washed down into the into the valleys
and their population collapsed. We still see the beautiful remnants of the impressive buildings
of the Anasazi Indians who are now gone because they lost their capacity to do agriculture when
things changed. But starting with the scientific revolution in the 17th century, change started
to come faster and faster because of improving methodologies and communication systems and
attitudes of tolerance, tolerance toward science, tolerance toward new thinking.
Thus in the last few hundred years, there has been less and less time to adapt while simultaneously
codependency is heightened, raising increasingly pressing questions of sustainability and putting
more and more demands on technology. In the next lecture, we'll deal with one aspect of this
question by extending a theme raised earlier in this course to produce more food through a
land-based agricultural system. One needs to either work the land more intensely or efficiently
or work more land. Just as we've seen here, you have to keep working the land more effectively.
We will examine that theme again in a slightly different setting as we discuss farming the waters.
