Hello. This time, we're going to take a turn back to discuss a few more of our domesticates,
these creatures with which humans have formed and continue to form mutualistic symbiotic
relationships. As we pointed out, these relationships are mutual in that aspects of both parties
contribute to shaping the relationship and that there is potential benefit to both parties
and both the domesticate and the human are in some way profoundly changed by the relationship.
We have followed a rough chronological approach to this course, which necessarily requires
us to move around a bit through various disciplines. Our study has taken us through the earliest
efforts of domestication to the formation of settled communities and the movement of
domesticates around the globe. We've seen how the practice of agricultural food production
spawned a growing population that has in turn necessitated the development of dependable
and growing food supplies, driving a kind of autocatalytic positive feedback that continues
to expand the population and increase the demand to bring forth more food from the earth.
Our chronology then brings us to this lecture on farming the waters, a rapidly expanding
set of practices that shows great promise, but may also pose significant problems.
Now the word farming is really quite apt in this context, for as you'll see, there are
numerous parallels between this industry and land farming, which we have been discussing
up to this point. An oft repeated theme of this course has been that once we became food
producers, we began to engage in a kind of positive feedback where production of additional
food led to population increase that demanded still more food. This becomes a problem at
the production level because there are basically only two ways to get more output from an agricultural
system. One is to use the land more intensely and efficiently, and the other is to use more
land, or as we see here, you will, to take to the waters. So this course simply is an
extension of that point we have made repeatedly, and we'll make again, that we're in that
positive feedback loop in the only way we have to respond to it if we cannot limit our
population size and our individual demands is to get more out of a given farmable piece
of the earth or farm more of it. Early hunters and gatherers in terrestrial environments
also essentially gathered aquatic resources as well. Our ancestors fished and gathered
edible and useful products from oceans, lakes, and flowing water. Long after many terrestrial
forms had been domesticated and raised or cultivated, human beings were still fishing
and gathering kelp and other products from the waters. In other words, really hadn't
changed our ways from hunting and gathering when it came to aquatic environments. A combination
of our rapidly expanding human population and ever improving, and I say improving in
a qualified sense, improving in that we're getting more and more efficient at getting
materials out of aquatic environments. So an ever improving techniques for fishing and
harvesting from the waters have nearly exhausted many of our traditional fisheries and placed
many kelp and weed beds under significant stress. In some respects, the modern technically
advanced fishing industry is literally, and I mean literally, vacuuming fish and shellfish
out of their natural fisheries and putting them on our dinner plates. One response to
these problems is the farming of the waters. That is, attempting to raise aquatic domesticates
and controlled ways akin to traditional terrestrial farming. In other words, do something very
much like our land based hunting gathering ancestors did. If they hunted enough that
they depleted the prey animals and their population was growing and they wanted more
of those prey animals, that was the necessity that drove them closer and closer to domestication
and then improved the domesticates till the food supply could again satisfy the population.
Unfortunately, some of the same drawbacks seem to attend farming the waters as did farming
the land. To get more food, either more of the resource needs to be used or it needs
to be used more intensely. This lecture will deal with attempts to use this potentially
promising resource more intensely. That's not to rule out that eventually we can't
use more of it, but this lecture is going to deal with using aquatic resources more intensely.
Until this point, we've dealt only with terrestrial domesticates. Throughout the course, we emphasized
that we've drawn our domesticates largely, though not absolutely exclusively, but largely
from plants or animals that we either hunted or gathered when we were living as food procurers.
In other words, we didn't go out and get some exotic or different thing that we'd not seen
before and get involved in domesticating it. We began to domesticate the creatures that
we were already depending on as hunters and gatherers. We simply began to grow them more
effectively, use the land more intensely, get larger input to us from the land, or in
other words, greater output from the land to us. Our foraging ancestors fished as well
as hunted to supplement and round out their diets when appropriate aquatic resources were
available. So fishing in its various forms has continued to be the principal way that
people obtained the vast majority of their fish and shellfish. And useful aquatic plants
have traditionally simply been gathered from the sea by foragers. So that's been different
than the terrestrial situation. It's as if we had continued to hunt and gather on land
because that's essentially what we've done in aquatic environments. However, a combination
of an exploding world population and ever more efficient methods of fishing and gathering
have begun to seriously deplete the natural resource of our wild aquatic environments,
as we've pointed out. One proposed solution then to this expanding problem is to farm
the waters so as to maximize the output of the aquatic environments available to us.
This is the same problem we discussed earlier when we talked about the ways food could be
produced in terrestrial environments. We're going to discuss the management of a few of
the aquatic creatures that we've begun to raise in farmed settings. Now freshwater catfish
and carp have been farmed in Asia for at least hundreds of years. Today, catfish farming
has spread to many other parts of the world. That is in part due to the fact that catfish
are efficient converters of food into edible fish. They're generalized, and I must say
not very fastidious omnivores, and thus it is possible to make a net gain in catfish
protein by feeding vegetable matter and all sorts of scraps of animal material to catfish,
which they seem to enjoy very much. They're reasonably tolerant of pollution in their
environment and are not overly demanding in their oxygen requirements. In fact, there's
one really very interesting phenomenon in the southern United States. There's a type
of catfish called walking catfish. They don't actually walk, they don't have legs, but they
kind of flopped their way from one pool of water to another looking for a better environment
and they can cover significant stretches of land to find this new resource, making it
obvious that they can tolerate being out of water for some time and still remain strong
and viable. Catfish are tough and hardy and can stand a good deal of handling without becoming
seriously injured as anyone who has ever fished for catfish can attest. They are tough. If
you catch a group of fish in a freshwater environment and try to take them home, the catfish will
be the last ones to die. Farmed catfish can now be found on many restaurant menus and in
supermarkets. It's less expensive and more available than wild catfish and it tends to
be uniform in size and appearance, something that customers seem to appreciate. Now please
note that as this course progresses, I'm going to go back and say more and more about that
consumer preference issue because over and over again we're told by people that all consumers
look for in their food source is availability, predictability, convenience, and price. And
that's an interesting issue because consumers in today's world drive the way things are done
and that will be one of the issues that we'll talk about in our concluding lectures. These creatures,
these catfish, are usually raised in ponds or tanks that can sit on land, making it possible,
and this is important, to avoid polluting freshwater sources if adequate care is taken.
So catfish farms can set lightly on the land if you will and not necessarily cause any big
pollution issues and we've talked about the advantages that the catfish itself brings to the system.
Tilapia is another freshwater fish that is now being intensely farmed. I can remember a time
when I'd never heard of tilapia and now you can hardly go to a restaurant that you don't see
tilapia on the menu. There are three naturally occurring species of this fish but it is the
Nile tilapia that is most commonly used in the commercial industry. These fish are generally
grown in ponds in warm climates and management of these ponds is becoming increasingly intensive
and sophisticated. You can also follow the increase in sophistication among the people
who raise tilapia and greatly expanding yields of this fish are, if not driving down the costs,
they are at least holding them so this becomes an economically competitive source of fresh fish.
In extreme cases, tilapia can consume up to 30% of their body weight per day
of high protein pelleted diets. This is now a significant business with just one country.
I'll just give one country as an example. Taiwan produces and then exports well in excess of
100,000 tons of fillets of tilapia per year beyond what the country consumes itself.
That's after Taiwanese consume their share of the tilapia. That's how many fillets are exported
and so we're not even talking about the whole fish, we're just talking about fillets so you
can see that these things can be produced in prodigious quantities.
It should be no surprise to anyone that farm raising salmon has proved to be an economic success
given the relative rapidity with which this product has found its way into major markets.
Farm raised salmon is pretty much within the price range of many more people than wild caught
salmon. It's not an inexpensive food item but wild caught salmon has become quite expensive
because of its relative rareness and the effort that has to go in to catching it and the seasonality
of that catch. But farm raised salmon eliminates some of those problems. People like me who go
around talking at lots of events after dinner used to always laugh about being on the rubber
chicken circuit because we always had poorly cooked chicken as the entree before we spoke.
Now most of us talk about the rubber salmon circuit. It has in fact penetrated into many aspects
of American life. Salmon farms are now found in a number of localities around the world
where the water conditions are suitable. So what is a salmon farm? A salmon farm is just
generally a netted enclosure in which the salmon live until they're ready to be harvested. Now I
just kind of toss that off. This also is a industry that is maturing and improving and I don't mean
to describe all salmon farms in that way and many of them are quite sophisticated in terms
particularly of their feeding facilities, the way they feed the fish. Much of that's automated
and it's scientifically managed. So these are not unsophisticated systems. These fish are,
these farm salmon are true domesticates. I really mean that and this is an important point.
There are true domesticates in that they are genetically different from their wild counterparts
and they can be distinguished from their wild counterparts. Farm raised salmon doesn't have
the same taste, appearance or nutritive value of wild caught fish but as pointed out before it
can be supplied in a dependable way in a uniform size at an affordable price and we've seen that
formula obviously lead to success in this industry. There is concern that farms, salmon farms can be
sources of ocean pollution. Several kinds of pollution that we have to worry about. One is
escapees from these farms. If they're netted in closures with thousands and thousands of fish in
them don't be too surprised if one way or another some of these guys escape and here's the issue.
They're genetically close enough to the wild type salmon to successfully mate with the wild type
and produce hybridized offspring. This could significantly dilute the wild type gene pool
with domestic salmon genes which could lead to a loss in survivability for the wild type
and a reduction in the desired qualities of these wild fish. There's also a great
concern about the impact salmon farms have on the quality of the water in the surrounding ocean
because if these are netted in closures there's going to be leaching out of uneaten food
and waste from these densely crowded fish and these can be serious pollutants. Now this is a
problem not unlike what we see on land when we concentrate large numbers of animals be they
chickens, turkeys, pigs or dairy cattle in what we call CAFOs, concentrated animal feeding
operations. Animals are pass-through systems food goes in waste comes out it's natural it's no
problem with normal distributions of animals across the landscape but when you have abnormally
high concentrations CAFOs are that some of these salmon farms are that the disposal of the waste
materials become significant problems that have to be dealt with and that's going to also make up
part of a lecture that's coming later in this course. Finally we have to keep in mind that
salmon are carnivores and have to have fish in their diet. Though the salmon that's produced in
these farms is surely more appealing to people than the fish that's fed to the salmon there's
actually no net gain in fish protein as a result of salmon farming which makes farmed salmon
something of a kind of luxury item it's a step up from the feed fish to the salmon.
We can also talk about shellfish which make up an important part of the diet of some people and
certainly show up on restaurant menus and much of the shellfish that are eaten today do come out
of farming situations. Oysters are increasingly farmed in what are being called oyster ranches.
I don't know quite why the word ranch was chosen over farms but that's what you find in the literature.
Areas once rich in oysters such as the Chesapeake Bay often become over harvested that can knock
down the population or and this is important to the way this course fits together these areas that
once produced large numbers of shellfish can be damaged by pollution because these shellfish grow
in estuarial areas where fresh water coming down rivers meets with salt water from the ocean
creating an estuary and increasingly many of our freshwater systems coming down into the ocean
are heavily polluted with materials running off from CAFOs so that figures in again and has had
something to do with the decline of shellfish production in some of our richest areas.
In some of these places the oyster populations are being restored by farming techniques employing
things like oyster floats on which the oysters are seeded and then put back into the water.
Most mussels and hard clams now available to us are produced by farming techniques.
Mussels are encouraged to attach to rafts or long lines usually coming down from the rafts
and clams are actually planted. The young clams are planted in beds and then they're covered with
plastic netting to keep them in place and to help protect them from predators. Interestingly there
really isn't much controversy about the difference between these farm raised shellfish and those taken
and those taken from the wild as compared to the furor that seems to surround salmon farming
and the invidious comparisons that are made between farmed salmon and wild caught salmon.
Of great significance is the fact that these shellfish farming techniques seem to have little
negative environmental impact. The shellfish involved are all filter feeders
sieving their food from the water that passes through them and thus are not likely to greatly
increase the pollution in the waters around the places where they're being farmed. It can also
be argued that the product is also actually not as good as but maybe more desirable since it tends
to be cleaner and free of what used to be called beards or those those fibrous materials that
are sometimes used to help muscles or clams attached to a solid substrate. Another major
advantage to this approach of farming appears to be the ease of harvesting. If you've got your
muscles attached to a long line you simply need roll in the line and take them off or if you've
got them in a bed you just need to bring that up or float something of that sort which is easier
and probably easier on the environment than dredging or vacuuming these things off the bottom of
the ocean. Now marine plants have been used as food as thickening agents and solidifying agents
for many years. There are a number of cultural issues and cultural differences involved here.
Some cultures make much more use of seaweed and other marine plants as food than others do
but it seems that in this modern world our food technology industry has discovered some of the
benefits of these aquatic plants and so worldwide the food technology industry makes significant
use of these plants to provide thickness, smoothness and other textural characteristics to a variety
of processed foods. Traditionally these plants were simply gathered from the sea but now particularly
because of the demands of this food technology industry which needs huge quantities of this
material in order to put it into all sorts of products many of which I'm sure we've all consumed
and we've enjoyed the texture we've enjoyed the thickness they show up in things like milkshakes and
whatnot. Surprising places they're a wonderful starting material for food technologists that's
put a lot of pressure on those people who simply would go out and gather these things from the wild.
So in recent years successful programs have begun to farm these plants in marked off
tended beds which look very much like terrestrial farms. In fact when you look at pictures of them
especially in the shallow areas when you can sort of look out or you get elevated above them and look
out they look for all the world-like fields and they can be used to grow some of these interesting
plants which can then be harvested and what is this doing for us? This is doing exactly what
terrestrial farming did it's not that those plants weren't there before it's not that that seabed
wasn't there before it's not that that water wasn't there before but now there's an effort to
systematize it to increase the density of the plant by putting it in a certain place by tending
it by keeping things away from it that might otherwise eat it or destroy it until you have
it in the form you want and then you collect much more of it than you could simply by randomly
moving around the beach or through the shallows trying to collect this stuff. So in a very real
way this is farming and in a very real way it fits precisely with what we've been talking about in
this course about farming or utilizing a piece of the earth more efficiently and more intently and
what else? Exerting more control over nature okay so that's what's going on now in that part of
farming the waters. As farm raising fish shellfish and aquatic plants then becomes more common
it should be expected that more and more species will be raised in this way
and that seems to be going on. Some seafood restaurants now feature Atlantic salmon from
the Pacific Northwest. Atlantic salmon from the Pacific Northwest. This is not an oxymoron but
rather the result of introducing Atlantic salmon fry to a confined controlled environment in the
Pacific Northwest in which they are raised and ultimately harvested rather than caught.
So farming the waters holds great potential promise for feeding our burgeoning world population.
However as pointed out this approach is not without problems and is generating its share
of controversy. We're going to return to this subject in the final lecture of this course
when we ask if we are approaching another crisis point in the history of our species.
This is something that we really don't want to lose sight of. We know that planet earth
has a significant amount of dry land and that has been our home and that is where we have carried
out our domestications and where we've carried out our farming enterprises where we have become
food producers and where our population has grown. But we all know that the majority of the surface
of the planet is covered by water. We know that that water is a tremendous resource for us but
we also know that it is the principle controlling factor in many of the cycles that take place
in nature upon which we absolutely depend. I see no problem at all with moving into the waters
and making a concerted effort to farm them carefully to expand what good products we can
bring forth from the ocean. But we had best be mindful of the damage we could do if we let our
appetites or our greed get in front of our good sense. The oceans are a vital resource.
The world as we know it depends on the cycles and systems often driven by the oceans
and we would perturb those at our peril. Now in the next lecture we're going to have a little
bit of fun. We're going to move again to another group of domesticates but these are not domesticates
involved directly in the food production system. They don't provide fiber. They don't provide motive
force. They certainly are not ornamental or decorative but I promise you after we finish that
lecture you will come away feeling that these domesticates have done and will do a great deal
to make human life longer, healthier and a great deal more pleasant. We'll see you then.
