Welcome back.
Several times in this course, I've asked you variously knowing what you know.
Could you imagine the advent of civilization without domestication of plants and animals?
Or, I've said, do you think civilization, modern or ancient, could survive if all the
domesticates suddenly disappeared?
In both those instances, I suspect your answer was a resounding no.
But in this lecture, I'll introduce another group of domesticates, including bacteria,
fungi, insects, and one more mammal, that you may not have previously thought of as
being domesticates.
If your answer to those earlier questions was not an unqualified no, I think it will
be by the time we discuss these unusual domesticates.
For not all domesticates are birds or mammals or seed plants or fish or shellfish.
There are many other organisms that also fit our definition of a domesticate.
We'll look at a limited number of examples here.
For example, brewers and baker's yeasts play key roles in food and beverage production.
The genetics of these microorganisms is carefully monitored and controlled because the breads
and the beverages that result from their metabolic activity owe subtle qualities of
taste, texture, and aroma to the specific genetic packages present in these microorganisms.
Most antibiotics are what we call secondary metabolites, and I'll fill you in on that
later.
Secondary metabolites of fungi or bacteria that are maintained in laboratories in which
are genetically altered.
Also bacteria such as Escherichia coli are essential tools in the practice of molecular
biology which is having a growing impact in medicine and of course in food production.
Honey bees not only give us honey and beeswax but are also essential pollinators of many
of our open pollinated fruit and vegetable domesticates.
And silkworms have supplied humans with a wonderfully strong and luxurious fiber for
making fabric that has resisted replacement by chemically manufactured substitute fibers
for years.
And of critical importance to scientists working on problems like cancer and other human diseases
it is necessary to have a reliably true breeding laboratory mouse.
So the construction of a little creature called the black six provides a good illustration
of the domestication of a non-farm, non-pet animal for just that purpose.
Okay, brewers and baker's yeast are good examples of microbial domesticates that have had a
long association with human beings.
We've been enjoying the benefits of their work for as long as we've been leavening
bread and making wine and beer.
But it really wasn't until the 19th century that we fully understood what yeast was and
appreciated that it was actually a living organism and then we began to handle it in
the way that we commonly do today.
Here's an example again of one of these situations where ancient peoples and people centuries
ago were doing things that were important, they were getting good results, but they didn't
understand exactly what it was they were doing.
And now in a later day we have a better perspective and so I'm trying to sort of share what we
know now with you when we talk about some of these more ancient practices.
This we know now are single-celled fungi that can form clumps or filaments.
That means that even though they are microbes and can be seen as individual organisms only
with the aid of a microscope, as fungi they are what we call eukaryotic organisms, meaning
their cells have true nuclei and they show true chromosomes at the time of cell division
and their genetics in some parts of their cell division can be explained by standard
Mendelian analysis.
They generally reproduce by a kind of budding process and most can grow by respiration the
way we do in the presence of oxygen or by fermentation if oxygen is absent.
They're useful to people in bread making, wine making, beer making because they ferment
sugar in the absence of oxygen, in other words anaerobically.
In an anaerobic situation yeast can ferment sugar to carbon dioxide and ethanol.
Of course none of these things as I mentioned were known about yeast physiology or yeast
anatomy by the ancients, but that didn't stop them from taking full advantage of these
yeast properties to make highly valued products.
The same yeast reactions take place in both bread and beer making.
In both of those cases, bread and beer, the glucose molecule, whether it comes from barley
malt in the case of beer or from the dough in the case of bread making, whichever way
that glucose molecule is broken down by the yeast to two molecules of carbon dioxide and
two molecules of ethanol.
The carbon dioxide is a gas and the ethanol is a volatile alcohol.
So it's the intoxicant the ethanol is in wine, beer and even all distilled beverages.
The process of baking, putting in the oven, bread of course evaporates the alcohol, but
the holes made by the gas, the carbon dioxide bubbles in the bread dough, leaven the dough
and then when we bake it, it of course is light and airy, so that's the difference between
leavened and unleavened bread is the addition of yeast.
So despite the old temperance legends, leavened baked goods are not intoxicating.
You're not going to get tipsy eating bread dough or cookies just because they've been
made with yeast because they've been baked.
However, you might want to be a little careful about the unbaked dough because you could
note some effects if you ate enough of it.
Be hard to do though I think.
In beer making, the ethanol stays in the product making beer then an intoxicant.
Also in modern beer making and I want to distinguish modern beer making from the ancient beer making,
the carbon dioxide bubbles are trapped in the beer and dissolved under pressure because
the beer is tightly sealed during the gas releasing phase of the process.
The same happens in champagne.
That is, as the gas is being released, if the vessel holding this fermentation system
is sealed tightly, the pressure builds up and the gas is actually forced into solution
as the pressure builds.
Then when the cap is removed, the bubbles effervess, so the beer then is done that way, is naturally
carbonated.
In the more ancient methods of making beer, there was no effort to trap the carbon dioxide.
So the beer was still or flat or maybe had just a little fizz if some of the yeast was
still active and there was still some fermentation going on and some CO2 bubbling off as you
were consuming it.
We know that beer making is a very ancient process.
There's good evidence for brewing and drinking beer and those cuneiform records of the Sumerians,
those people we talked about who lived in the southern end of the Tigris Euphrates Valley,
who were doing some irrigation, you may recall that.
Beer is also mentioned in the Gilgamesh legend, again from that culture that we discussed
earlier.
But we know beer making to be at least 6,000 years old, so it's a little older even from
those people and it is probably even older than that.
We know that when the Sumerians made beer, they did it in a way quite different than
the way we do.
They didn't put grain in directly, but they actually baked bread and had bread, but that
still had starch in it, which could be broken down to release glucose.
So if there was just some natural yeast floating in the air, what they would do is crumble
some bread into water and then set it aside under proper conditions of temperature and
what not, and they would start to get some fermentation and they could actually turn
that into beer that they would drink.
Later, the Egyptians, the Greeks, and the Romans were all known to use barley malt for
this purpose, which I think would give, by our standards, a much more appropriate beer.
By so doing, you'll recall barley was always considered a kind of an inferior grain, by
doing this they were able to convert a low quality grain into a high quality beverage.
So yeast was the agent of fermentation.
The actual mechanism of what was going on was not elucidated until the middle of the
19th century, as I mentioned before.
That's when Louis Pasteur, a familiar name, finally showed that yeast was a living organism.
So that was a contribution by Pasteur, and he showed that fermentation was actually a
manifestation of the metabolism of those living organisms.
Now knowing what we do about yeast as an organism, and a domesticated one at that, it is not
surprising that commercial bakers and brewers take good care of their yeasts.
They use proven strains that are often genetically and phenotypically different from other strains.
These differences result in subtle effects on texture, flavor, and other characteristics
of the finished product.
Thus, these single celled microorganisms clearly fit our definition of a domesticate.
Let's turn now to the world of medicine.
We've been talking up to now, almost exclusively about agriculture and food production, but
domesticates, as society gets a little bit more complex, can also begin to have impact
on other parts of society.
So now, let's turn our attention to the world of medicine, and specifically to the issue
of antibiotics.
Antibiotics are what we call secondary metabolites of fungi or bacteria.
Let me tell you what a secondary metabolite is, because it's a somewhat unusual term.
A molecule is called a secondary metabolite if it's produced by an organism but is not
on its way to becoming synthesized into the material of the organism.
It's not going to the organism's proteins or lipids or nucleic acids, okay?
But it is also not taking part in the energy-releasing breakdown of a chemical energy source in the
way that ethanol and carbon dioxide are primary metabolites in the case of yeast fermentation.
So a secondary metabolite is something different.
It's something that sort of spins out of the metabolism, which is usually simply the
breakdown of a carbon source to get energy and then taking materials and building it
into more of yourself.
But these fungi and some of these bacteria can spew out secondary metabolites, which
can be active chemicals and probably play a role in the life of these microorganisms
in the soil or in the water, wherever they're living.
Because remember they're living in a competitive environment in nature.
Now in 1928, Alexander Fleming, a Scottish microbiologist, made a serendipitous observation
involving a zone of inhibition surrounding a fungal contaminant on a Petri plate on which
he was growing the bacterium Staphylococcus.
Fleming had Staphylococcus on his plate and that's what he was studying, but he got a
contaminant on there, he got a mold on there.
And he looked carefully at it, which was an unusual thing to do really, and he saw this
zone where it looked like the bacteria either didn't grow or died.
He reasoned correctly that the inhibition was due to something being released by the
fungus that was dissolving into his solid culture medium, radiating out and suppressing
the growth of the bacteria he'd put on the plate.
It's a virtual certainty, in fact I know because I've done that.
It's a virtual certainty that others had seen similar things.
But mold contaminants were a nasty problem for a microbiologist and such contaminated
plates were routinely just discarded without any careful examination.
The plate was considered to be ruined if it had a mold on it.
And he took that extra step and saw something that maybe many others had seen before, but
he had that prepared eye and prepared mind and he made something of it.
He and a group of colleagues were able to eventually isolate the active bacterial inhibitor
and they named it penicillin because the mold from which it was derived was called penicillium.
So penicillin is an antibiotic, it's a secondary metabolite of penicillium.
Penicillium when growing on a plate is breaking down carbon sources, getting energy, making
more of itself and spewing out this secondary metabolite.
Subsequent experiments showed that penicillin actually killed sensitive bacteria and seldom
had any negative effects on humans or animals unless they just happened to be allergic to
it.
By 1940 penicillin was being mass produced by the American pharmaceutical industry.
It was moved to America because of course by then the war was raging, Britain was being
bombed and the pharmaceutical industry in America began to make penicillin which saved
the lives of many allied soldiers in World War II and ushered in the age of antibiotic
medicine.
More antibiotics were in common use, bacterial infections and contagions were among the leading
causes of death worldwide.
Medicine has exploited the use of antibiotics so effectively that that is no longer the case.
In fact we may have as a society become somewhat complacent about bacterial infection because
we assume there will always be some antibiotic that the doctor can prescribe that will make
us well.
That is becoming a much more problematic situation which we will discuss at some length later
in this course when we discuss the ways some animals are grown in our present global food
production system leading to the selection of antibiotic resistant pathogens, a serious
business.
Antibiotics are generally antibacterial and not antiviral.
So some contagious diseases never responded well to antibiotic therapy and had to be addressed
in other ways.
We as I just mentioned bacteria can quickly become resistant to antibiotics if they're
not used wisely and we're going to return to this observation as I mentioned in the
last lecture of this course because I think it's serious enough that it may affect the
future of our species on this planet.
Antibiotic companies carefully select, modify and maintain the organisms that produce our
antibiotics and since they are generally different from the wild types from which they arose
they are truly domesticated creatures.
Another organism that you may not have thought of as a domestic is the bacterium Escherichia
coli usually known by its shortened name E. coli.
E. coli is not the only bacterial domesticate but it's the only one that we're going to
discuss in this course.
It should be clear after you become convinced that this is a domesticate that there would
be many other kinds of bacteria performing similar functions and being handled in the
same way and that they could also be considered domesticates in the same way that E. coli is.
Now I took a second to tell you about the kind of cell that yeasts were made of and
that fungi were made of.
Let me take a second to tell you about bacteria because they're different.
They are fundamentally different from all other life forms we've discussed in this course.
All the plants, animals and fungi are composed of a cell type called eukaryotic as we said
which has a true nucleus that nucleus is membrane bound and they have real chromosomes.
Mendelian genetics applies to all such creatures and so they are set aside.
Those are the creatures that we know most about.
Bacteria on the other hand appear to be far more simple.
They're all single celled and they're prokaryotic cells.
That name would imply that they essentially maybe arose before these true cell types.
Such cells do not have true membrane bound nuclei or true chromosomes and they do not
follow Mendelian principles.
Their genetic material is DNA like all other organisms however.
And at the molecular level there is a fair amount of similarity though there are some
differences.
There's a fair amount of similarity between the way prokaryotes replicate their genes
and express them when you compare it with eukaryotes.
The bulk of E. coli's genetic material is contained in a large circular piece of DNA
that functions somewhat analogously to a chromosome but it's not a chromosome and there's just
one.
However E. coli also has some additional DNA containing a limited number of genes in much
smaller circular pieces of DNA called plasmids.
These little DNA molecules are very useful to persons interested in genetics at the molecular
level.
E. coli often depends upon having specifically modified bacteria such as E. coli can be to
serve as carriers of specific genes that are being cloned or transferred to another organism.
E. coli is probably the most commonly used organism to perform that function because
so much is already known about its genetic makeup and its physiology.
A number of genetically unique strains of E. coli have been constructed and maintained
to perform these tasks.
They're distinctly different from each other and the wild type both genetically and phenotypically
so these useful organisms can rightly be considered domesticants.
Later in this course we'll discuss the brave new world of genetically modified crops and
transgenic domesticated plants and animals.
One of that work could have been contemplated let alone carried out if it had not been for
the workhorse of molecular biology E. coli.
Yet another creature you may not have thought of as a domesticate is the insect the honeybee.
Honeybees are just a small subset of a large group of bees that can be found in the wild
throughout the world.
It is thought that our hunter-gatherer ancestors probably gathered wild honey from wild honeybees
because there's reference to honey as far back as we can go.
However there's good evidence that human beings have been keeping.
Now we're not talking about wild hunting but they're keeping these bees.
It's like enclosing them when you're keeping them.
So we know that human beings have been keeping these bees of just a few species for many
years.
The ancient Chinese were making artificial hives and keeping bees at least 3,000 years
ago.
It's known that the ancient Egyptians often placed sealed pots of honey in royal tombs.
Some were even found in the tomb of King Tat or Tutankhaman.
In the Exodus in the Bible the ancient Hebrews were looking for a land of milk and honey
suggesting they were also familiar with beekeeping.
We certainly know that Aristotle mentions beekeeping so obviously the ancient Greeks
were engaged in the practice and Virgil who described so much about agricultural things
described certain aspects of beekeeping in his Georgics.
Bees are the only source for honey.
It's a substance much prized by humans.
It's not only sweet and tasty but it also naturally resists spoilage because of its
very high sugar content.
Remember like those preserves of fruit and fruit juice that we discussed earlier.
And also because it contains some natural antibacterial substances.
It is a great source of quick energy.
Of course we also know that bees produce wax that they use in building the honeycomb
in which they raise their young and though bees wax is still an important product today
the modern chemical industry has given us some substitute products.
But wax was essential in a world of candlelight before the development of the modern chemical
industry and electric lighting.
Bees also provide another absolutely vital function for agriculture.
Food producing people that depend on agriculture depend on bees.
The reason is that it's of great importance to modern agriculture to do the purposeful
and systematic addition of honey bees to the area where you're growing crops that need
to be open pollinated.
Just like a number of fruit trees and some of the cuckoo brits that we talked about earlier.
These plants absolutely depend on honey bees in order to set their fruit.
So beekeeping has come under some stress however in recent years because the practice is to
take hives down to places like Florida, let them over winter, bring them back up and put
them in orchards, put them in fields.
Beekeepers charge rent for that and then they get to keep the honey themselves.
The first problem that we began to notice with our domestic bees was a problem of Africanization
of some of our domestic strains.
African killer bees were introduced to strengthen and improve some of our domestic strains.
This is a clear example of unintended consequences causing problems.
Some of these strains are so aggressive as to be truly dangerous and they can and do
interbreed with the more docile Italian varieties that are our typical domestic bees and the
wave of this sort of Africanized, more vicious bees has been moving north in the United States
for some years.
Of even more concern is the spread of a truly mysterious malady recently described as Colony
Collapse Disorder or Colony Collapse Syndrome.
This phenomenon was first reported in 2007 by a commercial beekeeper who noted that his
bee colonies were collapsing during the winter period in Florida.
To open them up there's more than any bees in there.
At first it was felt that the problem was localized but unfortunately it appears to
be widespread and growing.
Though so in the affected bee colonies do show signs of disease not all of them do.
And still too early to tell with any great certainty what is really going on.
This may be a case of just too many challenges falling on the bees at once.
Insecticides, climate differences, changes in condition, overuse, it just may be too
much for the bees to bear and the colonies may just be collapsing and not recovering
but it's a problem we had better solve.
It's causing major disruption in the American bee industry since commercial beekeepers need
to be able to count on having a certain number of viable active hives each spring in order
to start the honey and wax producing cycle and to service their agricultural customers
that are counting on them to supply pollinators.
While we may be able to relatively easily adjust to a world without honey and wax we
would really be hard pressed if we also lost all the fruits and vegetables that depend
on honey bees as pollinators.
Another interesting insect that has been domesticated for many years is the silkworm.
In fact a domestic silkworm has been with us so long that its wild progenitor is now
extinct.
It is known that silk production has been going on in China for at least 5,000 years and probably
longer than that.
Silk is made from the proteanaceous fibers excreted by silkworm caterpillars or larvae
as they form a cocoon.
Each cocoon is made from a single fiber that can literally be hundreds of meters long.
Silkworms eat only one thing, eat the leaves of mulberry trees and so require a source
of that food if they're to be successfully raised as domesticates.
Many larvae are needed because it takes about 3,000 cocoons to make a pound of silk.
Though the chemical fiber industry has tried for years to make a synthetic silk, only the
natural product seems to have the luxurious properties that many have come to know and
desire.
For years the silk industry was operated as a Chinese monopoly but traders were able to
steal some eggs and also some mulberry seeds and needed both and so the industry eventually
spread outside China.
Silk is now produced in China and Japan and Burma and other parts of Asia as well as Italy
and Spain and during the colonial period in America there was an effort made to establish
a silk industry here but the climate just wasn't suitable and it didn't happen.
Laboratories working on cancer and other diseases that affect humans and animals need
a reliably true breeding laboratory animal that can be used as a test animal in a number
of different kinds of studies.
As we learned when discussing the work of Mendel, it's absolutely critical to have the proper
experimental subjects and system when asking basic or applied questions in a controlled
setting.
The laboratory mouse has fit that requirement for many years, they're small and do not take
up much space, they're easy and relatively inexpensive to maintain, as mammals they share
many properties with humans and many of our mammalian domesticates and so in order to
address problems that have a genetic component to them it's important to have a mouse that
breeds true, breeds true for many traits.
That is a mouse that has its measurable traits fixed through homozygosity.
A man named Little in the 1920s devoted much of his life to essentially establishing this
kind of a strain.
He finally developed something called the black six strain of laboratory mouse through very
careful scoring of traits and intense inbreeding but it had to be very careful with that because
if you get everything inbred of course the mouse can become very weak and would be hard
to maintain but he did manage it and the black six has really been a kind of work horse
in the laboratory for that kind of work for many years.
All of the examples cited in this lecture represent non-farm, non-pet, non-decorative
domesticates.
Despite all the things that they're not, they all are very valuable partners and they
play important roles in making our lives longer, healthier and a good deal more pleasant.
In the next lecture I'd like to turn to a discussion of the emerging global food production
system and its heavy dependence on technology and biotechnology.
We've been leading up to this discussion since we talked about the spread of agriculture
and the movement of domesticates.
That process accelerated greatly after the Colombian exchange but the system we'll be
discussing next time is different in magnitude and impact and it'll be different than anything
we have seen here before.
We'll look for you then.
