Welcome. As this course has progressed, we've followed the distribution of domesticates from
their points of domestication to other locations and habitats where they help their human partners
along the path to civilization. We've seen people alter and refine the form and function
of their domesticates to support their increasing interdependence with these creatures. It's
long been realized that crops and animals perform better in some environments than they
do in others. We mentioned those things when we talked about oats growing where it's too
wet and cold for optimum wheat growth, or when we talked about barley growing in higher
salt environments than wheat, and potatoes doing better in Ireland, which is more like
their Andean homeland than in Italy. Commerce and trade have traditionally moved agricultural
commodities from places of production to places of consumption. But at every step,
we were aware that though imports of one kind or another were becoming increasingly important
to the operation of society, most of the food people consumed was grown within a few miles
of where they lived. That was true in virtually every country until after World War II, at which
point we began to produce larger quantities of basic foods where they grew most successfully,
and then transport them to their places of consumption, which in some cases could be
halfway around the world. Such a system does have appeal from an efficiency perspective as long as
there's efficient and inexpensive transportation available, and there are no interruptions in
that transportation system caused by war, or politics, or natural disaster. This becomes
particularly important when one considers that the world never has many days of stored food
available at any given time, assuming that food would be distributed equitably across those who
needed it the most. In addition to issues of distribution, we'll also review another issue
related to our current global food industry. Biotechnology is also becoming increasingly
important in the management of our domesticates being utilized in that system. In the last half
century, artificial insemination has gone from being an exotic technique to playing a fundamental
role in the dairy and turkey industries and parts of the chicken industry. Embryo transplantation
is also used to spare high quality performance females from having to gestate young and give birth
in a number of species. But this global technology dependent system is not without risks and drawbacks.
Issues of social justice and long-term robustness stand in stark contrast to the more optimistic
predictions emanating often from the agribusiness community. This lecture deals with the degree
to which the food production system has become globalized and increasingly dependent on technology.
As I just said, it has long been known that animals and crops perform better in some environments
than in others. For millennia, commerce and trade have moved agricultural commodities from regions
of production to places of consumption. There's nothing new in that and there are many examples
of foods being transported over great distances to meet consumer demand. For example, the English
love their tea but they can't grow it anywhere near the British Isles. As a true global food
system evolves, there are a few requirements that must be met if it is to function well
to adequately nourish the burgeoning world population. There must be, as I said, a reliable,
efficient and at least relatively inexpensive mode of transport. That transport has to be
appropriate for the food being shipped. Proper conditions of temperature, humidity, etc.
have to be maintained because we're talking often about shipping fragile, perishable things.
Care must be taken to protect places where large-scale commodity production is taking
place from the pitfalls of monoculture. You know that I've mentioned that over and over.
So monoculture and monocropping are things to keep in mind because you'll recall that
we've already spoken of some of these pitfalls. We talked about the Irish potato famine and
we talked about the loss of the Dutch coffee industry in Sri Lanka. Note that both of these
cases it was a fungal disease that wiped out the crops for several years in a row. Some
years ago, just to extend this further, the banana industry experienced a similar attack
on a type of banana then being grown as a monoculture and supplying consumers around
the globe. Fortunately, that industry was able to come up quickly with a replacement
strain and the industry survived. But now there are concerns that the present strain,
the Cavendish banana, the one we all know, may be having disease problems of its own.
It's also essentially a monoculture, so stay tuned for that. We may see more and more of
this sort of thing as the use of large monocultures becomes more and more prevalent in a globalized
system. There needs to be some coordination between producing and consuming regions that
buffers wide swings in the market for commodities, and some mechanism in addition to fluctuations
of the market needs to ensure that fair prices are obtained for commodities in order to ensure
that the most benefit accrues to the largest number of people. Methods of sharing information
and distributing education and training need to be developed and maintained in order to
need to be developed and maintained in this system. Now it's not just the products themselves,
things like high quality seeds and modern effective fertilizers are often produced far
from where they will ultimately be used. That raises another set of transportation and fairness
in pricing issues. We're obviously well along in the development of a truly global food
system. Such a system could provide many benefits if the above mentioned criteria are met and
the problems avoided or at least ameliorated. It should be noted that with a few exceptions,
such as citrus, bananas, green vegetables in the winter, and coffee and tea until the
mid-1950s, just after the Second World War, the bulk of food consumed by most people in
America, and probably the world for that matter, was produced within about 100 miles of their
home. Much of it closer than that, but most of it within 100 miles. The situation has changed
so much from that, that there are now campaigns being organized to produce and eat locally.
These people are now considered, or these situations are now considered a novelty rather
than the norm. In fact, people who try to eat that way are even given a special name of
their own. They're called locovores, from meaning local eaters. We'll discuss the potential
problems associated with our dependence on this global system, but first we need to take note of how
reliant this system has become on technology and on biotechnology. Biotechnology is the manipulation
of biological materials to achieve a specific goal. We'll discuss several techniques now that are in
wide use and have greatly changed the face of some aspects of agriculture. The first of these is
artificial insemination, or what we will abbreviate as AI. It's the mechanical insertion of semen into a
receptive female without the semen donor there, or being present to actually see what's happening.
AI was not too long ago a rare and expensive procedure. Now it's absolutely routine in several animal
production systems and often less expensive than the long run in some systems than keeping the
males around. For example, it is expensive, troublesome, and not a little dangerous to keep bulls on a
dairy farm. Bulls are big, potentially dangerous animals. Dairy bulls are known to have short fuses or
be a little ill tempered at times, and you have to have special places for them. They can't be in the
pasture with the cows or they're causing problems. So you have to have special housing and you've got
to be careful with them, and so they do add a problem for the dairy farmer. Hence AI is used
extensively in the dairy industry. Since bulls produce a prodigious number of sperm and large quantities
of semen when they're managed for that purpose, now only a handful of the truly finest dairy bulls have
sired an enormous number of the nation's dairy cows by employing AI. This could never be done if they
were doing it the old fashioned way. This is not only a matter of convenience and safety, but it's a way
to spread around the results of some of the most successful breeding programs. The average dairy farmer
can now put the genes of a bull that he could never afford on his own farm into his dairy herd. This
practice has led to widespread improvement of large portions of the world's dairy herd.
Said another way, it's possible for one bull to produce enough semen to impregnate vast numbers of cows.
It is economically feasible then to spend a significant amount of time, effort and money in carefully
selecting the very best possible bull since he can be expected to produce more than enough semen to make the
entire process economically viable. In the case of dairy cattle, about the only traits though that are really
selected for in a donor bull have to do with the quantity and quality of the milk his female offspring
will produce in their lifetimes. Hold on a minute. Think about that. What an unusual trait to select for.
You're not looking for any traits in him. You're not looking for anything that you can see. You're looking for something
that you have to statistically generate. That is, you have to keep records of the amount of milk that his female
offspring produce. Don't care about his male offspring. And you're only interested in the quantity and quality of the milk.
As we have pointed out before in this course, with such a single minded selection process, when you're just looking at one
thing, it's not surprising that other characteristics that are not particularly advantageous might be expressed.
That now seems to be going on in this case. Many of these donor bulls have strange shapes. They're very large in
front and small, and they have small hind quarters. This would clearly have been a disadvantage for them if they were to impregnate cows
in that old fashioned way. I don't know this for sure, but the rumor is also that some of these animals also have very unpleasant
positions. Now that may have something to do with the fact that they spend their life in a stanchion and they have wires stuck in them
to stimulate parts of their body and things that probably would make anybody a little irritable.
But in any case, these animals would probably be way too dangerous to have on your farm and would be difficult to handle.
But those traits can be now totally ignored since the donor bull will never see any of the cows he's to mate with,
nor will he ever leave the laboratory farm where he was born and where his semen is relentlessly collected.
As a consequence of this widespread use of AI and the genetic advantages it can provide, milk production per cow
is now very great compared to what it used to be just a few years ago.
But one significant drawback to this practice is that the nation's entire milking herd is becoming increasingly inbred
and the gene pool is narrowing and you know that I constantly point that out as a hazard.
I don't like monocultures and I don't like narrowing gene pools and I think you're beginning to see why we worry about this.
This reduces our options for improving our domesticates and making them more resistant to disease and contagion,
increasing their productive lifespans, making them easier birth mothers and a number of other traits that seem to be going in the wrong direction at this moment.
A big gene pool gives us a bigger tool kit. A narrow one reduces our options.
In the Holstein breed in America, most of the cows being milked today can trace their ancestry back to only a handful of highly selected bulls.
They are phenomenal milk producers but they are not as good at giving birth as the less improved cows of the past
and their productive life may not be quite as long and it may be statistically becoming shorter.
Another benefit, there are benefits clearly to AI, another benefit of AI in the dairy business
and this is fascinating is the opportunity to shift the sex ratio toward females at the time of conception.
It is possible to enrich a semen sample for sperms that will produce a female calf.
If one is trying to increase his dairy herd, that would be a good option to be willing to pay a little extra for when the AI man comes to call.
AI is also used in the beef industry but to a much lesser extent.
Now in the world of race horses, the thoroughbred breed is not allowed to be reproduced by artificial insemination.
In that breed, a live cover is required to produce a foal.
Standard bred harness horses, on the other hand, are often produced by AI.
AI is necessary, absolutely necessary, in the production of the common, white, broad-breasted commercial turkey.
These birds have such large, such expanded chests that the males can't actually get into the proper position to inseminate the females,
so you're left with AI or nothing.
Also greater efficiency of impregnation can be obtained with AI in the large production facilities usually associated with the production of these birds.
Similar efficiencies are also obtained in the production of layers and broilers in the chicken industry.
Embryo transplantation is a technique that allows top quality females to serve as the egg donor and the implantation site in a mating.
However, once the embryo is formed and implanted it can be flushed out and then transplanted into a surrogate mother that will gestate the fetus and give birth.
In this way, high quality and high value females can be bred more often without taking time off to gestate young.
They can also perform in the case of resources instead of gestating.
They're also, and this is important, if they're expensive animals, they're also spared the debilitating and somewhat dangerous experience of giving birth.
So embryo transplantation is used on occasion in the dairy and beef industries and with harness horses.
It is also a wonderful technique for breed conservation people, people like me,
since embryos can be kept viable for years in frozen liquid nitrogen without change,
and if something should happen to a rare breed you might be able to go back and at least rescue some of the genes
by thawing out some of these embryos, transplanting them into receptive females and giving birth to creatures that had both parents,
the male and the female, be members of the breed you're trying to preserve.
So there are a lot of real benefits that can be applied to the use of embryo transplantation.
In recent years robotic milking facilities have been developed, and I can't help but smile when I think about this.
These remarkable mechanisms are very expensive, but they're very efficient, they really work.
They tend to extract more milk from cows than traditional methods.
Interestingly, and I think this is wonderful, they also appear to be more humane and easier on the cows, thus extending their productive lives.
And of course they eliminate the need for a great deal of human labor.
Let me just take a second to describe one of these facilities because they're incredible.
When you go in you see the large robotic milkers, they're great, huge, stainless steel machines.
And they have equipment on them that look like an electric milking machine that will obviously fit on the teats of the cow,
and those are held by wires that can obviously be moved by little motors.
And all of this milking equipment is separated from the cows by two little gates that are controlled by the machine.
The machine can open the gate, let the cow in, it can close the gate behind her and keep her in there, and then it can open the other gate.
The cows in this facility all wear a little necklace around their neck that has little numbers on it that identify them.
Their little computer chips and the robotic milker recognizes the cow by the numbers on her little necklace.
Now cows, when they're fresh, when they are lactating, begin to get a little uncomfortable when their udder begins to fill.
In a normal traditional milking situation, cows are milked twice a day, once early in the morning and once in the evening.
But they're pretty uncomfortable by morning, and they're pretty uncomfortable by evening.
But there's nothing normal about that. In nature, a calf suckles when it's hungry,
and the mother often calls it over when she gets a little full and wants the relief of being nursed.
In these robotic systems, the cows just lounge around, they're like they're in a spa.
And then when they feel like they'd like to be milked, they just get up and mosey over to the little gate,
and they sort of push up against it, the machine reads their number, and goes back to their records and checks to see when they were last there,
and if it's too soon for them, and if it's not, the gate opens, and in they go.
And I think it's interesting, there'll be a queue of cows, they're lined up because they want to do this.
And it goes in there, and then lasers find the teats, and they actually aim the milking machine, and it goes up, and it attaches.
Then it makes a note of exactly where the teats were, because it will be able to save time.
The next time that cow comes up, it can get there quicker.
It also pulls a very small sample of milk, and then stops, and that milk is drawn out and run through a spectrophotometer,
through an analytical machine that checks for mastitis infection.
This is a wonderful test, and if the cow is not having a problem with that, then it starts milking.
And of course, that means that the cows get checked more regularly for that troublesome disease.
They get milked when they want to get milk, they give more milk, there's less trouble for the people,
and the cows last longer and are happier.
It's quite a nice system.
So not all large things, not all robotic things, not all advanced things have to be hard on animals or have to be hard-hearted.
Sometimes you can have win-win situations.
Biotechnology has found its way into the world of plants as well.
In areas where good soil is difficult to come by,
you can find situations like hydroponic systems.
So good soil isn't absolutely essential.
You can set up a different kind of system and grow your plants that way.
These systems eliminate the need then for soil and infuse the plant with all the dissolved nutrients that are needed through a kind of drip irrigation system.
Advances have also been made in the development of artificial potting soils that can improve on the qualities of most soils that we have in nature.
These are often used on ornamentals or on other plants that can justify what is obviously an added expense.
So the globalization of our modern food system with its attendant production and transportation technologies provides more food to a larger human population than our ancestors could possibly have imagined.
However, there are also problems and challenges we face now as a result that our forebearers would never ever have had to cope with.
The end result of the practices and procedures just described is to bring the power of modern technology, economies of scale, and the inherent advantages of climate and growing space to bear on the central human need of food production.
In order to do that, a new level of specialization has had to be accommodated since many of these techniques are just too expensive for small subsistence type integrated farmers to obtain.
As a result, these smaller operators find it increasingly difficult to compete in an international commodity cash market.
The result is that there is a trend to larger and larger farming enterprises, each tending to be more specialized, which leads in some cases to monoculture and in other cases to narrowing gene pools.
For many, this is a disturbing trend. Since it results in widespread dislocation of traditional farmers around the world and it's forcing most of the world population to become dependent on food grown some distance from them,
often in other countries and on other continents, and it is placing ever more control of the nutrition of the world's population in the hands of a relatively small number of enormous well-capitalized transnational corporations.
For these people, the worries become more intense when they factor in the dangers of monoculture. The attendant narrowing of the gene pools of a number of our most important plant and animal domesticates,
the increased control inherent in the increase of the number of proprietary industrial strains of animals now in the food production system, and the constant uncertainty surrounding the transport of goods in a timely fashion around the world.
Just how secure is such a food system in a world which must deal with terrorism, piracy, war, global unrest, and natural disasters? We don't appear to have any shortage of any of those things, right?
So, what has this brought us to? We started with absolutely localized food growing systems, hunter-gatherers growing food that they and their extended families eat, then maybe their village.
We know that by the time of the Egyptian and the Roman empires that there was a large regional trade in things like grain. We know that grain was shipped around the Mediterranean, so we know that things were already being grown in some places and used in others.
But I think that argument that things were grown within a few miles of where people ate them by and large was probably true. This situation prevailed, as I say, in a country even like the United States until the 1950s.
If you check the records you'll be astonished to learn when chickens were finally banished from New York City. It was not uncommon for city dwellers to have chickens. People did have vegetable gardens when living in crowded conditions.
People were used to growing their own food, but increasingly we've become dependent on a distribution system and the system has become more centralized. It's probably worth noting that the largest industry in the world is the food industry.
There are 6.6 billion people. We do like to eat, if we can, about three times a day. That's, what, 19.8 billion meals? And if we dollar-denominate those at just $1 apiece, which is probably very conservative, you can see that that's a huge amount of money per day and it's every day.
It's not only 365 days. When you're talking about that much, it's 365 and one-quarter days a year. So it's a huge industry, but it was always dispersed. We have seen a tendency now as the system has become globalized for it to also become consolidated in terms of control.
And for a number of people, this is getting to be a serious concern because we do worry about who and what controls our food since we have no choice but to be food consumers. We can give up many things in our life. Food is not one of them.
In the final lectures of the course, I'm going to discuss many of the current practices and research achievements and opportunities growing from our improved understanding of the hereditary processes and the implications for future food production and our successful
continuance of the grand experiment begun approximately 10,000 years ago by our forebearers to make the move to food production, setting the stage for the development of this modern global civilization.
In the next lecture, we will discuss the use of molecular biological techniques to literally engineer some of our key domesticates. I'll try to point out the continuum that exists from the fundamental genetic work of Mendel to the promising but sometimes unsettling formation of
transgenic domesticates engineered to play key roles in our high-tech global food system. See you next time.
