Hello. In the last lecture, we discussed some of the technical advances being used to get
some of our key traditional domesticates to significantly increase the expression of the
traits for which they had been selected in the first place. In that lecture, however,
we limited our discussion to technical impacts on animals and plants that can trace their
ancestries back directly to initial domesticated creatures, to the initial domestication events.
Now that the Mendelian mechanisms are understood and the makeup of genes and the way they're
expressed and regulated is now well established, human beings have the capacity to move genes
freely from one kind of an organism to another, producing what are known as transgenic organisms.
Such transgenic organisms have actually become commonplace and can be found in the food stores
of most developed countries. Molecular biologists can now transfer genes from one species to another
and by so doing have begun engineering genetic material to provide traits that could never
have been obtained using conventional breeding techniques. Though these approaches are applicable
to both plants and animals, up to this time they've been used more extensively in plants.
Clearly powerful and promising, such practices have been met with skepticism throughout much of the
world which has led to debates affecting international trade, food marketing and legislation.
Once an organism has been engineered to express some useful new trait, it is important to be able to
reproduce that organism faithfully without losing the newfound genetic potential which likely took
substantial investments in time, treasure and human effort to obtain. That is best done through
asexual reproduction where the offspring are exact genetic copies of the parent. This is generally
not a problem in plants which have retained the capacity for asexual reproduction but until recently
was a virtual impossibility for vertebrate animal domesticates. The cloning of the sheep Dolly has
now introduced asexual reproduction to useful animal domesticates. Most of our important animal
domesticates have now been cloned in fact. In this lecture we will discuss some of the techniques
in current practice to produce transgenic plants and animals and we will consider some of the promise
and concerns growing from this fascinating new aspect of biology. In previous lectures we have talked
at some length about animal and plant breeding and the wondrous results that can be achieved using
controlled mating and artificial selection. In this lecture we will talk about using techniques derived
from research and molecular genetics to take things a step further. This is an important point to grasp. On the
one hand the work we will describe is part of a continuum of progress in hereditary science that can
mark its beginnings in Mendel's monastery garden. Yet on the other hand we should not lose sight of the
radical lurch forward that this research stream has taken with our new capacity to move genes freely from one
organism to another and by so doing literally construct creatures that would not and would not have ever formed
without human intervention at this molecular level. The very concept of speciation is based upon
the fact that organisms that can't mate effectively with each other are members of different species. What these
new techniques of gene transfer in a sense have done then is breach the species barrier. By definition
you have to be in the same species in order to breed normally and produce viable offspring. Now we can simply
move the genes into a new species from a donor in another species. We can now step across the reproductive
isolating mechanisms of nature and make our own life forms. Something interesting to contemplate is a bacterium that
contains genes and expresses them making human proteins still a bacterium or is it partly human? It certainly isn't
human is it? Our science and technology have brought us to this point where we have wondrous new tools but the
problem is going to be wisely and judiciously employing them to increase the Earth's carrying capacity for our kind
and allow us to continue to meet the rapidly increasing demands of the positive feedback loop our predecessors
placed us into when they began to exert control over nature by forming domesticates and producing food but at the same
time not create for ourselves additional problems that we wouldn't have to deal with if we had been more careful. In traditional
plant and animal breeding the breeders limited to rearranging the genes that are present in the species being dealt
with. The new technique of genetic engineering depends upon the universality of DNA as the genetic material in all organisms on Earth
and allows for breaching the species barrier by moving DNA containing genes among different species that could not by definition mate.
Work on the structure and chemistry of DNA begun in the late 1950s in which continues to gain momentum to the present has made it
possible to isolate specific genes, replicate them and insert them into entirely unrelated organisms where it is hoped they will be expressed
providing new and valuable properties. The molecular biologist tool kit contains a variety of endonucleases, ligases, plasmids and other gene transfer
vectors. I'm going to take a few minutes and talk about those in a minute. But DNA as you will recall is a double-stranded molecule
comprised of just four repeating units. These units or bases are arranged in a code that specifies the sequence of amino acids in proteins
that can be made using DNA as a sort of master template. What scientists who wish to transfer genes from one organism to another need to
accomplish is to find a way to cut the genes to be transferred out of the DNA of the donor organism, insert them into some agent that can then be used
to replicate them and transfer them to a recipient and accomplish that transfer by essentially inserting the donor DNA into the host DNA
and then hoping that it will be expressed in its new home in the recipient organism. If the operation just described is successful, the recipient organism
is in effect a transgenic. It has its own genome which is characteristic of its own species plus part of a genome from an organism of another species.
It now may have properties and capacities that no other member of its own species possesses. Molecular biologists require a kind of tool kit in order to effect the sort of gene transfer
to form a transgenic in the way that we just described. We're going to talk about that tool kit now. It will generally contain a group of enzymes called endonucleases.
They're used to make very specific cuts in the donor DNA, excising the genetic material that's going to be transferred, excising it or cutting it out of the donor DNA.
The donor DNA then has been cut out containing these now excised genes is going to be fused with the DNA of an agent that can replicate it, making many copies of the excised donor genes.
Such a fusion is usually accomplished using another tool, the so-called ligase enzymes that can in effect sow the donor DNA into the DNA of the agent that will replicate it.
Some of the most commonly used agents for both replicating and transferring donor DNA are bacterial plasmids. We mentioned those last time.
Those are those small circular DNA molecules possessed by some bacteria that we discussed as being important to molecular biologists who wish to transfer genes and form transgenics.
Thus, another important tool in the molecular geneticist toolbox is a good set of plasmids or other agents such as some of the viruses that can both replicate the genes to be transferred and affect the transfer.
Now, complicated as this set of procedures may seem, it's got to be kept in mind that this sort of thing is now truly routine.
People requiring no more training than an advanced college undergraduate or a laboratory technician can successfully perform such operations and literally thousands of such procedures are carried out every day around the world.
Though these approaches are theoretically applicable to both plants and animals, as I mentioned before, to date, they have been used more extensively in plants. There are several reasons for this.
In the first place, plants provide the same set of advantages in this sort of work that they supply in traditional genetic research.
They can reproduce sexually and asexually. They often produce seeds that can be recovered and stored. They're generally less expensive to manage and care for than animals.
Finally, and this is a subtle point, such work on plants does not seem to excite as much political opposition or moral outrage, thus allowing work to move forward with less interruption than it might if the subject were an animal.
A couple of good examples of some plant transgenics come from maize and soybeans, two of our food domesticants, that have been engineered to contain a gene that renders them resistant to a general chemical herbicide.
So how are these useful? After planting the beans or the corn in the ground, this herbicide is then sprayed on the field. All plants, weeds, except, except the herbicide resistant plant are killed, thus eliminating the need for energy consuming tilling and leaving the sort of clean field that farmers used to just dream of.
But I don't want you to lose sight of this. If you think about it, this is just a high tech advance on the approaches used by those first transitional farmers moving from hunting and gathering to food production.
Those folks use tools made of stone and wood to vanquish the weeds, thus favoring the domesticate they sought to grow. Such tools have just been replaced by the fancy gear of the molecular biology lab and a diesel tractor, but the aim is still the same.
Now along those same lines, many crop plants have now been engineered to contain a gene derived from a bacterium called bacillus thuringiensis, or BT.
This gene from this bacterium codes for the production of a protein that is lethal to the larval stages of many insect pests that attack our plant domesticates.
Thus these plants contain their own insecticide, and they don't need to be sprayed during the growing season, both providing an economic advantage and eliminating one additional source of environmental pollution, that is the spraying around of insecticide.
Similarly, a number of plants that can be damaged by frost, such as potatoes and strawberries, now routinely contain a gene derived from fish that helps them resist damage caused by freezing.
Now you know you can't have a fish in a strawberry mate, so here you can see the power of this sort of transgenic work.
The plants, the ones that resist herbicide action, those with BT, and the ones made resistant to frost damage, are all transgenics that could not have been produced by traditional plant breeding techniques, but rather require the special skills of the molecular geneticists.
At first blush, one might imagine that this brave new world provides all the answers needed to grow abundant food in an environmentally sensitive way.
Productivity can be increased while reducing the need for energy costly spraying and cultivating, and the number of hazardous materials, such as insecticides, can be eliminated from the environment.
But in reality, the concerns are many, and the cause of much discussion and some controversy about the use of these plants and these techniques in general.
Please let me comment on a few of these.
In crops that are consumed where you actually eat the plant, eat part of the plant, the inserted gene products are also consumed.
Do you really want a dose of bacterial insecticide with your corn or fish protein with your potatoes?
To the best of my knowledge, no one has ever been harmed, or even been able to detect any of these genetic additions.
But that is of little comfort to persons who question and continue to question if we know enough about the long term and possibly even multi-generational effects of such materials in our diet.
There is concern that some of the inserted genes could spread to other organisms through natural processes.
There is evidence that genes can, on occasion, unpredictably, jump from one organism to another in nature.
Take, for example, the case of herbicide resistant soybeans or corn.
If the herbicide resistant gene should get into some of the weed population, an important level of control over weeds could be lost.
Ownership issues are also a problem.
Because some of the seed producers can now patent their seeds, it is illegal for farmers to save those seeds for planting in subsequent years, even if they bought them.
They bought them to be used in a given season and that's it.
On the one hand, this is a reasonable situation, since the seed company spent huge sums of money and took considerable financial risks in developing these special seeds that will grow into useful transgenic plants.
Is it not reasonable then that these seeds are, in a sense, their intellectual property and thus protectable by patent or copyright?
But this is also a major problem in some countries where seed saving is a very long standing tradition.
And the inability to save seed and the need to buy expensive new seed each year would constitute an insurmountable economic barrier driving small farmers off the land,
creating societal upheaval and opening the door for more control of food production by a small group of tech-based, well-capitalized transnational corporations that are gaining a greater and greater share of the largest business in the world, agriculture.
Since the transgenic plants involved are being used in agriculture, they're being, by definition, placed in essentially uncontrolled environments.
This could be a far cry from an experimental patch where a number of safeguards could be employed to contain the engineered plants.
So there are all sorts of issues about these plants getting loose. There have been lawsuits about people being found who have some of these patented plants growing in their field.
And people come in and say, you didn't buy these this year. How dare you have these in your field? And the farmer says, I'm sorry, the pollen blew over or the seeds blew over and then they're both in court.
And this sort of thing is a new kind of problem in the world of agriculture because we've been saving seed and farmers have been using it judiciously for thousands of years.
And now suddenly we have a legal code, which seems quite reasonable, stepping in and changing a very old tradition.
A number of countries have been reluctant to engage in this type of agriculture, and they've also embargoed agricultural commodities from countries that do employ those practices.
That seems to be changing, however, as people become more familiar with these engineered plants and information on their safety or the lack thereof accumulates.
For a number of years there was strong resistance to the use or import of what protesters in Europe labeled as Franken foods to imply that they're like the Frankenstein monsters sort of created out of pieces.
However, some of the import restrictions against such materials are being relaxed. There have been some limited number of actual problems, however, associated with this sort of thing, and that does point out that reasonable caution should always be applied.
You may actually remember this. There was an incident where a type of transgenic maze, which was cleared for animal use but restricted for human use, got mixed into the commodity handling system in this country.
And since there was no difference in the appearance of this corn from normal maize and it all got mixed together, it found its way into corn chips and other corn containing snacks.
This precipitated a major product recall and a great deal of financial loss and embarrassment for the industry.
I should quickly point out that no one was injured in this incident, nor the restricted maze probably was not in any way dangerous to humans.
But the mistake points up the inherent weakness in the safeguards that proponents of these genetically modified crops offer as protection to the public.
And it did little to bolster public confidence in the safety of such crops and the practices that produced them.
As I pointed out on several occasions, asexual reproduction is efficient and preserves the genetic arrangement of the parent.
The purpose of sexual reproduction on the other hand seems to be to shuffle or mix up the genes offered by the parents and by so doing create a genetically unique offspring different from the parents and any of its siblings.
Except of course in that unusual case where you have monozygotic twins.
And such sexual shuffling of genes is a major reason that natural selection works and appears to be a major factor in the continued survival of a number of plant and animal species.
Plants can typically reproduce both sexually and asexually, the asexual way being by cloning.
Some plants strongly prefer one form of reproduction or the other, but all are generally capable of performing both kinds of reproduction at some point in their life cycle.
Thus plants have an inherent capacity to preserve advantages or advantageous combinations of genes that are presented to them by repeated asexual reproduction.
They can reproduce without having to shuffle up a nice combination of genes once it's been established.
By contrast, vertebrate animals on the other hand seem to have lost the ability to reproduce asexually somewhere along the line in their evolution and thus must use sex in order to reproduce themselves.
It would appear that this evolutionary path has for the most part been successful for the vertebrate animals, but it is predicated on having a large gene pool in a population in order to maximize its potential.
Hence the worry of some people like me when we see some of our agricultural practices seriously restricting the gene pool of some of our most valuable domesticants.
This difference between animals and plants gives plant breeders an advantage not shared by animal breeders.
It is relatively easy to preserve a specific genotype in plants if the plant can be cloned, that is asexually reproduced, thus reproducing the same genetic arrangement generation after generation.
The same is not true in animals. Since sex is required for reproduction in vertebrates, the offspring are almost surely going to be genotypically different from the parents.
For this reason, it is not usually possible for animal breeders to preserve a given genotype in living specimens.
I see this in my own sheep flock all the time, even though I am dealing with an endangered breed that has very specific characteristics that I am trying hard to preserve.
I can see my flock change ever so slightly generation to generation, despite my efforts to keep things constant.
For that reason, the cloning of the sheep, Dolly, by Ian Wilmot and Keith Campbell and some of their colleagues at the Roslyn Institute in Edinburgh in 1996 opened a new set of opportunities for animal breeders.
Though cumbersome and inefficient, cloning has now been successfully carried out on most of our domesticated animal species.
So how did Dolly come to be? The Roslyn team started with a healthy sheep oocyte. What is an oocyte? It is simply the female sex cell.
So they excised one of those from a healthy female sheep. They then carefully removed the nucleus from that. Now this is a sex cell.
So what is the chromosome number in the sex cell? It is haploid. So they have a healthy oocyte. It is a haploid cell. It has a true nucleus, but only half the normal number of chromosomes.
What do they do? They enucleate it. They carefully reach in with a tiny needle and suck out the nucleus.
And now they have an enucleated oocyte. It is an oocyte not carrying the genetic information it was designed to carry.
They then carefully removed the diploid nucleus, now has the normal number of chromosomes, from a mammary gland cell of a six year old fin dorset sheep.
A different sheep altogether and placed that diploid nucleus into the enucleated oocyte.
Okay, now what has happened here? Now you got a sex cell that started out haploid. You take out those chromosomes and you put in a double set.
When would a sex cell have a double set of chromosomes in it? After conception. After it is fertilized.
What they have essentially done is duplicate a fertilized egg and then they shock it literally into action by passing a mild electric shock through it, which begins the cell dividing.
They keep this dividing cell mass in a plate, culturing it in the laboratory until it reaches a developmental stage called the blastocyst, which is a tiny little glob or mass of cells.
And then they take that and what do they do with it? They transplant it into the womb of a surrogate mother who would gestate the embryo and birth the lamb.
The Roslyn folks took some obvious steps to be sure they knew what they had if they were successful in producing a lamb in this way.
The diploid nucleus came from a six year old fin dorset. The oocyte that was enucleated came from another kind of sheep that was easily identifiable as being not a fin dorset.
Finally, the surrogate U was from yet another breed of sheep, different in appearance from the nuclear oocyte donor.
When Dolly was born on July 5, 1996, she was clearly a fin dorset. The experiment had worked. Dolly was not the offspring of her birth mother. She was not the offspring of her egg donor.
She was in effect a younger version of her fin dorset donor. She expressed the characteristics of the nucleus that was taken out of the donor cell.
She was a clone. She was made up of diploid cells that had been constituted at the time her nuclear donor was conceived.
The genetic arrangement of the nuclear donor had now been reproduced asexually and from July 5, 1996, it could no longer be said that vertebrate animals were not capable of asexual reproduction.
They just needed the help of a big research team, tons of money, and a few other animals to help out as surrogates in order to get the job done.
Inherent problems with the procedure, for example, its inefficiency make the widespread use of cloning and domesticated animals pretty unlikely.
For example, in the series of experiments that produced Dolly, there were 276 other attempted clones that failed to make it pass various steps of the procedure.
One success out of 277 tries is not the sort of record of success that holds much promise for large scale production programs.
However, there may be some utility for the technique in the case of animals that are the product of exceptionally long, tedious, or costly selection efforts.
That is, those that you have to put lots of time, treasure, and effort into, and you can only afford to do that if you had some way to prolong it.
So in the next lecture, we will be talking about ways that we can use some of these remarkable techniques in molecular biology,
not to expand our food producing system, but now to sort of reach into the future and take steps that will cause human beings and their domesticates
to develop a kind of relationship that I'm sure our hunter-gatherer ancestors had no notion of when they began those first domestication events.
We'll see you then.
