Welcome back.
We've come to the last three lectures in this course, and I think you're probably convinced
by now that this story of the human partnership or mutualistic symbiosis with plants and animals
is in many ways the story of civilization itself.
I hope you've begun to look at the many domesticates around you and even at your dinner plate
in a somewhat different light.
Our last lecture and this one bring us to a whole new point in this ongoing mutualistic
symbiosis with our domesticated plants and animals.
That is, the reliance upon them not only for food, shelter, motive power, and companionship,
but for new ways of making the most complex of pharmaceuticals and even replacement tissues
and body parts for people when our own bodies become diseased or begin to fail.
This is truly a new frontier of science, and like most frontiers, leaves us many times with
more questions than answers.
I can't begin to cover all that should be covered about this truly awe-inspiring topic
in one 30-minute lecture, so I'll limit myself to offering you a brief overview of the history
and high points of transgenic plant and animal research and xenotransplantation and xenografting.
That is the replacement of human tissue with that of animals.
We're entering an era in which we may be developing entirely new relationships with
our domesticates as a result of advances in biotechnology and molecular biology.
These advances will make it possible to contemplate fascinating new techniques in surgery, drug
production, and administration of pharmaceuticals.
These new relationships are dependent in large part on the increasing ease with which
it is now possible to form transgenic organisms, that is, organisms containing DNA or genetic
material from two or more completely unrelated species.
This is indeed a brave new world, presaged in literature by such works as Mary Shelley's
Frankenstein or H.G. Wells' The Island of Dr. Moreau.
Such work has serious implications not only for science, but for cultural, ethical, and
social considerations as well.
In this presentation, we will stick to a discussion of the science involved as the ethical and
social considerations of all these changes are much too complex for the limitations
of this course.
The age of plant-derived pharmaceutical proteins has already begun.
With transgenic tobacco plants, that is, tobacco plants that have the human gene for
serum albumin, they began producing that protein in 1990.
Now many blood products, growth factors, hormones, and even veterinary vaccines to mention just
a few of the classes of compounds that can be produced in this way are under commercial
management and development.
The pace of progress in this promising area is increasing as basic advances are being
made in methods of creating transgenic plants, controlling the expression of the trans genes
that have been inserted, developing optimum crop production systems or what are called
production platforms, and modifying structural and functional properties of the final product.
Already it has been possible to push product yields up and cause production costs to go
down in the formation of a number of important pharmaceuticals.
This approach, being termed molecular farming, has a number of advantages over conventional
laboratory-based transgenic syntheses as described in the previous lecture.
Although all such high-end technology is quite expensive, culture of transgenic bacteria
is relatively more expensive when compared to molecular farming.
That's because in molecular farming, plants are used for the synthesis of the desired
product, and it's clearly less expensive to cultivate plants than grow bacteria in
large scale.
It is also easier to scale up production by simply planting more of the transgenic plants
to accomplish the same degree of scale up with bacteria would mean building additional
laboratory culture space which is inherently more expensive than preparing a larger plot
for growing transgenic plants.
This is not a huge advantage when the pharmaceutical in question needs to be made in only exceedingly
small amounts, but if large quantities are required then there is a real incentive to
use the molecular farming approach.
Another inherent advantage to using transgenic plants instead of transgenic bacteria for production
of pharmaceuticals is that some large complex molecules involving more than one protein
chain are often difficult to produce in prokaryotic or bacterial systems.
On the other hand, plants are eukaryotic and have the inherent capacity to produce these
more complex molecules.
It would seem that the bacterial systems may not be capable of translating some of the
more complicated transgene derived from eukaryotes, thus favoring eukaryotic systems when the
production of such complex molecules is the final objective.
In time it is likely that molecular farming may overtake lab based transgenic production
of more complex pharmaceutical compounds or those which need to be made in very large
quantities.
Of course there are a number of concerns that need to be carefully looked after.
The first and most obvious is physical containment of the transgenic plants being used.
Should any escape from the production facility they could pose a danger to animals or people
that might consume them.
Phyllo is particularly useful in this effort because of course it's not a food product
so its genetically altered transgenic form won't pose as great a threat should some transgenic
plants manage to breach the containment facility.
At present some of the countries and populations most in need of pharmaceuticals or vaccines
are the least able to afford them.
Many people live in places devoid of the infrastructure needed to support sophisticated laboratory
based production regimens.
Molecular farming might prove useful in these circumstances since the transgenic plants
could be produced in one place and then transported to another for growth and harvesting of the
wanted materials.
Production and purification of the product would still have to be carried out but real
savings in transportation, cold storage etc. could be affected by carrying out these procedures
closer to the point of administration.
Similar work is also underway using transgenic animals that have been dubbed and I'm sorry
about this, farm animals spelled P-H-A-R-M for pharmaceutical animals.
Animal production platforms have many of the same advantages as plant platforms over transgenic
bacteria systems for pharmaceutical production.
The transgenic or farm animals can also be produced in a sophisticated laboratory setting
and then be shipped to the area where the pharmaceuticals are intended for use, thus
as in molecular farming saving substantial resources which could prove vital in less
affluent countries.
In the winter of 2009 the United States Food and Drug Administration approved the first
drug produced from a human gene expressed in one of these farm animals.
The material being sought is a protein called antithrombin which is important in controlling
blood clotting.
The usual way of getting it is to obtain it from donated human plasma.
But in this farm animal system the human gene for antithrombin is inserted into goat embryos
that are then transplanted into surrogate mothers for gestation and birth as we described
in an earlier lecture.
Because the human gene is inserted at the one cell stage in the formation of the embryo
every cell of the goat will contain this human gene.
But here's the clever thing.
Stuff is known about expression of goat's genes that it has been possible to link this
human gene to a group of goat genes that are expressed only in the goat's milk.
Thus the goat makes the human antithrombin only in its milk.
Because milking goats does not damage them in any way a single goat can produce large
amounts of the human protein that can be harvested very easily by just milking the goat and
that can be done several times a day.
It has been estimated that just one of these transgenic farm animal goats can produce as
much antithrombin in one year as could be attained from 90,000 blood donations.
If even more of the substance should be needed for any reason all that needs to be done is
expand the flock.
It should be noted that straight forward as this procedure sounds there is opposition
to its use.
Animals unlike plants are sentient beings and it is reasonable to ask if converting
a domesticate from a FARM animal into a PHARM animal is ethical.
The humane society of the United States is among the groups that thinks it is not.
Why?
Well because not all proposed systems are as efficacious as the one just described for
antithrombin production.
If the transgene cannot be linked to the group of genes expressed only in milk the FARM animal
may make the foreign protein in most of its cells and this could have deleterious effects
on the health and certainly the comfort of the animal.
In some parts of the world there are problems associated with distribution and application
of pharmaceuticals that go beyond the expense of production and availability.
One such cultural barrier is a general aversion to needles in some populations.
Maintenance of sterile conditions during injection can also be a serious problem in
some places.
Thus there is a natural tendency to look for other ways of administering medicines.
Materials produced by transgenic plants and transgenic animals are produced in what may
often be edible materials such as milk or fruit.
However, despite the obvious advantages of oral delivery to date the only the Saban polio
vaccine is delivered in this way suggesting that there are basic problems that need to
be overcome if this is to be an effective way of delivering vaccines.
In the same vein it should also be appreciated that if pharmaceuticals are eventually produced
in a form that would be amenable to oral administration they would not likely be delivered in regularly
recognizable forms such as milk or produce because regulated doses of such medicines
would obviously be needed so some level of processing would undoubtedly be required in
order to come up with a product that would reproducibly provide the desired effect.
Now it's one thing to obtain a blood protein from the milk of a goat but our reliance upon
domesticated animals is going even farther.
Many of our friends, neighbors and family members are walking about assisted and sustained
by valves, vessels and connective tissues derived from domesticated animals.
Xenotransplantation or xenografting the transplanting of an organ or body part from one species to
another is not new.
History scientists and basic researchers have been conducting xenotransplantation in laboratory
and clinical settings literally for hundreds of years.
Often these experiments involved the transplantation of an organ or part from one domesticate
to another not with people involved.
This was done to develop techniques and procedures and explore the efficacy of such approaches
with the ultimate hope that at some point in the future it might be possible to extend
human life or improve human health through such procedures.
Then in 1967 Christian Barnard carried out the first successful cardiac allograft not
a xenograft an allograft that is the transplantation of an organ from a donor to a recipient or
the donor and recipient are members of the same species.
In the Barnard case it was a human heart into a human being and that moved transplantation
surgery into the mainstream of medical practice.
Rapid progress followed and cardiac transplantation became available at many technically advanced
medical centers around the developed world.
Other allografts are now also carried out in what is almost routine fashion with kidneys,
lungs and even livers being transplanted with considerable frequency and noted success.
These advances in surgical techniques led to a second level problem that is reliable
sources of donor organs and parts.
It quickly became apparent that rejection caused by immunological incompatibility was
the major stumbling block in many of these procedures.
As a result various forms of immunosuppression involving drugs or radiation are commonly
used following transplantation.
However, suppression of the immune system places the patient at significant risk of
secondary infections leading to an unsettling number of situations where the operation was
a success but the patient died.
The more closely related a donor is to the recipient the more likely the donated organ
or part would be accepted minimizing the need for extensive immunosuppression.
In practical terms however there are many more potential recipients on waiting lists
than there are well matched donated human organs.
This situation is causing renewed attention to be paid to the possibility of xenotransplantation
in the clinical setting.
Now one obvious place to look for possible xenotransplantation donors is in closely related
primate species.
However no primate species is likely to have matches as close as human donors.
Obviously.
In addition many of these potential primate donors don't exist in large numbers, may be
facing extinction and would be unable to give informed consent for the donation thus
raising several additional ethical issues.
Such procedures have been performed the most successful of which was a 23 year old woman
who lived for nine months after receiving a kidney from a baboon.
Unfortunately because baboons are considerably smaller than humans their organs are also
smaller and thus would be suitable only for small adults or for children who would then
later need a larger organ if they survived and outgrew the baboon organ.
In addition the old blood type so common in humans in baboons is very rare and that would
significantly limit the number of potential donors that could provide good matches for
human recipients.
Even so baboon livers have been transplanted to human recipients with some limited success.
One aspect of xenografting that has become quite common in clinical practice is the use
of parts taken from domesticated pigs for heart valve and vessel replacement.
Though these procedures are complex success rates have been climbing due in part to the
fact that these pig body parts can be stripped down to their basic working components thus
greatly reducing the likelihood of rejection and allowing physicians to employ reasonable
levels of immunosuppressant therapy.
Unfortunately the rejection problems continue to loom large when talking about transplanting
an entire organ from a different species.
The current situation cries out for some reliable ready source of suitable organs well matched
to potential recipients to replace the problematic need for human donors.
It is around this problem that molecular biology, gene transfer, transgenic animal construction,
sophisticated breeding, embryo transplantation, cloning and transplant surgical techniques
are all converging.
This is a gathering of many specialties.
These are at present the leading candidate to be used as a source of donor material for
large scale clinical xenotransplantation.
That is because pigs are similar to us in terms of their physiology, their size and
their internal anatomy.
There will undoubtedly be enormous problems to overcome in engineering a donor animal
that would be immunologically acceptable to a human recipient.
Work has begun in this area and pigs are presently being constructed with some of their genes
that are involved in producing antigens that make them incompatible with any human recipient
knocked out.
This lends encouragement to researchers working to produce swine and possibly other animals
that are immunologically compatible with specific humans and that could be used as donors for
any number of whole organs.
Such breeding protocols would have to be more intense, precise and challenging than
any animal breeding previously undertaken in order to develop organs of the right size,
compatible with human physiology and precisely matched to the recipient's immunological
profile.
The only way such an approach could hope to be economically feasible would rest on the
ability to clone such an animal once it was constructed through extensive breeding, genetic
engineering and screening.
Much more would have to be done in this area to minimize the typing problems that abound
in such a xenotransplantation, but it should be noted that despite the complexity and difficulty
of such work, it should be theoretically possible to construct a pig with organs that would
not be readily rejected by a human recipient.
Another problem has to do with swine viruses.
It is known that the genome of swine contains many latent viruses that are different from
but similar to some human viruses.
Given the recent problems the world population has faced with SARS and swine flu outbreaks,
it would be wise to use an abundance of caution when considering introducing pig organs into
the human population on a grand scale.
The possibility exists that pig and human viruses could recombine under such conditions,
resulting in zoonotic disease that could in the worst case scenario spread from human
to human.
This sort of man-made plague is the stuff of Grade B science fiction movies, but it
is within the realm of possibility.
It strikes me that it would be foolish in the extreme to risk the lives and health of
vast portions of the world's population until adequate testing has been conducted and appropriate
safeguards are in place to protect not only those under medical treatment, but the population
as a whole.
It is at least interesting to contemplate a brave new world in which an almost endless
supply of replacement parts could be available from carefully engineered domestic animal
partners bringing to an end the era of human organ donation with all its problems of supply
and emotional and ethical difficulties.
In this lecture, we have discussed the use of transgenic domesticated microbes, plants
and animals to make human materials such as insulin or antithrombin, which could be
given back to human beings for clinical or therapeutic reasons.
Remarkable as that may seem, it strikes me that it is less surprising and unsettling
than the thought of using domesticates in a different way.
That is not to make human materials to give to humans, but rather to make engineered organs
and body parts to be incorporated into people, making them some sort of composite organism,
mostly human, but partly animal.
When humans first began the process of domestication, it was probably with the primary thought
that such practice would make the food supply more abundant and predictable.
When one thinks that those events took place only six to ten thousand years ago, I find
it almost astonishing that we have come so far in what is a comparatively short span
of time.
Our hunting gathering ancestors were not greatly dependent on domesticates almost by definition,
with their dogs and their bottle gourds they were able to spread around the globe and
populate a wide range of habitats.
But those first domestication events, leading to more food and thus more people, and finally
more people with greater expectations and demands, has led us to the present situation
where we are no longer just dependent on our domesticates for our daily existence, our
health and the quality of our lives, we are on the verge of depending upon them to provide
us with healthy organs, growth hormone, insulin and other physical parts and compounds.
This is taking that mutualistic symbiosis to a level that many of us can hardly begin
to conceive of, and as we read and study about these new ventures, we do begin to feel the
boundaries between ourselves and the rest of the creatures with whom we share this planet
begin to grow strangely fuzzy.
As we approach the end of this course, we'll continue to stress the degree of dependence
we have developed even though many in our generation have become almost unaware of the
domesticates with which we have partnered to reach our present state.
In the next lecture, we'll consider some of the changes that are taking place at the
sites of production of our agricultural products in this age of industrial farming.
The evolution of plant and animal domestication has led us all down many unexpected and surprising
paths.
It is time now to leave the laboratory and check in on how a beloved American icon,
the family farm, has been similarly affected by the continuing evolution of the relationship
between the human population and domesticated plants and animals.
We'll be focused particularly on those animal domesticates being raised on that picturesque
and familiar old McDonald's farm.
We'll see you then.
