Any time that we build robots to do work outside, the challenge is mount roads and
off-road mobility are more challenging than factories. But the challenges are
redoubled for aerial robots. The physical demands of flying impact every system on
the robot. Sensors and actuators have to support full mobility in three
dimensions and energy requirements are high while weight has to be kept low as
possible. The entire control loop has to function much faster and yet the
challenges of aerial mobility are what made aviation an early and consistent
adopter of robotic technologies. That's right, piloted aircraft are robots even
when the pilots are on board. Piloted aircraft often include robotic assist
technologies that operate the aircraft autonomously when they're turned on by
the pilot. The best example is the autopilot found on commercial aircraft
and that was actually invented by the Sperry Corporation shortly before
World War I. While we don't normally think of a plane flown by an autopilot as an
autonomous robot it is, at least when the pilots aren't at the controls. An
autopilot is an embedded robotic system with autonomous self-control using
sensors to guide movements. And even better, all the self-control technology
assisting human pilots is equally available for unmanned aerial vehicles too.
An unlike aircraft that carry human pilots, unmanned aerial robots can be
almost any size, from vehicles as biggest commercial passenger aircraft to
micro vehicles the size of insects. And they can even execute maneuvers too
stressful for a human body, opening up new design and new performance
possibilities. Aerial robots go up by a whole host of names, drones, unmanned
aircraft, unmanned aerial vehicles, unpiloted aircraft, unpiloted aerial
vehicle, unpiloted air system, and remotely piloted aircraft.
Unmanned drones come in two types fully autonomous and remotely controlled.
And autopilots operate unmanned aircraft like many commercially available drones.
The drone you see in this clip is a Walkera Tali H500 and it's a
hexacopter. It has six propellers that provide the thrust for lift, keep it
aloft, and thrust for moving forward and maneuvering. You control the Tali
hexacopter using a radio control console that transmits and receives signals
including video from the drone. Now what's really cool about what you see in
this video clip is that the drone is controlling itself to remain stable.
One of the great illusions in robotics is when an inherently unstable robot
like a hovering hexacopter isn't moving. It looks like nothing is happening.
And that's the illusion. To keep the robot still takes all sorts of control
that you can't see in action until we perturb the system. If you were to
walk up with a stick and poke the drone, that would be a perturbation.
Now, real-life perturbations come in the form of wind or if the drone is near
trees brushing against branches. Here's something else you need to know about
just hovering. Drones can use active ping sensors located on the bottom of the
craft and pointed to the ground in order to measure altitude.
If the distance of that ping sensor, what it measures, is not one meter.
Let's say it's set for one meter, then the thrust is adjusted to keep the craft
right at the height that's desired by the controller. Now, maintaining that height
is an example of negative feedback control. The actual height is constantly measured
by that ping sensor and then adjusted to reduce the difference between the actual
height and the desired height. The feedback is the information that you get
from the sensors about the actual height. Now, when the Tele H500 is hovering,
it is working on autopilot. It's doing the work of coordinating all six of those
motors for me and when I step into the control loop and I do things like
control altitude, heading, and speed, I can even alter the amount of work that
the Tele 500 is doing for itself. Now, the moment I take over full control of a
complicated flying machine is the moment that I get into trouble. Flying a
helicopter is very complicated. One of the most important features for any drone to have
is landing. You want a drone to be able to autonomously land to avoid crash landing.
So drones like the Tele H500 have a built-in landing autopilot function that help you preserve
your investment in that robot. Because the Tele H500 has autopilot functions but also
allows me to control it, it's a remote control drone with some autonomous functions.
Most drones are this mix of remote control by a human and autonomous control by the robot.
What varies among drones is the degree to which they offer autonomous autopilot functions.
For example, an old-fashioned radio-controlled airplane offers absolutely no autopilot
functions and you really have to know what you're doing with these remotely piloted
aircraft. You actually have to be a pilot. They're easy to lose and easy to crash.
One of the great safety features built into the Walkara Tele H500 is that if it flies out of
communications contact, it will automatically return to its starting position. It uses GPS
navigation to accomplish this. The Tele 500 makes flying look easy but to understand just how much
the drone is doing for us autonomously, we need to take into account the challenge of having
your robot work in the air. Designing and building an aerial robot all begins with the basics of flight
that we've just talked about, getting airborne, staying airborne and landing gently. Now the
bodies of robotic aircraft need to be lightweight to minimize the energy needed to keep the drone
aloft. Bodies also need to be aerodynamically shaped to help the actuators generate lift
and reduce drag. If engine power is lost, it's also useful if bodies can glide, parachute or
otherwise survive an emergency landing. The Tele H500 is lightweight weighing only about
2,000 grams or about four and a half pounds including its battery and camera. The retractable
land legs are made of carbon fiber which is known for its high strength to weight ratio.
Lightweight, stiff and resilient plastic makes up the main fuselage.
You can see the drone's peculiar shape. It's very broad in one dimension and thin in another
and that broad horizontal dimension needs lots of area in order to house the propellers.
The narrow vertical dimension needs to be thin in order to present as little resistance to forward
flight as possible. The actuators of drones need to be lightweight as well. If actuators are actively
generating lift as well as forward propulsion like we see in helicopters or these rotary wing
aircraft then they need to have a high power to weight ratio. One of the ways to get a motor to
be small and powerful is to trade off torque for power. You'll find a motor with high torque
and a hand drill. That torque gives you the leveraged drive a screw that slows speeds.
Because power is by definition the product of force and velocity, high torque motors are low
power because they don't generate high velocities when driving in a screw. The drone's motors take
the opposite trade off, fast with low torque. So for the motors of a different drone, one called
the Parrot AR Drone 2.0, the motors are brushless in runners with a combined power output of 14
.5 watts. In rudder motors are DC motors that spin extremely fast. They lack a magnetic iron
stator core so that makes them very lightweight and more efficient to spin. But the lack of that
magnetic stator means they have virtually no torque at low speeds. Instead they are built
to operate at very high velocities at 28,500 rotations per minute. The sensors of drones
are also of two main types. Proprioceptive sensors monitor the state of the robot and they must do
so with high speeds of reaction and good accuracy. So when we look at the sensors of the Parrot
AR Drone we see that it's got to be able to monitor its rotational attitude, its acceleration,
and the altitude above the landing deck. And the rotational work of sensing is done with a three
axis gyroscope, three axis accelerometer, and then the altitude with ultrasound sensors.
Navigation sensors must detect current position on a map, compass heading, and airspeed, and
altitude. Now one of the very cool things about many drones is that you can fly them
using an onboard GPS navigation system. The Parrot AR Drone, for example, has a pressure
sensor for estimating altitude when the flight path gets higher than the ultrasound sensors can
manage, and it's got that three axis magnetometer that we've seen before for compass headings.
It also has two cameras, one pointing out front and one pointing down, and the one pointing down
can be used to estimate the speed over the ground. Energy supply needs to be of high density because
the cost of flying is so high. The primary cost is to stay aloft, to generate lift. If this can
be done for free as in a balloon or dirigible, the energy cost of flight is for forward propulsion
only. Lighter than aircraft suffer from needing large size to carry gases. The large size makes
them slow, so any rotary winged aircraft like a helicopter, quadcopter, or hexacopter is in big
trouble. The Parrot Drone has a lithium polymer battery rated at a thousand milliamp hours. It's
pretty lightweight and that's good, but the trade-off here is between weight and capacity.
That battery only carries enough energy to power the drone for about 12 minutes of flight time.
The heavier Walkera Tali H500 carries a larger battery for 25 minutes of flight time. Figuring
out how long a battery lasts is actually quite complicated because the rate at which the battery
discharges depends on the load placed upon it by the motors and motors are constantly varying
their work, but we can make a rough estimate. Let's say that we operate the motors at their
maximum combined power rating of 14.5 watts. Under that condition we'd be getting a minimum
time of operation. Now this is a worst-case scenario since most of the time the motors aren't operating
at full capacity. Hovering, for example, should draw the least amount of current for a flight
behavior because the drone is not trying to move forward as well. The highest rate of current draw
should occur during accelerations, high performance maneuvers, flips and things like that to create
a lot of inertial force. Electric power is the product of voltage and current and the current
is measured in amps. So if we imagine powering these motors for an hour that would require
14,500 milliamp hours of draw on the battery. Now we get 14,500 milliwatts by converting the 14.5
watts from using amps to milliamps. So now to fly the Parrot drone at max power for an hour
would take a battery with 14,500 milliamp hours. Now the Parrot's actual lithium polymer battery
only has 1,000 milliamp hours so 1,000 divided by 14,500 is 0.069. We multiply that ratio
by 60 minutes and we get about four minutes. Again this is a rough estimate and in real
operation the AR drone flies for about 12 minutes. You can also get replacement batteries to double
that flight time but there are always trade-offs right. A battery with more capacity usually means
a heavier battery and a heavier drone means that the motors have to spin faster in order to
keep that quadcopter hovering. Add a big enough battery to spin the motor for a couple of hours
and the drone couldn't even take off. So this is a clear example of the trade-off between
the weight of the robot and the energy capacity of the battery. Control of aerial robots includes
behavior-based systems that offer rapid reflexive corrections of flight systems using
negative feedback control to do things like maintain proper flight attitude or engage in maneuvers.
Rapid control is particularly important in inherently unstable aircraft like rotary wing
vehicles or an air vehicle traveling at high speed. Also certain environments produce wind
turbulence and that turbulence can be very challenging for micro drones in particular.
Urban settings can be tough this way since wind eddies form around the sharp edges of buildings.
Most micro drones have operational limits on wind speed. For the Parrot AR drone 2.0 that
limit is about nine miles per hour. Model-based control algorithms are needed for navigation
to compute heading to the next waypoint, speed over ground, and altitude above ground.
The challenges of controlling a robot in the air are exemplified by a simple behavior,
object avoidance. Object avoidance is very easy to program in land-based robots like Roomba.
Now Roomba uses bumpers, IR proximity detectors to do object avoidance. These are active sensors,
the IR sensors anyway, that emit electromagnetic energy in the infrared range.
The sensor also has a detector that is reading the intensity of the reflection of IR off an object.
So one of the things that happens when we use IR is that it takes energy to do that kind of
sensing and imagine what would happen if Roomba were moving much faster than vacuum cleaners usually
move. It wouldn't have time if it was going really quickly to both sense an object and then being able
to avoid it. So that's why object avoidance with micro drones like the Parrot won't work with IR
sensors, right? You just by the time you get close enough you're too close to veer away if there's
an object. So you have to be close to make them work and then you would have to be slow enough
stop very quickly to be able to maneuver out of the way. So drones need long range sensors.
Large drones like the MQ9 Reaper can carry radar, but micro drones can't.
So two developments may soon help micro drones. The creation of small and lightweight radar
and the development of object detection algorithms that use video.
Since many micro drones have video, this would be great. The problem is that to detect objects
quickly with video, you'd need a fast computer. And fast computers tend to weigh more than slow
ones. Now given all these design challenges for drones, you might start to wonder, isn't it,
isn't anything easier in the air? Or is it all just challenges? Yes, there are some easier things.
One of the fundamental challenges of robotics, navigation, is easier outside and in the air
than, for example, being outside and underwater. And that's because GPS can be used outside
and at a height above the tree line or the highest buildings, very few obstacles exist.
Aircraft-sized drones are large enough to carry sophisticated sensors and high density energy
supplies sufficient for long voyages. Drones such as the Global Hawk can stay aloft for nearly 24
hours. Since large drones operate primarily in unrestricted and high altitude air spaces,
object avoidance involves primarily other aircraft. And radar systems on board can be used in
conjunction with land-based air traffic control. Speaking of air traffic control, we've mentioned
how a commercial aircraft flying on autopilot is operating as an autonomous robot. An autopilot
is an example of an embedded or hidden robotic system, very much like your adaptive cruise control
on your car. Autopilots are some of the earliest robotic systems invented and they've been around
for almost as long as fixed wing aircraft. We've seen an autopilot at work in the
Walkera Tali H500 and they work in a very similar way on commercial aircraft. Now the most important
thing that an autopilot does is to fly a plane in straight level flight. This was the first function
of the first autopilots nearly 100 years ago. Sensor guided movements are the key to autonomous
behavior in a robotic system like an autopilot. So we need a sensor that is linked to an actuator
and the sensor in the first autopilot was a gyroscope. So what is a gyroscope? Now you may
have played with one before. Let me pull it out here. Recognize this? Its official name is Chandler
Gyroscope after the Chandler company that made these toys. Let's see if I can get it going.
I've got this piece of tape on here because I very carefully wrapped this up and I'm going to give it
a good spin here and here we go and put it first of all here and so one of the great things about
gyroscopes is that they're auto-stabilizing. Now I can try to tip it over and I can put it on my
finger like so and it balances itself. It doesn't like to move off its axis and that's what makes
these guys kind of magical and actually as I try to move it it's resisting it. I can't share my
feelings with you on this but it's fighting me here and what's great about this is that any
time I generate a tilting force I can feel the gyroscope pushing back here and this is related
to Newton's laws of motion so it's slowing down here we go all right so there's our gyroscope.
The take-home is that forces of motion come in opposing pairs. You can't have one without the
other so how does the gyroscope do it? It's this balance of forces that Newton's laws predict so
the tricky nifty thing about spinning tops or rotating gyroscopes is that their ability to
generate a reaction force is proportional to how fast they are spinning so they can balance gravity
when they spin so they don't fall down. Now while gyroscopic sensors started out as mechanical
devices like the one I just showed you modern gyroscopic sensors are microelectromechanical
gyroscopes. These tiny electronic devices the size of a human hair contains a small mass that
vibrates on tiny spring as the device experiences the forces of angular rotation that small mass
changes its pattern of vibration that change in vibration is then converted to a change in the
electrical signal that the device is producing. The usual arrangement in a robot like the parrot
or the tally is to have a three-axis gyroscope so that changes in angular velocity can can be
detected in the three independent rotational axes pitch yaw and roll. So you can see how you
might put a motion resistant self-stabilizing if you prefer gyroscope to work for you in your robot.
Well Elmer Sperry certainly did and he patented the idea in 1915. Now Sperry didn't invent gyroscopes
what he did invent was a way to build motorized gyroscopes and put them to work to be able to
accurately sense and respond to the movement of the world around them. So based on those gyroscopic
responses Sperry could then have the control system of the ship react right so there's this little
force generated when I try to move this so that's a way to measure acceleration. So a gyroscope is
used to help stabilize a ship and when it is it's called a gyro stabilizer. So Sperry's patent
and others that followed helped him build the Sperry Gyroscope Company. Now even though Sperry
started making automatic stabilizing systems for the Navy and for ships he was interested in the
new fangled technology of powered aircraft so he filed a patent in 1917 to create an aerial torpedo.
I find two things and there are many more amazing about this invention. First the aerial torpedo is
the world's first patent for an unmanned aerial system as defined right now by the FAA and the
Department of Defense. The second thing that I find amazing about Sperry's automatically controlled
aerial torpedo is this by including radial control and autonomous control Sperry mapped out that
entire control landscape that we've already discussed today. Now keep in mind that this
patent was filed almost a hundred years ago in 1917 so the idea of drones and unmanned aerial
systems being some modern invention is nonsense old-school robotics man that's what it is and
in May of 1917 the Navy actually ordered five of the Curtis N9 seaplanes to be modified into the
aerial torpedo. On March 6th 1918 one of the aerial torpedoes unmanned took off and flew
for almost a kilometer becoming the first ever unmanned aircraft in a complete unmanned aerial
system. What kept the unmanned aircraft operating autonomously was a system of gyroscopic stabilizers
lasers connected to actuator controls. A pitch up of the plane's nose is sensed and causes a signal
to be sent via the controller to the elevators on the back of the plane to tilt the tail down.
A negative feedback controller keeps adjusting the elevators to keep the plane flying level.
Negative feedback control also works in the other axes of rotations yaw and roll so if a plane
starts to roll a gyroscope detects that motion and sends signals to tilt the allerons on the wings
if the plane starts to yaw the gyroscope detects that motion and sends signals to tilt the rudder
on the vertical stabilizer. While the Navy lost interest in unmanned aircraft shortly after the
end of world war one in 1918 Barry went on to use the autopilot in manned aircraft.
In 1933 popular mechanics published an article on the Sperry Automatic Pilot. The article said
quote on long runs the robot pilot permits the human pilot to simply watch the dials while the
plane is maintained on an even compass directed flight at constant altitude. The automatic pilot
functions twice as fast as the human pilot in making corrections for tiny electrical fingers
feel the most minute deviation from the course and corrects it before the human knows what is
happening. While the development of the automatic pilot has reached a high stage perfection
aeronautical experts reject the idea of using it to replace the co-pilot end quote but that was 1933.
The autopilot on a modern commercial aircraft now flies in an environment modified with beacons
from above and from below. We have GPS sensors that take advantage of GPS satellites. We have
distance measuring equipment that sends paired pulses to transponders on the ground. In addition
inertial guidance systems constantly calculate current position by dead reckoning and there is
typically a flight control system which can even sense and rebalance the fuel and the plane's tanks
to even out the plane's distribution of weight. Not flying a lopsided plane obviously improves
fuel efficiency. So commercial and military planes are now very sophisticated robots.
This is what makes it increasingly possible not only to replace the co-pilot but pilots
and not only in military planes such as reapers predators or global hawks.
One of the long-standing challenges in flight systems as we talked about earlier
is carrying sufficient energy to power your flight. Fixed wing aircraft have an advantage
over rotary winged aircraft and that they generate lift by propelling themselves forward.
Once you get airborne you can take advantage of fixed wings by getting energy
efficient as you go along by gliding. So aerial robots can be built as gliders. Gliders move
forward by sinking. The challenge is to catch an updraft if you can and gain height. The best
gliders in the animal kingdom do just this using the air rising off a warming mountain face to
give them the height to glide over that mountain. Birds can also use a technique called dynamic
soaring and we see this in oceanic birds like albatross. The trick is to glide quickly through
regions of increasing wind velocity. These wind gradients are found throughout the ocean
with slow wind speeds near the surface and faster layers of wind as you go vertically.
Dynamic soaring allows birds to travel for hundreds of miles without flapping
at speeds of up to 30 miles per hour. Radio controlled gliders have been able to
go even faster, a lot faster. Radio controlled gliders flying in a loop over mountainous terrain
have been steadily breaking one another's records with a new record of over 500 miles per hour reached
using a kinetic 130dp glider in 2014. With such results in mind a researcher at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution Philip Richardson has calculated that glider UAVs may be able to hit top speeds close to
10 times the speed of the winds they're riding at least for small UAVs in slower winds. This is far
more than any albatross could attain. Hybrids that use both fixed wing and rotary
rotary wings are also possible and this approach has been demonstrated in the Makani power kite
which was the very first fully autonomous wind harvesting robot demonstrated in 2013
and it was bought by the way that same year by Google. Looking like a glider this robot has a
large fixed wing span of 26 meters about the diameter of a high wind power turbine but it also
uses four turbines to foretake off and landing. Now the rotors capture wind energy but when there
is too little wind to gather energy the computer powers up those same rotors to land the robot
safely and wait for wind to resume. Similarly Google X's project wing demonstrated a UAV
delivery service concept using helicopter style takeoff and hovering combined with an airplane
style movement for better long distance travel and since there's no human pilot on board the robot
could flip from vertical to horizontal something that would be disorienting if humans were on board.
The result is a much simpler design than vertical takeoff and landing approaches the military has
tried for piloted planes. Now when discussing energy efficiency we should also probably mention
robotic balloons and dirgeables whose main disadvantage is they carry so much gas that that
makes them slow they have high drag. So high pressure helium balloons were used by the Soviet
Union's Vega 1 and Vega 2 missions to Venus in 1985. Each balloon was three and a half meters in
diameter and carried seven kilograms of instruments in a gondola suspended on a tether 13 meters below
the balloon. Floating about 54 kilometers above the planet's surface an altitude where pressure
and temperatures are more similar to the Earth's surface each balloon operated on battery power
for nearly two days. Now robotic balloons have been tested high in Earth's atmosphere to approximate
conditions on Mars. Now still the biggest frontier is that the small flying robots that you've met
like the Walkara Tali 500 or the Parrot AR drone 2.0 present a lot of challenges. Compared to larger
drones micro drones operate near the ground in complex urban environments and even inside buildings.
Being so near the ground a micro drone encounters a host of obstacles including buildings,
wires and trees. GPS based navigation systems suffer when proximity to a building puts the drone
in a GPS shadow unable to contact the optimal number of satellites for high accuracy localization.
Micro drones are worth all the fuss because we can put cameras on them and cameras on board are
exciting for a host potential users. We can do live and recorded coverage of parties, group
gatherings and outdoor trips, surveys for real estate firms, search and rescue, hazardous environment
exploration, military surveillance, high resolution weather and climate mapping and traffic monitoring.
So this is already an incredible array of work for aerial robots and this list doesn't even mention
all the other kinds of actuators drones might utilize such as those you might use for agriculture,
delivery services, firefighting, wildlife management and so on.
In many ways what has happened over the last century in aerial robotics exemplifies the
progression of robotics as a whole. First of all we see partial autonomy and embedded robotic
systems developed early on. Second as small powerful electronic computers develop and are
paired with GPS navigation systems aerial robots take off literally and figuratively
extending their fully autonomous capabilities. Third improvement in computer algorithms for
dynamically unstable motion and for extending battery life make sure that we can build a larger
range of sizes and different kinds of body types. So robotics has been key to improvements
in aviation almost from the very beginning of flying planes so the drones that seem to
explode out of nowhere in the 21st century are really better seen as yet another step in the
overall progress of aerial mobility and someday not soon but someday robotics may be how we finally
get that flying car we've been waiting for.
