When I was a child, and that was quite some years ago, I used to love to watch cowboy
movies.
In fact, I even liked to listen to cowboy music.
One of my favorite groups was the Sons of the Pioneers.
They actually sang with Roy Rogers, who was the king of the cowboys.
And one of their signature songs, and yes, it's still played today, is a song called
Cool Clear Water.
It begins all day I face the barren waste without the taste of water.
The story of a cowboy in his horse Dan wandering across a desert.
And deserts are the subject of our lecture now.
Deserts look dry.
The very word desert seems to convey a sense of aridity, a land where water is at a premium.
That is indeed true.
But there is much variety evident in the world's deserts, which can range in appearance from
undulating monotonous sand dunes with little apparent life to colorful landscapes.
And a wash with color of myriad blooming flowers.
Some deserts like the Atacama Desert along the coast of Peru and Chile resemble what we
might imagine the surface of a planet such as Mars to be like, seemingly devoid of any
life.
Ironically enough, the Atacama Desert, incidentally, sits right next to a part of the Pacific
Ocean where upwelling occurs, one of the absolutely richest marine ecosystems in the world.
So you have one of the least productive terrestrial ecosystems side by side with one of the most
productive marine systems.
Other deserts, like the Great Basin Desert of Western North America, are populated by
a monotonous looking assemblage of shrubs such as Big Sage Brush.
Still others, like the Sonoran Desert of Mexico, Arizona, and Southern California abound with
succulents, some of them very large.
Some cacti, other cacti as well, and many species of shrubs, even some trees.
Deserts contain many unique species of plants and animals because inhabitants of deserts
are subjected to very strong selection pressures, resulting in remarkable adaptations to the
constant aridity.
You've really got to be able to deal with water shortage and heat and things like that
in order to survive in a desert.
For instance, kangaroo rats, which are common in North American deserts, subsist without
drinking liquid water.
They actually are metabolically capable of deriving sufficient H2O from the seeds that
they eat.
Barrel cacti's swell and shrink as they absorb water depending on when the rains come and
go.
And if you look at a simple thing like a lizard in the desert, you see remarkable adaptations
to the reality of desert life.
Many desert animals are not very active during the day when the heat of the day is at its
worst, but they become active toward evening.
Lizards kind of hedge their bets.
If you measure the temperature of the soil or measure the temperature, say, six inches
above the soil in a desert, that's the lizard's world, you'll find that in the course of the
24-hour day and night, you go from hot to very cold.
Deserts can be quite chilly at night and they can be quite hot during the day.
But if you take a lizard and measure its temperature throughout a 24-hour period, you'll find, perhaps
surprisingly, that the lizard's temperature doesn't vary all that much.
How can that be?
If you take the lizard and put it into a laboratory and put heat on it, it will warm up.
If you cool it in the room, the lizard's body temperature will cool down.
This is because lizards are ectothermic, so-called cold-blooded animals.
They're metabolically not capable of regulating their body temperature.
So how is it then, if this is the case, that a lizard can live in an environment such as
a desert that goes through temperature extremes in the course of a 24-hour day and not go
through nearly the same degree of temperature extremes in its own body?
The answer is what ecologists term behavioral thermoregulation.
Lizards are very subtle in the positions that they occupy on rocks.
During the early morning hours, when it's cool and the lizard's body temperature has
dropped a bit, lizards expose themselves fully to the sun.
They spread their bodies out flat and absorb a maximum amount of solar radiation and begin
heating up.
Some lizards even darken their pigmentation in the skin because the darker the skin,
the more it absorbs solar radiation and more it absorbs the heat from the sun.
But as the day becomes hotter, lizards do various other things.
They angle their bodies away from the sun.
They stand upright in the rocks so that their bellies can lose heat, and then they retreat
to the shade.
These are the ways animals cope with desert realities.
Desert biomes occur in many places on Earth.
Deserts are found in the temperate zone, and they're called cold deserts there because
they generally experience snow and cold temperatures in the winter months.
Deserts closer to the equator are referred to as hot deserts because they rarely experience
snow.
Shrubs tend to be the dominant form of plants found in cold deserts, but succulents such
as cacti join shrubs in hot deserts.
In general, biodiversity is highest in the hot deserts.
This is part of this general trend that the closer you get to the equator, regardless of
what the ecosystem tends to be, it will be most diverse.
Globally, many deserts occur around 30 degrees north and 30 degrees south latitudes.
These are roughly the tropic of cancer and the tropic of Capricorn.
This, as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, is because of major convection cells in the
atmosphere that converge there, and when they do, they have already dropped their moisture.
So the air that rushes downward is completely dry, and this is the desert belt, as it's
sometimes called.
There are four deserts in North America, and you can easily visit them all, and they're
wonderful, wonderful places.
Let's just name them and describe them briefly.
The Great Basin Desert is a cold desert.
It ranges from the Canadian border and eastern Washington state, south to Nevada, and parts
of Arizona and eastern California is indeed vast.
It is what faced the pioneers when they crossed the Rocky Mountains on their way to California.
After you negotiated those passes of the Rocky Mountains, you still had to cross the Great
Basin Desert.
It is called the Great Basin, as it is bordered on the east by the Rocky Mountains and on
the west by the Cascade and Sierra Nevada mountain ranges.
If you fly, for instance, from Chicago to San Francisco, you fly directly over the Great
Basin Desert, and you really get appreciation for how this really is a basin surrounded
essentially by a wall of mountains to the east and a wall of mountains to the west.
The Chihuahuan Desert is found throughout much of northern and central Mexico, crossing
into the U.S. border at Texas and eastern New Mexico.
The Chihuahuan, as you can tell from the name, is probably a hot desert and indeed it is.
It's a desert of shrubs.
The Sonoran Desert, perhaps the most picturesque of any of the four North American deserts,
contains many cactus species, including the giant saguaro cactus and the organ pike cactus.
It is found from northwestern Mexico and the Baja Peninsula through southern Arizona and
parts of southern California.
The Mojave Desert is the smallest of the North American deserts.
It's combined essentially to southeastern California, including Death Valley and Assault
and Sea.
The Mojave Desert is famous for its unique appearing Joshua trees, which are really a
form of yucca.
Yucca is a kind of spiny leaf plant that sends up shoots with flowers on them, but Joshua
tree is a yucca that grows as a tree with these bizarre branching patterns.
If you've ever seen the old B science fiction movies from the 1950s that came out of Hollywood,
movies like them and others, you've seen Joshua trees because they were all filmed in that
general area.
In South America, one finds the Atacama Desert along the coast of Peru and Chile.
The Atacama Desert exists because of the Andes Mountains.
What happens is all this vast amount of moisture in the Amazon basin, it's all being evaporated
by rainforest, is blocked from getting to the western coast of South America because
of the high Andes Mountains.
The Andes Mountains in various places easily top 20,000 feet.
There's also desert in Africa, both in the northern part of the continent, where the
Great Sahara Desert extends from Morocco through Egypt, as well as in the south, where the
Karoo Desert forms much of South Africa and Namibia Botswana.
Much of interior Australia is desert.
A huge desert.
I recently flew over central Australia and you could look down and just kind of entertain
the thought that you were flying over Mars.
You couldn't really see any evidence of vegetation and the soil was a deep red color.
The largest desert on earth is the vast Gobi Desert found throughout most of Central Asia
and throughout much of China and Mongolia.
The Gobi Desert and places around it are most well known today as great sites for discovering
fossils.
All manner of different dinosaur fossils and mammal fossils have recently been taken
from these areas and the reason for that is that deserts have a high rate of erosion.
Because they have relatively little plant cover, erosion by wind and even occasionally
by flood when it happens to rain for brief periods of time, continue to expose rocks
and if those rocks should contain fossils, it's a very useful activity for fossil hunters
to go and look around in deserts.
There on the surface are the remains of life that existed millions of years ago.
Now, as I've said several times in these lectures, deserts typically experience very low.
That means 10 inches or less amounts of annual precipitation.
What moisture they do receive tends to be seasonal, falling during a brief wet season.
For example, in the Sonoran Desert in southern Arizona, rain falls brief in the spring.
If you go there just after the rain falls, you will see the flush of annuals as it's
called.
There are many species of annual plants and an annual plant is a plant that only lives
for a year.
It's actually genetically programmed for the seed to germinate the plant to grow, flower
and go to seed in the course of a single growing season.
This is what's described as an annual.
In deserts there are a variety of annuals that essentially lie dormant as seeds until
they get a sufficient amount of rain and then very quickly they grow and bloom and
go to seed.
These are many species of colorful flowers.
Rain also occurs on the Sonoran Desert rather sparingly in the mid to late summer, usually
as late afternoon thunderstorms.
The temperature range in deserts is very wide with mean annual temperatures, and this is
mean annual temperatures ranging from as low as 23 degrees Fahrenheit to as high as 86
degrees Fahrenheit.
So you see deserts aren't really determined by temperature.
Deserts are really determined by lack of moisture.
There's a very big temperature range that supports deserts of various kinds.
The warmest temperatures of any place in the United States are typically recorded for Death
Valley, California, which is part of the Mojave Desert.
The temperature there was once 134 degrees, well actually it was 134.5 degrees Fahrenheit.
That makes it the second highest temperature ever recorded on Earth.
Desert soils tend to be fertile.
That may surprise you.
You look at a desert and you see not many much plants, sometimes you don't see any plants.
But desert soils have an abundance of essential minerals.
Why should that be?
Well, what happens is when it rains on a desert, when deserts get precipitation, especially
if it's a hot desert, the heat then makes the evaporation bring the minerals up.
It's kind of reverse leaching.
And so the water actually moves back out of the soil into the atmosphere and as it comes
up it brings minerals with it.
So many desert soils are really rich in minerals.
The sparse plant growth that typifies desert is really a result of the shortage of water.
Some desert plants, such as honey mesquite, which is a common kind of tree in places like
the Sonoran Desert, have very, very long tap roots that grow sufficiently deep to reach
groundwater.
When most of the other plants are leafless and look very dry, mesquite will still have
green leaves on it.
The reason for that is it's going way, way down into the soil, getting at the water.
Others like many species of succulents absorb large quantities of water and simply store
it.
They absorb it during the brief times when it's available and they utilize it during
the long dry spells.
In areas of really high temperature, evaporative water loss from desert soils results in a
lot of deposition of minerals at the surface and you see things like salt lakes, for instance,
dry lakes that are just encrusted with salt.
Because there's relatively little plant cover, erosion by wind and flood waters is particularly
common in deserts.
I mentioned this in relation to fossil hunting.
Fossil hunters love this because it's continually exposing new rocks.
In North America, such as the case in many locations, including Dinosaur National Monument
in Utah and the Petrified Forest in Arizona, one of the richest fossil hunting grounds
in the world is the Karoo Desert in South Africa and I already mentioned the Gobi Desert
in China and Mongolia.
Given the natural fertility of desert soils, it is little surprise that irrigation can
convert a desert into a productive agricultural land.
If you fly over the Great Basin Desert or over the Sonoran Desert, you will frequently
see large circles of green below you.
These are areas where there's been irrigation and you can grow crops in these areas.
The soil is really rich.
However, doing so involves a great deal of cost because you have to get the water from
somewhere and bring it into the desert.
The high cost has increased even more in hot desert irrigation because of the high evaporative
water loss caused by the high temperature.
In other words, the efficiency of water use is not very high, so you really need a lot
of water to convert a desert into a productive agriculture if you can somehow get that in
a reasonably cost-free manner, well then you can do it, otherwise it takes a lot of money
to raise corn in the desert.
Deserts have a surprisingly high biodiversity.
Many species of plants have adapted to thrive in deserts.
Trubs as well as large cactus species tend to be widely spaced with shallow extensive
root systems that absorb moisture from a large area of soil.
In fact, it's kind of funny when you look at the distribution of shrubs in some deserts,
they look almost like it's an orchard, like somebody planted them, like they're really,
really all equidistant from one another.
How did they manage that?
Well, it turns out that at least in some cases there are toxins in the leaves of shrubs that
decompose into the soil and actually prevent the seeds from other shrubs from germinating
in that soil.
So this is really a form of plant territoriality.
The plant manages to change the characteristics of the soil around it such that it inhibits
the invasion of that particular area of soil by other shrubs, and this accounts for the
relatively even distribution.
Leaves of many desert shrubs are typically small and very waxy.
The waxier the leaves are, the less there will be water loss from the leaves, and so
that's what that adaptation is all about.
Bear in mind that wind tends to be a factor in deserts and this would enhance evaporative
water loss, so anything that can minimize that is an adaptation that would increase the fitness
of the plants.
Some plants have an abundance of thorns as well as toxic chemicals in their leaves to
discourage herbivores.
I mentioned the toxic chemicals that discourage other plants from growing near the shrub,
but they also have toxic chemicals in their leaves which tend to discourage herbivorous
insects, for example.
Thorns are a pretty obvious adaptation and many people think the real function of thorns
is to protect the plant from grazing, and there's really no question that that's part
of it, but actually it's surprising how much thorns can provide shade for a desert plant
as well depending on the angle of the sun.
Thorns also break up the pattern of wind blowing across the plant, at least when the thorns
are quite dense.
The pungent odors of shrubs, such as creosote bush and big sagebrush, are produced by the
many chemicals that protect these plants in various ways.
Species such as choia cactus actually use their dense thorns as a means of dispersal.
After ever in the Sonaran Desert, you'll learn to be careful of choia.
There's actually one species of it that's called the jumping choia.
It doesn't really jump, but the plants have long chain-like branches that divide it into
sections called joints.
And what happens is if you brush up against one of these joints, albeit ever so gently,
the joint will break off the plant and hook on to you.
And the way the thorns are arranged, it is devilishly difficult to get it off you.
Now of course the function of this is dispersal, because once these joints are moved and dropped
on the ground, they're able to put down root systems and grow another plant.
The only way to get one of these joints off, I find without extreme discomfort, is to take
a comb, like you would comb your hair, and literally comb the joint off of your arm or
any place else that happens to be attached.
Now of course the usual kinds of animals that move these choia joints around are things
like deer and the little pig-like animal, the collared techery.
It's a very efficient means of getting the plant dispersed.
Many desert plants, particularly cactus and Old World euphorbias, I mentioned euphorbias
in an earlier lecture, euphorbias look remarkably like cactuses.
You find them in Africa, for example, they're not cactuses.
It's a case of convergent evolution.
They're very different kinds of plants, but euphorbias have evolved exactly the same succulent
adaptations, the same growth form as cactuses have.
What euphorbias do and what cactuses do is photosynthesize through their stems.
The leaves have become needles and it's really the stems that have the chlorophyll and do
the photosynthesis.
There's a tree called the Palaverde tree in the Sonoran Desert.
Palaverde means green bark, and that's exactly the case.
This tree can drop leaves, which means that it doesn't suffer much evaporative water loss,
but it has chlorophyll in its bark and so it can still photosynthesize with its bark
and stems.
Many desert plants, including creosote bush, mesquite, palaverde, and cacti are pollinated
by animals.
That may be surprising, but there are very intimate relationships among desert plants
and various kinds of animals.
Some like creosote bush, for example, produce small but colorful flowers and these attract
a variety of insect pollinators.
Honey mesquite, which is a tree, becomes amazingly colorful when it's flowering.
It's like the golden arches times ten.
Brilliant yellow flowers attract pollinators for many miles.
But the one I really want to share with you is the case of the giant saguaro cactus.
The giant saguaro cactus you've seen in all the cowboy movies, it's that cactus that's
tall and it has arms coming off the side that reach upward.
It's a real signature species of the desert, although it's relatively limited in distribution.
It's really only found in the Sonoran Desert.
But in the case of the giant saguaro cactus, you look at it and you wonder, how does this
cactus reproduce?
Well, if you look carefully, you see that at the tips of the big, wrong arm branches,
there could be flowers, and these are small flowers, but if you look at them, they become
larger at night.
They open at night when they form a large, flat, white flower.
Now what would pollinate a large, flat, white flower way high up on a cactus?
And the answer is bats.
Saguaro cactuses are coroptophilic, as we call them.
Bats belong to a group of mammals called the coroptera, and philic means friendly.
So in fact, what the giant saguaro is, is bat friendly.
It uses bats as its pollinators.
It has these long, snouted bats with long tongues that come and literally bury their
face in the flower.
And what they're doing is getting moisture into a certain extent protein because there
are also insects in the flowers as well.
And then the bat will move from flower to flower, sampling the various flowers for their
nectar, and in fact, the bat's face at that point will be completely covered with pollen.
So as it moves from cactus to cactus, it's spreading the pollen and ensuring the reproduction
of the plant.
That may sound like a very unusual situation, but there are lots of bat friendly plants,
not only in deserts, but in other areas, particularly in the tropics.
And bats have unique adaptations for this relationship.
Some bats actually have neck hairs that point forward, actually trapping the pollen.
Some bats drink their own urine, and then what that does is enable them to digest pollen.
They actually eat some of the pollen and take protein from it.
So they're all manner of adaptations, and if you look at the shape of that pollinated
plants, they are inevitably shaped in such a way that the flowers stick out really obviously
well away from any thorns or anything that could injure the wings of the bats.
So this is an example of what ecologists refer to as an evolutionary mutualism, and in fact,
in all these cases of insect or bat, or in some cases hummingbird pollinated plants, what
you can effectively think of is that the plant is using the animal as a surrogate sex organ.
That's exactly what's happening.
Even though plant diversity can be fairly high in some desert areas, no desert has very
high primary productivity.
Deserts are always limited in the amount of photosynthesis they accomplish.
These limitations are imposed by an extreme shortage of moisture.
That's really what it mounts to.
Though harsh physical conditions typify deserts, many intriguing biotic interactions are essential
to ecosystem structure.
I mentioned the saguaro cactus with regard to its pollination by bats, but let's hear
a little more about it.
Seeds of saguaro cactus after the bats have pollinated the plants, of course the flowers
go to seed.
In fact, the native Indians, the Papakone Indians of the snorren desert harvest saguaro
fruits and use them for food.
But if the fruit falls to the ground, the seeds open, there are lots and lots of different
seed predators, little mice and things like that.
So the probability of an individual saguaro seed actually germinating is pretty small,
but it's not just the ability to escape seed predators that's important.
It's where the seed falls.
The seed can't fall in the open.
If it does, it probably won't germinate.
It will be too hot for it to germinate.
It really needs to fall near a rock or a nearby plant.
If it does, there will be a little bit of shade in the course of the day, and in nature
a little bit can go a long way.
A little bit can be the difference between survival and extinction.
And so if the seed of the saguaro cactus falls reasonably close to a rock or a little shrub
or something and gets a little shade, it might germinate.
The best place for a saguaro seed to grow is in the shade of a shrub or a tree such
as a power verde.
It is very common, and people wonder about this, to see the giant cactuses emerging from
the low crown of a shrub or power verde.
You wonder, what's that all about?
Well, it turns out that the power verde or the shrub serve as what ecologists call nurse
trees, nursing the young saguaro by providing enough shade for it to actually germinate and
grow.
Cactuses harbor a surprisingly high biodiversity of animals.
Again, looking at the saguaro cactus, which has been extensively studied, upwards of 30
species of birds, nests and cavities in saguaro cactuses, for example, and many of them nest
on the cactus as large hawks, for instance, will build nests right on the tops of the
cactuses.
Many desert animals are active really only at night when the air temperature is that
much cooler, minimizing evaporative water loss, so the desert really looks deceptive
during the day.
If you see it during the day, you're only getting a weak sense of what the total biodiversity
really is.
Numerous rodent species inhabit deserts, some elegantly adapted anatomically and physiologically
to the harsh desert conditions.
I've already told you about the fact that kangaroo rats never have to drink water.
They can metabolically manufacture it just from the digestion of the seeds that they
eat.
The kangaroo rat is named for its long hind legs, enables it to jump skillfully, and it
eats all manner of different kinds of seeds.
Jack rabbits, well-known to inhabitants of North American deserts, have large ears that
obviously serve to increase evaporation and cool the animal during the heat of the day,
and it isn't an interesting that jack rabbits are one of the few mammals that you actually
do see during the heat of the day.
They're adapted to tolerate it because of their ears.
Wood rats, which are sometimes called pack rats, assemble large middens containing foods,
mostly seeds, as well as other objects unrelated to nutrition.
Anthropologists sometimes uncover small artifacts in wood rat middens because these middens
can last many, many years.
Reptiles adapt very well to deserts.
Reptiles, of course, are ectothermic, and so they have to be fairly careful about coming
out during the heat of the day, they just might boil, but as I mentioned for the lizards,
for example, and there are many species of lizards in deserts, reptiles basically hedge
their bets through behavioral thermal regulation.
It's really as simple as this.
In the heat of the day, they move into shade or shelter, in the cool of the night, they
come out and are active.
One of the more specialized species of reptiles is the sidewinder, which is a kind of rattlesnake
that is uniquely adapted to move sideways rather than forward in adaptation from unstable
shifting sand dunes.
People have adapted throughout history to living in deserts and continue to do so.
Many of the major oil-supplying nations of the world are located in the Middle East,
a region that is primarily desert.
Thanks to sophisticated, though costly, agricultural techniques, countries such as Israel are able
to grow many crops in some of the world's most arid soils.
I already mentioned the costs associated with that.
Human use of deserts in North America is potentially stressful to regional water supplies.
When you fly over cities such as Phoenix or Tempe or even Tucson, you see a real surprising
amount of golf courses and lawns and things like that.
All that water has to come from somewhere.
It's not a natural component of the immediate environment.
Because of increasing human populations in desert regions, encroachment by housing developments,
malls, industrial parks is threatening many desert areas with fragmentation in species
loss.
Immigrants to desert regions frequently attempt to replace natural vegetation with lawns and
other water-costly landscaping, and swimming pools are downright luxuries in those areas.
So as ecologists look into the 21st century and the challenges it sets for us, wise use
of areas like deserts certainly is part of what we need to think about.
Another threat to deserts is the increasing use of off-road vehicles.
Like the Arctic tundra, desert plants are not able to recover easily from disturbance.
For example, it requires about 80 years, that's 80 years, for a saguaro cactus to attain a
height of 6 to 8 feet, the point at which it will produce its first blossoms.
So to say that one more time, it takes nearly a century for a saguaro cactus to go through
puberty.
Full maturity of the plant is not reached until well over a century, and it can survive
for up to 250 years.
However, saguaro cactuses don't have tap roots.
Like virtually all cactuses, their root systems are highly shallow.
If you're looking at, say, a 50-foot saguaro cactus, you have to walk 90 feet in any direction
from the base of that cactus, and you're still over its root system.
In other words, the root system radiates out that far.
Without a tap root, the cactus is really not very secure in the soil, and so something
such as an SUV or a pickup truck, if it happens to bang into the cactus, it will topple it
in a matter of seconds.
Incidentally, one of the principal causes of mortality for saguaro cactuses is lightning
strikes, because, of course, saguaro cactuses tend to be the tallest things in the desert.
Unfortunately, many desert plant species are in demand as ornamentals, and this leads to
the illegal collection of various cactuses, and it's become an increasing problem requiring
legal protection for species such as organ-pipe cactus and giant suoros.
It's interesting when you think about it.
Deserts were once thought of as great wastelands, and now they're recognized for their unique
ecological characteristics, and their plants have even become desirable to people who cultivate
them for their backyards.
There's much to be admired about deserts.
There's much to be known about them, and their areas of surprisingly high biodiversity, again,
attribute to exactly how effective natural selection is at adapting organisms for the
challenges they face, even environments where something as basic to life as water occurs
in very relatively low amounts.
Well, probably you're getting a little thirsty about now hearing about all this water loss,
so it's time to go to a place where water isn't much of a factor, except in its abundance.
We're going to take a very radical change and go from the desert biome to the tropical
rainforest in our next lecture.
