When I was a student in high school, I can remember being assigned to read The Grapes
of Wrath, the classic novel authored by John Steinbeck.
There's an expression about youth being wasted on the young, and that certainly may be true
of my reading of The Grapes of Wrath at that time, but I've reread it since, and I realize
what a spectacular book it really is.
It's a poignant tale of the Jode family and their daunting trek across 1930s America following
Route 66, the so-called Mother Road from Dust, Strick and Oklahoma, to what they hoped would
be the Promised Land of Southern California.
All that because of what was called the Dust Bowl, a term describing the effects of protracted,
severe Midwestern drought, a drought that certainly had a profound effect on the region.
What caused the Dust Bowl?
What really happened?
In 2004, a team of researchers who were applying a complex atmospheric land general circulation
model, and the translation of that is really complicated math, determined that prior to
the onset of the drought, the drought that became the Dust Bowl, sea surface temperatures
in both the Atlantic Ocean and Pacific Ocean had deviated significantly from normal.
In the Atlantic, it was warmer than it should have been, and in the Pacific it was cooler.
In particular, the cooler than normal Pacific sea surface temperature altered the air circulation
in the upper atmosphere, such that rainfall was suppressed throughout the Great Plains.
That was the first thing to block the rain.
But worse, the warmer than normal Atlantic sea surface temperature resulted in blocking
moisture from the Gulf of Mexico.
That was the second punch of the one-two punch.
That combination resulted in the severe and protracted drought.
Records from tree ring data suggest that the Great Plains, and this is what's interesting
here, has experienced similar droughts once or twice a century over the past four centuries.
You see, climate change does happen.
Sometimes it happens in cycles, and the effect of it can be severe.
Such a frequency of change is sufficient to impose significant ecological stresses on
ecosystems to stimulate evolution, if you will.
And that is why climate is the number one factor in determining ecosystem characteristics.
The linkage between climate and ecology has long been understood.
I like to say that the first really good ecologist was Charles Darwin.
Any student of ecology needs to read on the origin of species.
Darwin's greatest of many books, the one that was published in 1859, the one where he first
presented the concept of natural selection, the theory of natural selection, as the force,
if you will, the blind mechanistic force that changes organisms.
Darwin wrote in the origin, and I quote,
Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of a species, and periodical
seasons of extreme cold or drought, I believe, to be the most effective of all checks, unquote.
The checks to which Darwin referred were deaths of organisms that were not adapted to climatic
shift.
This is the very essence of natural selection.
Natural selection, as you'll learn, works by selective survival and selective death.
There are dust storms on Mars, and immensely high winds on the planet Jupiter, and it can
thus be said that both of those planets have a climate.
Its moon, in contrast, has nothing above its dusty, rocky surface.
It lacks a climate simply because it lacks an atmosphere.
Climate results from interactions among atmospheric gases, whatever they may be, and solar radiation,
landforms, and oceans.
In other words, everything on the planet contributes to influencing climate.
And in the case of Earth, the ecological planet, that also includes organisms.
I mentioned, in response to a question earlier in the lecture series, that oxygen was first
put in the atmosphere by photosynthetic bacteria.
Oxygen was the first great pollution event of Earth.
Organisms had to adapt to it.
It tore cells apart, but that adaptation has happened, and organisms now thrive and indeed
depend on oxygen.
But oxygen was added to the atmosphere by organisms.
And today we are in a period of climate change.
That many would argue is significantly affected by what are called anthropogenic forces, namely
people.
But we'll say more about that eventually.
Earth has solar radiation, atmospheric gases, landforms, oceans, and it has organisms.
All of these things combine to make a dynamic climate that significantly affects the distribution
of ecosystems on the planet.
It sets up what we call a climatic gradient.
It's why we have cold adapted species in one part of the planet and warm adapted species
in another.
Because Earth is a sphere, solar radiation strikes the planet most directly at the equator.
It strikes much more obliquely at the poles.
Because of this fact, sunlight is more concentrated per unit area at the equator, and thus that
region of the world heats up more than regions to the north and south, even allowing for
seasonal changes.
Polar regions receive the least concentrated amount of sunlight, and thus are the coolest
areas on the planet.
Sunlight is kind of spread over a wider area because of the obliquity of the planet's
angle to the sun.
This is not rocket science.
All you have to do is take a flashlight and play with a globe, and you can easily demonstrate
these things for yourself.
The result of differential heating is the formation of large convection cells.
Convection cells are the things that form when you heat anything in a pan, whether you're
heating water, pasta, or whatever.
So these convection cells characterize various latitudes.
For instance, as warm air hits the equator, the warm air rises.
It takes moisture with it, and so it rains a lot on the equator.
What do you know?
Tropical rain forests.
But as the cells move away from the equator, they become more and more devoid of moisture
because as the convection cells rise, the air cools, that condenses the water vapor within
the cells, and it rains.
And so by the time the convection cells, the air masses in them, have migrated from the
equator, they're pretty dry.
Convection cells converge at places like the tropics of cancer and tropics of Capricorn,
and typically those are areas that have deserts.
Convection cells are very characteristics of latitudes around 23 and a half degrees
north and 23 and a half degrees south, because that's where the convection cells converge,
they're devoid of moisture, and so we have deserts.
The movement of convection cells on Earth is complex enough, but it's even more complex
because the planet itself is moving.
A body on Earth moves most quickly at the equator.
Did you know that?
If you want to have the fastest speed on Earth, you stand on the equator.
You're moving faster there than you are any place away from it.
That was actually a question on a test I took once.
This phenomenon is known as Coriolis effect.
If an object is moving to the north, it will tend to be deflected to the east, and if it
is moving to the south, it will tend to be deflected to the west.
This is really important.
It not only sets up patterns of movement of the atmosphere, but patterns of movement of
surface currents of the oceans.
It creates, for example, the generally clockwise circulation of ocean currents in the northern
hemisphere and counterclockwise circulation in the southern hemisphere.
And in case you're wondering, no, toilets don't always flush clockwise in the northern
hemisphere and counterclockwise in the southern hemisphere.
That's a myth.
It just doesn't happen.
It all depends on how the toilet is set up, not where it's located on the planet.
A look at the Earth from an ecological perspective will quickly reveal that there are several
huge terrestrial areas on the planet that can be described in the broadest sense.
We talked about this in the last lecture.
You know them now.
There are different kinds of forests, boreal, temperate, deserts, grasslands.
A somewhat closer look will produce a finer resolution.
Grasslands can be evergreen or deciduous.
They can be a mixture of both.
There's something called the northern hardwoods forest in the state of Massachusetts, where
I live, that has a lot of hemlock trees.
Those are evergreens.
It also has a lot of white pine.
Those are evergreens.
But it also has a lot of deciduous trees, for instance, like birches and sugar maples.
Grasslands can be interspersed with trees, in which case they're called savannas.
They can be just grasslands, in which case we call them prairies.
In the United States, grassland ecosystems were once more extensive than they are today,
having largely been converted to agriculture.
But once savanna and prairie were far more extensively distributed.
Deserts, of course, are typically arid, often extremely so.
But organisms such as succulent cacti and long-eared jackrabbits, whose very anatomies
reflect adaptations to environments where water is scarce and heat may be oppressive.
And that's a good point to consider.
When you look at how organisms exist in ecosystems, what biologists call their morphology or how
their structure relates to their ecosystems, and you look at something like a giant saguaro
cactus that you find around Tucson, Arizona, every characteristic of that plant is basically
based on the fact that it has to store water.
It has a very widespread root system that sucks up water, like a sponge sucks it up
on your kitchen counter.
It has an expansive stem, accordion pleated, that can accommodate a large amount of water.
But if you put too much in it, it can actually rupture the cactus.
So it's adapted to take so much and not much more.
It's leaves are not leaves at all.
They have evolved into sharp needles that act somewhat to protect the cactus against predation.
But more, they act to shade the cactus.
It's amazing how needles can act to shade cactus when the angle of the sun is in a certain
position.
So the very anatomy of a cactus to say nothing of a long-eared jackrabbit that has immense
ears, not all the better to hear you with, but all the better to lose heat with, reflects
the reality of the environment which is.
This is the very essence of adaptation.
It is the very essence of the problem Darwin was trying to solve when he wrote to the origin
of species.
Why do organisms look like they do and act like they do?
And the primary selection pressure in nature is climate.
That's what causes biomes.
Biomes differ from one another primarily due to climatic variation from one place to another.
Climate quite blindly, and I emphasize blindly, selects for differing arrays of adaptations
from one climatic region to another.
As I said before, and as I reiterate here, two variables, temperature and precipitation,
specifically average annual temperature and average amount of annual precipitation largely
determine the type of biome.
Amazing if one knows the average annual temperature and average amount of precipitation one can
predict with great accuracy just what type of biome will be present.
I'm giving an example.
If the mean annual precipitation is somewhere between 118 and 157 inches per year and the
mean annual temperature is anywhere from 68 degrees Fahrenheit to 86 degrees Fahrenheit,
the biome will be very lush tropical rainforest.
I'll bet you knew that.
How many of you live in an area that has over 100 inches of rainfall a year to say nothing
of 150?
And yes, it is rainfall.
None of it falls as snow.
And 68 degrees to 86 degrees annual temperature is quite warm.
Let's take another example.
If the mean annual precipitation is say only 40 inches a year and the mean annual temperature
remains between 68 and 86 degrees, will you have tropical rainforest?
Uh-uh.
What you're going to have then is tropical savannah.
So that difference in rainfall from 100 inches plus to 40 inches, even if the temperature
stays the same, changes the whole characteristic of the ecosystem instead of having lush rainfall
rainforest, you have open grassy savannah with scattered trees, such as you find throughout
most of East Africa, for example.
Deserts are uniformly arid.
There's just no getting away from that.
And in general, they receive less than 10 inches, sometimes radically less than 10 inches
of precipitation annually.
But some deserts are hot.
They can be warm or warm of the rainforest.
While other deserts are quite cold, such as the Gobi Desert, for instance, in Asia or
the northern part of the Great Plains Desert in North America.
Arctic tundra, the realm of the caribou and the snagly owl, is both dry and cold, so
cold that permafrost, which is actually frozen soil, endures throughout the year.
Tundra typically receives about 10 inches of precipitation a year.
This means it's a desert and has an annual mean temperature of, oh, something around
minus 10 degrees centigrade, which is very cold, 0 degrees centigrade is 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
So tundra is a cold, harsh, windy place that's surprisingly dry.
Still, it has a growing season, and that growing season allows it to, for a short time each
year, have a fair diversity of various kinds of short plants, as I'll describe when we
talk about tundra in its own lecture.
The importance of mean annual temperature and mean annual precipitation in determining
which terrestrial biome will prevail in any one particular location was first revealed
in 1947 by a scientist named Leslie R. Holdridge.
Holdridge developed a system of ecological classification still in use today.
It's called life zones.
The Holdridge systems passed the test of time.
Let me give you an example.
Alexander von Humboldt, the great German explorer, was one of the first people to really seriously
explore South America.
And one of the things Humboldt observed, which many people now who are tourists in South
America observe, I recently saw this in Ecuador, is that if you start, say, on the eastern
slope of the Andes Mountains at a low elevation, you'll be in tropical rainforest.
But as you move up the slope, you won't be in tropical rainforest.
You'll be in an area called cloud forest, where there's clouds most of the day.
And there's a distinctly different look to the vegetation.
The trees are shorter, there are fewer different kinds of them, and they're filled with all
manner of epiphytes.
These are plants that grow on other plants, like orchids, for instance, and various cactuses
grow on these trees.
As you go higher still, you get into a dry kind of grassy area, or sometimes a wet grassy
area, just depending on the precipitation, something called paramo, or puna.
And as you cross over on the other side, you get into dry forest.
And so Alexander von Humboldt was able to realize that just moving up and down a mountain
changes climate enough that you move from one life zone to another.
Again, it's a question not of organisms.
It's not the organisms that are determining that climate is determining which organisms
are there.
This approach was applied by a man named C. Hart Miriam in the United States in the latter
part of the 19th century, working in the central Rockies around Flagstaff, Arizona, for instance,
and you can see this as well in places like Rocky Mountain National Park, which is in Colorado.
What Miriam realized is if you start at the lowest elevation on the mountain, an ecosystem
that he called the Lower Sonoran Zone, you are functionally in desert.
You are in an area that gets very little precipitation a year.
It's quite warm.
The Lower Sonoran Zone is desert.
You find succulent plants there, cactuses, and various kinds of desert shrubs.
But if you move just ever so slightly in elevation, you go into what's called the Upper Sonoran
Zone.
This is high desert.
This may be a combination of desert shrubs and trees, trees such as pinion pines and
junipers, which are kind of wiry little trees.
It almost looks like a miniature forest, widely spread out among what otherwise are desert
plants.
So you have the Upper Sonoran and Lower Sonoran Life Zones.
And then if you go higher still in elevation up the mountain, you enter what Miriam called
the Transition Zone.
Why is it the Transition Zone?
Well, because it's high enough to get just enough precipitation and to be just that
much cooler that there is a transition from a desert type ecosystem to a more lush forested
ecosystem, particularly with a species of tree called the Ponderosa Pine Tree, the Ponderous
Pine, which occurs through so much of the West.
So the Transition Zone is where you move out of desert and move into forest.
Same latitude, it's the same longitude, different elevation.
As you go higher still in elevation, you enter a life zone that Miriam called the Canadian
Zone.
It looks like you're in Canada.
Suddenly you're surrounded by spruce and fir, subalpine fir and angloman spruce.
It seems to be everywhere and lots of aspen too.
If you go higher still, you go into the Hudsonian Zone, named for the most northern reaches
of Canada that are basically around the boreal forest.
Trees here are gnarly, they're short, they're subject to wind pruning.
It's cold up there and it's windy.
And if you go higher still, you leave the tree zone entirely.
Tree line is behind you.
You stand atop a mountain on Alpine Tundra with scattered boulders, lichens, wildflowers,
the same kind of ecosystem you would see if you were standing well inside the Arctic Circle.
In fact, it's very interesting that for every 625 foot change in altitude, 625 feet, that's
equivalent to moving about 100 miles in latitude.
So as you're starting at the bottom of that mountain and going up for every 625 feet you've
moved in elevation, you have moved 100 mile equivalent in latitude.
And that's the life zone concept.
And better than anything else, it illustrates, I think, the overriding importance, I would
say, of climate in determining major ecosystem characteristics.
There are other manifestations of climate as well that I want to share with you.
One of them is the concept of the rain shadow.
Topological features, such as mountains, exert very strong influence on climate.
Consider what happens, for instance, in the Cascade Mountains of Oregon, for example,
if you were to travel from west to east.
Now, if you look at a map of Oregon, particularly a relief map, you can see that there's a very
rugged mountain range that runs through Oregon called the Cascades.
Start on the west side, say at Port Blunder, something like that, and move east.
You would begin in the cool, moist, temperate rainforest, an astonishing forest of tall,
Douglas fir trees, western red cedars, a lush understory of big leaf maple, various shrubs,
lots of ferns.
You'd think a dinosaur is going to come out and look at you at any time.
It's an amazing place, and I'll say more about it in a future lecture.
In all likelihood, however, it would be rain.
There's a good reason why they call it the temperate rainforest, and that's this.
The cool moisture from the Pacific Ocean rises, and as it rises, it cools even more, and
it starts to rain.
As these winds blow in off the Pacific Ocean, there's the Cascade Mountain Range blocking
them, forcing them upward, forcing whatever moisture is in them to cool down and rain,
and so it rains and rains and rains, and when it's not raining, it's foggy, and so these
forests are bathed and fogged.
That's what keeps the redwoods so big in California.
It doesn't rain all that much, but it does fog on them, and so that's a mountain effect.
In California, it's largely the Sierra Nevada's, but in Oregon, it's the Cascade Mountains,
so you're in the temperate rainforest.
If you ascend that mountain, if you go up an elevation, the trees will become shorter
and shorter, not because of the fact that there's less rain, because of the fact that
there's more wind.
More wind creates wind chill.
That creates an effect of pruning the trees, and finally, if you get up to the highest
elevations, there's very little in the way of trees.
So then you cross the mountain, you cross the Cascades, you ascend the slope, and you
go down on the other side.
What do you find?
Well, what you find first is ponderosa pine.
All of a sudden, the forest is drier.
Instead of Douglas fir and Western red cedar, you're finding tall, and I mean tall, ponderosa
pine trees with a wide understory, almost a park-like understory.
It's a very interesting forest to be in.
If you go still lower in elevation, you leave the ponderosa pines, and you get into a scattered
area of junipers and desert shrubs.
You get essentially into the Great Basin Desert.
So you've crossed the mountain, and on one side of the mountain, the western side, you
are in temperate rainforest, and on the eastern side of the mountain, you are in transition
zone, a transition life zone, and then you are in desert.
Now, let me tell you about how people can think sometimes.
I was on a bus trip at a meeting of the Ecological Society of America that was held in Oregon.
It was at Oregon State University, and I did the very ride I just described to you.
We took a bus of PhD ecologists and graduate students on exactly the trip I just described,
and when we got down on the eastern slope, we had lunch at a picnic grove, and a couple
of people came over to me, and the trip was only half over.
We were having lunch.
We were supposed to go to some other areas in the afternoon, and I said, what would you
say to talking to the guide and seeing if we could go back to where we were this morning?
Because it was raining then, and it's fine here now.
We should go back, and maybe we can get some pictures of that forest when it's not raining.
Think about the absurdity of that statement.
The only reason it was raining was because we were on the western slope of the mountain
where it always rains.
But when we were on the eastern slope of the mountain, we were in the rain shadow.
The mountain blocked the rain.
By the time the air crossed the mountain, it was devoid of precipitation.
All of it had dumped on the western side of the mountain.
So what was on the eastern side of the mountain was dry air, and that, again, is the importance
of climate in determining ecosystem types.
Finally, you get into the desert on the east slope of the Cascades, a sagebrush desert of
a great basin.
There's a marked difference between the east and west slopes of the mountain, and that's
due to the prevailing winds from the Pacific Ocean and how they carry moisture.
That's all there is to it.
Like I said earlier, it's not rocket science.
There is one other element to climate that I haven't mentioned so far, and it's one
that you really need to think about a little bit because it's been misrepresented for many
years to the general public, and ecologists themselves have finally come to understand
the importance of this variable.
I've talked about temperature, talked about precipitation.
Could there be other than that that would affect ecosystems in such a profound way?
Well, it's a four-letter word, and it starts with an F. It's fire.
Because the Earth's atmosphere is nearly 20% oxygen, Earth has fire.
Without oxygen to sustain it, fire can't exist.
In places where climatic forces cause frequent lightning, fire is quite simply an ecological
reality.
You would be surprised at how many places this includes.
From grasslands to various forests, even the tropics has burned from time to time.
Most of us associate fire, of course, with disaster, sometimes of a catastrophic nature.
I grew up in a time when everybody went to see the animated film Bambi, the Walt Disney
film.
I also grew up in the area of Smokey the Bear.
I kept looking at you with those big bear eyes saying, only you can prevent forest fires.
Well, sure, you don't throw lit cigarettes out of your car.
You don't leave campfires unattended.
But you do need to realize there's a difference between human carelessness and the fires that
may cause, and what ecological realities are, particularly with regard to the history of
the region.
The reality is many ecosystems experience regular fire.
This couldn't be any more clear than in looking at the adaptations of organisms that live
in those ecosystems.
Consider a plant called the longleaf pine, which lives in southeastern United States.
It lives in places like Georgia, Alabama, places like that.
It's named for its 18-inch long needle leads.
Longleaf pine has adapted the presence of fire to the degree that high frequency but
low intensity fire is essential for preserving longleaf pine ecosystems.
If it doesn't burn, it won't stay longleaf pine.
If it doesn't burn, oaks and other species less tolerant of fire will inevitably out-compete
and replace longleaf pine.
Colleges have done the work, they've done the experiments, and that's a fact.
Longleaf pine seeds sprout into plants that resemble dense grass clumps.
Most people wonder what that weird thick grass is.
It's a big clump, it looks like some little grassy space alien standing in the field.
The young plant is protected from ground fire by the unusually dense umbrella-like clump
of needle leaves.
And what happens is, above ground, the longleaf pine doesn't grow all that much, but below
ground it's growing like crazy.
The root system grows very rapidly and very deeply into the soil.
Once a long taproot is developed, a taproot is a thick root that stores a lot of energy
and also goes very deep into the soil, and that only takes between three and seven years.
The pine seedling, upon experiencing fire, grows taller very quickly.
The fire actually is a stimulus to the growth of the thing.
Now how could that happen if it wasn't for the fact that the plant has been subjected
to selection pressures from fire ever since it's existed?
Some pine species, such as jack pine, which grows in the boreal forest, have cones that
are termed serotonous.
That means that they tightly enclose their seeds until subjected to the high temperature
of a fire, upon which the cones open and literally pop the seeds out.
The pine seeds fall on the newly burned ground, and guess what?
After burning, all the minerals that were in that litter layer are just sitting there
in the soil, waiting for those little pine seedlings to use them.
Instead of the pine seedlings, thrive and grow very quickly.
Pines with serotonous cones are fire dependent for their reproduction, it's just that simple.
Without fire, ecosystems with longleaf pine and jack pine, as well as many other species,
will be replaced by species that are less fire adapted, but better competitors.
For example, all along the eastern coastal plain of North America, from the southern
states through Cape Cod in Massachusetts, or not for periodic fire, species such as
pitch pine and Virginia pine would be replaced by oaks.
You can see this happening in various places where fire has been prevented.
Recent studies suggest that flowering dogwood, which is a beautiful plant and occurs as a
naturally growing plant through much of eastern North America, is a common understory tree
in the eastern forest.
But it's declining, and studies suggest it's declining because it's infected by a
fungus called anthracnose, and the scientific name of this fungus is quite scary.
It's dyscula destructiva, dyscula destructiva.
The fungus is exotic to the United States, it's like many invasive species, it's calamity
for those things that are susceptible to it, and the dogwood has very little resistance
to it.
So why is it lacking the dogwood so much?
The reduced occurrence of fire, which was once common in the region, may be a factor
in the decline of the dogwoods.
As lack of periodic burning prevents the forest canopy, that's the thick layer of leaves
in the tallest trees, the periodic burning permits the forest canopy to grow thicker
leaves.
It's literally darker in the forest as a result of the fact that the trees are not periodically
subjected to burning.
This increases the moisture overall in the forest, and I'm trying to explain this so
you can see the connections here.
Lack of fire, the trees grow thicker canopies.
Thicker canopies mean the forest holds more moisture.
More moisture means the fungus can thrive.
So that's the key, perhaps, to what makes this fungus grow as prolifically as it does,
and attack the dogwoods like it does.
And the animals are also adapted to natural fire.
There's a beetle that is called pyrophilic.
What this beetle is, it's a kind of bark beetle.
It has the ability to detect infrared wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation, meaning that
it can sense heat from a fire at a distance of up to 50 miles.
So the whole thing homes in on fire.
It flies to the site of the fire, and there it deposits its eggs beneath newly burned
bark.
The burned bark is just perfect for the larvae of the beetle.
They hatch, and they're called beetle grubs.
They tunnel into the burned trees.
They feed in there on insects and other fungus, and they speed the decomposition of the charred
tree.
And so fire is a very, very natural component of ecosystems.
It's part of climate, really, because natural fires are started generally by lightning.
It's important to recognize the importance of fire overall.
We could say much more about it, but that'll do for now.
Well, we've been talking about climate, and it should be apparent from what I've said
that climate can change, and it changes at various scales.
Ever since we've understood something in the history of the Earth, you can see the
degree to which climate has changed for various reasons.
What's happening today?
Well, that's a long question to go into in the last few minutes of lecture, but I'll
give you a hint.
I did a field guide some years ago called a Field Guide to Eastern Forest.
And in that field guide, I tried to show the patterns of distribution of plants and animals
in different kinds of forests that we found throughout the East.
And to illustrate a typical southern hardwood forest, such as you'd find in, oh, say, Alabama
or South Carolina or parts of Georgia, I illustrated it with a variety of different trees and the
following birds, which at that time were highly typical of that area.
A bird called the Carolina Wren, that certainly suggests the South, another one called the
red-bellied woodpecker, one called the tufted titmouse, one called the cardinal, and one
called the mockingbird.
All of these birds were typical backyard forest birds of the so-called deep South.
Every one of these species breeds in my backyard in Massachusetts on Cape Cod today.
All of these birds, which would have been highly rare had they been seen on Cape Cod
just a half century ago, are bountiful there today.
These are what we call southern affinity species.
They are obviously animals which are adapted to a certain range of temperature that at
one point typified a different part of the country, or let's just say it has extended
beyond what it once was.
Now, it's not quite that simple.
You can make arguments that these birds have adapted to colder temperatures in northern
regions, and that may very well be true.
But other species, such as turkey vulture, which has nothing to do with little insectivorous
birds other than to eat their carcasses from time to time, and animals such as the Virginia
opossum, an animal which was once very much associated with southern latitudes, is now
moving more and more north.
When you have a group of ecologically unrelated animals, all moving north, it does suggest
that there is a climate change occurring.
And there are other examples of this as well, which I'll bring out in future lectures.
In our next lecture, we're going to look at biogeography and evolution.
We're going to tackle the question of what evolution might be, how it works, and how
it integrates into the concept of distribution of plants and animals from one part of this
ecological planet to another.
Stay tuned.
After the lecture, a student posed this question.
If climate has been continuously changing, why is it that people are sure that climate
change is caused by human activities?
That's a very good question, and it's still one for which we don't have a definitive answer.
Climate change today certainly does seem to be occurring, and there are many reasons why
we think that's the case, many of them ecological.
These range from the melting of permafrost and the Arctic to the melting of ice sheets
and the Antarctic to various other things, such as when caterpillars emerge in the spring
and certain temperate areas that are emerging earlier, migratory birds are returning earlier
than they traditionally do.
All of these suggest a general warming pattern in the Earth.
The question then becomes, couldn't this just be part of the natural cycle of Earth?
The answer to that is yes, it could, but it can't be denied that the atmosphere has also
been changed ever since the industrial revolution began.
As I'll explain eventually in the later lecture, the amount of carbon dioxide is increased
dramatically in the atmosphere, and carbon dioxide is, without any question, a greenhouse
gas.
Now carbon dioxide can certainly increase for natural reasons.
That's one of the reasons why climate has varied on Earth, historically, is because
the natural cycles of the Earth sequester or release carbon dioxide in different amounts
in different times because of different circumstances.
But when carbon dioxide is increasing dramatically, it should have the effect of increasing the
warmth of the Earth because of greenhouse effect.
One of the primary results of the industrial revolution has been to increase the amount
of carbon dioxide.
And so I think that's the principal reason why the suspicion is that anthropogenic activity,
if not being the cause of global warming, is certainly contributing to it.
