Eastern North America, as well as much of Europe and temperate Asia, has forests characterized
by broad-leaved deciduous trees.
The similarity among these forests can be quite striking.
Sycamores in China are scarcely distinct from those in North America.
That surprises a lot of people.
Why should sycamores in New York be similar to the ones in Beijing?
But this isn't a coincidence, but rather a historic result of continental drift, the
trees having evolved before the division of that ancient supercontinent of Laurasia, the
northern supercontinent.
Oaks, maples, sycamores, beaches, hickories all typically lose their leaves in synchrony
as summer turns into autumn.
Leaf drop is an adaptation for the impending winter when the air temperature will become
sufficiently cold that the soil freezes.
And that, as I mentioned in the lecture on the boreal forest, prevents the uptake of water,
makes it impossible, in fact, and so the trees become essentially dormant for the winter.
Leaf drop is a precursor to this physiological dormancy, permitting the trees to endure a
period of prolonged cold winter without catastrophic water loss.
Now you might be asking a fairly obvious question here if you really think about it, and that
is, how come the broadleaf trees, which are at a lower latitude than the boreal forest
coniferous trees, how come the broadleaf trees lose their leaves where the coniferous trees
keep their leaves?
Why can't the broadleaf trees learn a little trick that the coniferous trees learn?
It's a pretty deep question when you come to think about it.
It's not as easy to answer as you might think.
But we'll start with this.
The selection pressures imposed upon the living organisms, the plants, by the environment
in the boreal forest, fundamentally have to do with short growing season.
There simply isn't very much time.
And so if a plant sheds all its leaves in the boreal forest, it better have a way in
the spring of growing them back pretty fast in order to be able to make enough use of
photosynthesis in the short growing season that it has.
Thus, there's a selection pressure, which has resulted in some cases, not in all, but
in some cases in trees retaining their leaves.
But these leaves are not broadleafs, they're needleleafs.
No broadleaf tree in the boreal forest retains its leaves.
But broadleaf trees are there, like asthmans, they are deciduous, they lose their leaves.
So needles are a unique leaf adaptation to winter.
They allow the tree to hold on to its leaves, they simply go into this winter hardening,
and then in the spring the leaves are already present when the sun finally begins to shine.
Now what happens with broadleaf trees is they really have in a sense an advantage over needleleaf
trees.
You can ask another question, ecologists like to ask questions like this, and that is, well
given that those spruce trees are so successful, why don't they simply move down and live throughout
all of eastern North America?
Why let those oaks and hickories in?
The only answer to that is that oaks and hickories on average are probably better at getting
solar radiation with their broadleafs.
Broadleafs are flat, they're solar panels, they're wide, they're really good for picking
up sunlight.
The trouble is they're also subject to great evaporative water loss, they are very wide,
and when wind blows across them they can lose their water.
It wouldn't do for trees such as oaks and hickories and maples to try and retain their
leaves in the winter, that would be tantamount to killing them, they're going to be desiccated
and the plant will lose all its water and that will be that.
So leaf drop is really an adaptation that permits the plant to get through the winter
and the growing season is just long enough, certainly adequate for them to regrow their
leaves in the spring and still have adequate time to make plenty of photosynthesis happen
during the summer growing season.
So that's as best ecologists can do to account for that really profound pattern of, and think
about it, you have evergreen trees in the boreal forest, you have evergreen trees in
the tropical forest, but the evergreen trees in the tropical forest are broadleaved, the
evergreen trees in the boreal forest are needleleaved, and in between you have broadleaved deciduous
trees in the temperate deciduous forest.
A temperate deciduous forest typically contains a mixed assemblage of deciduous trees along
with a few evergreens such as hemlocks and pines.
In the southeast of North America, for instance, in places like Georgia and Alabama and the
Carolinas, there are many, many pine trees because in the thin sandy soils that characterize
coastal regions in particular, pines have a real advantage, so they're actually more
common in many areas than deciduous trees.
A typical deciduous forest is annually cyclic, the leaves opening gradually unfolding in
spring, in the summer the growing season the leaves become maximally large, that's the
time of the most photosynthesis.
Why are trees green?
What makes a tree green?
Probably most of you know it's chlorophyll, but what makes a tree green?
Well what is chlorophyll?
Chlorophyll is a molecule, it's a pigment molecule, that means it reflects a certain wavelength
of light.
What happens in photosynthesis is that chlorophyll is very critical in helping the plant to capture
some of the sun's energy.
And so what happens is that chlorophyll is very sensitive to certain wavelengths of visible
light, particularly red and blue.
Now you all know that you can take white light from a lamp or anything else and put it through
a prism and it divides into its various colors.
You can see this effect with a rainbow for instance, which is sunlight passing through
drops of water that function as a prism.
It turns out that if you look at the wavelengths of light as they compare from color to color,
red are the longest wavelengths of light and blue are the shortest wavelengths of light
in terms of the color spectrum.
It's possible for plants to use both red and blue light for photosynthesis, so they
absorb red and blue light.
They reflect green light.
Chlorophyll is a pigment that reflects green light.
So the appearance of plants green is an indication that they have chlorophyll and chlorophyll
is reflecting the light.
The curious thing is why are plants green?
It isn't really an adaptation in the sense of color at all.
They're green because they don't use the green wavelengths of light.
They're green because they absorb red and blue wavelengths of light.
And so what happens in the fall?
Well, what happens in the fall is that the plant genetically triggers its chlorophyll
to deteriorate, so the pigment molecule itself begins to break up.
What that does is expose other pigments, which have been masked underneath the green of chlorophyll.
Some of these are brown and some of these are yellow, and occasionally they even make
new pigments that are red.
And so the various colors, the various shades of red, yellow, brown that are associated
with leaves in the fall are pigments that remain or are synthesized after the deterioration
of the chlorophyll that was necessary for photosynthesis.
In winter, aside from scattered conifers, which retain, of course, their needle-like
leaves, the forest has a stark, almost foreboding look to it as bare branches are all that remains.
But that whole pattern is an adaptation shared in common by a lot of species of plants that
are not closely related to one another.
It's a kind of convergent evolution, if you want to call it that.
That's what deciduousness really is.
I mean, oaks aren't that closely related to hickories, but they're both deciduous and
both deciduous for the same reason.
Another characteristic of deciduous forests, which if you really look at them, you can
see fairly clearly, is that they're typically stratified in the fairly clear layers depending
on the heights of various plants.
There is, for instance, a canopy layer where the tallest trees are, and they tend to be
all about the same height.
Typically speaking, the canopy of a typical deciduous forest will be something like 60
to 70 feet tall.
Sometimes a little bit taller than that can sometimes get up to 80 feet.
Usually there will be what ecologists like to refer to as an understory or sub-canopy
of trees.
These are trees such as dogwoods and sassafras that typically don't grow very much taller
than 20 or 30 feet.
So now you have a layer of canopy trees and a layer below it of sub-canopy or understory
trees.
And then there'll be yet another layer, a shrub layer in many cases, of various kinds
of shrubs, viburnums, blueberries, huckleberries, rhododendrons.
It kind of depends on a combination of things, like how much acidity there is in the soil,
for instance.
Huckleberries really like acid soils, viburnums aren't quite as wild about it.
Then below the shrub layer, there's typically a layer of herbs or wildflowers and ferns.
And below that is what ecologists love to refer to as the litter layer, the area where
all of the leaves accumulate, the various fallen branches, leaves, etc.
It's interesting to note a temporal pattern in this layer, in this layering or stratification
of the forest.
And that's this.
Take a look at a forest in the spring, a temperate forest in the spring.
And you'll see that it turns green from the ground up.
What happens first is the plants nearest the ground start to turn green.
And then the shrubs start to open up.
And then the understory trees start to leaf out.
And only then do the canopy trees start to leaf out.
It's very interesting because the canopy trees can essentially afford to wait the longest,
can afford to wait until it gets the warmest and the days get to be a bit longer, because
they have the most direct access to the sun.
Once they leaf out, they're the tallest trees, their leaves are going to be facing the sun.
But the understory trees, the shrubs and the herbs should leaf out sooner to get started
growing because they're in essence adapted to take advantage of the reality of light
getting to the forest floor before the other trees leaf out.
So this all sounds very purposeful, like the plants got together and planned a strategy.
That's certainly not the way it happened, or at least not the way we think it happened.
More to the point, natural selection is what it is.
And any plant growing near the forest floor that began leafing out earlier and could tolerate
somewhat lower temperatures would have an advantage over plants on the forest floor that didn't
do that.
And so over time, selection selected for the basic pattern that understory plants leaf
out before canopy plants do, and we see that pattern very, very evident whenever we look
at a forest throughout the spring.
The temperate forest biomes represented in the northern hemisphere throughout most of
eastern North America, it's different in western North America, Europe, China, Japan,
all have temperate forests and they're all very similar.
There are also temperate forests composed of very different species of trees in places
like Argentina, southern Australia, and Australia, for instance, they're mostly eucalyptus trees,
places like Tasmania and New Zealand.
The key to understanding the temperate forest biome is growing season.
This is the number of days when conditions of temperature and moisture are favorable
for sustained growth, when the forest can become lush.
As you might expect, growing season becomes shorter in the northern hemisphere as you
move in latitude from south to north.
For example, the growing season is about 250 days duration in much of the deep south,
including Mississippi, Georgia, Louisiana, but it's short into about 200 days in North
Carolina.
It's about 175 days in duration in New York, everybody knows this who has gardens, and
up in Ontario it's only about 140 days, so compare 140 days with 250 days.
Still it's deciduous forest.
The most important variable of climate is temperature, which varies from high in the
summer months to often well below freezing for much of the winter months.
Precipitation throughout the temperate forest is less variable than temperature, but because
of the cold air, temperatures and winter, precipitation often falls as snow, and that
makes a big difference because it certainly prevents the forest from doing anything until
that snow melts.
Deciduous forest drop leaves in the fall, and thus there is a substantial buildup of ground
litter that is then worked on by decomposer organisms, but it's not worked on until the
following spring.
So there's a kind of lag between the time the leaves drop and the time they actually
start to decompose.
Ecologists have studied what they call the litter layer community, and it's very active
in mulching the leaves and releasing minerals that will enter the soil and subsequently
be taken back into the vegetation.
As I emphasized earlier, this is really the essence of recycling.
We can't forget that there are really two major components to ecosystems that absolutely
have to be there for these ecosystems to function.
One component is the producers.
There has to be energy brought into the ecosystem, otherwise there's nothing to sustain it.
But there has to be decomposers.
There has to be ways of taking your complex organic compounds that are the stuff of life,
that are the components of bodies, and disassembling them and making them re-available.
And that's what the microbes do.
That's what happens in this leaf litter community.
And it's not just microbes.
It's all manner of little insects, worms, and things of that sort.
Earthworms, for instance, are famous for their ability to rework soils.
So the leaf litter community is an essential component, especially the bacteria and fungi,
the microbial organisms, because these are the ones that will ultimately take the organic
material, break it down, and re-release these materials for, again, uptake by plants in the
process of primary production.
Notice I left out the consumers, the heterotrophs.
We aren't really necessary to that system.
We just couldn't exist without it.
But the two key components here are the producers and then the decomposers, the group that make
available the materials to continue the recycling process.
Now I talked a little bit about soils in the boreal forest.
Soils in a temperate forest are somewhat similar.
They tend to be acidic.
And let's talk about that a little bit.
I promise to say something about acid rain.
There's a northern temperate forest in a place called Hubbard, Brooke, New Hampshire, which
is a leader site, meaning long-term ecological research.
It's been studied since the early 1970s, and I'm recording this in 2008, and that site
is still being studied.
When you have that amount of time, you're working in real ecological time.
You gather a lot of data.
You learn a lot.
There are two things I want to share with you of many things that have been learned from
the study at Hubbard, Brooke.
One has to do with acid rain.
Acid rain happens because if there is acidity, excess hydrogen ions in the atmosphere, they
will come down with the rain.
The rain will actually be more acidic.
It will have, because of things like hydrogen sulfide and various other acids, nitric acid,
for instance, it will actually add hydrogen ions to the soil.
And when this happens, these hydrogen ions will start to combine with minerals that are
already present in the soil, and they'll form new compounds.
What happens is the hydrogen moves into the soil, liberates minerals from the soil, and
these minerals, in turn, wash away from the soil.
So what acid rain has the effect of doing is taking all manner of things, like calcium,
magnesium, et cetera, and providing a kind of chute by which this can just wash right
out of the soil.
So one of the concerns about acid rain is it's changing the nature of the soil by essentially
eliminating or reducing, I should say, some of the key important atoms that are present
in the soil.
Now, Hoverbrook studies provided great amount of data on that phenomenon.
Why is there acid rain in New Hampshire, where the Hoverbrook forest is located?
It's because prevailing wind patterns from the Midwest, where there's a great deal of
industry that produces the components of acid rain, tend to move from West to East.
And so by the time the rain occurs in New Hampshire, it's saturated with these acidic
components that got way back in Chicago and places like Indiana.
While I'm talking about Hoverbrook, I might tell you one other interesting study that
was done there, and that is they clear cut an entire watershed.
That is to say they cut all the trees down, cut all the shrubs down, expose the soil,
and watch what happened by doing very, very careful measurements of the outflow streams.
And what they found was that the presence of vegetation really, really is essential
to retaining minerals.
The degree to which mineral erosion occurred, the loss of critical minerals in the clear
cut area was very dramatic.
I could go into details about the various kinds of things.
You probably don't want to hear them.
But the fact is that clear cutting certainly does have an effect of losing soil fertility.
And one of the things that many people are concerned about on Earth today is the overall
loss of topsoil from agricultural areas, forests, et cetera.
Soil is a very complex thing.
It's partly alive.
It depends on ecosystems to protect it, indeed, to make it.
And when it's exposed to erosion, it erodes quickly, and it changes chemically in such
a way that it is less suitable for growing things after that process has occurred.
Let's now talk about the biodiversity of the temperate deciduous forest.
It's impressive.
It never really rivals the equatorial rainforest, but it's certainly impressive.
Permanent residents include many, many different kinds of plants, far more, well, considerably
more than you find in boreal forests.
But among animals, lots of migratory birds, nut consumers like squirrels, chipmunks, raccoons,
wild turkeys, blue jays, deer, skunk, foxes.
There's all manner of snakes and salamanders and things of that sort.
It's really quite a diverse system.
Vegetation diversity is very complex and deciduous forest.
I already mentioned the stratification of the forest into canopy, sub-canopy, shrub,
and herb layers.
In eastern North America, for instance, different regions of forest are dominated by different
tree species.
So there's kind of a patchwork of different forest types.
There's the maple basswood forest, the okikari forest, for instance, the northern hardwoods
forest.
In the southeast, the southern hardwood forest is a rich forest of species such as various
magnolias, Virginia live oak, common persimmon, pecan, red bay, pawpaw.
This species assemblages in very strong contrast to that of the northern hardwood forest that
you'd find around Hoverbrook, New Hampshire, comprised mostly of yellow birch, sugar maple,
American beech, and eastern hemlock.
Now these are both really deciduous forests.
Yes, hemlock is there in the northern hardwood, but it's largely deciduous forests of sugar
maple, beech, and yellow birch.
But they're just very different tree species composition because it's really a big range
of latitude and growing season that simply selects for different clusters of species.
The most species-rich area of any deciduous forest, and if you get a chance to go there,
I really recommend it, can be found in the Great Smoky Mountains.
In the Great Smoky Mountains of eastern Tennessee, it may be possible in something called a cove
forest to go out in the morning and identify over 30 species of trees in close proximity.
Species such as white basswood, Carolina silverbell, the very tall and imposing tulip tree, yellow
buckeye, and the ever-present sugar maple, and many, many others.
Only in certain tropical areas do you get a diversity routine of over 30 species of trees
in close proximity.
So the cove forest represent the single richest part of the, at least the deciduous forest
in North America.
Ecologists have really struggled hard to understand what sorts of factors determine the species
composition in various regions in the overall deciduous forest biome.
I mean, why should it be that things like sugar maple combines with yellow birch and
hemlock in the northern hardwoods, while to the south you have the trees, and I mentioned
as far as the southern hardwood forest, et cetera.
Why should this be?
What are the reasons for it?
Why should there be some places where beach and nape are in close combination, other places
where they're not?
Well one prevalent view was that such forest associations, as they were called, associations
among species, were really highly interdependent, perhaps evolutionarily determined, and were
held together by some kind of very strong interactions.
In other words, this would suggest that American beach and sugar maple were somehow forced,
determined to associate.
And it's interesting, particularly in Europe, a whole school of study which was called phytosociology,
that's sociology applied to plants, and as I said, it was largely started by European
ecologists, they struggled to find order among plant associations and to reveal what they
called rules of assembly, what would bring these species together.
In North America, an ecologist named Frederick Clements looked at this question hard and
tried very diligently to see order in the way forests developed from abandoned pastures,
for instance, the kinds of changes that occurred in the forest, what I'll talk about soon under
the general term of ecological succession.
So ecologists struggled to see patterns and order where they may not have been very much.
Other ecologists objected, they suggested the co-occurrence of such species was largely
coincidental.
The result of each species having similar physiological requirements, similar tolerance
limits and similar distributions.
In other words, if you're together waiting for a bus and there's an accountant next to
you and a biochemist next to you and a physician and a laborer, are you associating?
Are you there for any reason?
No, you're only there because you're getting the bus.
You have no other kind of relationship among you, but you have to be there because that's
the bus habitat.
So the argument from these opposing ecologists was that most of these different species of
plants are there coincidentally.
They have the same tolerance limits.
They have the same distribution patterns.
And this was known as the individualistic plant community.
And that indeed tends to be the view that modern ecologists have.
In other words, a lot of the order that we tend to see in nature may be somewhat superficial
and it may not mean any deep or profound underlying pattern.
Now I mentioned pollen profiles, I think in the last lecture.
And pollen profiles have shown us that following glaciation, the various species of trees have
recolonized in the North in patterns different, perhaps from what they were before glaciation,
and they certainly didn't come back together.
In areas that are today maple-basswood forests, the basswoods did not come back with the maples.
They didn't go sort of one branch locked in another branch back to where they used to
be.
These individual distributions accumulated over time, suggesting that there's really
no deep underlying meaning to the current distributions of species as they coexist.
Forests throughout much of Eastern North America were extensively cut during the years of European
colonization.
But these areas used for agriculture and pasture were largely abandoned beginning in the mid-1800s.
This is when the Midwest opened up, people were moving west, better soils were being
discovered for agriculture.
The Industrial Revolution provided the ability to make plows that would cut the thick Midwestern
grassland soil.
Talk about grasslands in the next lecture.
After abandonment, vegetation strongly tended to follow a generally predictable series of
changes.
Weeds, the common plants, wildflowers, and grasses of pastures soon gave way to various
kinds of shrubs, and then certain trees which were fast-growing colonizing species, and
these trees in turn were eventually replaced by so-called climax tree species, typical
of a mature forest.
This is a process that the ecologists came to call ecological succession, and it's been
the subject of a great deal of study.
But the bottom line on succession is not that it's any elaborate coordinated process.
What ecologists have learned is that succession results from numerous species, each of which
has evolved a unique life cycle that happens to be optimal at various levels of disturbance
and light intensity.
And so what happens is in succession, you have a temporal kind of changing of the guard.
What's good for ragweed this year won't be good for it next year.
There's no great plan underlying, and it's just a fact that is ragweed lives in the soil,
other things do, things change, and ragweed is replaced by a plant adapted to a somewhat
greater amount of shade.
That in turn will be replaced by a plant with adaptations to grow stronger but persist longer,
and so you have this gradual change from field to forest.
Biodiversity is strongly seasonal in deciduous forests.
Wildflowers and ferns evident only in the summer months, though they survive as root
systems below the ground during the winter.
Did you ever wonder where all those little wildflowers and things go in the wintertime?
They die back to ground level but they survive as root systems and they grow back pretty
quickly in the spring.
Pond animals such as frogs and toads simply go down into the mud and get dormant and hibernate.
Bird species and certain bats go through long annual migrations and they come back in the
spring.
And the great characteristic of the deciduous forest is the temporal wave of change that
occurs with the seasons, the wave of birds that return.
You have an annual bird migration that is correlated with the emergence of leaves because
with the emergence of leaves is the emergence of caterpillars.
And when all the birds come back, the thrushes, warblers, orioles, growths, beaks, when they
all come back, they're going to nest.
And what they need in order to nest is protein.
And so what they're going to eat are caterpillars.
Caterpillars are really bird food.
And caterpillars don't come out until the leaves emerge.
And so you have this temporal pattern of leaf emergence, then caterpillar emergence, and
then the birds come.
Do the birds have any effect on the caterpillars?
Well, yes they do.
How would you determine that?
Oh, it's not so easy but it can be done.
In areas both in North America and Japan, ecologists have succeeded in putting screens, kind of
cloth mesh, over trees.
Mesh that prevents birds from getting to the caterpillars on those leaves, but a mesh which
is still large enough to allow sunlight to penetrate.
So basically what ecologists have done is to protect the caterpillars from the predation
of birds.
And what ecologists have learned is trees that are so protected for the caterpillars,
the caterpillars do just great.
And in fact the trees get much more leaf damage than trees which are also covered with mesh,
but mesh which is big enough to admit birds.
So when birds come back from their wintering grounds and start to nest and lay eggs and
raise young, they're feeding their young on caterpillars.
And that is a top-down effect on keeping the forest healthy.
Because if those birds didn't exist, caterpillars would exist in numbers sufficiently large
to really significantly damage the leaves.
You can also see this in cases with exotic caterpillar species like gypsy moths, for example.
Gypsy moths were originally brought over to be silkworm moths.
They escaped from some place in eastern Massachusetts and they actually caused considerable damage
to oak forests.
Birds don't eat gypsy moths.
Gypsy moths are very well protected by a lot of little spines, hair-like things that they
have on them, and very few birds will eat gypsy moths.
Some do, most don't.
And where gypsy moths become abundant, the forest becomes stripped of leaves very quickly.
So ecologists have been able to determine that the rhythms of the forest with the emergence
of leaves, caterpillars, birds are in fact such that birds do exhibit a very strong, strong
top-down effect.
Essentially, I won't use the term controlling, but very strongly influencing caterpillar abundance.
This leads to an interesting point, incidentally, which is that with global climate change,
what is happening is that you have a loss of synchrony between the emergence of leaves,
caterpillars, and the return of birds.
Each of these entities is evolutionarily readjusting, if you will, to the reality of a different
amount of temperature, a warmer earth.
And so the synchrony that had evolved is being disrupted in places.
Birds are coming back too soon.
The caterpillars aren't out yet, because the birds are moving up through warm temperatures,
but the caterpillars, it hasn't been warm enough for them to come out yet.
So these are the kinds of things that ecologists are studying and measuring
in the course of trying to document and understand what seems to be apparent climate
change occurring in the earth right now.
Another thing that is happening in deciduous forest is, of course, this is one of the areas
where people live in great abundance.
Nobody who's a stranger to Eastern North America fails to realize that more and more houses,
shopping centers, shopping malls, things like that are going up.
The effect of all this, not only in North America, but many other places as well,
is what ecologists refer to as fragmentation.
What were once large tracts of forest were being broken up into isolated chunks of forest
considerably smaller from what they once had been.
What this does is act to isolate populations, and not in a particularly good way.
I'll just give you one example, although this is an area of great study in ecology now,
and you could almost do a course in fragmentation, but listen to this.
It's a study that involves a bird called the woodthrush.
The woodthrush is a long-distance migrant, meaning it spends the winter in South America
and Central America, and then comes north to nest in Eastern North America in the
understory of deciduous forest.
In fragmented areas where woodthrush is nest, they don't lay eggs that produce woodthrushes.
They, in fact, produce a different species of bird called a cowbird.
Now, how can they do that?
Well, what happens is woodthrushes lay their eggs, and cowbirds, which is a kind of black bird,
are what we call brood parasites.
They come in and surreptitiously lay their eggs in the nests of other birds.
They're young, hatch, and are very precocial, and they push out the other little birds that
are, in fact, the birds that auto-own the nest.
And so cowbirds are found in fragmented forests because cowbirds won't enter a large forest,
but they will come to a forest edge.
And the more fragmented a forest becomes, the more there is this edge effect.
And so cowbirds can find woodthrush nests, and they will then parasitize them,
and woodthrushes will end up raising more cowbirds than they will woodthrushes.
And this, of course, reduces the woodthrush population.
It's a fragmentation effect.
We can go back year after year after year and still find the woodthrushes in these fragmented
forests, even though they're not producing any young because they're raising mostly cowbirds.
Why is that?
It is because there are still areas of large forests that act as sources.
And these source forests produce a surplus of young that then colonize these fragmented
tracks that we call sink forests.
They're sinks because once the bird colonizes that, it ceases to reproduce.
It becomes, in essence, evolutionarily dead.
So one of the effects of fragmentation is to change the dynamics of populations,
such that there are some populations that are not producing at all and have to be continuously
supplemented by source populations that are reproducing and still dispersing young.
Well, that's just one example of what fragmentation does.
Fragmentation also increases predation rates and various other things.
But at this point, that's probably all you need to know.
From the fact that deciduous forests are constantly being manipulated by humans has
come a whole field of ecology called landscape ecology that focuses on how landscape patches,
like fragmented patches, for instance, interact to affect such things as biodiversity.
For example, if two woodlots are isolated by fragmentation, they essentially become forest
islands and each may be too small to support animal species that typically require large areas.
But if you simply allow a corridor to exist between these two forests,
that may change things entirely.
If you have a corridor connecting them, then the two isolated forests won't be isolated anymore.
Species will be able to move from one to another and they'll function as though they were a larger
unit. These are some of the things that ecologists are studying than temperate forests.
Well, we've talked enough about forests for the time being. We still have to talk about that great
tropical rainforest. But I'm going to save that one for the moment. Let's not leave the temperate
zone quite yet. In our next lecture, we're going to take a look at grassland and savanna,
two systems quite different from forests, but no less interesting.
