In this lecture, we're going to look at three unique coastal ecosystems.
One of them technically isn't all that coastal, that's the coral reef,
but we're going to include it for reasons that'll become apparent.
We're going to start, however, with looking at the salt marsh,
and then we're going to look at something that's rather similar to the salt marsh
in many ways, at least as far as ecologists are concerned,
which is mangrove forest, and then we'll look at the coral reef.
First, a salt marsh.
The marsh is defined as a wetland where grasses and sedges predominate.
Freshwater marshes are often characterized by such species as captails.
Well, we're not going to talk about those.
A salt marsh, as the name implies, is a coastal marsh where tidal influence is strong.
Consequently, the marsh is regularly inundated with salt water.
When you think of a salt marsh, it's getting fresh water from the land,
it's getting salt water from the tide,
so it's this back-and-forth kind of thing between fresh water and salt water.
Thus, a salt marsh has what we call brackish water.
It's waters containing variable concentrations of salt,
depending upon the degree to which fresh and salt water have mixed in the marsh,
and depending on the tidal cycle.
Salt marshes are usually in close proximity to estuaries,
and the combination of marsh and estuary is absolutely ideal habitat
for many kinds of marine organisms, particularly juvenile life cycle stages
of various fish and invertebrates that will later join the fauna of the open sea.
Thus, salt marshes have a valuable role in the conservation of marine fisheries.
They're often referred to as nurseries for the juvenile stages of various marine animals.
The ecological worth of salt marshes has never really been appreciated until relatively recently.
When colonists first came over to Massachusetts, for instance,
they used salt marshes as a source of hay to keep the animals alive in the winter,
so there was some use for it in any case.
But both on the east and west coast, salt marshes were really historically regarded mostly as havens for mosquitoes.
Consequently, they were extensively drained and converted into various human uses.
The so-called Back Bay region of Boston, Massachusetts,
now home to many thousands of peoples, very well named.
It was, indeed, once a bay, extensively bordered by salt marsh.
Those ecosystems were long ago, either filled or drained, or some combination of both.
A visit to Boston today would never suspect that much of the city, as I put in quotes,
was once a bay and a salt marsh.
The same story, incidentally, is true of much of San Francisco, California.
Salt marshes are characterized by grasses and sedges in a way they look like marine prairies.
These species are collectively called halophytes, H-A-L-O,
because they're highly tolerant of high concentrations of salt.
Salt marshes in eastern North America consist mostly of a kind of grass called salt marsh cord grass.
This spartina alternaflora is the scientific name,
and this is indeed one of the most physiologically hardy of any of the marsh grasses,
and thus it tends to dominate areas of very salty water where tidal influence is greatest.
Salt marsh cord grass grows very well under virtually anoxic conditions.
That means virtually no oxygen in the peat that's the real soil of the marsh.
It also tolerates extremely high exposures to salt.
No other salt marsh plant can survive under such oxygen limitation,
thus salt marsh cord grass is fundamentally able to persist by virtue of its physiological ability
to adapt to extremely low oxygen levels.
When in competition with other salt marsh grass species under controlled conditions
where the substrate is not anoxic, cord grass is easily outcompeted.
Think about this for a minute. This is something that happens occasionally in ecology.
Certain species avoid competition with other species by evolving a kind of physiological hardiness
that enable them to colonize areas where simply other species can't be,
and that's the case with salt marsh cord grass.
However, there is a closely related species called salt meadow hay.
This is spartina patins, and it's usually found growing at higher elevations beyond the alternate floor.
Their conditions are less severe. It isn't as stressful. There's more oxygen.
There is less salinity extreme.
Mixed among the spartina patins is a grass called spike grass,
and there is other species of plants called grass warts.
In other words, once you get away from the most severe area, you increase the diversity.
There is a zone that only is composed of a few species,
but there are more species there than there are in the spartina alternate flora area.
Beyond the salt hay zone, there's typically a zone of black rush followed by a zone of marsh elder,
and each of these zones tends to contain more and more different species of plants.
So you really see a pattern of zonation going from the extreme tidal exposure to a much more mild tidal exposure,
very much like the one I talked about in the last lecture concerning the inner tidal zone.
Salt marshes, though low in plant biodiversity, are extremely productive ecosystems.
Now, I told you that one of the reasons tropical rainforests are productive perhaps
is because there are so many species of organisms there that do photosynthesis,
but you can have a productive ecosystem with only a few species.
You just have to have a lot of individuals.
Think, for instance, of a healthy pasture of wheat or corn or something like that.
That's a single species, but it's highly productive.
In the case of salt marshes, conditions are ideal for high productivity.
You have good mixing of the waters, which brings in lots of nutrients.
You have exposure to sunlight, and so these are conditions which are needed,
and of course you have plenty of water to begin with.
In addition to salt marsh grasses and other plants, many minute forms of algae such as diatoms can be found in salt marsh.
If you look carefully at the mud of a salt marsh when the sun's shining on it,
you'll see that it has an odd color.
It takes on a kind of golden sheen.
If you scrape some of that mud up and put it under a microscope,
you'll see thousands upon thousands of little diatoms all photosynthesizing on the surface of the mud.
The combined photosynthesis of these tiny phytoplankton organisms,
as well as the marsh grasses, enhances the overall productivity of the marsh.
Now what happens to this productivity?
Well, the high productivity of the salt marsh supports many kinds of invertebrates,
and you know what they are, things like crabs, shrimp, mussels, snails, lots of different kinds of worms,
but it also supports large animals such as minks, raccoons, and numerous bird species such as herons, egrets, rails, and shorebirds.
Marshes are very valuable habitats.
Yes, there are many insect species, particularly such nuisances as mosquitoes and biting flies.
These also abound in salt marshes, but they're fed upon by various kinds of dragonflies
and many kinds of birds such as tree swallows and purple martens.
Fiddler crabs are common in salt marshes.
The males have one claw that is much, much larger than the other,
and that gives the group the general name Fiddler crab.
Looks like it's carrying around a kind of crustacean version of a violin.
Studies have demonstrated that Fiddler crabs have a mutualistic relationship with salt marsh cordgrass.
Works like this.
The extensive furrow network of the crab colony aids in bringing aeration to the roots,
as well as slowing down the accumulation of dense sediment, which is called peat.
That can limit the growth of cordgrass.
The presence of a stand of cordgrass acts to stabilize the mud, however, and that's a huge advantage to the crabs.
So without the cordgrass, the tidal currents would continually agitate the mud,
making it difficult for the crabs to have a stable colony.
So the crabs aerate and the cordgrass provides the stability,
and thus these two very different kinds of organisms are mutually beneficial to one another.
Now what happens to all of this photosynthate, this productivity that is grown each year in the cordgrass?
Salt marshes export much of their productivity to neighboring estuaries.
What happens is this.
The grasses that are the products of the growing season die back in the winter,
surviving the cold and ice of winter as roots in the mud.
This is very typical of many plants.
The above ground shoots are often sheared off by ice or tidal forces,
and they're moved by tidal action, eventually reaching the estuaries,
where they are colonized by a host of microbial organisms that form a food resource for larval invertebrates and fish.
So to sort it out for you step by step, it works like this.
A blade of salt marsh cordgrass dies in the autumn.
It is sheared off either by mud or the tides, and it washes into the estuaries.
There it's colonized by bacteria and various other small microbes.
They all eat some of it and take it into them.
Thus, even though the blade of cordgrass is largely cellulose,
very hard to digest by most animals,
once the microbes colonize it, they add a protein component to it.
And so then small fish and various kinds of invertebrates start to munch on the microbe-encrusted grass, the dead grass.
They start to take in the microbes as well as the grass getting protein.
And so what happens is that all this energy that has been taken in by the marsh in the course of the growing season
is released in very small pulses as that grass is decomposed
and moved through various digestive systems of creatures in estuaries and even in the literal zone of the open ocean.
So the marsh really fertilizes the coastal ecosystem.
And this is the great value of salt marshes with regard to their ecological function.
Salt marshes also act as natural sponges, absorbing nutrients which are recycled in the growing marsh plants.
There are some interesting interactions here as well.
Some organisms, such as the ribbed muscle, which is common in salt marshes,
actually are keystone species in concentrating nutrients that are then used by the salt marsh grasses.
The muscles are filter-feeding mollusks. That is to say, they take in water and selectively take things out of it.
And what they do is filter suspended particles such as plankton and various other tiny, tiny things.
And in doing so, they remove and concentrate nutrients such as nitrates and phosphates.
These are then deposited on the marsh mud in the form of compact things called pseudophiesies, for one of a better word.
And they're like small pellets of fertilizer. Many of the marsh plants can then use them, enhancing their growth.
Many marsh species, including various clams and oysters, also filter out and remove particles of pollutants,
things such as DDT, heavy metals, mercury, etc. This makes it dangerous to eat these.
In some marshes, there are many areas where clamming, for instance, is sometimes not possible because of either contamination by some pollutant
or something like red tide, which is contamination by a kind of phytoplankton that can cause illness.
Natural pollution products, such as toxins, produced by maniune algae, this is the red tide I'm talking about,
can bioconcentrate in marshes due to activities of filter feeders.
Marsh environments have been overlooked as having ecological value, but there are still extensive marshes along the east coast of North America
and various other places, also the west coast of North America.
And ecologists now recognize that economically marshes are really valuable because of the ecological functions they perform.
I'll make reference to the economic evaluation of ecosystems in the last lecture, so we'll pass on that for now.
Now, there's an ecosystem found in tropical areas that's very similar to salt marshes, at least in terms of how it functions ecologically,
and this is mangrove forests.
Mangroves are a diverse assemblage of coastal tropical tree species.
These are marsh grasses, these are tree species, but they all have in common that they have this tolerance for high concentrations of salt.
There are about 34 species of mangrove trees worldwide, and these are mostly distributed throughout the vast tropical Pacific regions,
though we do have them in the tropics in the western hemisphere as well.
Mangroves are not a taxonomic group any more than any salt marsh plants are, but they instead represent many plant families.
What they have in common is that they are all adapted to withstand the physiological stress of being immersed in high concentrations of salt water.
So when we talk about mangroves, it's not a family of plants, it's a group of plants from different families that all share this adaptation
of being highly tolerant of immersion in salt water.
Mangrove forests typify tropical coastlines, but they also may line rivers where there's a tidal influence.
In fact, in many areas such as Belize, for instance, in coastal South America, they go quite far inland in the rivers.
As long as there's some kind of salty influence, you'll find them.
Like salt marsh grasses, they thrive in high-stealing environments, but they're easily outcompeted by plants in low-salinity areas,
where otherwise they could survive.
In other words, you could plant a mangrove in many areas, and it would thrive.
But where it's in competition with other kinds of plants, if you don't have that high salinity, which essentially selects out those other plants,
you're not going to have mangroves.
It's easy to outcompete.
There seems to be a trade-off in nature between the ability to tolerate extreme physiological conditions and the ability to compete effectively with other organisms.
You can have one or the other, but you can't have both.
In general, mangrove species are really excellent colonizers and quickly invade and grow in areas subjected to the effects of tropical storms such as hurricanes.
These are very much hurricane-typhoon-adapted species.
Most mangroves are small trees.
They rarely exceed 30 to 60 feet in height.
Some grow as dense shrubs, in fact, and mangrove root systems grow well in soft coral sands as well as thick anoxic mud.
The forest itself provides a complex coastal habitat for many species and animals, so let's look at some of those adaptations in more detail.
There's a species that's been studied well, the red mangrove tree.
This is an abundant species in tropical regions throughout the world.
It really gets around.
It typically has extensive prop roots, anchoring it firmly to the shifting sand.
These are roots which stick down like fingers reaching into the sediment.
These are quite unmistakable when you see them.
The roots are abundantly equipped with what botanists call lenticels.
These are small openings that admit air needed for the roots to survive when they're immersed.
This is a superb colonizing species.
Red mangrove seeds actually germinate while they're still attached to the parent plant.
That's really an unusual characteristic.
The seedlings look like long, pencil-like pods hanging vertically from the tree.
A lot of people think they're fruits and they're not.
Once dropped in the water, they can survive for a long period transported by the currents.
What happens is the mangrove makes these long, pencil-like seedlings
and then they eventually drop from the tree and then they just float.
They're like lottery tickets.
They're just floating around in the ocean to see what happens.
But as the seedling absorbs seawater, it soon floats vertically rather than horizontally.
It starts to orient vertically, the top of it kind of bobbing around.
And the very base of it now sticks some inches down in the water column.
Now, when the water column washes up against some mud or something like that,
that's just what the plant needs.
It immediately starts to grow roots to anchor it.
So red mangroves typically form dense stands on exposed sand and mud flats.
They're the first colonizers in such areas.
They also can grow on coral reefs as well.
Other mangroves follow them in colonizing.
Once the red mangroves come in and kind of stabilize a mud bar,
then other kinds of mangroves will begin to move in that are somewhat less effective colonizers.
But once you get a stable substrate, they can exist.
Black mangrove, for instance, often grows densely in thick anoxic mud.
It manages to secure sufficient oxygen to allow its very shallow root system to survive.
It does this through the help of what are called pneumatophores.
These are odd vertical shoots that are coming off the root system.
It looks really strange.
When you walk into a black mangrove area, you begin to wonder,
what are those strange little stiff worms sticking up all over the place?
And you find out they're really these pneumatophores of the roots.
The prop roots of mangroves like the red mangrove, for example,
provide absolutely excellent habitat for many kinds of marine animals.
If you snorkel in the warm waters around the roots of mangroves,
you'll be really pleasantly surprised at what you see.
Attached to these roots are various sponges, sea anemones,
odd invertebrates called tunicates, various kinds of mollusks and worms.
And then there are lots of fish.
The fish kind of poke in and out among the mangrove roots.
There are crabs there as well.
It's really a diverse ecosystem.
Many species of coral reef fish spend part of their juvenile life cycle
among mangrove forests.
This is a really rich area for them to feed.
And in this manner, mangrove swamps function like salt marshes and estuaries,
providing nurseries for juvenile marine animals.
Similarly, and importantly, mangrove leaves, which are thick and waxy,
eventually drop onto the sediment or directly into the sea,
and there they provide another essential energy source.
Just like what happens with the remains of the Spartina grasses,
the same thing happens with mangrove leaves.
They're colonized by whole hosts of organisms fed upon,
and that energy that was fixed in the coastal mangrove swamp
is slowly dissipated into the food webs of the coastal areas.
Red mangrove is highly productive.
Other photosynthesis is so high that it can add up to 8 grams
dry organic matter per square meter per day.
That's a lot.
And as I said, this productivity is utilized in the way I described
by it slowly being released when the leaves are dropped into the water
and slowly are colonized and decomposed.
So mangroves, like salt marshes,
are considered to have very high ecological value.
It's so regrettable that throughout the world's mangrove forests,
these forests are being cleared more and more
by such activities as dredging, channeling, or cutting as a source of wood.
Huge tracks of mangrove forests were destroyed during the Vietnam War
by spraying with herbicide.
Other tracks of mangrove forests are removed for aquaculture,
for shrimp farming, and I'll say more about that in the final lecture.
But suffice it to say for now that mangrove forests are ecologically quite valuable.
And what I mean by that, they're valuable in the sense that humans understand value.
They actually add to the potential for harvesting fish in coastal areas.
They have real economic guts, so to speak.
And so this means that we need to pay more attention to the loss of mangrove forests
throughout the world.
Well, I mentioned coral reefs, and now it's time in the remaining minutes of the lecture
to turn our attention to the coral reef ecosystems.
Coral reefs are found throughout clear marine waters of the world's tropics.
They're kind of the marine equivalent to the tropical rainforest.
Among the oldest ecosystems on earth, coral reefs,
though not with the same assemblage of species found today,
have existed virtually since the Cambrian period over 500 million years ago.
Reef organisms are among the most abundant in the marine fossil record.
Today, coral reefs support the highest species richness of any marine ecosystem.
Like their terrestrial counterparts, the tropical rainforest,
coral reefs support myriad species and accomplish very high rates of photosynthesis.
Reefs are both diverse and productive.
All coral reefs are combined to clear tropical waters.
Cool water or sediment deposition will soon kill coral reefs,
and there are many places in the world right now where coral reefs seem to be in decline,
sometimes bleaching, dying, and reasons for that are possibly to do with climate change,
but there are other factors as well.
Most coral species live in Indo-Pacific waters where over 700 species can be found.
In comparison, Atlantic coral reefs are much less species rich with only about 60 species of coral,
not 60 compared with 700.
How do you explain this difference?
Well, the difference in species richness between the older and larger Indo-Pacific tropical oceans
in the Atlantic and Caribbean is true of fish as well,
so it would ever cause this with coral species, also caused it with fish.
There are about 500 fish species in the Bahamas.
There are about 2,000 fish species in the Philippines,
and about 1,500 in Australia's Great Barrier Reef.
Now remember what I said about tropical rainforests.
It has an area that is large, and if it's old enough, it can accumulate species.
The Pacific is an older and larger ocean,
tropically, than the Atlantic,
and that may be reflected in the greater diversity of corals and the greater diversity of fish
that has evolved in this region.
This combination of larger area and a longer time to accumulate species may apply here.
Now what is coral?
Coral is actually a kind of animal, and it's related to sea anemones
and somewhat more distantly to things like jellyfish, that kind of thing.
Corals are part of the phylum Nedaria, sometimes called selenirata.
These are little stinging things known for their tentacles that possess stinging cells.
All reef corals are colonial, growing together in complex matrices
that are composed mostly of calcium carbonate, which is secreted by the animals themselves,
so they make their little houses.
The reef structure is also augmented by algae that secrete calcium carbonate,
and in the Indo-Pacific, giant clams.
Giant clams are remarkable looking things.
They don't occur in the Atlantic, but they're these huge mollusks that are embedded in coral reefs throughout the Pacific.
So what a coral animal is is a little cup-like animal, a polyp,
with little tentacles that captures minute organisms suspended in the water column
using these stinging cells that are part of their tentacles.
Now coral reefs have extraordinarily high primary productivity.
They fix about as much carbon as rainforests do,
relative to the amount of biomass or weight that they have.
Now you might have caught something here.
I said that corals are animals. Do animals photosynthesize?
Well, these animals, in a sense, do.
Why are coral reefs so productive?
That's the question.
Well, a close look within the coral matrix reveals the presence of numerous tiny, one-celled plants.
These plants have a kind of tongue twister of a name.
They're called zooxanthella.
If you dissect that name, what it means is these are a kind of one-celled algae
that are in very close partnership with an animal.
That's where the zoo comes from, and that animal is the coral animal.
The zooxanthella are related to various kinds of algae that can be found throughout the world,
but these are unique algae.
These are algae that are only found embedded in this coral matrix.
The plants and their coral hosts are very mutualistic in their interaction toward one another.
You see, it works this way.
Zooxanthella augment the growth of the coral colony and supply much carbohydrate
because they're very active photosynthesizers.
So it's really the zooxanthellae which fix the carbon which do the photosynthesis
which make the primary productivity of the leaf.
Now get this.
Measurement of the intake and output of carbon dioxide on a coral reef,
which is a way of measuring photosynthesis,
indicate that corals with zooxanthella, now not all corals have them, but many do,
corals with zooxanthella, which are known as hermitic corals,
are for all intents and purposes functioning physiologically as plants.
This means these corals with the zooxanthellae are taking in more carbon dioxide than they're giving out.
They're actually adding photosynthate.
So this is where the productivity of the reef happens.
It happens in the corals themselves because of this intricate interaction
with this kind of microscopic plant, the zooxanthella.
Now this can be seen very clearly if you look at the kinds of corals with zooxanthella.
If you're familiar with diving on a coral reef, you realize that corals take different shapes.
And in the shallow parts of the reef, you find many branching corals.
These corals remind you of plants.
They're branched very much like a plant is branched.
There's a good reason for that.
The corals that do have the zooxanthella, and these corals are not only functioning as plants,
they're shaped like plants.
So they're exposing a maximum area to the sun.
These corals sometimes have thin branches.
Sometimes they have very wide, flattened branches.
Those corals without zooxanthella, like the deeper occurring corals, don't have those kinds of shapes.
They tend to be ball-like, the brain corals, for instance, and various other kinds.
And so you can see in the very shape of the coral colony,
which is in part at least genetically determined by characteristics of the coral organisms themselves,
you can see quite clearly the fact that these corals, these colonies,
are really functioning in this close mutualistic relationship with this algae
to account for the high productivity of the reef.
And this high productivity in turn supports this high diversity of various kinds of fish and things like that.
And if you really want to see the fish of a coral reef, you need to look throughout the day.
If you go out in the morning and afternoon, you'll see a certain array of fish.
But if you go out at dusk and at night, a whole different array of fish appears.
It's a remarkable diversity.
Coral reefs are very structurally complex ecosystems,
and they're characterized by both horizontal and vertical zonation patterns.
Horizontal zonation is determined essentially by the intensity of wave action
from the windward to the leeward side of the reef.
Wave action just like wind blowing on a mountain really affects the shape of the coral colonies.
Vertical zonation, of course, is the result of depth and light penetration.
Even though tropical waters tend to be quite clear, you can only go down so far before you lose the light.
Reefs may form as fringing reefs, barrier reefs, or atolls.
A fringing reef is usually along the edge of a continent,
something like the... and barrier reefs are that way as well.
But fringing reefs also tend to surround islands,
and they're really built up by the corals and the shallow sediments where the islands rise up.
You can see this throughout the Pacific region.
In fact, Charles Darwin was the first one to describe this process.
Darwin was very, very interested in geology,
and when he studied reefs on the voyage of the Beagle,
he really characterized how reefs grow
and the patterns of difference between fringing reefs, barrier reefs, and atolls.
He particularly figured out what an atoll is.
A barrier reef generally runs parallel to a coastline,
and atolls are circular reefs that remain where an island once was,
but now subsided.
Darwin figured that out.
He looked at these rings of coral in the Pacific Ocean
and realized that these rings of coral had once been islands,
and since Darwin suggested that,
it's been very clear to scientists that this is indeed the case.
Ecologists have learned that corals are highly competitive with one another.
Just like the trees in the rainforest are competitive for light, so are corals.
Like plants, some corals tend to overtop and shade out other species.
This happens with plants as well,
and you have to think about corals as this unique kind of organism
that actually functions like a plant in many cases.
However, still other corals poison their competitors when they come in direct contact with them.
It's been observed that certain corals start to die as soon as they touch the surface of other corals,
and further work has shown that this is because there actually are toxins exuded by one onto the other.
Given all this biological competition, it may seem surprising that reefs
maintain such high species richness.
I mean, why shouldn't the corals eventually all outcompete each other and only one remain?
But the answer to why they remain so diverse is that they're subject to frequent disturbance
by wave, action, or storms, I mean hurricanes, typhoons, things of this sort.
And so what happens here is the game is always set back.
A coral might be outcompeting another coral, bingo, a hurricane comes along,
both corals are washed away, the area is recolonized,
and so the frequency of disturbance keeps the game of competition from coming to closure.
And in fact, we've seen a very similar process happening in rainforests as well.
One of the reasons rainforests have so many species of trees is because the disturbance rate
tends to be high enough that no one species can eventually outcompete all the others.
That same characteristic seems to be true of coral reefs as well.
Like rainforests, coral reefs are being lost due to various human activities.
Overfishing is a problem, chemical pollution is a problem.
Coral reefs are also negatively affected by El Nino events.
I haven't really described El Ninos, that's really beyond the scope of this series of lectures,
but nonetheless El Ninos can reduce coral reefs in various areas,
particularly significantly bad El Ninos.
And finally, the one problem which is being observed in coral reefs around the world
is this general pattern of bleaching, which seems to be due perhaps to temperature changes
that are occurring in the world's oceans.
The coral reefs is fascinating and diverse as they are bear watching,
because there are certainly some things that are happening now that don't go well for their future.
Well, I don't want to end on a negative note,
but the fact is that ecology does have a lot of concerns about what is happening in the environment,
and so we're going to look at that general issue in the final lecture of the series
where we look at ecology in relation to conservation
and what sorts of things ecologists are looking at currently.
