Here's a quiz for you. Who discovered the North Pole? And if you can do that one, who
discovered the South Pole? And if you can do that one, when was the North Pole discovered
and when was the South Pole discovered? Well, of course, they were discovered a long time
ago, but who was the first one to get there is what I'm really asking. In the case of
the North Pole, there is apparently some dispute. It was either Frederick A. Cook who
claims he got there on April the 21st, 1908, or it was Robert E. Perry who claimed he got
there on April the 6th or 7th, 1909. There's some dispute as to which is really the correct
account, and this isn't, of course, the deals with that, but it's interesting to note that
both of those arrived in the 20th century. The North Pole was such a foreboding and difficult
place that it's really hard to get to. South Pole's even harder. The first group to get
there was led by Rold Amundsen, who got there on December 14th, 1911. You might remember
Ernest Shackleton, who almost made it, but didn't quite make it. So the North Pole and
the South Pole are difficult terrain, that difficult ecosystem, one exposed to great
extremes of climate, and yet life exists, you could even argue in some cases it thrives
in polar regions. So in this lecture, we're going to take a look at polar ecosystems and
one particular ecosystem common to polar areas, which is tundra. So suppose you are standing
on the North Pole, you're either Cook or Perry, and suppose at another time you're standing
on the South Pole. What, besides the fact that the location is 90 degrees north and
90 degrees south, is the difference between them? Think about that for a minute. The answer
is that the North Pole is on ice. On the North Pole, you're standing on an ocean, but it
happens to be covered with ice, and at the South Pole, you're standing on a continent,
the continent of Antarctica. Because the North Pole is located on the Arctic Ocean,
a sea of ice is present most of the year, but that provides much more moderate conditions
overall than what happens when a continent is on the pole. Antarctica is perhaps the
most harsh, forbidding area on the planet. It is very difficult to survive the conditions
of the interior and Antarctica. Consequently, when you go there, you really don't see any
evidence of thriving ecosystems, at least not on land. You feel the wind, you see the
ice, but you don't see plants, and you don't see very many animals. The animals you do
see are fundamentally animals of the sea, of the marine environment, things like penguins,
for instance, and seals. Penguins come out on land to nest, penguins are birds, they
can't give birth in the water, and seals come out on land to rest, but you don't see anything
that's the equivalent of lemmings, for instance, or caribou, which you do see in polar regions
in the North. The North Pole is located on the Arctic Ocean,
it's a sea of ice, and because of global climate change, that ice is currently melting, so
things are changing on the North Pole. Antarctica, which was once part of the great continent
of Gondwana, is the coldest continent on Earth, completely surrounded by ice, but that ice
also is melting at a rather unprecedented rate. So both our polar regions have ecosystems
currently undergoing change, they may indeed be at the forefront of the global climate
change that many people think is a reality today. Though bitterly, bitterly cold, and
in the dark or in the twilight for much of the year, both polar regions, the Arctic and
the Antarctic, have in common that they are ecologically productive.
Let me recall for you what productivity is. It's the amount of photosynthesis that occurs
in a given area. Now, how can they be very productive? While they're not on land, even
the Arctic tundra, which has modest productivity during its short growing season, certainly
doesn't have productivity, certainly doesn't have as much photosynthesis in total as something
like a temperate forest, for instance, or even an average field of corn. But both of
these areas undergo very significant changes in the seas as the seasons change, and so
both the Arctic and the Antarctic are quite productive in marine ecosystems. The Antarctic
supports a thriving food web of things such that the Great Whales can come and feed to
their heart's content during the growing season in Antarctica. Likewise, they move to the
Arctic in the northern summer to feed because of the richness of the seas. So you have a
bit of an ecological paradox here. On land, the ecosystems are very low in productivity,
but on the sea, at least for that time of year when the sun shines on the sea, the oceanic
food web is a thriving food web far, far more productive than any oceanic food web in tropical
waters, for instance, with the exception of coral reefs. Ocean currents bring up essential
chemical nutrients because the seasons change. Seasonal change changes the air temperature.
Air temperature changes the water temperature. It stirs it up, and so nutrients that have been
out of reach of the organisms come up to the surface at the same time. The sun is there.
That produces a mass of algae. That, in turn, produces a mass of phytoplankton,
and that supports a very rich ecosystem. That's why there are so many penguins and things like
that down in Antarctica. And incidentally, if you ever see any film that depicts penguins in the
Arctic, somebody did something wrong because the northernmost penguin is the Galapagos penguin
that lives equatorially on the Galapagos Islands. Penguins are a southern hemisphere species that
are common to the seas around Antarctica and around South America and Australia and places
like that, but there are none of them north of the equator. The food web in the Antarctic and
Arctic waters is so rich that it supports a great many different bird species, mammal species,
as well as the various marine species such as fish and invertebrates and things of that sort.
Again, and to reiterate, it's quite a contrast between what happens on land and what happens on
water. It speaks to what productivity really is. For a short time a year, all the ingredients, water,
minerals, sunlight, are available in the surface waters. And the organisms that live in those
surface waters, the phytoplankton, which are tiny one-celled plants, you can sort of see them
when you look at the water. The water has a little green tinge to it, but if you have a microscope,
you can really see them. And you can see the tiny shrimp-like animals that feed on these phytoplankton
and in fact whales feed on a kind of crustacean, a shrimp-like crustacean that's called krill.
Krill often have red pigment in them and they color the water red because they grow in such
enormous populations when they feed on the rich phytoplankton that for a short time each year
characterizes these waters. So the first thing to know about polar regions is that the growing
season is very short, but it has a far different outcome on water as compared with land. In the
seas, the growing season is extremely rich, results in such a productivity that you have many kinds
of fish, whales, etc. supported on land, a very different story. The growing season on land is
short and in extreme situations, as are found in anterior Antarctica, virtually no plants exist.
You can walk over the ice of Antarctica mile after mile after mile and not find anything, no
plants. But there is one kind of ecosystem found not only in the high Arctic, I'm not saying Antarctica,
but high Arctic, but also at high elevations on mountains that is permanent and diverse and is
well adapted to climatic extremes of wind and cold. This ecosystem is called tundra. Now suppose
you're standing in New Hampshire at an elevation of about 5,300 feet atop Mount Washington,
or suppose you're visiting Rocky Mountain National Park in Colorado, maybe you're on Trail
Ridge Road, which goes up to an elevation of about 11,000 feet. Or perhaps you're wandering along a
straight gravel road leading out of Dead Horse, Alaska, well inside the Arctic Circle. This is
the road that the Alaskan pipeline is on, or maybe you're just wandering around lost in Northern
Siberia. I don't recommend that. Regardless, in each case you would be on tundra. Tundra is the
biome that is found in the coldest and often the driest places on earth where conditions are sufficiently
severe so as to prevent the existence of trees except in extreme dwarf form. How severe can it be?
Well, let's look at Mount Washington, for example. The record temperature at Mount Washington for
cold is minus 47 degrees Fahrenheit. That's minus 47 degrees Fahrenheit. On average, Mount Washington
gets 256 inches of snow each year, the maximum being 566. The mean wind speed on Mount Washington
is 35.3 miles per hour. That means under normal conditions there are gale force winds. And under
extreme conditions, and by this I mean every three days or so, there are hurricane force winds that
are recorded. Now, why am I telling you this? Well, imagine you're living there permanently.
This is the climate. This is the environment that you adapt to.
Vegetation does live there permanently and is adapted to that climate. The vegetation on Mount
Washington as well as other areas within the tundra consists of lichens, mosses, grasses,
and wildflowers, as well as a few scattered shrubs and very little else. So this is kind
of a one-dimensional kind of ecosystem. It looks like a big rug with rocks poking out here and there.
There's no complexity to it that's particularly obvious, and that's because everything is down
close to the surface. Everything is flattened, prostrate, growing around rocks, sometimes over
them, but very, very flat. This doesn't mean that these things are ephemeral. Lichens,
it can be among the oldest organisms. They can live for many years. The various wildflowers
that are found there are not annuals. They're perennials. They flower. They go to seed,
and then next year they do it all over again. So these things are actually very well adapted species
to this particular environment. And what environment is it? Well, tundra is open and
windswept and in a climate that's very, very dry such that only a protective blanket of winter snow
will help the plants to survive that long period of time when the sun is basically
not functioning in that system because it's on the other hemisphere. In many places in the tundra,
snow is relatively rare, and I'm speaking about the northern tundra, the arctic tundra. This is
because there's simply not enough moisture in the air to produce snow. It's so cold that there's no
evaporation of water off of the ground in order to produce snow. Organisms of this biome probably
endure the worst weather conditions and enjoy the briefest growing season of anywhere on earth.
Latitudinally, the tundra biome, which is named arctic tundra, occurs generally north of the
arctic circle, which is roughly 66 degrees north latitude. Low tundra is tundra where the tundra
mixes with boreal forest. I told you in an earlier lecture that biomes are not sharply segregated.
There are ecotones, that is to say transitional areas from one biome to another. And so low tundra
is where tundra mixes with the boreal forest, and that begins at about 72 to 73 degrees north latitude.
So if you go up into northern Canada or Alaska, you can really see this transition. You see the
trees becoming smaller, more gnarled, and then eventually you look around and there really are
no trees anymore and you're standing on tundra. Tundra exists as a band around the northern
most of the world's continents, and it's generally similar in North America and Eurasia. In fact,
many of the same species occur in both places. And as I mentioned earlier, talking about Mount
Washington, tundra can also be found above treeline at the summits of tall mountains.
Montane tundra, mountainous tundra, is usually called alpine tundra. So we distinguish here
between alpine tundra and arctic tundra. If arctic tundra is latitudinally based, alpine tundra is
altitudinally based, elevationally based. As I mentioned earlier, tundra is highly limited
in Antarctica. You really don't look for it there. Antarctica is just too severe on land.
Obviously, tundra regions are cold much of the year with a markedly short growing season.
In the case of arctic tundra, temperature is affected by the low angle of solar radiation.
This means that the sunlight is not concentrated but spread out. And so even during the growing
season, it doesn't get very warm. In mid-summer, temperatures only reach about 15 degrees centigrade,
which is pretty low. In the case of alpine tundra, exposure from elevation tends to keep the
temperature low, even though the angle of solar radiation may be much more direct.
After all, in Colorado, for instance, or Mount Washington in the summer, the sun is shining
fairly directly on the mountains. The mountains are high and windswept, and that alone keeps the
temperature cool. Remember those wind speeds on Mount Washington. Wind speed generally is
frequently high, especially in the Arctic, where it can routinely reach 65 miles an hour. You don't
want to be standing out in that. It's interesting that most of the precipitation in alpine areas
and arctic areas is in the form of snow for most of the year. But perhaps surprisingly,
as I mentioned earlier, the arctic snowfall amounts tend to be rather small. Precipitation is
sufficiently sparse that arctic tundra is fundamentally a desert. And again, this is because
it's cold. It's simply too cold to evaporate moisture in any amount that would provide for a
great deal of snow. Now, in comparison with that, alpine tundra areas are different. Alpine
tundra areas experience considerably more precipitation because they're lower in latitude.
Think of how much snow, for instance, accumulates on the Sierra Nevada mountains in California in
the course of winter, the same with the Rocky Mountains in Colorado. The most notable characteristics
of arctic soils have to do with their permafrost. Permafrost makes a real difference. And what
permafrost means is it's soil that is permanently frozen just below the surface of the ground.
This prevents its use by plants. This is one of the reasons roots from trees can't penetrate. It's
one of the reasons most of the plants live a very shallow existence on the surface.
In summer, the very upper levels of the soil thaw enough so that that moisture that's provided
can be rapidly sucked up by the roots of the plants, the various mosses and wildflowers
that grow there. Because of the thawing and refreezing of the upper levels of the soil,
there's an intrinsic instability in arctic soils. And this is an instability that produces
an interesting result. Because the soils are constantly freezing and refreezing, what happens
is the formation of what ecologists call hummicks, elevated areas that take the form of polygons.
And anybody who's ever flown over the arctic tundra or has seen films of the arctic tundra from
the air sees this striking geometric patterning often over very wide areas. And this is simply
a result of permafrost. Polygons form from the constant thawing and freezing and thawing and
freezing of the upper layers of the soil. This is a process that eventually sorts fragments of rock
from the smaller rubble depositing the larger fragments at the borders of the polygon,
which itself may be several meters in diameter. In New England, for instance, rocks are still
coming up in the winter from the soil because of freezing effects, rocks left over by glaciation.
In the arctic, what the polygons do is sort out the patterning of the rocks, making their own little
rock walls around the polygons. And the polygons themselves are the areas where all the plants
grow. Alpine tundra soils do not usually experience permafrost. It's relatively rare. It's just that
the growing season is a bit longer there. And the soils themselves are generally young, having
been created by the rising mountain range. Mountains themselves are geologically active if
they're high, and so they simply don't have enough soil for permafrost to be the case,
nor are they really cold enough. The soils on mountains are typically very rocky with lots
of gravel. Large rock fields called fell fields are common. These fell fields, incidentally,
are excellent habitats for cute little creatures like marmots and pikas.
In general, and perhaps surprisingly, the biodiversity of both alpine and arctic tundra
is not all that low. Sure, it's low compared to some other ecosystems, but it's rather remarkable
how many organisms have adapted to live under these severe climates. And we're going to talk
about some of those organisms by way of example. But generally, the biodiversity of the arctic
region is lower than the biodiversity of any other region. There are fewer species of plants,
fewer species of mammals, fewer species of insects. No, there are no snakes or lizards,
those are ectothermic or cold-blooded animals, and they simply can't live up there for the
short growing season and then tough it out for the rest of the year. Ecologists have long recognized
that there's something they call a biodiversity gradient. Biodiversity, which means the richness
of species, the number of species, say, per square mile or hectare or something like that,
is by far highest in equatorial regions. It becomes progressively lower as you move away from
equatorial regions either north or south. And so logically, by the time you get to the polar regions,
there's not nearly as many species. But why should that be? Ecologists are not in uniform
agreement as to what the answer to that may be, but I'll suggest one thing. This is too hard to
evolve species. I think it's remarkable there are the number of species that there are in these
very challenging areas, but it's very difficult to cope with the physiological realities that
are imposed upon you, an animal or a plant, by these kinds of severe climates. But the region is
inhabited, inhabited with a surprising number of diverse life forms. In Arctic tundra, the presence
of really high winds in a shortened, contracted growing season, and incidentally, the growing
season is at most 100 days and usually a lot closer to 60. That's barely two months that plants have
to do their thing. That selects, as I mentioned earlier, for low prostrate plants, literally
lying low to minimize the evaporative water loss that they're going to be exposed to. The more
high a plant grows in high wind, the more desiccated it's going to be. Because as plants are exposed
to wind, they lose water. So by being prostrate and being close to the ground, they minimize that.
Many of them have little hairs on their leaves. They look like little hairs that breaks up the
pattern of wind blowing over them. They're called cushion plants. They really just kind of hunker
down. And that minimizes their evaporative water loss. That's a very general adaptation
among plant species that live in tundra areas. Many of the wildflowers, as I mentioned, are what
we call perennial. That means that they live a long time and they flower each year. Some of them
are called cushion plants for the shapes they have. They look like little pin cushiony type things on
the rocks, and the very shape of them being, as I mentioned, adaptations for the reality of the
climate. There's also something that's a very important food source called reindeer lichen.
Reindeer lichen is, and it's true that it is eaten by caribou and reindeer, is a kind of plant which
is a combination of fungus and algae that grows up in twisted little stalks that are abundant
over rocks in many areas. It contains enough nutrients and grows sufficiently densely that
it actually does provide good food source for a lot of the animals that live there. As far as trees
are concerned, certain species of willows and birches manage to persist even in tundra areas,
but they're dwarf. They look like little shortened trees. They look more like shrubs. You wouldn't
really take them to be trees when you first look at them. In wet areas, sedges dominate. Sedges are
similar to grass, but they're more hearty. These vegetation patterns are also generally true of
alpine tundra. In fact, many of the plants found in northern Alaska can also be found in various
mountain ranges in alpine tundra. How they got there is another question. It's notable that
numerous species, and I mean numerous species, of perennial wildflowers are found in the Arctic,
as well as alpine tundra. Well, enough about plants for the moment, although we'll get back to them.
Animals also abound during the growing season in the Arctic. You've probably heard of lemmings
and lemming cycles. Lemmings are fairly small rodents, although as rodents go, they tend to be
fairly husky. They're related to voles. They have little football-shaped bodies and little short
tails, and lemmings are famous because of the repeated cycles of abundance that they go through.
Generally, lemmings cycles occur about every four years, and nobody quite yet knows why.
It's an interesting thing that many species of animals cycle in population density
in northern latitudes. Lemmings cycle, so do things like links and hair. These things go through
kind of a feast-fam and population pattern, and the regularity of it is striking to ecologists.
As I said, in the case of lemmings cycles, it tends to be about every four years.
The lemmings are really important animals because they, along with arctic hairs, serve as very
important food sources for a surprisingly diverse group of predators. Things like wolves, arctic fox,
grizzly bear, snowy owl, and a kind of hawk called the rough-legged hawk. It's called the
rough-legged hawk because it's got feathers all the way down its legs, making its legs look very
rough. Feathers obviously protect the legs from getting too cold. In addition, during that very,
very short growing season, the arctic provides a magnificent habitat for a lot of species of
shorebirds. Now, shorebirds are things like sandpipers and plovers. These birds have an amazing
migration. They migrate from breeding areas in the arctic to wintering areas as far south as southern
Argentina, and so they literally fly from one end of the globe to the other, wintering in the south
and flying all the way to the north for a very short growing season. Why do they do that? It's
because at that time, when it is warm enough to provide wet tundra habitat, that's also a great
flush of mosquitoes and other insects. And so when these birds come north the nest, they cryptically
locate their nest and eggs, hopefully so that, well, I shouldn't say hopefully, I don't know if birds
hope, but they certainly are adapted to locate their nests and eggs such that they're difficult to
find by predators such as arctic fox and various other things. But what birds really need to do
to raise young is to provide them with a great deal of protein, and with the great insect flush
that occurs early in the growing season, they have the protein to do that. So an amazing number of
long-distance migratory birds, not just sandpipers and plovers, but things like loons, grebes, and
various species of ducks and geese all crawled into this habitat for the short time of year.
You go there in the middle of winter, you won't see any of them. You go there in the middle of
summer, and it's absolutely thriving. Of course, you'll be very busy swatting mosquitoes, but the
mosquitoes are the things that the birds depend on, and other insects. There are many, many kinds of
insects that have aquatic larval stages that the birds also eat. Herds of caribou graze on the
tundra, along with the shaggy musk oxen. And as I said, the insect show is something to behold,
though a lot of people really don't enjoy it when it's mosquitoes eating them.
Let's talk about these lemming cycles for a minute. What causes them? Ecologists have
tried to figure it out. What is it actually? Well, literally, about every four years or so,
lemmings become very abundant. So abundant, you can't miss them. Now, like the tundra they live on,
lemmings are circumpolar. So they've been known in northern Europe for some time. How abundant
do they become? They become so abundant that if you look into the history of the region, you find
there are actually exorcisms in towns to try to get rid of lemmings. There are eyewitness accounts
of lemmings running through the town and literally climbing over sleeping cats. The cats, having
killed so many, they're totally satiated from eating them and they don't give a damn anymore.
Lemmings become really, really abundant. What causes this? Why should they go through these
cycles? What ecologists initially thought was that predators, like the arctic foxes, wolves, etc.,
simply eat down the population of lemmings, and then when they eat down the population of lemmings,
they don't have anything to eat, so their own populations suffer, and that takes the heat
off the lemmings and lemmings get busy being good reproducers and bounce right back. For years,
it was thought that that was about the only explanation, although a number of ecologists
creatively invoked cycles of sunspots and things like that as possible effectors of the population
variation. What seems to be the case may be a little bit more complicated. When you think of
something like the arctic fox eating a lemon and you imply that the arctic fox controls the
lemming population, that's what ecologists call a top-down effect. In other words, from the top
of the food chain, there is an effect generated toward the bottom. But there's another alternative,
and that is, suppose the plant food changes from being very rich to not so rich. Suppose the minerals
in the plants actually change such that the lemmings aren't getting the vital nutrients that
they need. That's a bottom-up effect where the plants are affecting the next level in the food
chain. The best we can tell now is that the lemmings go through essentially a combination of top-down
bottom-up effects. They do have a tendency to eat certain plants, which once those plants aren't as
abundant negatively affects lemming populations, and at the same time they are heavily preyed upon.
So it may be that lemming cycles are a combination of two different factors acting on them from two
different directions. They certainly have affected the evolution of their predators.
Consider the big white owl, the snowy owl. You might have seen it in Harry Potter films.
The snowy owl nests in the arctic, and it lays anywhere from zero to 16 eggs,
depending on how many lemmings are around in a given year. Now, how can it reproduce with zero
eggs? Well, it doesn't. Snowy owls are faculative reproducers. In years when lemmings are really
scarce, they simply don't reproduce. In fact, what happens in those years is snowy owls erupt.
They fly away from the arctic, and they fly all the way down over the boreal forest, and in fact,
you can see them in the lower 48 states. Not in Florida, but you can see them in Massachusetts
and Pennsylvania in places like that. When snowy owls lay up to 16 eggs, it means that there are
lots of lemmings around. So they adjust their reproductive behavior. What ecologists refer
to as their clutch size, the number of eggs they lay, they adjust that each year to the foods available.
And so the lemming and snowy owl are just two examples of how organisms have adapted to the
realities of life in the arctic. The thunder is fragile. This is because the growing season is
so short, and it requires many years for the vegetation to recolonize. It's something
destroys it. This is one of the reasons ecologists are concerned with overuse of areas in the arctic,
especially places like the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Now, when the Prudhoe Bay pipeline was
built, the one that goes from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez, great care was taken to try and ensure
that there would be minimal disruption to the environment and by and large, that has worked
successfully. What will happen in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in terms of potential
oil drilling remains to be seen, but it should be noted that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge
is one of the most pristine areas of arctic tundra, where there's a very, very high density of
breeding animals. And so any use of that should be done with the greatest of care. And the final
point to mention is one I reiterated a bit earlier, and that is that arctic tundra is changing fairly
rapidly due to the melding of permit frost in some areas, and the melding of the arctic ice pack
seems to be related to a general warming trend in the climate that's occurring now.
In our next lecture, we'll get away from this cold windswept area and go down to an area a bit
less extreme, the zone of Christmas trees known as the boreal forest.
