I like birds. I like to watch different kinds of birds, and I like to keep a life list of all the species of birds that I see.
Now, suppose I want to see all of the 10,000 or so species of the world's birds. What would I have to do?
In one word, travel. I've seen parrots in the tropics, and I've seen penguins in the oceans off of Antarctica.
And those are simply two extremes. The Earth's distinct seasonality, combined with ever-drifting continents over millions of years,
has resulted in widely separated land masses where unique organisms have evolved to survive in varying climates.
So if I wanted to see all 10,000 of the world's bird species, I've got to go to a lot of different ecosystems.
This lecture will focus on the distribution of global ecosystems. It's kind of an overview type of lecture.
I'm going to introduce you to the basic ecosystems that we're going to look at in more detail in the remaining lectures.
But I think it's important to get this overview and something about the relationship among these systems and some of the major ecological processes that affect them.
Ecosystems vary dramatically from one point on Earth to another.
We begin with the most obvious characteristic of ecosystems, distribution, and that is that Earth has two major kinds of ecosystems.
Do you know what they are? What are the two major kinds of ecosystems on Earth?
Think about that for just a second. Second's up. The answer is aquatic and terrestrial.
This is something that was fascinating to Aristotle.
You look at the kinds of organisms that live in aquatic habitats.
Compare them with the kinds of organisms that live in terrestrial habitats. They're very different.
The adaptations are amazingly different. The seas are vast, but they do not encompass the entire planet, and this is no small point.
I think the distribution of area is that the oceans cover about 71% of the planet terrestrial.
Because continents and islands exist, the evolution of life on Earth evolved to be far more diverse than it would have been if life had been entirely confined to the seas.
In other words, if Earth were nothing but a planet of ocean, it wouldn't have nearly the diversity of life that you have.
Consider just one example, insects.
Though just under a million insect species have been described, it's estimated that at least 2 million actually exist,
and many entomologists believe up to 30 million or more species of insects actually exist on the planet.
Regarding beetles alone, beetles are in one order of insects called the Coleopter.
They are thought to be over a million species.
I can't resist sharing with you a well-known anecdote in evolutionary biology.
There was a famous British evolutionist named J.B.S. Haldane, and J.B.S. Haldane was a kind of Marxist evolutionary biologist.
I think that's fair to say.
And once he was asked by someone in the clergy, in a somewhat sarcastic way,
what his study of biology and evolutionary biology in particular had taught him about the creator.
Haldane thought about it for a minute, and he said,
well, he has an inordinate fondness for beetles.
What Haldane meant was there are just so many beetle species,
but you could extend it to just so many insect species, there are many, many kinds.
Insects have very strong influence on numerous terrestrial ecosystems,
ranging from plague proportions, in the case of things like outbreaks of locusts, mosquitoes, things of that,
to disease vectors, speaking of mosquitoes, which transmit many kind of different diseases, including malaria.
Insects are also essential plant pollinators.
A great many plants in the world could not exist if it weren't for insects to pollinate them,
if it weren't for insects to disperse seeds, for instance.
But there are no insects in the ocean, not one.
Insects are entirely terrestrial.
They evolve from early terrestrial arthropods.
Arthropods are joint-legged animals that have exoskeletons, things like cockroaches,
but also things like crustaceans, you know, things like lobsters, crabs, etc.
Without land, there would be no insects.
And thus, the most diverse kind of animal ever evolved would not exist.
That should give you a pretty good idea of the importance of land and water
as diversifying factors in the ecology of the planet.
On the other hand, the most species-rich group of vertebrates, and we're vertebrates,
vertebrate means animals with backbones.
We have an internal skeleton of bone, which is a centrally located backbone of vertebral column.
Other kinds of vertebrates are fish and birds and reptiles and amphibians.
We are mammals, of course.
Fish, the osteichthies.
The word osteichthies means bony fish.
Osteib means bone, ichthies means fish.
Bony fish are the most diverse group of vertebrates, and of course they live in water.
Now, while some of these inhabit freshwater, and they're thus in a way terrestrial,
I know that sounds like a contradiction in terms,
but all freshwater occurs on land, rivers, lakes, etc., are on continents.
So you could almost consider them terrestrial.
But most osteichthies, most fish, all sharks, for instance, are fundamentally marine.
Sharks are not osteichthies.
Incidentally, they're made of cartilage, another technical point.
There are 20,000 known bony fish species.
The vastness of the oceans has served to permit this great speciation.
Fish is a good example of it.
The next most diverse group of vertebrates, as mentioned above,
are the 10,000 extant bird species.
Astro mammals, the group which we're members of, there are about 4,500 of them.
Most of them are rodents and bats, and virtually all of them, with the exception of the cetaceans.
And if you want to count the pinnipeds, the walruses, and seals, mammals are terrestrial.
In marine waters, the equivalent of insects might be thought of as crustaceans,
or the lobsters, the crabs, the shrimp, and the various kinds of zooplankton,
like little copepods, for instance.
But they're collectively far, far less diverse than insects on land with about 30,000 species total,
including some that inhabit fresh water.
What's important here with this example is to think about the fact that water and land
are very different in terms of what one has to have in order to exist and survive in these areas.
This should be obvious, but it's no small point.
Evolutionary biologists and ecologists look at what they call adaptations.
Adaptations are genetic characteristics of the anatomy, of the physiology,
in the case of animals, of the behavior of organisms that suit them for their particular ecosystem.
And in the broadest sense, land and water are two very different ecosystems.
So that gets us started, at least, but there's more.
The 23 and a half degree axial tilt of Earth, the tilt that's responsible for its seasonality,
combined with the scattered positions of the continents, make Earth's climate quite variable from poles to equator.
For example, Earth would be far more temperate in general,
were it not for the fact that the continent of Antarctica is directly over the South Pole.
That's right. Antarctica is directly over the South Pole.
And when Antarctica drifted to that position, which was about 36 million years ago,
in the middle of what we call the tertiary period, it resulted in the world becoming more temperate.
Large areas of tropical, subtropical forest were gradually replaced by grassland in Savannah.
It was a very large deal. This is when modern horses evolved, for instance, which are grazing animals,
they feed on grass.
We can generalize by identifying three broad climatic regions.
You could probably name them.
There's the polar region, the Arctic and the Antarctic.
There's the temperate region. Many people live in the temperate region.
And there's the tropical region. Most people actually live in tropical regions.
Of course, these regions are not sharply separated, but tend to meld together where they overlap.
An example, for instance, is southern Florida, where it is best to describe the climate as subtropical.
You have a combination of palm trees and tropical trees such as the gumbo-limbo tree,
which can be found in Belize and Costa Rica.
But you also have oaks that are real temperate zone oaks.
That's a subtropical area.
And that's a good point, actually. Ecosystems are not sharply separated, usually.
Where you have what ecologists refer to as ecotones, you have a blending of one kind of ecosystem into another.
The reason for that is that climate usually isn't radically different from one place to another.
It gradually changes. It's a gradient effect.
You don't take a single step and walk from the tropics into the temperate zone.
Physical conditions of climate, particularly temperature and patterns of precipitation,
largely determine the characteristics of terrestrial ecosystems.
Now, I'm talking about terrestrial ecosystems first, then I'll talk about marine ecosystems.
Let's start with terrestrial ecosystems.
I want you to remember those two things.
Temperature, precipitation.
Temperature, precipitation. Just two variables.
If I know the average annual temperature and I know the average amount of precipitation,
I can very accurately, in a general way, predict the kind of ecosystem that exists there.
Organisms have to adapt to one another.
It's a reality that prey have to adapt to predators.
It's a reality that predators have to adapt to catching prey.
But before they can do any of that, they have to be able to live in the area in which they live.
They have to be able to adapt to the physical variables of the environment.
These are largely compressed into general variables, temperature and precipitation.
Consider raccoons, for instance.
I have raccoons that come around my house.
In the summertime, the raccoons look kind of slender.
This is because they've lost a lot of their winter fur.
In the winter, they seem to get very large.
They look like large puffballs because they put on such thick fur.
They come around looking for food at night.
They come up on my deck and I sometimes throw some cat food or dog food out to them.
But when it snows, they disappear.
Where do all the raccoons go?
Where they go is to a den and they all bunch up and they all huddle together with their fur coats.
They eat enough food that they have a pretty good layer of fat.
And what they do is hole up for a number of days, literally riding out the bad weather,
until it's possible for them to forage again without losing more energy than they gain when they forage.
This is the reality of adapting to climate.
Climate is the overriding variable in what determines ecosystems.
Ecologists have long understood that if you know the average temperature and average amount of annual precipitation,
you get an accurate predictor of the kinds of ecosystems that occur in that region.
For example, a region that experiences less than 10 inches of rainfall annually will in all likelihood be desert.
Not all the time, it could be very short grassland, but most of the time,
any area that gets less than 10 inches of water, you've got desert.
If that region is warm, it will be hot desert, usually dominated by various succulent shrubs and cactuses.
By the term succulent, I mean able to store water.
But if the region experiences a cold winter, including regular snowfall,
then ecologists, clever scientists that they are, refer to it as a cold desert.
And it will be dominated by cold adapted shrubs such as sagebrush.
In the high deserts of the American West, you find an abundance of sagebrush.
They handle winters just fine.
The coldest of the desert type ecosystems is so cold that we recognize that it is unique.
It's called a tundra.
You find tundra in the high Arctic inside the Arctic Circle.
You don't find it as much as in Antarctica, and I'll tell you why when we get to that particular lecture.
You also find tundra in certain high mountains, what we call alpine tundra.
And I'll say more about that in a future lecture.
It's time to introduce you to a term, and that term is biome, B-I-O-M-E.
Major terrestrial ecosystems, and I underscore terrestrial ecosystems, are called biomes.
In the course of these lectures, I'll discuss each of the major biomes in the world,
but by way of introduction, I want to name them and give a few characteristics about them right here.
Inside the Arctic Circle is the Arctic tundra biome.
This is a vast ecosystem that might not look very impressive to you when you first see it.
It consists mostly of low-lying plants, plants such as sedges, which are closely related to grass, and lichens.
Lichens are unique plants that are a combination of algae and fungi living in a very complex, interdependent relationship,
so interdependent that we recognize them as a single entity, the lichen.
And numerous tiny flowering plants, some which are quite beautiful.
This is also a land of dwarf willow trees.
Trees can't grow to any kind of stature here. They have to be very small.
It's a land of caribou and lemmings.
Tundra is not common in Antarctica. I mentioned that just moments ago.
The reason for that is that Antarctica is just too cold.
Antarctica is so cold and so desolate with such high winds that tundra ecosystems are even prohibited from being there.
The number of land plants in Antarctica is shockingly small.
And yet the odd thing about Antarctica is that it has a very, very high productivity.
I'll talk about productivity later in this lecture, but that's because Antarctica supports a very thriving marine ecosystem.
So while Antarctica as a continent is ecologically, I suppose you could say, unimpressive.
As a marine ecosystem, it's anything but.
Let's move to the temperate zone.
The temperate zone begins beyond the Antarctic and Arctic circles.
Those circles incidentally are at 66 degrees north latitude for the Arctic circle and 66 degrees south latitude for the Antarctic circle.
In the north, the temperate zone begins with what we call the boreal forest biome, boreal forest biome.
That extends like a broad ring of spruce and fir trees all the way around the globe.
It encompasses much of Canada, northern Europe and Siberia.
It's also found along mountain ranges, particularly in the American West.
And there's also part of it in eastern North America called the Appalachian extension that runs down literally from Mount Katahdin in Maine all the way down to Georgia.
The biome is dominated by cone bearing coniferous trees, Christmas trees, if you want to call them that, spruces and firs, most of which are evergreen.
Let's get a few terms here. Evergreen.
Evergreen means that the tree looks green 365 days a year. It doesn't mean it never loses its leaves.
Evergreen trees drop their leaves, but they don't drop them in synchrony.
You drop a leaf here, you drop a leaf there, but by and large you stay green the whole time.
The evergreen trees of the coniferous forest are also needle-leaved trees.
And needle-leaved trees are different from broad-leaved trees.
A balsam fir, a white spruce, that's a needle-leaved tree. You all know what they look like.
A broad-leaved tree is something like an oak or a maple where the leaf is flat and broad, so we need to make that distinction as well.
For instance, in the tropics you have a biome that is dominated by evergreen broad-leaved trees.
But in the boreal forest you have a biome dominated by evergreen needle-leaved trees.
The temperate boreal forest is often referred to as the spruce moose biome because the largest undulate animal, the largest hoofed animal on the planet, the moose,
is found throughout the world. It's called the elk, I think, in Europe, but it's the moose, along with spruce trees.
The next major biome is the deciduous forest, and this is comprised of broad-leaved trees that are typically dropped in synchrony.
That's why it's called deciduous forest. You have deciduous teeth, your baby teeth, they're dropped and they're replaced by your permanent teeth.
Deciduous forest means the annual leaf-dropping event that occurs after the growing season.
These are forests of oaks, maples, elms, and the thing that distinguishes this particular biome is the autumnal changing colors of the leaves.
It makes the biome one of the most aesthetic of nature's ecosystems.
Incidentally, it's interesting that most people who study ecology study it because of the aesthetics.
Ecology is one of the most beautiful branches of biology.
Histologists would argue that looking into a microscope itself is an aesthetic experience, and indeed they're right.
Looking at bones is an aesthetic experience. It's really remarkable to see how skeletons are put together.
But ecologists love to be out in nature. That's the reason they got into it in the first place, and certainly the temperate deciduous forest is a great example.
Much of eastern North America and Midwestern North America, as well as Europe, parts of China are dominated by deciduous forests of oaks, maples, sycamores, and elms, as well as numerous other trees and shrubs.
The third major forest biome is tropical, and it consists of a range of forest types, from dry woodlands, such as typify much of the Australian alfax, to rich tropical rainforests.
That's found in the Amazon basin, as well as throughout parts of Central Africa, Asia, Indonesia, Northeast, and Australia.
I've spent a great deal of time studying tropical rainforest. It's a remarkable place.
Tropical rainforest is characterized by having more species of plants and animals per square hectare, per square meter, however you want to measure it, than any other of the world's terrestrial biomes.
Indeed, that is the unique characteristic of tropical rainforest. It's extraordinarily high biodiversity.
Tropical rainforest may harbor over 50% of the world's species of plants and animals, at least terrestrial.
Tropical rainforest is equatorial, and it occurs between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn, encompassing about a 47-degree latitudinal band.
So those are the major forest types, and tropical rainforest, when I say tropical rainforest, understand that in that latitudinal belt between the Tropic of Capricorn and Tropic of Cancer, it isn't all tropical rainforest.
Because depending on conditions, it can be other things. It can be tropical dry forest. It can be tropical thorn forest. It can be savanna. It can be grassland.
Tropical rainforest is only part of that climatic range. We'll talk about the reasons for that.
Which brings us to these other biomes. There are also biomes of grassland, savanna, and desert.
These occur generally in areas with less precipitation or much more seasonal precipitation than is typical of forest biomes.
In other words, forests, and this shouldn't surprise you too much, depend on having adequate amounts of water.
In New England, where I live, we usually receive about 40 inches of precipitation or so per year. Some of it falls in the form of snow in the winter, and the rest of the time it's rain.
If you have either a situation where you don't have very much precipitation, or the precipitation is compressed into a particularly short time in the year, you won't have forest.
You'll have something else. Something like grassland, savanna, or even desert.
Grasslands once typified the American prairie, but much of the original prairie is now converted to agriculture.
The steps of Russia form another region dominated by mixed species of grasses. These are the two great grassland areas of the world.
There's also areas in Africa, of course, the African grassland areas.
There's another word, savanna. Ecologists usually don't put an H at the end of that word. Sometimes they do, but mostly it's S-A-V-A-N-N-A.
Savanna is well-developed in African Australia and consists fundamentally of grassland, but with various amounts of trees scattered within.
So the classic shots that you see on the Discovery Channel of the African landscape is usually savanna. You see acacia trees, baobab trees, things like that, popping up among what is obviously very largely a grassland ecosystem.
Deserts are found where moisture is least available, and deserts are usually throughout the world dominated by shrubs.
But hot deserts are a bit different because they're dominated by succulent plants such as cactuses, particularly in the western hemisphere.
In fact, cactuses only occur in the western hemisphere, but there's a very similar kind of plant that looks very much like a cactus.
These are called euphorbias, and these are found in places such as Africa. Euphorbias and cactuses represent an example of what's called convergent evolution.
Don't worry about that now. We'll talk about it in the next lecture.
Fire-adapted shrubs and highly seasonal precipitation characterize a biome called chaperol.
Chaperol is not a very large biome. It's found scattered throughout the world.
The Mediterranean region is the area most known for chaperol, but chaperol is also found in coastal California and along the coast of Chile.
Now, I mentioned something. Fire-adapted shrubs. What do I mean by that?
Fire is part of climate. Fire is normally set by lightning. Fire is a very normal part of the Earth's evolutionary history, and both plants and animals have adapted to fire in various ways.
And so in areas that have relatively frequent fires, the whole life cycles of plants and animals are actually dependent on periodic fires, and that's the case for chaperol.
Of course, that forms a great problem, as you probably know, in areas of California that are heavily built in chaperol areas when the Santa Ana winds come and when fire starts, it can be quite devastating.
But I want you to know that normally at least the plants that are found in that area actually are quite, in an evolutionary sense, used to that periodic fire and indeed dependent on it.
So, chaperol is an ecosystem. There are other ecosystems as well, including forested ecosystems, that periodically depend on fire to sustain them.
Now, as I mentioned, the biome concept is normally applied just to terrestrial ecosystems, and you can think of a biome as a large-scale geographic terrestrial ecosystem.
And the biomes are things like the tundra, the boreal forest, the temperate forest, tropical forest, chaperol, savanna, grassland, desert.
What about the oceans? What about the seas?
Well, in the seas, the concept is more what we call life zones that differ by depth and by the proximity to land.
For example, the literal zone is found near coasts. When you're looking out, walking along a beach, you're walking along a rocky intertidal zone.
You're in what ecologists refer to as the literal zone, the area where the sea is shallow and where, indeed, because of the tides, the sea interacts with the land.
So, the literal zone is near coasts where water is shallow. The pelagic zone is the area of deep open ocean.
So, once you get away from the continental shells and the continental slope, you're out in the pelagic zone where the water is deep.
The average depth of the ocean is about two and a third miles. So, that takes you out to the pelagic zone.
And if you go down in a diving bell and you go all the way to the bottom of the ocean, wherever it may be, you're in the benthic zone.
Benthic means the life zone in the depths of the sea at the bottom of the ocean floor.
This is because you have different organisms that inhabit the water column in the pelagic zone compared with the organisms that inhabit the ocean floor and indeed burrow into the sediments on the ocean floor.
So, the most simplistic notion, basic notion of the biome concept in the seas is the life zone concept of the shallow literal zone, the deep pelagic zone, and the very deep benthic zone at the bottom of the ocean.
Why study biomes? Why do we recognize these as being important one from another?
Well, biomes demonstrate how plants and animals are adapted to different kinds of major climates.
And because the amount of the sun's energy captured by vegetation differs remarkably from one biome to another, that's what makes the study of biomes interesting.
Because Earth ultimately depends on energy. We get our energy from the sun, and we get it particularly from plants that take a very small fraction of it from the sun in this process that I describe called photosynthesis.
Since virtually all life on Earth depends on photosynthesis, and I say virtually because there are places in the great depths of the oceans where the heat of the oceans actually sustains bacterial communities that are not dependent directly on solar radiation on the sun's energy.
But virtually all life on Earth does depend on photosynthesis. Such differences from biome to biome become important.
Ecologists look at photosynthesis at the biome level in a term that they call primary productivity.
What primary productivity means is the amount of energy plants capture in a given region. How, for instance, do plants in the Arctic compare with plants in, say, a tropical rainforest in the amount of the sun's energy that they capture?
This is called primary productivity. We call it primary because it's at the very base of the food web or the food chain. Plants are really the base.
They provide the energy base, and the animals eat the plants, or the animals eat each other. In fact, terms that ecologists use, plants are primary producers.
They're also called autotrophs. Autotrophs means that they are able to capture their own energy from the sun. Plants don't have to eat. They take energy from the sun. If a plant is out in sunlight, it's going to get energy.
Consumers, or heterotrophs, are things like you and me and cats and dogs and all animals and fungi and things like that. Heterotrophs, or consumers, are things that depend ultimately on producers or autotrophs to provide food.
If you want to go out and lie in the sun, be my guest, but you're not going to get fat from doing it. On the other hand, a plant that goes out lies in the sun does get fat from doing it. If you want to get fat, you have to eat the plant.
And so, ecosystems are organized in part by the distances that the organisms are from the energy base. Plants are the closest to the sun because they take some of the sun's energy for themselves.
Things like grasshoppers and sheep are at least two steps away. The plants are the first step, the sun is the first step, and they plant to the sheep, or the plant to the grasshopper is the second step.
So, most of the energy to be found in living systems is found in plants, and a small fraction of that energy moves on to the sheep and the grasshoppers and the other kinds of animals called herbivores, animals which eat plants.
Then there are the carnivores, the animals which eat animals. Wolves eat sheep, and birds eat grasshoppers, and so these are actually three steps away from the sun. The energy from the sun goes to the plant, and the energy from the plant goes to the grasshopper, and the energy from the grasshopper goes to the bird that eats the grasshopper, like a sparrow or something like that.
And so you can see that we begin to get a structure in ecosystems that is very, very highly dependent on the amount of energy going into those ecosystems. So how do these major ecosystems compare?
Now, and incidentally, you're thinking of yourself, I'm sure, because we are a very anthropocentric animal, and you're probably saying, hey, wait a minute, I eat animals and plants. I have a steak and a salad. Well, you're an omnivore if you do that.
Omnivores are animals that feed at various levels in the food chain, sometimes feeding on plants, other times feeding on animals. Things like raccoons and bears are omnivores.
All right. How do these major biomes compare with regard to their productivity? This is a pretty hard thing to measure, but over the years ecologists have gotten pretty good at it, and I can give you a few ranges.
You probably wouldn't be surprised if I told you that the major biomes that have the lowest productivity are things like deserts and tundra. Why?
Well, in the case of deserts, it should be apparent. In order for things to grow, you have to have solar energy. That's true. A lot of sun shines on the desert. That's not much of a problem.
The deserts are water limited. It's not just a case of having solar radiation. You also have to have water. And so what limits the productivity, the primary productivity of deserts is water shortage.
I'll say more about that when we talk about deserts, but the productivity of a desert, for instance, or a semi-desert on average, is something in the neighborhood of about 40 dry grams per meter squared per year.
Now, that probably doesn't mean anything to you, but you assume well when I give you some comparison figures. For instance, if you compare that 40 with a tropical forest, a tropical forest on average.
This is just on average. There's a range around it, but a tropical forest can fix 2000 dry grams per meter squared per year. So a desert has an energy base of 40 dry grams per meter squared per year compared to 2000 for tropical rainforest.
So when I tell you the tropical rainforests are lush and have many, many kinds of organisms in them, you can begin to see perhaps one of the reasons why.
Now, if you compare a tropical rainforest with a temperate forest, a temperate forest has an average of about 1250 dry grams per meter squared per year, again, compared with 2000 for a tropical rainforest. Why is this?
Well, it's because the growing season is shorter. You can go to a tropical rainforest at any time of the year, or 365 days. It doesn't matter which one you pick, and it'll be green and it'll be growing.
But if you visit a temperate forest in, say, Michigan in the winter, there aren't going to be any leaves on the trees, and the forest is shut down. So it's a difference in growing season that largely accounts for that.
And that ultimately is because of the difference in temperature and precipitation, those great big huge variables that determine the characteristics of ecosystems.
Now, a temperate forest, like a lush oak forest, or even better, a maple basswood forest, say, in Ohio or something, how does that compare with a boreal forest up in, say, Alberta, Canada, or someplace like that, maybe around Quebec?
Well, a Canadian forest, which is in the boreal biome, maybe about an average of 800 dry grams per meter squared per year.
So if you look at the boreal forest, which is closest to the Arctic Circle, 800, if you come down a little bit where the growing season is longer to a temperate deciduous forest, 1250, and if you go all the way to the equator where the growing season is all year, 2000.
What about the tundra, that high arctic ecosystem of sedges and lichens and little tiny plants?
Well, it does better than deserts. In fact, for the short growing season that it has, the tundra actually does quite well because it has a lot of water.
And so it can grow. And even though the plants are very small in stature, they grow pretty fast.
And so that has a productivity of about 140 dry grams per meter square per year.
So that should give you the general idea of why ecologists are interested in primary productivity.
Primary productivity is, and I've said it before, but it's so important that you understand it. It's the energy base, and from there you go.
You have to have energy in order to support ecosystems, and the energy in various biomes differs one from another.
What about the oceans and places like that?
Well, if you go into the open ocean, you may be surprised that the productivity is quite low.
There's more of open ocean. There's more of the pelagic zone than there is of any other ecosystem, at least in terms of unit area.
Something like over half of the Earth's area would be pelagic zone, but the productivity is only about 125 dry grams per meter square per year.
So this compares with deserts and tundra. The open ocean is not very productive.
And the reason for that is in a shortage of water. It's a shortage of light, and it's a shortage of minerals.
Most of the minerals are not up in the surface of the water column. They're down low in the benthic zone.
Atoms like calcium, nitrogen, phosphorus, things like that.
The other reason is that light is lost very rapidly in the ocean.
Red light, which is essential to photosynthesis, is filtered out almost immediately when it hits the water.
This is when, if you're diver, for instance, and you cut yourself and you're fairly deep, you'll bleed black blood,
because the hemoglobin that's coming out has no light to reflect the red on it.
And so these are the limiting factors in pelagic productivity.
But along the continental shelf and in areas where there is upwelling, where there's bottom water that comes up containing minerals,
that productivity goes up a lot. And continental shelf and upwelling areas have productivities that can be up to 1,000 dry grams per meter square per year.
And that compares very favorably, for instance, with temperate forest.
So that gives you a somewhat of a range of these productivities as they vary from one ecosystem to another.
And that range is pretty broad, and that's all ultimately because of climate and the constraints that climate puts on organisms as they adapt.
We've talked a lot about climate in this lecture, but not quite enough.
In our next lecture, we're going to look in still more detail about the importance of climate as it affects ecology.
