Lecture 3, Camus, The Stranger, Part 2
The flat matter of fact description of Mersot's life outlook in The Stranger raises some vital
philosophical questions, namely the role of reason and human experience and the nature
of human consciousness.
There's a contrast that really defines the book, in fact defines it in a rather obvious
way.
On the one hand, there's what we might call lived experience, and throughout the book
what we get from Mersot is a really moment-to-moment, very present-oriented description of what
he is experiencing at the moment.
On the other hand, there's what we call reflection.
Reflection is what Mersot, throughout the first half of the book, never does.
As I said, he has occasional thoughts, this hardly counts as reflection.
He responds to his employer and says, why should I do this?
That hardly counts as reflection.
What's interesting about Camus is the way he plays these two off against one another.
On the one hand, you might say, Part 1 is all about lived experience, and Mersot is
quite happy, and in an important sense which I'll try and make clear, he's complete innocent.
In Part 2, when he is obviously guilty of a serious crime, he is forced to reflect.
And there are two different parts of the book, two different parts of a life, and Camus now
generalizing would say two very different and sometimes opposed parts of everyone's
life.
Just to take a couple simple examples, we've all been in a situation where we really want
to simply get lost in our experience.
Listening to a piece of music at a concert, for example, we'd really love to just be
one with the music.
But if you're like me, a reflective person, what you find is that instead of getting lost
in the music, you're thinking, and some of the thoughts are straight distraction and
irritation such as, I've got this essay due tomorrow, I've got to give a lecture on Friday.
But even if you're thinking about the music, there's a sense about thinking about the music,
thinking about the composer's life, thinking about whether you've heard a better rendition
of the same piece.
It's an interference with the experience of the music.
And one wants to stop this and say, no, no, stop thinking, just listen.
But the truth, of course, is as you do that, you're just thinking on another level.
And now you're thinking about your thinking and not listening to the music.
So thinking sometimes interferes with experience, whereas philosophers have generally praised
thinking above all else, the life of contemplation.
What is starting to become evident already is the fact that there is a sense in which
consciousness, reflection, interferes with experience and life.
On the other side, I don't have to tell any of you that sometimes you are trying very
hard to think seriously through a problem, or more to the point, you're reflecting on
your own existence, you're reflecting on what you've been doing or decisions you have to
make.
But suddenly the appetites reach through and you find yourself just hungry or thirsty.
And at that point, suddenly your thinking comes to a halt or at any rate is seriously
compromised.
There's a sense in which the stranger in a very blunt way plays these two off against
one another and Camus' philosophy, as we'll see, has very much to do with reinvigorating
the notion of lived experience and taking that, not the philosophical notion of reflection
as the meaning of life.
Well, what is rationality?
What is reflection?
I think the first thing to do is to tie those two together.
That rationality in the sense that we're going to be talking about it requires reflection.
That means it requires thought, it requires thinking.
It requires thinking about ourselves in terms that are not geared to just the moment and
what we're doing or even decisions we have to make in the immediate future.
But reflection has to do with thinking about ourselves as a whole, who we are, what our
lives amount to, how we fit into the world, how we get on with other people, what other
people mean in our lives.
Rationality requires this kind of reflection and consequently we would say in this sense
that Merceau in the first part of The Stranger isn't rational, he is not, as the Greeks would
put it, a full human being.
Second, rationality is the ability to anticipate consequences.
Rationality is often defined by philosophers and ethicists as appreciating means and ends,
knowing how to get what you want, but also understanding what the consequences of your
actions are.
You are a chemist who invents a new drug and of course your whole concern, one hopes, is
going to be what its effects might be, how it might be abused, what side effects it might
have, but of course this is just what Merceau doesn't do.
He walks out on the beach after an altercation with a gun and never gives a moment's thought
to what might possibly follow from this behavior.
Rationality is also adherence to standards, moral standards, most obviously, but in almost
any walk of life, if you're an engineer, it's obvious that there are standards you have
to appeal to.
If you are a professor, there are standards you have to appeal to.
If you are simply a parent, there are all sorts of standards you have to adhere to and
these are going to be reflective, they're going to be given to you to a large extent
by the culture, but the social dimension of rationality very much has to do with fitting
into your culture in a certain kind of way.
I think this is often underplayed by philosophers who think of rationality primarily in terms
of individual thought.
But what counts as rationality is often very much a cultural, contextual consideration.
It was rational in the 12th century to believe that the earth was flat.
That doesn't mean that it's true, but it adhered to the standards of evidence, the standards
of what counted as a good theory at that time, and again, Merceau flunks.
There's a sense in which, although he goes along, and for example at the trial, his employer
is perfectly happy to say, well, yeah, he was a good employee, he did what he was supposed
to do, nevertheless, there's a sense in which he doesn't so much adhere to standards as
just falls in, and he doesn't really pay much attention to moral standards in particular.
Otherwise, his neighbor Raymond, for example, would have been an object of repulsion to
him.
Which raises the question, central to the course, to what extent do passions, do emotions
depend on reason?
Throughout the history of philosophy, these have often been opposed to one another, as
some of the quotes I gave in the first lecture would suggest.
On the one hand, there is what makes us distinctively human, reason and rationality.
On the other side, there is what sort of ties us to the beasts, our residual emotional
repertoire.
But I think the first thing to say is that emotions involve concepts.
Emotions are conceptual.
Emotions involve recognition.
Emotions are about the world, or a term I will introduce later in the lectures.
They are intentional in a very specific philosophically important way.
Emotions in fact involve and contain rationality, Nietzsche says at one point, as if every emotion
didn't contain its own quantum of reason.
I in fact would argue a stronger thesis.
I would argue that what we call rationality is in fact bounded by our emotions.
What we care about and to act rationally is ultimately to act in line with what we care
about and what our culture cares about.
Finally, emotions, as a general rule, tend to be unreflective.
What that means is we have them, but we don't necessarily think about the fact that we have
them.
In fact, very often as we all know, we have emotions and don't even recognize that we
have them at all, or might deny them when we're challenged.
But I think to think of emotions as necessarily unreflective and therefore in some sense as
not rational is an oversimplification.
Because the truth is when we reflect on our emotions and sometimes emotions themselves
are very reflective, what we find is that there is a very dynamic exchange between what we
call emotions and as we all know from our own experience, sometimes you can talk your
way out of an emotion.
You can show yourself that the arguments which the emotion presupposes are not valid arguments
or you can use an argument against the emotions.
For example, I have no right to be angry because he really didn't do anything wrong.
The connection between emotions and reflection is going to turn out to be a very complicated
one.
And one of the things I would say about love, for example, is that love quite distinctively
involves a kind of reflectiveness.
French aphorist, La Rocheville Co., at one point, said, how many people would never fall
in love if they hadn't heard the word?
And I think there's something very important by way of insight there.
Emotions involve values.
It's not as if emotions are simply perceptions of the facts of the case, but rather emotions
always weigh things.
That's why we talk about positive and negative emotions.
That's why so many emotions have very strong valuations attached to them, for example,
to take the obvious.
Love and hatred.
Love is a very positive evaluation.
Hatred is a very negative one.
Sadness, to take a different kind of example, is an evaluation of a certain loss.
Joy is an evaluation of a certain wonderful state of affairs.
And if we went through the list, I would argue every emotion has this kind of value-laden
nature.
And that, of course, too, ties them to rationality.
Often what philosophers talk about as the rational thing to do might, I think, even
better be described as the thing that makes the most emotional sense to do.
Maybe not at the moment, but in a broader span of time, looking at what it is that serves
our lives.
Finally, emotions tend to be about the self.
If you think about some emotions, this becomes absolutely obvious, including some emotions
we're going to be talking about this lecture.
Emotions like guilt, shame, embarrassment, regret, remorse, or to move to the positive
side.
Emotions like pride.
Some emotions are comparative, like envy, or comparing with what we have with what someone
else has, or jealousy, same sort of argument.
I would argue that all emotions are self-involved in some way, which is not to say that they're
selfish, and which is not to say they're just about the self.
But to understand what it means to have a self is to understand something about our emotions.
In Camus, as I said, what we get is this play of experience and reflection in opposition.
And that really is what The Stranger is all about.
In part one, what we get is Merceau's experience as he walks through everyday life, up to and
including his experience of, shall we say, being involved in a murder.
In prison, on the other hand, Merceau is forced to reflect.
Now, this has many profound implications.
The philosopher Kierkegaard, whom we're going to talk about next, says at one point, he
feels like a man who's already dead.
And when he says that, it's because he feels as if he's lost touch with his immediate experience.
He is spending too much time thinking, reflecting.
When he writes about the present age, this would be about 1850, Kierkegaard says, the
age is too reflective.
It is absent with regard to passion that these days, not even a suicide acts out of despair.
He rather basically thinks himself to death.
As you'll see, this theme about reflection versus experience is going to permeate much
of what we do.
In prison, Merceau is forced to reflect.
His life has been taken away from him.
The sensual pleasures that he enjoyed, the beach, the smells, Marie, that's gone.
What he has left, well, it's hard to say what he has left.
In another human being, we might say he still has his self, he still has his soul, he still
has his thoughts, he still has his memories.
But in Merceau's case, all of this is rather dubious, in fact, only of that list that really
sort of clearly is still present in any sense, is his memory, but it actually takes some
time in prison before he even quite understands what that is and how important it is.
He reflects a little bit, to begin with, on what he's lost.
But again, I'm a little hesitant to call it reflection, he misses Marie.
It's not quite the same thing as thinking about her.
In general, what we find in prison is that he is, in a way, trapped with his thoughts.
But most important, he's not alone.
While there's no doubt that people at the beginning of the novel were forming judgments
about him, opinions about him, what's clear is he was oblivious to them.
At one point in his mother's funeral, he comments, casually, to us, one of those thoughts.
For a second I had the absurd thought that these people were sitting in judgment of me,
and he immediately dismisses the thought as absurd.
Well, turns out they were.
But in the second part of the novel, in the trial, the same people come in, and of course,
what they're doing, quite explicitly, is they're there to sit in judgment of him.
What the second part of the novel is about, in a way, is other people, or what Jean-Paul
Sartre will call being for others.
The idea is that we don't exist by ourselves, that the opinions of others are not just contingencies
that we can throw off, but rather it is the opinions of others, which at least in part
make us a person, allow us to have a self.
And so in the second part, what happens with Marceau is, as other people judge him, often
to his face, for example, when the prosecutor talks to him in the magistrate's office,
what we see is that he is being forced to consider himself as a certain sort of person.
For instance, he says at one point, when someone calls him the criminal, he says, I had never
learned to think of myself that way.
But of course, the truth is he had never come to think of himself in any way.
He did not characterize himself as the lover of Marie.
He did not characterize himself as his mother's son.
He did not characterize himself in terms of his job.
He did not characterize himself as a French Algerian.
There's a sense in which self-concept and consequently self is something that he had
not yet attained.
Now I'm using the word reflection in a rather general way, but let me point out that we
use reflection in two very different senses, although as you'll see they come together
rather dramatically.
French actually have two different spellings for this.
The idea is, in the first place, the reflection is something you see in a mirror.
You look at yourself in a mirror and there's a sense in which you don't see yourself.
You see the reflection of yourself, or more accurately, the reflection of your body.
It's a quite literal sense of reflection and it has to do with being mirrored back and
we can think of all sorts of circumstances in which something like this happens.
Most interesting, of course, is the sense in which we see ourselves mirrored in another
person.
Now you can take this quite literally, for example, when you're talking to someone at
a close range and you see the reflection of your face, at least, in the pupils of their
eyes.
But of course, it'd be pretty superficial if that's all you saw.
What you see is they're looking at you and what they're giving you back, perhaps in what
they say, is a reflection of yourself, or again more accurately, a reflection of how
it is that you appear to them.
On the other hand, there's this philosophical notion of reflection, where reflection very
generally means conceptual thought, contemplation.
What we'll be talking about here is reflection of a very specific sort, namely reflecting
on oneself.
One self is an object of reflection.
But now, take those two metaphors and it's interesting how philosophers have collapsed
them, for example, with a very simple kind of picture, that when you introspect, when
you examine yourself, as Descartes does very cursorily, and I think therefore I am, there's
a kind of loop in which you go out of yourself and then into yourself, in which you perceive,
but what you perceive is yourself, or what you perceive is your own consciousness.
Now this is going to raise all sorts of philosophical questions later on, in what sense your consciousness
can be the object of your consciousness.
But as a metaphor, it's quite revealing that there's a sense in which when we think about
ourselves, when we reflect on ourselves, what we are doing is in some sense turning all
of our perceptual-conceptual apparatus into a kind of loop, and taking ourselves as the
object of our perceptions and conceptions.
What this means can be interpreted in lots of ways, but one way of thinking about it
is that it's not just as if there is an invisible mirror through which we make the loop, but
rather the mirror is something very concrete.
As I just said, the concreteness is another person.
It goes back to the philosopher Hegel, early 19th century, who had a very keen sense of
the ways in which the notion of the self is dependent on other people.
There's a sense in which to come to a sense of oneself is to come to see oneself through
the eyes of others, and it's a rather intricate psychoanalytic process which has been described
in many ways in many different details about how, from that sense of socially-derived selfhood,
we managed to get anything like an independent self, think of ourselves as individuals rather
than simply as that which other people think of us in a certain way.
One way of thinking about the trial in The Stranger, now to give that some more detail,
is that the trial is Camus supplying Merceau with not just one, but a whole town's full
of people looking at him, judging him, giving him a self.
What Hegel had argued was basically that we come to selfhood only through the recognition
of others, and in Camus' novel I think we can say Merceau comes to selfhood only through
the recognition of others.
The judicial process, of course, is somewhat restricted. It isn't concerned with Merceau
as an overall human being, but it's concerned with him with regard to one particular action
which he has performed. Nevertheless, the way the trial goes, and many people have found
this absolutely outrageous, is that it's not just his act of murder which is on trial,
but it really is, in a sense, his whole life.
What condemns him in the trial is the prosecutors making a big deal out of the fact that this
is a man who did not weep at his mother's funeral, and the witnesses, of course, backed
this up, that he was rather casual, he was restless, he was complaining about the heat,
he was drinking coffee. The one thing he didn't do was act like a full human being.
The prosecutor who is outrageous in his own regard says of Merceau at one point, I've
looked into the eyes of this man and I have found not one redeeming human trait. There's
a sense in which he even goes so far as to say the next trial in the docket is somebody
who has killed their parents, and he says as far as he's concerned Merceau is guilty
of that crime too for not weeping at his mother's funeral.
So there's a sense, if we're concerned about justice in this book, which is probably sort
of beside the point, there's a sense in which Merceau is wrongly tried. In fact, I find
it fascinating that his defense counsel never once even raises the defense of self-defense,
but nevertheless the result is that Merceau looks around the courtroom, he sees people
in effect condemning him, and suddenly he realizes he wants to burst into tears. He
is coming to the conclusion that he is a self and there's a sense in which he is guilty.
Now the guilt has to be contrasted, of course, with innocence. In the first part of the book
he's innocent, and he's innocent in a way in that straight Old Testament sense. He has
not eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. He doesn't have any moral judgments,
and consequently even when he does a terrible thing, he kills a man. One is hesitant to
say that what he's done is an evil thing, or that he's guilty. As I said, there's even
a problem about whether we sensibly want to talk about agency here. Throughout the trial
he remains unaware of the moral significance of what he has done. It is to him, in part,
a matter of annoyance because he can no longer live the life he lived. It's a matter of
some confusion because he is now branded as a criminal, whereas he himself never thought
of himself in anything like that way. In the same sense that Adam and Eve were chased out
of the Garden of Eden because they ate of the apple, or rather because they disobeyed
God. Merceau is sent out of his rather innocent and happy existence into what most of us would
consider the hellhole of prison, where interestingly enough he doesn't suffer, but what he certainly
does gain is a knowledge of good and evil. He comes to see himself as guilty, but let's
be careful about what this means. On the one hand, guilt means he did it. You might call
this causal guilt. He was the one with his finger on the trigger, but that's not what
this story is about. You might also note that he was legal guilty, declared guilty by the
court, but that, of course, isn't relevant either. You can be cleared guilty when you're
innocent, you can be guilty, and nevertheless be found innocent. The question is whether
he's morally guilty, and that's what he comes to discover as the trial and the second part
of the book move on. To be morally guilty, in one sense, is simply to be human. It's
to reflect. There's a doctrine of original sin that lurks in the background here, and
you might think in the following way. We are aware of the fact that people are suffering
all around us. Imagine Camus in Algeria in the midst of the Civil War in Europe during
the Second World War, and there's this nagging sense that we ought to be doing something
and that what we do can't possibly be enough. That sense of guilt played Camus, and it's
that sense that he wants to instill in his character, Merceau, to make him fully human.
Nevertheless, Merceau resists, because for him, despite the fact that he is forced to
this recognition, he holds on to the innocence of part one with remarkable strength. At one
point, he comes to see the chaplain, or rather the chaplain comes to see him after repeated
rebuffs, and they have a discussion in which the chaplain, of course, is pressing upon
him the importance of believing in Christ, the importance of repenting for his sins,
and most important, the importance, given his execution and pending, to look forward
to a blissful afterlife. Merceau, for the first time in the book, loses his temper.
It's the first true emotion he experiences. What he argues, rather articulately, is that
if there's an afterlife at all, the only one that he can imagine or desire is an afterlife
in which he would once again live just this life. It's experience, it's this life that
counts, nothing else, and he muses that if one had just one day to live, one could spend
all eternity just savoring the memories of each of those precious moments. He goes back
to the consideration about how he has lived. He has lived one way, not another way, he
didn't marry Marie, he didn't go to Paris, he could have so it, and comes up once again,
but now reflective with the conclusion that it doesn't matter how you live. You live one
way, you live another way, but ultimately it's just life. Later in Mythocisophus he will
advance the rather perverse conclusion that while we worry about the quality of life,
the truth is there's only quantity. It's life itself that really matters. After musing
on this, he comes to what is probably the key phrase to the entire book. He considers that
he is about to die, he considers that he has lived just the way he has lived and no other,
and he says it doesn't matter, and so he opens his heart to the benign indifference of the
universe. It's a phrase that will repeat itself in the Mythocisophus, and he comments that
it feels so brotherly because now thinking back we realize that there's a sense in which
Merceau has been without meaning, and his death is without meaning too. But he dies happy,
and this notion of dying happy, a happy death, is one we're going to see throughout Camus'
works.
