Lecture 11, Nietzsche, The Immoralist
Nietzsche certainly contributed heavily to the general understanding of him as a destroyer,
as an immoralist, as an anti-Christ.
He claims himself to be an immoralist, and I think this is perhaps more than anything
else, one of the reasons why he is so often attacked in philosophy and outside of philosophy
as a danger.
The truth is that Nietzsche was generous, kind, courteous, trustworthy, a good friend,
and my guess is he probably never did an immoral thing in his life.
So one is tempted to ask, was he so out of sync with himself that the philosophy on the
one hand praises and defends immorality while he himself was a perfectly moral good citizen?
And I think the answer is no, that's not what's going on here, it's not a matter of
the philosopher out of sync with his philosophy, Nietzsche, more than anyone, insisted that
the philosopher should be an example of his philosophy.
But then we have to understand what he means by immorality, and it's not what you immediately
would think it to be.
I think a good interpretation of this aspect of Nietzsche is to say that what he attacks
first of all is a particular kind of morality, not morality across the board, and certainly
not ethics and values as such.
He attacks Judeo-Christian morality, and even that I think we should be very careful, not
in all aspects.
What he dislikes about Judeo-Christian morality is first of all its emphasis on the other
worldly and its detraction from our enjoyment of, our attention to, this life.
But more deeply, there are a number of notions in Judeo-Christian morality which lend themselves
to cruelty and hypocrisy, and it's these that Nietzsche wants to call into question.
In particular, there is an interpretation of Judeo-Christian morality which emerges at
the beginning of the 19th century, at the end of the 18th, defended by Immanuel Kant
and some of his followers.
It takes Judeo-Christian morality to be essentially a kind of rational morality, and it is defined
most of all by what Kant calls the categorical imperative, the notion of a general universal
rational principle which is binding on all rational creatures, in other words on all
human beings.
What's wrong with such a morality?
Well just to start, one can ask whether universal principles, in any form, whether defended
by reason or not, do in fact apply equally to all human beings.
One can go cross-cultural and very quickly ask whether, for example, a native of Samoa
or India or South Africa or Finland really should be subject to the same kinds of moral
strictures that a citizen in bourgeois Germany would be bound by.
One can ask, I think, more insightfully whether in fact principles do apply to everyone equally,
or rather whether it might be that every universal principle which is applied without
attention to the particularities of the individual might very well be disadvantageous or hurtful
as opposed to beneficial and good for everyone involved.
Take for example something I have to do quite often, grading a class of students, and there's
a sense in which whatever grading procedure I adopt, what I'm doing is going to be more
to the advantage of some students, I hope those who work hard and all that, but more
to the advantage of some students than to others.
One problem with Judeo-Christian morality and this idea of universal rational principles
is the fact that while it pretends to be taking everyone equally under its umbrella, in fact
what it does is to the advantage of some to the disadvantage of others, and we'll see
that this is going to be an absolutely central thesis of Nietzsche's attack on morality.
Or to put it in a different way, one can think of the Judeo-Christian tradition, now moving
to the New Testament, thinking of it in terms of loving thy neighbor and a certain kind
of respect, but here too there's a very real question about whether love so spread out,
whether love extended to everyone, including strangers and enemies, really still deserves
to be called love at all, or whether respect, something which we can certainly understand
with people whom we are admiring of, whether respect can be stretched so thin as to respect
every human being and still have the concept mean anything.
Here's the interpretation that I would want to give.
First, that what Nietzsche means when he says he's an immoralist, is he rejects the
rather particular notion of morality, which appears first of all in the Old Testament
as the Ten Commandments, and is updated and defended by Kant as a sequence of rational
principles, and that notion of morality as it appears in the New Testament, in which
love and respect are stretched so thin that they no longer have anything like the power
that they are supposed to have.
But here too, there's a more philosophical interpretation.
One might look at it in this way.
What Nietzsche is doing is he's rejecting not even so much a kind of morality as opposed
to a certain way of looking at morality, and again, let me go back to Kant.
The idea is that if morals is defined by rationality, then by its very definition, it must be
universal, applicable to all human beings, and quite independent of feelings, culture,
individual considerations, and Kant would even say, of consequences.
On the other hand, one might take the philosophy of utilitarianism, which was also very powerful
in the 19th century, John Stuart Mill is roughly a contemporary of Nietzsche, and take that
philosophy, the greatest good for the greatest number that one always ought to act in such
a way as to maximize benefits and minimize harms, and think of that as a way of characterizing
ethics or morality.
One comes up with the rather obvious conclusion.
Mill himself worried at great length about it, about whether in fact such universal principles
and the general notion of pleasure or happiness, and the supposed commensurability of different
kinds of pleasures and different preferences and interests, can in fact be used as an adequate
notion of morality as such.
What Nietzsche wants to say against both the kind of philosophy we get in the Old and New
Testaments, and defended by Kant, and the kind of philosophy that we find in people like
John Stuart Mill and the utilitarians, is that as much as these might seem to be different,
in fact, they're all of a piece.
That what they do is they tend to focus, in particular, on particular actions.
The idea of whether an action for the utilitarians has good or bad consequences.
Whether an action in Kant is motivated by the right kinds of intentions or what he calls
a good will.
Whether an action is motivated in the New Testament by love, or whether an action is
motivated, as in the Old Testament, by the fear of God, and a universal commandment.
What he wants to say is that there's an alternative to thinking about things in this way.
There's an alternative focus which has been ignored, and in fact, it's a very old philosophy
one that has very strong credentials, but nevertheless has almost disappeared from modern
thinking.
The way I would put it is it's a philosophy of virtue, a philosophy of character.
One thinks, for example, about the ethics elaborated by Aristotle.
It is defined not by rules, not by the right thing to do, certainly not by love, fear of
God, but rather it is all defined in terms of and motivated by a person having good character,
a person having the right kinds of virtues.
One of the interesting features of having the right kinds of virtues is that it escapes
from the kind of dilemma which has come down to us as really almost the essence of Christian
modern ethics, and that is the kind of split between put it one way, pleasure on the one
hand and duty on the other, or to put it in a different way, the split between how one
conceives of oneself as a righteous person and how one conceives of oneself in terms
of self-interest, or very simply, the kind of split we find in such modern writers as
I ran, between selfishness on the one hand and altruism on the other.
Well, what Nietzsche wants to say is this is a false dichotomy, and if you look at this
idea of virtue, as it's defended for example by Aristotle, and Nietzsche and Aristotle
are very close on many of these points, what comes off is not that one makes a choice between
one's righteousness or duty, and one's own advantage or pleasure, quite to the contrary.
Aristotle tells us that one enjoys being virtuous for its own sake.
This is not quite to say that virtue is its own reward, that's a kind of cheap follow-up
that suggests that if you do the right thing, you'll be rewarded.
That's exactly what Nietzsche and also Aristotle want to get rid of.
Rather the idea is that you are so identified with your virtues, you think of yourself as
an honest person, as a person who doesn't lie, as a person who is trustworthy, as a
person who is a friend, and consequently that's what motivates you, because not to act in
your own character, to act out of character, to act against your character, is so debilitating,
so offensive that it's not something you would ever think of doing.
When you think about people who are very trustworthy and honest, and you ask them why don't you
lie, they might give you a Kantian answer, lying is wrong, it's a universal rational
principle, or they might give you an answer of the sort that Mill would give, lying hurts
people's feelings, it makes you untrustworthy in the future and so on.
But virtue person, someone like Aristotle or Nietzsche would rather say, I don't lie
because I'm not a liar, and that's really the end of the matter.
So to put it very succinctly, Nietzsche says he's a neymarist, suggesting at least that
he defends all kinds of really bad actions.
In fact, he doesn't defend virtually any bad actions, what he says instead is that we have
to look at morality in a different way, and in particular, I would put Nietzsche side
by side with Aristotle, and I would add side by side with the earlier Greeks notion of
ethics, and say what Nietzsche has in mind is a way of thinking about ethics that puts
all its focus on the notion of individual character, what kind of a person are you, and of course
I put that in the second person, in fact for Nietzsche it should, as in Kierkegaard, almost
always be put in the first person.
What kind of a person am I?
Because one of the things that Nietzsche defends throughout his philosophy, although I would
add not always consistently, and certainly not consistently as a person, is the idea
that we spend much too much energy judging other people.
This itself is a sign of a certain kind of nihilism, a certain kind of decadence, a certain
kind of immorality, and for Nietzsche the idea of judging other people is already something
gone wrong.
The person you judge is yourself, and you judge yourself in terms of whether or not
you are and have lived up to the character that you can be and want to be.
In terms of this idea of looking at morality in a different way, Nietzsche gives one of
his most dramatic accounts, in this case of the history, and he would say the genealogy
of morality.
It goes back to the notion of perspectivism that I discussed in the last lecture, the
idea that one always sees a phenomenon, a thing, sees the world from one perspective
or another, and I mentioned that there are aesthetic perspectives, scientific perspectives,
religious perspectives, moral perspectives, and Nietzsche plays these off against each
other.
One thing to say is that Nietzsche, playing off the perspective of the aesthetic view
and the perspective of the ethical view, almost always comes down on the side of the aesthetic
view.
So, just as he said, the ancient Greeks were so beautiful because they accepted their position
and lot in life and made something of it.
One might say that Nietzsche, in the realm of morality, finds virtuous people beautiful,
not so much good, or even in a sense, you know, morally good, a term which he uses very
reservedly, but rather the idea is that we see them as beautiful, and in ethics, as in
aesthetics, the idea is to be beautiful.
In line with his perspectivism, Nietzsche also suggests that there are perspectives within
the realm of ethics, within the realm of morality.
Now this is not something we normally think of.
I used the phrase in the last lecture, the moral point of view, suggesting that there
is just one, that there is a way to view the world morally.
And of course, the very word morality suggests that it is in some sense one thing, one set
of principles, take the ten commandments, or Kant, when he's talking about morality,
talks about the categorical imperative, but notice he talks about the categorical imperative,
as if there's just one of them.
And even when Kant goes on to give an elaboration of different, as he puts it, formulations
of the categorical imperative, the idea is that still, morality is something singular
and unified.
Nietzsche by contrast distinguishes between what he calls master morality and what he
calls slave morality.
His history, or genealogy, tries to trace back these different notions and the concepts
of good and evil and good and bad, which as you'll see are quite different, through history
with an attempt to understand how we came to use these terms in the ways that we now
do.
On the one hand, it's straightforwardly a historical investigation.
What he's trying to do is he's trying to find the sources of our moral prejudices.
At the same time, it is genealogy, or rather I think we would say etymology, in the sense
that he's really interested in the language and how the language emerges and what terms
are related to what terms through history, and how we come up again with the understanding
of morality that we now have as a singular, unified set of principles.
Well let's begin by talking about master morality.
Master morality is easy enough to find in the ancient world.
One finds it most notably in ancient Greece, and of course in Greece's subsequent culture
in Rome.
One finds it throughout the Middle East and throughout the Mediterranean in ancient times,
and one thinks of virtually all of the great societies of the ancient world in Sumeria,
in Assyria, in Babylon, and of course in Israel because we should not forget that Israel
was at one point a great state in the Middle East, and we'll go back and talk about that
in a number of different ways.
But most notably of course Nietzsche's concern with the Greeks, whom he adored, and when
he talks about the Greeks again, while I think Aristotle is an example of what he's talking
about, a much better example in his own mind would be the Greeks of Homer's epics.
And here, as often, Nietzsche talks in a rather severe warrior mentality, often exaggerates
the case, in fact the book in which he most thoroughly discusses this, called the Genealogy
of Morals, he subtitles it a polemic, and we should make no mistake that Nietzsche is
trying to shock us, and in particular trying to shock us into seeing morality in a different
way.
Well, what is master morality?
When you think about the masters of ancient Greece, and of course we're talking about
a very small class of aristocrats and rulers, and they are supported by an enormous number,
perhaps in the millions, of slaves, captives, and other people, craftsmen, soldiers who
are not aristocrats.
The structure of society in the ancient world is for the most part a triangle, with a very
small number of very privileged, powerful people at the top, and an enormous number
of people who are not so well off at the bottom, many of whom, most of whom, are slaves, whose
life consists of essentially supporting and making possible the life of the Greek aristocrat.
Aristotle, for example, had no tolerance for work.
He never worked, I think, a day in his life.
He acted as a tutor, but he didn't think, of course, as philosophizing and teaching as
work, for Alexander the Great.
But when he goes to talk about commercial society and talking about merchants, when
he talks about the peasantry, when he talks about the kind of work that people do with
their hands, you can sort of feel the disdain.
It's the presence of such people, however, that make his life, as a philosopher, full
time possible.
It's those people who make possible the pursuit of the kind of excellence that the masters
generally admired.
And that, of course, is where the focus of master morality lies, precisely in that notion
of excellence.
Morality uses a word, which can be translated either as virtue or as excellence.
And one might think, those are two completely different notions, because the idea of virtue
is a moral notion, whereas the idea of excellence, well, that's kind of practical, prudential.
I mean, you can be excellent at archery or excellent at pot building.
That has nothing to do with morality.
Whereas, if we're talking about virtue, well, isn't that, you know, things like honesty
and trustworthiness and things that really fit into a very special conception, a moral
conception of ourselves.
But of course, precisely what's important here is the fact that these two things are
not opposed.
That what we're doing when we pursue morality, broadly construed, master morality, is what
we're pursuing is our own excellence, and virtues are excellences.
So when Aristotle goes on to list the virtues, we might be surprised to find not only just
such things as honesty and trustworthiness, but also something like wittiness, being a
good friend.
In short, being congenial, being the sort of person who gets along with others.
The idea is that in pursuit of being a really good person, a beautiful person, everything
gets taken into account.
And there's no reason to privilege some particular virtues or traits over others, not in general,
it really takes the whole package, what Aristotle refers to as the unity of the virtues.
The idea that a really good admirable person is going to have not just one virtue, but
all of them in proper proportion.
Now Nietzsche, as I said, rejects Aristotle, at least in this sense.
He sees Aristotle and his two illustrious predecessors, Socrates and Plato, as already
belonging to a period in Greece, which is, in his words, decadent.
It's already on the downward slide.
Now some of this reflects Nietzsche's rather anti-democratic thinking.
In fact, this is a period of Greek democracy, and interestingly enough, Socrates here is
on Nietzsche's side, Socrates also was an opponent of widespread democracy.
But the idea was that Greece, in its glory, was the period before.
And consequently, the conception of the virtues and the conception of excellence that Nietzsche
really admires, again, can be found much more in Homer and the early Trudidians than it
can be found in Aristotle and his contemporaries.
The idea here is, I think, unmistakable.
Because on the one hand, a kind of celebration of warrior virtues.
But as always with Nietzsche, its warrior virtues understood metaphorically.
So Nietzsche often talks about his own writing and the courage it takes to write, the courage
it takes to express your opinion, the courage it takes to examine yourself and to overcome
yourself in very warrior-like terms.
But notice, none of this has anything to do with killing people.
Nietzsche's own very short stint in the military was for the most part in a non-military role.
The truth is that what it amounts to is a kind of celebration of a certain kind of pursuit
of excellence which Nietzsche wants to claim has much disappeared from the moral scene.
And that's illustrated by the fact that we tend to distinguish, on the one hand, the
moral virtues, and on the other hand, what we simply call excellence or some kind of
accomplishment.
But let's turn to slave morality, because that's where the heart of the argument lies.
To be very blunt about it, what Nietzsche calls slave morality is what we simply call
morality.
That morality has in effect eclipsed master morality, and the big question for Nietzsche
is, how has that happened?
Slave morality gets traced, as does master morality, back to the ancient world.
And in searching for the source of slave morality, Nietzsche points out that the people who originated
this morality were literally slaves.
He's thinking, for example, about the ancient Hebrews.
And here it's important not to think of the ancient state of Israel, which as I said was
one of the great states of the ancient world, but rather the Hebrews in the time of exile
and the enslavement in Egypt.
One can imagine, for example, one brilliant Hebrew slave thinking to himself, why do we
always have to be the inferiors in this social arrangement?
Or in terms of its logic, slave morality is, as Nietzsche puts it, a reactive morality.
It is an attempt to reject, to turn upside down, the excellence morality pursued by the
masters.
It takes the following form.
For example, the masters think that wealth is a wonderful thing, but then in the New
Testament we read, it's easier for a camel to get through the eye of a needle than is
for a rich man to get into the kingdom of heaven.
Suddenly wealth, rather than being a virtue and a benefit, is a real liability.
One looks at the masters with, very often, their superlative educations, and although
this is a later phrase, one comes away with the idea that ignorance is better, ignorance
is even bliss.
One sees the warriors of the aristocratic class with all their power and fighting ability,
but the New Testament tells us, the meek shall inherit the earth.
What's going on here?
Well one can put it in a very systematic way.
Whereas master morality pursues excellence, in a way pursues one's own conception of what
it is to be a great person, what it is to be admirable, and it's not so much comparative
as it is, here's what I can be.
In slave morality, to the contrary, it is reactive.
The slaves see the masters and they envy them, they feel inferior to them, and consequently
they come to resent them.
And insofar as resentment is a very clever emotion, what the slaves at some brilliant
point in history learn to do is to turn the master's values upside down.
So what the masters would call good, the slaves now refer to as evil.
So wealth, power, education, even freedom, is something which is no longer viewed as
particularly desirable, but rather something to be avoided.
And on the other side of it, the masters make a distinction between good and bad.
Bad means failure, it means pathetic.
So on the one hand, if a master fails to achieve what he sets out to achieve, that's bad.
And of course he looks down, the metaphor is significant, and all these people who are
not even in a position to try to achieve the things the master aspires to, and he sees
them as bad, meaning pathetic.
It's interesting to note that Aristotle doesn't even allow for the possibility of slaves and
other non-aristocrats to be happy.
They might be good slaves, or they might even be in some sense good people, but nevertheless
they can't achieve the kind of happiness, fulfillment, excellence that the masters insist upon.
On the other side, if the slaves emphasize evil as the primary category, they have a
notion of good which is in many ways dependent on the notion of evil, because if what is
evil is what the masters consider good, and if these are things to be avoided because
they make you in some sense a worse person, then to be good is in fact to have less of
these things, or best none of these things.
The ultimate result of this is a kind of self-denial.
So at its extreme, what we get is the phenomenon of asceticism, which Nietzsche talks about
at some length, people who utterly deny themselves.
Now I think we underestimate to what extent this is still part of our ethic, and I'm not
here talking about extreme Christian or other religious sects that, for example, refuse
to eat anything just above subsistence, but rather I'm thinking, for example, of many
of us who go on diets, who have various kinds of food restrictions and so on, beyond the
point of medical health, or in some cases, for example, vegetarians, moral righteousness,
but rather to the point of quite conscientious self-denial, because the truth is that from
this tradition what we learn is that the good is self-denial, that denying oneself is quite
apart from its medical or even ethical benefits, a good thing in itself.
So now we have two warring conceptions of morality.
On the one hand, we have master morality with its emphasis on excellence, we have slave
morality with its emphasis on self-denial.
What happens?
Well, a theology makes the difference.
The masters are convinced by roughly the third century of the new millennium that being
a slave, being self-denying, is ultimately much more beneficial in terms of one's prospects
for heavens and so on.
But curiously, after 2,000 years of slave morality, master morality has not been erased.
It's only been sublimated.
Nietzsche points out the phenomenon of what he calls bad conscience, which is innaturally
strong and powerful people, this kind of war within themselves as they try to restrict
their desire and restrict their sense of what they themselves can be.
What you get is a curious battle of pride and humility, of excellence and mediocrity.
One thinks, for example, of the medieval popes, enormously powerful men, who at the same time
were obviously obliged to the Christian sensibility and Judeo-Christian morality, slave morality
in such a way that they could not, on the one hand, simply admit, as an ancient Greek
would have done, that he or she was better than anyone else or better than those around
him.
But rather, there's a kind of humility here, which is forced, artificial, and yet the notion
of master morality continues.
But with 2,000 years of slave morality, that's given us the self-discipline that comes from
self-denial, which is going to allow for the spiritualization of morality.
And what Nietzsche is really after, quite the contrary of an immoral anti-Christian position,
is really a new conception of spirituality, something that has not the liabilities and
disadvantages and hypocrisies of the old tradition, but something very new, something
which we'll see later manifested in what he calls the ubermensch.
