These lectures are part of the great courses on tape series.
The great courses on tape cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks. Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you
spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled No Excuses, Existentialism and the Meaning of
Life.
The lecturer is Professor Robert Solomon.
Professor Solomon received his undergraduate degree in molecular biology from the University
of Pennsylvania and his master's and doctoral degrees in philosophy and psychology from
the University of Michigan.
He has taught at Princeton and the University of Pittsburgh and is now the Quincy Lee Centennial
Professor of Philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin.
Professor Solomon has been awarded the Standard Oil Outstanding Teaching Award and the President's
Associates Teaching Award.
He has published dozens of articles and more than a dozen books in philosophy and psychology.
Each of Dr. Solomon's lectures is outlined in the course guide that comes with these
tapes.
The course guide also includes a glossary, timeline, biographical notes and bibliography.
You may find it useful to review the outlines before and after listening to the lectures.
Lecture 13, Nietzsche, the Ubermench and the Will to Power
In this the last lecture on Nietzsche, I'd like to talk about two of his most famous
and most notorious notions.
The notion of the Ubermench, the Superman or Overman, and his idea about the will to
power.
The Ubermench I'm convinced is famous largely because of a play that George Bernard Shaw
wrote parodying the notion called Man and Superman.
It was a comedy and very successful.
The fact is that the Ubermench really just appears in one book of Nietzsche by no means
in the whole book and that's at the beginning of the spoke Zarathustra.
Nevertheless, Nietzsche speaks of higher men all the way through his work and the distinction
between higher and lower is something which is absolutely essential to his thought.
Zarathustra talks about the possibility of the Ubermench.
He often talks as if the Ubermench is an evolutionary step.
He says at one point, following Darwin.
Darwin is a bridge between the ape and the Ubermench.
There are many ways of understanding this but I think for our purposes now we should
mention that Nietzsche's relationship to Darwin in fact is very complicated.
He was clearly under Darwin's thrall in many ways.
I pointed out a few lectures ago that in his epistemology, his views of truth, he had a
view which was very much a kind of pragmatized form of Darwin's evolutionary theory.
Nevertheless, with regard to Darwin as a whole, I think he took him to be much too much in
the tradition of looking at man as the highest accomplishment of evolution, probably not
true of Darwin.
He also saw Darwin as taking the thesis that survival the fittest meant that the best survive.
Whereas what Nietzsche is very concerned about is the idea that if you look at evolution,
it's not necessarily the best that survive at all.
There was a theory that was circulating a few years ago, courtesy of the novelist Tom
Robbins, that said basically that the final stage in evolution, the last two creatures
to fight it out, will be the cockroach and the gonorrhea bacillus.
The idea is that basically evolution gives no guarantees of giving us the better.
So I think we should look at Nietzsche's and Zarathustra's promise of the Ubermench
as a mere possibility, something to aspire for, something to dream about.
As evidence for this, in the same speech where he talks about the Ubermench trying to turn
on the townspeople and get them excited about this possibility of overcoming themselves
and becoming more than they are, he introduces another character called the last man, where
the idea is to get people truly disgusted with themselves and to see that this is another
possibility for evolution, another way that we might turn out.
And in fact, it's a way that is very close to the way we are.
The last man is the ultimate bourgeois consumer, the ultimate couch potato.
He, she, is a person who has no aspirations, is merely content, comfortable, satisfied.
As Nietzsche puts it sarcastically, the last man says, we have invented happiness and blinks,
the blink being on the one hand a sign of idiocy, on the other a sign of just not wanting
to see what life is really like.
So two possibilities, the Ubermench, which clearly Nietzsche portrays as an ideal, and
the last man, which is a kind of counter-ideal.
In fact, precisely the ideal that would be defended by a great many utilitarians as the
best that we could possibly have.
To understand the Ubermench, I think we should go back to the discussion of master morality
and slave morality.
Because when Nietzsche talks about master and slave morality, what he distinguishes
there is strength and weakness.
The difference is primarily one of power and also of independence.
The master assumes his power, he assumes his abilities, and he aspires to excellence.
He also does this in an important sense alone, not that he doesn't have friends and allies,
but there's a sense in which the values, the talents, the ideals that he pursues are very
much his own.
Slave morality, by contrast, is a morality of the weak.
The slave is very concerned with what other people think.
The slave is very concerned about not being different.
The slave is very concerned and primarily concerned with defense, with protecting himself from
those who are stronger.
So the picture of slave morality that Nietzsche gives us, which he sometimes also calls heard
morality, is of lots of weak people, most of us in fact, herding together for self-protection.
What characterizes as slaves is weakness, and weakness not necessarily physically and
not necessarily just in terms of our status in society, but Nietzsche makes it very clear
that there's a sense in which weakness of spirit, weakness of soul, weakness of will
is what it's really all about.
The relationship between the master and the slave consequently looks something like this.
The master is independent and powerful.
The slave is relatively powerless and consequently resentful, and as we saw, slave morality is
basically a reaction against master morality.
Now one way to understand the ubermensch is to understand the ubermensch as a version
of master morality, or as I ended one of the previous lectures, we might say that the
ubermensch is master morality spiritualized by 2,000 years of slave morality and its self-discipline.
To characterize the ubermensch in this sense, we might say first of all, in contrast with
slave morality, the ubermensch is free of resentment.
In fact, some of my colleagues would even define the ubermensch as a character who is
so free of regret and resentment that he can fully and enthusiastically endorse that thought
experiment we called eternal occurrence.
Would you like your life lived over and over and over again exactly the same?
The ubermensch is someone who can say with no hesitation whatsoever.
Yes, gladly I would accept this.
But the idea of the ubermensch as a step in evolution raises a number of problems for
Nietzsche, because first of all, as I said, it is by no means guaranteed that this is
what we're going to become.
But secondly, it is impossible for him, in some of the things he says, for us to become
really anything.
And this goes back to the kind of biological determinism I talked about in the previous
lecture.
There's a sense in which we are born as the creatures we are.
We are born with our boundaries, limits.
And the consequence is that what we become is in fact just ourselves.
So when it comes to aspiring to be the ubermensch, one might say that for Nietzsche, this is
absolutely implausible.
One can't become something so much more than one is.
The ubermensch really is just a way of looking at ourselves and seeing that we're really
not so hot as we often think we are.
He often makes enormous fun of those who would call for the improvement of man.
And of course here he's talking not just about Christians and the kind of transformation
that Christianity is supposed to bring about, but also he's talking about the social movements
of his day and socialism in particular.
We can think to our own century and all the horrors that have been imposed upon people
by societies that have tried to change them from selfish, egoistic, capitalist to something
more socialistic, more egalitarian, and so on.
One thinks, for example, of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia and one is horrified.
But Nietzsche would say, of course you can't change people in that sense.
People are as they are and what we have to do is work within the realm of what we are.
So it's implausible to say that we can aspire to be and work towards being an ubermensch,
but nevertheless he continuously distinguishes in his philosophy between those who are higher
and those who are lower.
And higher and lower here typically refer to the will to power, something I want to
talk about in some detail in a moment.
But before we think that power here refers just to a kind of aristocratic status and
just to a kind of military prowess, which in the ancient world that Nietzsche admired
certainly would be the case, I think it's important to point out that the person who
emerges as the higher example of human being in Nietzsche's works more often than any other
is the German poet Goethe.
Goethe was, he says, someone who exercised all of his talents, who created himself as
a unified human being on the basis of them.
Goethe also fit the role as somebody who in Nietzsche's terms experimented with his life.
At various points in his life he was a civil servant, he was a lawyer, he was a poet, he
was a playwright, within the scope of his writing he tried many different styles and
of course his works are voluminous.
He was a passionate man, then had a rather intricate social life.
In other words, he was just the sort of person who explored the limits, who exercised his
talents to the maximum that Nietzsche really admires.
So when we talk about the ubermensch, when we talk about higher and lower, when we talk
about the world of power, I think it's very important to keep in mind that what Nietzsche
is ultimately concerned with is creativity, with a kind of spiritual life, and not simply
a world of power as that phrase might seem.
The notion of the world of power itself is problematic.
It's a phrase Nietzsche discovered early on and he really fell in love with it.
And we all know how this can work, you fall in love with a phrase and you keep using it,
but its meaning keeps changing and it often carries with it connotations that you really
just as soon do away with.
Let's be very particular about this.
The notion of the world of power is, in a way, directly borrowed from Schopenhauer,
Nietzsche's mentor, but Nietzsche rejects Schopenhauer and he rejects him rather thoroughly
as a pessimist and he rejects his metaphysics.
In particular, the world of power is derived from Schopenhauer's notion of the will, where
the will refers to the thing in itself, reality in itself, what's behind all the appearances
of the world.
But as we saw, Nietzsche rejects that very distinction between appearance and reality,
and the idea of a core reality and a reality behind the scenes is something that he utterly
rejected.
So the notion of will in Schopenhauer is one of the first things to go in his rejection
to Schopenhauer, and I would argue that perhaps the will to power should go with it, but it
doesn't.
Second the notion of power itself.
Power itself is not military power.
The word Nietzsche uses here is the word moch, not Reich.
Power is, very often, the power of thought, the power of the imagination, the power of
creativity.
There's a sense in which what we're really talking about is not so much power over other
people as self-mastery, and Nietzsche, despite his attack on asceticism and slave morality,
makes self-mastery one of the centerpieces of his entire philosophy.
It applies to the masters also, but there's a sense in which here it is much less desperate.
The idea is that masters also master themselves in their pursuit of excellence, but there's
a sense in which the discipline of slave morality, which really has allowed us to deny ourselves
and in a way shape ourselves in ways which we can aspire to.
And here, too, we see that tension in Nietzsche between the extent to which we are self-realizing
and we are capable of self-mastery and the extent to which, in some sense, we are the
product and the victim of the way we are brought up, our genes, and so on.
Schopenhauer took the will to be metaphysical.
Nietzsche, of course, rejects metaphysics and rejects that notion of the will to power.
I think a better interpretation, although Nietzsche occasionally falls into the idea
of talking about the will to power at the basis of everything, but a much better interpretation
and one that fits his theory, I think, in a more sympathetic way, is that the will to
power really is a kind of slogan covering a theory of motivation.
Here, too, Nietzsche gets ambiguous.
There's a sense in which he sometimes thinks about this theory as universal and covering
everything.
And he sometimes talks about the animal kingdom as well as all human behavior as motivated
by the will to power.
When he's in his more modest moods, and I think the more reasonable mood, and that is
to talk about the will to power as a very particular kind of motivation, one that motivates
a great many human behaviors and leaving aside for a moment the animal kingdom.
Basically, the idea is that what motivates us is a drive to feel powerful, and there's
an ambiguity here, too, because Nietzsche sometimes talks about the will to having power,
and sometimes he talks about the importance of the feeling of power.
And while we can see how these two might fit together, they're certainly very different.
One can be very powerful without knowing it, and one can have the feeling of great power
and the feeling might be an illusion.
But the idea is that what we act for, for the most part, is power.
How should we understand this?
Well, I think the first way to do it is to oppose it to its most obvious motivational
rival, and that is hedonism, the idea that people act for the sake of pleasure or for
the avoidance of pain.
In the utilitarians who are more or less his exact contemporaries, this theory that we
act for pleasure and to avoid pain is absolutely the centerpiece of their philosophy, its first
premise, if you like.
The idea is that you can understand human behavior by understanding what people enjoy,
what they don't enjoy, what gives them pain, and then look at their behavior as a kind
of means ends strategy to achieving the most pleasure and avoiding pain.
And Nietzsche wants to say nonsense.
Look at how people behave.
To be sure, sometimes they act for pleasure, and sometimes they act in a delayed way for
gratification at the ends of some means and causal continuum.
But the truth is, most people don't act for pleasure, they act for all sorts of reasons,
and the ones that Nietzsche wants to highlight are those which he would call power.
When I think about how to understand power here, I think maybe the best way to take it
is something very close to what we call self-esteem.
Now that's a fairly limp notion perhaps because it's been around California too long, but
the basic idea is that self-esteem is not just feeling good about yourself, but it's
being energized by your own ideas and energized by your own desires and energized by your
own talents.
Self-esteem isn't just a kind of superficial feeling about yourself, and it certainly isn't
just a matter of standing in front of the mirror in the morning and doing some affirmations.
But rather self-esteem can be taken as a very deep notion in which what you do is you think
of yourself as confident, and you think of yourself as capable, and you think of yourself
in terms of your ideals.
And what Nietzsche says is, if you watch human behavior, what you will see is that a great
deal of our behavior can be much better characterized as the will to power in this sense rather
than as the pursuit of pleasure, avoidance of pain.
Take for example the idea of, well say, the ancient martyrs, early Christians, who allowed
themselves to be persecuted in the name of their faith.
You have to really stretch to come up with any theory that says, this is for the sake
of pleasure and the avoidance of pain.
One can of course bring in the theological picture and say, well they're willing to take
an awful lot of pain in the short term for an infinite amount of bliss in the long term.
But that's not very convincing.
Even if they believe that, there's a sense in which what motivated them was something
much more powerful than the promise of eternal pleasure in the future.
What motivated them was, first of all, the sense that they were right and righteous,
the sense that they were standing for a cause that was much more important than their mere
individual lives could possibly represent.
Think of the way our students behave.
I often ask them, why are you taking this class?
And of course they flatter me and say, it's because we enjoy it and all that.
And I say, no, no, no, no, I'm glad that's true, but why are you taking this class?
And inevitably if we sort of trace the chain of reasons, it has something to do with how
they think about themselves, what their ultimate aspirations are.
And while there's a kind of limp story about, this will make me happy at the end of it,
but nevertheless it's very clear that what motivates them is something much more powerful
and that's their notion of themselves.
In short, the idea is that the will to power is a theory, and it's a theory about what
moves us, and it often, in Nietzsche's language, takes us into some of the really gory details
of human self-deception and hypocrisy.
Talking about Christianity, for example, he says that a great deal of what Christian
psychology talks about, for example, loving thy neighbor and having compassion and pity
for those who are worse off than yourself, really is a kind of hidden screen for motivation
that is much more vicious.
What is often called love, in fact, is a kind of contempt.
And love in the more romantic sense, which we celebrate as perhaps the most selfless
of all emotions, Nietzsche wants to say it's not selfless at all.
When you come right down to it, what we call romantic love is really possession, power-straight
and simple.
Pity, an emotion which is much praised through history, particularly in the Christian tradition.
He wants to say, we think of it in terms of simply feeling sorry for someone who is worse
off.
In fact, when you think about pity, what you come to understand very quickly is that it
is the kind of smugness of superiority.
It is feeling higher, more powerful, more fortunate than this other person.
One might also note that pity can give one a certain sense of pleasure, better him than
me.
But nevertheless, even the sense of pleasure, note that it is followed from the sense of
power and superiority.
It is not itself the goal.
So there's a picture that Nietzsche has, which he pursues in many details, and I would argue
that the real interest is in the details and the kinds of psychological analysis he
gives us.
But the idea is that the will to power is a theory of human behavior, which, whether
or not it covers all cases, covers more than enough cases to make it a very plausible and
very often dominant theory about what makes us tick.
One can think of the will to power in another way, and I think this is something that also
permeates Nietzsche's philosophy, and it doesn't really have to do with motivation at all,
and it's certainly not metaphysics.
It's the will to power as a kind of celebration, the will to power in particular as a celebration
of what I call the passionate life.
If you think back over the history of philosophy, both East and West in fact, what you find
is an overwhelming amount of emphasis on freedom from the emotions, and the idea is that emotions
enslave us, and rather a life of reason, a life of contemplation.
And philosophers since ancient times have often talked about the importance of peace
of mind and tranquility, and what at one point was called apateia, which is sort of translated
in our current term apathy, which doesn't mean just not caring, but what it means is
being free from the enslavement of passion.
For Nietzsche, as for Kierkegaard, there is a very powerful view to the contrary, namely,
what makes life meaningful is passion.
A life without passion would be essentially meaningless.
Some of the ancient Stoics used to say, we should live our life without attachments.
The idea was to make us invulnerable to fortune and fate.
The less you are attached to, whether it's people you love, or things that you own, or
positions that you hold, the less than anyone can take away from you.
And ultimately, you can reduce yourself to the point where all you can lose is your life,
but having removed other attachments, even that is no big loss.
This is the height of what Nietzsche calls slave morality.
It's not an accident that at least some of the ancient Stoics were slaves, although
I should add one of them at least was a Roman emperor.
But the idea is this whole thought about cutting attachments, cutting your losses, is exactly
the kind of defensiveness that characterizes slave morality.
By contrast, what Nietzsche wants to say is, attachments are what life is all about.
Attachments to people, perhaps Nietzsche himself was not big on relationships, but attachments
to ideals, attachments to aspirations, attachments to works, works of art, your own creativity.
That is absolutely essential.
And so against the general trend in philosophy, to praise a kind of meekness, to praise a
kind of withdrawal, to praise a kind of emotional absence, what Nietzsche wants to say is, life
is passion.
One of the things we might note is that throughout Nietzsche's works there's a metaphor of energy
that permeates much of his works.
Now one should say that in terms of the history of science, the notion of energy was a kind
of new arrival.
There was some semblance of concepts of energy in earlier centuries, but it's only really
in the 19th century that the notion of energy comes to hold the central place in physics.
Before that, for example, people talked about matter in motion and talked about inertia
and momentum and so on, but the idea of energy as something which was distinctive in its
own right was something that was fairly new.
And as I mentioned in the first lecture, Nietzsche was by no means antiposed to science,
but rather he looked at science as the source of some great ideas.
Well, this notion of energy was what he wanted to pick up as a kind of metaphor for human
life too.
But the human soul, the human psyche, operates with is energy and not far to see that Freud
picks up the same metaphor and makes it quite literally the centerpiece of his early psychodynamics.
But thinking of energy now not as a physical notion, but as something very much key to
human life, one thinks of a life of excitement and adventure.
One thinks of, especially, the kinds of adventures that give rise to the grand passions.
And Nietzsche here wants to say, along with Kierkegaard, that it's the passionate life
and passionate commitment and passionately throwing yourself into what you do that makes
life worthwhile.
But let's be very careful here.
Not every passion is desirable, and when Nietzsche defends the passionate life, he's not saying
any passion at all is OK.
Some passions are what he calls life stultifying, and one can take as a primary example the
passion of resentment.
Resentment is the passion that defines slave morality and the life of slaves.
Resentment is a passion which, on the one hand, is rather brilliant.
It can even be creative, but the very notion of resentment suggests someone who is very
low in self-esteem, someone who is putting themselves down, someone who is unwilling
to be constructively creative because their life is tied up in this kind of simmering
derogation of someone whom they hold responsible for their problems.
What Nietzsche is concerned with are the grand passions.
It was the philosopher Hegel, whom Nietzsche often puts down, who said, nothing at great
is ever done without passion.
Nietzsche often ignored the fact that Kant said something very similar earlier.
But for Nietzsche, this becomes the very centerpiece of his philosophy, not kind of a side slogan.
Love, for instance, is absolutely essential.
And again, it's not necessarily romantic love, which Nietzsche was inexperienced at, didn't
do very well with, and, well, he didn't think it was very important.
But rather it's the kind of love, for example, that he had for the ancient Greeks, the kind
of love that he had for the future of, perhaps not mankind, but the possibilities of evolution,
the ubermensch, and it was certainly the passion he had and he shows in his own work.
No one writes more passionately than Nietzsche.
No one uses more exclamation points.
There's a sense in which what Nietzsche takes life to be is, in fact, manifested in his
work.
He also says that there is really no distinction, no dichotomy, as philosophers have often argued,
between reason and passion.
This goes back all the way to Plato at least, and Plato, Nietzsche says, turned his reason
into a tyrant precisely in order to keep his passions under control.
Passions have often been conceived of in a sort of animalistic, bestial way, as if they
are foreign forces trying to take over.
Freud notably referred to the passions in general as the it, the id.
But there's a sense in which, as Nietzsche points out, every passion has its own quantum
of reason.
Passions are not simply irrational forces from our animal nature.
Rather, passions are themselves, forms of insight, ways of understanding the world, ways
of orienting or gearing ourselves to our lives.
And this ultimately is what's important for Nietzsche.
As opposed to life's stultifying passions like resentment, he praises the life-enhancing
passions like love.
And ultimately, it's the love of life itself, which is his highest ideal.
Life of affirmation, and that means not appealing to another world, a Christian heaven or a
future state of affairs and society, but simply accepting your life as your life and
loving it.
That is the highest virtue.
This is where eternal occurrence fits into his philosophy.
It is the test.
How do you feel about your life?
Are you capable of affirming your life in such a way that you would repeat it exactly
as is an infinite number of times?
The opposition here is his teacher, Serpent Howard, who, of course, said, looking at life,
much less thinking about it as repeating an endless number of times, what do you come
up with is a conclusion that it amounts to nothing.
But in Nietzsche's existential test, what we come to see is the possibility of a very
different picture, that we can look at our lives and look at the sorts of things he's
been talking about, even our own limitations, and say, yes, this is what I want, even an
infinite times more.
