I want to introduce you to IPython Interactive Computing. It's a fantastic IDE for developing
your mathematics code and it's certainly a step up from the IDELE that comes with most Python
installations. So just to show you here we are in the new xubuntu that's version 14.04 that's
just Ubuntu that uses the xfce desktop. If we open a browser we just go to ipython.org and
the installation can sometimes be a bit confusing. We'll just hit the install link there and it
will take us down the page of how to install it on a Mac and a Windows system, certainly
the Anaconda and the Intnought canopy works very well. Scrolling down to the Linux system
here we see we need to enter the terminal, open up the terminal and install some command line
programs here. The first one we want to do we're not going to start installing the IPython
notebook which is the IDE that we're going to use. We'll install all of these libraries.
So sudo, that super user do, we're going to get these applications from a repository and
then we're going to install them and it's python-matplotlib, python-sipy, python-pandas, remember
that's for your database development, python.sympy, symbolic python, and this is nice testing for
python, we needn't do that. So let's, you can just copy and paste that but let's go into opening up the
terminal. There we go, let's just enlarge the screen there and we can also just start typing there. So
remember it's sudo super user do apt-get and install and it is python-remember now what do we want to
install? You needn't get the order right but let's do matplotlib we certainly need and then python
let's do numpy, we can do python-sipy, we can do python-sipy, we can do python-sympy, and python-pandas-pandas-pandas.
Let's have a look, sudo apt-get install, python matplotlib, python numpy, python-sipy, python-sympy,
and python-pandas. It'll ask for your password.
And it'll start the installation process, just asking if you want to continue, we'll say yes.
It'll start the download and the install.
We note here the installation is complete and we're just here back at the command prompt.
Just remember now we still have to install the ipython notebook which is going to be our
development environment. So let's just go back there and we're going to say super user do apt
and install ipython-notebook. And off we go. Again it's going to ask for your
password. There we go. Type in yes, we would like to do that. And it's going to download and install.
And we see here that the installation is complete. And we can just go ahead and say exit.
We don't need the terminal any longer. And that is on the Linux system,
the installation of ipython notebook and all the libraries. Remember python comes with
most installations of Linux. And you have to add these libraries to do
various mathematical operations with.
So let's have a look. How does this work? Oh, it wants to remind me that I've got some updates there.
We can just now go back into the terminal.
Remember if I were to type in python here, it's going to tell me I'm running version 2.7.6,
which is excellent. There's the prompts. And I can just type in some code.
But let's just exit python there. What we're going to do is we'll have to learn how to use
some navigational commands in Linux. And the ones that you usually have to know is ls.
That's just a list. That will list whatever directory you're in. It'll list the folders
and the files. Now it's very good to keep the files that you're working on
in the cloud, for instance. So I'm using Dropbox. So if I just navigate to Dropbox,
by saying cd, that's change directory, and I'm in Dropbox. If I say list now, now this blue is very
difficult to see, but it'll list all the files and folders I have there. I'm going to change directory
again to Python. And there we have my Python directory. And if I now say ls, I have a list
there of all the directories and files in the Python folder. Now to go back, one up, a cd,
and space, and then two full stops. That moves you up the tree of your folder structure,
and I'm back into Dropbox. Now the way to start the IDE called ipython notebook, I'm just going to type in
ipython notebook.
And off we go. So what we're going to do, what ipython does, it's a development environment,
as we're starting it here, right inside of your browser. There we go, beautiful. And you'll note
here at the top, I'm in the home, my first name, and the Dropbox folder. So if I make any new notebooks,
which I do there, it will be automatically saved in this Dropbox folder. So you have to navigate first
to where you want to be. Now you can set up the initial environment to go to specific places, etc.
Or you can just open there and import one of your files directly.
So those were the two ways to do it. I can either use the structure here in the commands in terminal
mode, in the terminal window, to navigate to where I want to save the files. Otherwise, I can also come
here, click, and I can open them. But once I want to save them, it's going to save them here. So it's
important to navigate to where you want to be in the terminal first and then start working.
And this development environment, beautiful, beautiful here. We're using Firefox here. If I say
new notebook, there we go. And here we have ipython development environment. As I say, very good for
mathematics in as much as every block here is a block of code, which you can just execute by saying run.
You can make new insert new cells below. You can copy and paste. But very nicely, this is what you can do.
You can write Python code in a cell, but you can also do HTML markup language you can use right here.
So if I were to say something like italic, close italic, and I just say hello. Let's do this.
Hello all. And if I were to execute this, there we go. So you can have beautiful text in between your Python
Python code and execute the code and you'll have the code output as well. So I can just say a equals three
and a and if I shift enter or I just hit the run cell, there's my output three. So normal Python
in IDLE that we are used to, but with the added benefit of being able to put markup language right
inside of your code and have beautiful code, you can also then create plots with matplotlib and you can
run them in line right in your code and you can actually develop beautiful web pages this way.
Or this notebook I'm just going to save. I'm going to make a copy or I can save a checkpoint or just
close and halt. Now I had the ability up here when I click there to change the name of this.
So let's just say leave page and there we are there in john forward slash dropbox there is a new file
now called untitled. And if I click on it again it's going to open up. Now I didn't save it before we
left so that's why it's blank. And when I just close it there without saying file save and halt or close and
halt I should say I can shut it down there that'll shut down and write the file to disk. So just to
escape I just escape there. Let's close firefox. And now the way to close the program running in terminal
mode here you just have you just have to hit oh that's wrong trying to do this one-handed you will
just hit ctrl cc twice ctrl c and another hit c again and then you're out. If I now were to say list
you're going to find there's the untitled 0.ipynb that's my ipython notebook file. So it was saved
right here in this dropbox folder. So that's how to install ipython notebook. It's not a one-step
seamless installation perhaps as more mature languages have but it's a wonderful development
environment and you can do so much with it and of course fantastic for any kind of mathematical
python coding.
