In this course we're going to present data in the form of a flat dataset.
The most common example of this is a spreadsheet and you can see an example on the screen now.
I'm using Microsoft Excel but you can also use other spreadsheet software, LibreOffice
comes to mind.
It is a free and open source package that can do nearly the exact same things as can be
done with Microsoft Excel.
Here we do have Microsoft Excel and I want to show you what the idea is behind what we
call a flat file and how we store data in there and what the philosophies are around
doing this.
What you'll notice of course is that there are some column letters up here A, B, C, D, E etc.
And then down on the left hand side we see what we call row numbers.
So row 1, row 2, row 3, row 4, row 5.
So these are the columns.
So if I were to click on D up here that highlights the whole column that is column D. If I were
to click on 5 here that would be the whole row 5.
That gives each and every cell an address.
If I clicked on this cell it would be in row 5 and column D. That would be its address.
D 5 or when we start working in software we are more concerned with the row value first
and then the column value doesn't matter.
It has that address column D row 5.
And here's the philosophy.
We place the variable names inside of the head of each column in row 1.
So we see in the first column we have a header called column header as we refer to it sometimes
as ID and we've already populated a bunch here.
It says study underscore XR3 underscore 1.
So this simulates data from some study called XR3 and what we have on each of these rows would
be the entry for all the variables for a single patient.
So this was patient number 1, patient number 2, patient number 3.
Now throughout the courses that I do make for healthcare statistics and research we're
going to assume that the patient's identity and all of the issues, the legal issues surrounding
that has been taken care of.
It's different for every country and every region and everyone should be familiar of what
the legalities are of what can be done inside of these files, what data can be kept,
what the permissions are, what the ethical rules are for keeping this data.
I'm assuming that that is all sorted out.
So we have in this case our patients by number, that is their number, that data is kept separately
so we can have access to perhaps their patient folders if we need extra information.
Next on we see the age column.
So age would be a variable and we can type in an age for this patient.
Let's make this patient 35 years of age.
Now age is a numerical variable.
It's a continuous numerical variable and that means we can do certain statistical tests on
that.
The referral for us would mean where the patient was referred from and let's suggest that this
patient was referred from what we call the city region.
Now that city region would be a nominal categorical variable.
We have three regions in this study.
It's city and then inland and coastal.
Those are the three regions from which a patient can be referred and those are nominal categorical
variables.
But there's no order to them and they are most definitely not numbers.
Now let's move on to the next variable and that is temperature.
Let's assume this to be the admission temperature and let's suggest that this patient had an admission
temperature of 37.0 degrees.
Once again, we would see this as a continuous numerical variable.
The admission heart rate, let's make that 80.
Once again, continuous numerical variable as would go for the white cell count.
Let's suggest that this patient's admission white cell count was 10.1.
And then we want to know whether they have diabetes, yes or no.
Let's suggest that this first patient of ours did not have diabetes.
The only two data point values that we can add, there's yes and no.
There's no natural order to yes and no.
So that would be nominal categorical variable.
What grade of disease that they have?
Let's assume that the disease that we are testing here comes in four grades and let's
suggest that this patient had grade two disease.
Now what is that?
Grade one, two, three, four.
Is that numerical?
I would suggest no.
I would suggest that this is ordinal categorical.
The reason why it's not numerical is that there isn't a fixed difference between the data
point values, one, two, three, and four.
Because I cannot say that someone who has grade four disease is twice as worse off as someone
with grade two disease because two times two is four.
Or the difference between grade one and two is exactly the same as the difference between
three and four.
That has no meaning.
Those statements have no meaning.
So the numbers are actually just placeholders.
I could have put A, B, C, and D there.
They are not real numbers.
They are not numerical values.
They do have some natural order to them.
We would accept that there is some natural order between someone who's got grade one,
grade two, grade three, or grade four disease.
So we would call that nominal, I should say, ordinal categorical variables.
The patients received three groups of treatment and there was a placebo group.
Let's suggest that the first patient was in the placebo group, which we code as P in our
example here.
And then the outcome.
The outcome is whether they survived or did not survive.
So at the moment I'm going to just say, code this as this patient survived, this patient survived.
And lastly is months.
That would be for us a variable, again a numerical variable, how many months until they were last
seen, let's suggest that this patient was last seen, 20 months after they were randomized into this
treatment group and they survived.
That's the last time we saw them, which means they might have died at week, at month 21, but that was
the end of the study, we do not know.
So as a recap, these columns are all variables.
The variables contain data point values and those data point values are all of a certain
type.
Here we have numerical, we have ordinal categorical, continuous numerical, continuous numerical,
continuous numerical.
And this is nominal categorical again, ordinal categorical, nominal categorical, nominal categorical,
and again, continuous numerical.
And that is what we would do, we would fill in a row for each patient.
So that would be patient number one, that would be for patient number two, and this is what
we refer to as a flat file.
We have columns which represent our variables and rows which represent a subject in our study.
And what we want is for all these values down a variable to be of the same type.
I should not type in 20 here for the next patient.
That would just be a word, we want to keep this at 20 for the next patient and only choose
from the data point values for that specific variable.
So for referral it will be city, coastal, or inland.
So all of these should be either city, coastal, inland, city, coastal, inland, etc.
So we keep the data point values down these columns exactly the same.
But each row would be one subject or one patient in our data set.
And this is a data set that we would then import into our software to do our statistical analysis.
In the next video I am going to show you a very easy way to create some simulated data
right inside of Excel here, or any spreadsheet software for that matter, how to create some
simulated data so that you have something that you can work with, that you can use as data
to do your exercises with.
