In this video I want to show you how to easily create some simulated data so that you can use
when you are learning how to use your statistical software. Let me show you. I'm going to do this
variable by variable, in other words column by column. So I'm not going to do one for every
patient. That would be too long. I just want to show you if I click in one of these ID cells,
the patient ID, and I hold down control on my keyboard, it will be command on a Mac, and the
down arrow key I jump right to the bottom. And we see we are in row 251. That means we have 250
patients in the study because remember row number one was reserved for the column headers or the
variable names. So I'm going to hold down command and control again, hit the up arrow, and I'm right
at the top. So what we're going to do for age is to suggest that our youngest patient was 18,
our oldest patient was 85, and we just want Excel to choose a random integer value, that means a whole
number, between 18 and 85 inclusive. And the way I'm going to do that is with all formulas in Excel,
I start with equal, and I'm going to use the rand between, rand between function. We see it comes
up there. I've selected it and the tooltip is very small, but it says bottom comma top. So I'm going to say
the youngest patient was 18, the oldest patient was 85, and I'm going to ask Excel just to choose a random
number in that range, inclusive, 18 to 85. And lo and behold, it chose 18. Now I'm going to go right
to the bottom here, remove my cursor until it changes into that little arrow there, and I'm going to
double click. And what's going to happen is this whole column is going to be populated right to the
end, to number 200, patient number 215. It's going to stop there automatically because the column right
next to it stopped there. There was nothing below that. So the spreadsheet software will do that for
you automatically. I'm going to go all the way back up. I'm going to hit my F9 key. And every time I
hit the F9 key, there's going to be a new random number inside of each of these columns. They continue
to change. And what you'll see is when we change the next value, the next value, every time I type
something in there, I might suggest that this patient was a rural, and when I hit enter, you see
a change in the age column. So every time you do this, things are going to change, and I'll show you
how to stop that right at the end. I'm going to go into that column and hit delete, because I'm going
to move all the way across. So I've got something hidden on this side. I'm going to bring it back in.
I'm going to hit Ctrl X or Command X to cut. And I'm going to Ctrl V and paste it right there, just so
that it's closer. Now this is only, and I put some emphasis on these words, this is only for creating
this simulated data. I'm just showing you how to create your own simulated data. In a real data set,
we won't have any of these. They will not be there. And when I save this file in the end, I'm going to
actually delete this so that I can have my flat sheet only with the patient's details that I want
the data point values for these various variables. The reason why I'm bringing them in is I just want
to show you a little trick. Now here on this side for age, we just had a uniform random distribution.
In other words, it was every value between 18 and 85 inclusive was equally likely to be chosen at each
spot. But what if I want a random selection of these nominal categorical variables? As I mentioned,
our patients came either from the coastal region, inland or from the city. And I want this whole column
to be populated by those three values at random. And the way we do that is the following. Now,
unfortunately, there isn't a spreadsheet formula for this. You have to put a few of them together.
But once you see it, you'll remember it. The first one is equal, of course, because this is a formula.
It's indirect, indirect, and open parentheses, and then concatenate, concatenate.
And then inside of quotation marks, the column from which this was taken. So that was column M,
close my quotation mark, comma, then ran between, ran between, open my parentheses. And you see here,
this was in row one, two, and three. So I'm going to say it goes from row one to row three. So there's
one, two, and three. And I've got to close those parentheses three times because I had opened them
three. There's one, there's a second one, there's a third one. So they've all got to be closed.
And I'm going to hit enter, or I can just hit that little tick mark there. And it chose coastal. It
chose one of those. Once again, I can hover over there until it turns into a little cross. I should
say a little cross and double click that. And you can see at random, it chooses one of these. Again,
it's a uniform distribution. So every time each of these values will have one third of a probability
of being chosen. Next up, let's go to temperature. Now let's suggest that we want temperature to follow
a certain distribution. And let's have that distribution be the chi-square distribution with
one degree of freedom. So what do we do there? Equal chi. And if I move down there, I see chi-sq.inv
is what I want. I'm going to open my parentheses and it says probability. Now I want a random value.
So instead of typing a probability between zero and one, I'm going to say rand, open close parentheses.
Now the rand function there just takes a value between zero and one. And which just relates to
a random value. So a random probability, rand, open close parentheses. And then the degrees of freedom,
I suggested we're going to have one degree of freedom. But this is going to give us values round
about the one mark. So I'm just going to say, after closing my chi-square.inv parentheses,
parentheses, I'm going to say plus 36. Because I want that value, which is going to be in the order
of one, two or three, to be added to 36, to give me my final temperature. And we see the first patient's
temperature there is 36.2. I'm going to hover over there, move my cursor down, double click, double click,
and it's going to fill in everything for me. Now you'll notice that I only have one decimal place
here. In actual fact, if I highlight that whole column, there's actually quite a few decimal places.
Well, let's go down just on the values that we chose. There's quite a few more decimal places there,
and I'm just increasing them there. It's just the way that I wanted this to be printed to the screen
with a one decimal value. If I click on one of these though, we see they all follow the same formula,
but they do have more decimal places, and I'll show you in the end that those decimal places will
remain even though they printed like this to the screen with only one decimal place. Let's make a heart
rate value that follows a normal distribution. So I'm going to say equal norm.inv, norm.inv, open.
And once again, it takes a probability, a mean, and a standard deviation. The probability I want to be
random. I want the standard deviation, the mean to be, let's say 18, and with a standard deviation of 15.
And I close my parentheses. I hit enter. Once again, I'm going to go into that cell,
and I'm going to double click, and everything will be populated. Once again, let me just show you,
there are many decimal values there. I am just hiding them with those little buttons there.
For some more practice, let's make a white cell count, and let's make that from a
a totally uniform distribution. So once again, I'm going to say RANDBETWEEN. Now with the RANDBETWEEN
function, remember we can only have integer values here, but I want to, once I'll count,
let's make it from 8 to 20 anywhere in that region. There we go. It has a one decimal place there,
because the first one there was set with one decimal place. So that is a uniform distribution. Each of
these values between 8 and 20 inclusive has an equal probability of being chosen for everyone.
Let's practice one of these again. So I just want it to choose between yes and no. The patient
either has diabetes, or the patient does not have diabetes. And the way I'm going to do that,
remember it's equal, indirect. I'm hitting tab for autocompletion. Then it's concatenate.
Concatenate is the second one there. And that resides in column N there, the values that I wanted to
choose from, comma, RANDBETWEEN. RANDBETWEEN, it's only rows 1 and 2. So 1 comma 2. Close, close, close.
Enter. It shows no there for me. It's going to choose something different for you. I double click,
and everything is completed there. Grades 1, 2 and 3. Let's make that a uniform distribution. So
that's just going to be RANDBETWEEN. And all we want is between 1 and 4. And there's a 1 and 4
probability of every one of those values being chosen at every spot there. Double click and
everything is populated. The treatment group is going to be nominal categorical. We're going to use indirect,
indirect, CONCATENATE, CONCATENATE. This time I'm choosing inside of quotation marks, I'm going to
choose from column O. Close my quotation marks, comma, RANDBETWEEN. And it goes from row 1 to row 4. So I'm
going to say 1 comma 4. Close, close, close. There you go. And it shows a P there for me. It's going to be
different for you. Double click and everything is completed. Now, survived and died. Let's make a
little column for that. I'm going to ask for it to be between survived and died as the two data point
values for this nominal categorical variable called outcome. I'm going to choose that. I'm going to say
equal indirect, indirect, CONCATENATE, CONCATENATE. There we go. And it is going to be from column P in my
instance, comma, RANDBETWEEN. And RANDBETWEEN is only 1 and 2. Close, close, close. There we go.
It chose survived. Going to double click. Let's do the last one. And that is going to be the months.
So from the time that the patient started their treatment with a randomization here until they
died, let's make that a uniform distribution as well. So RANDBETWEEN. And we're going to suggest that
we make this from 20, from, let's make it from 5 months until, let's make it 25, let's make it longer.
Let's make it about 30 months. And I'm going to hit enter there or return. And once again,
I'm going to double click and everything gets, everything gets completed right down to patient
250. So that's a nice way to create some simulated data. You can create all sorts of data this way.
All I want to show you now, every time I hit F9, you can see the random values change. And one way to
get rid of that is I'm going to choose all these random values. Remember we started that right here.
I'm going to choose all of them. In that first row, I'm going to hold down the SHIFT and COMMAND or SHIFT and
CTRL key, hit the down arrow key. So they're all selected. And I'm going to say copy. And then down
here, not just paste, but I want to paste only the values. Paste values. As soon as I do that,
we are no longer going to have these chosen at random. The values that were there when we hit copy,
they're going to stay intact. I'm going to hit escape to get rid of these marching ants.
And now when I click on these, you see that it's actual values. It's the actual values. It's no
longer those functions that I typed in, the formulas that I typed in to get these random
values. It is now the actual values. And what I can now do is just to get rid of these, I'm going
to delete them. And I no longer need them because this has been done for me. It's all simulated data
that we can now work with. We have a chi-squared distribution here. We have normal distributions.
We have uniform distributions. And we have uniform distributions just for choosing these nominal
categorical variables as well. So there's a beautiful data set for us to work with.
We can import it into our analytical software and we can do statistical analysis on it.
