Okay, so we've had two very boring lectures. Let's be brutally honest about this.
Nothing really exciting yet, but we've got to ease our way into this abstract algebra,
and it's important to know about sets.
The next thing on my list, my to-do list here, is universal sets.
Universal sets.
I should just say universal set.
Now, it's not always defined, but in this course,
and really to understand things and get things done, we have to have this universal set.
And we say that this universal set U, which is not an empty set,
is defined so that we can define subsets.
We're just going to define it so that we can define subsets.
So I might suggest that I have this universal set,
and I'm defining it as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
so that I can have a subset here.
Let's make it a proper subset, and I'm going to have that equal to 1, 2, and 3.
1, 2, and 3, and I'm going to say that A is a proper subset of my universal set U.
And that's why we are always going to, even if we don't state it,
we accept that every set that we are going to use in this course,
does, is part of, is a proper subset of some bigger set,
which is what, which is never going to be an empty set,
and which we are going to define as the universal set.
That means I can define a new thing.
I can define the complement of A.
I can define the complement of A.
And that is going to equal the set of all X such that, not and, oh, that's horrible,
such that X is not an element of A, but X is an element of the universal set.
So it must be one of these, but it's not an element of A.
And that is how we define a complement, and we can only do that,
now remember, A complement is also a subset of my universal set,
is also a subset of my universal set, and that is why we have these universal sets,
so that we can start talking about sets as proper subsets of something,
so that they can also have a complement.
So this A prime, or A complement, is what we are going to call it here,
is just then 4 and 5.
4 and 5.
And this is very important.
This, for us, is going to be quite important.
The complement is the set of all elements X such that X is not an element of A.
Because that brings us just to getting the union of two sets.
If I have the union of A1, union of A2, that is going to be the following.
We are going to define that as X such that X is an element of A1, A sub 1,
and it's a union, so X is also an element of A2.
And it cannot be AND, can it?
We have to put something else there.
So I'm not going to have any kind of notation, so I'm just going to use OR, OR, OR.
And we know that from Venn diagrams.
If this is my universal set U, this is my universal set U,
if I have an A1 and I have A2, there's my A1 and A2,
the union of these two means that any element X, no matter where it is,
it's in there, in there, in there, anywhere in here,
it's either then an element of A1 or it's an element of A2.
And that's actually an element of both.
So it's going to be all over these.
So it's in one or the other one.
Which brings us to the intersection.
A intersection A1, A2, A1, A1, A2.
Another important point, it doesn't matter which way around it goes.
That is going to be the elements, all the elements X, such that X is an element of A1 and,
so I can put my comma there as well, X is an element of A2.
So now it's got to be in both.
So there is this distinction between OR and AND.
And if we look at our Venn diagram here,
my universal set A1 and A2, A1 and A2,
it's going to be all elements X, such that it is in both.
It must be an A1 and an A2.
And it's only this little bit here, the intersection here,
that we're going to be interested in.
All of this is really simple stuff.
What is going to be important for us is these definitions.
These are how we define.
We as beings of this planet define that that is the union of sets
and that is the intersection of sets.
That means we can use this in a proof because this is how we define it.
We define it in no other way.
And if something looks like this, it is this.
If something looks like this, it is that.
That is how we're going to define that.
Because now I can use the following.
I can take a subset or set at least A1 and I can subtract from that A2.
Now imagine what happens here in this Venn diagram.
Let's just draw another one.
You can just see this is my universal set.
This is A1.
This is A2.
A1 and A2.
If I take all of A1 and I subtract everything from A2,
which means I take away all of this.
I take away all of this.
So this is all that is left.
So that's all that is left.
And I'm going to define that in the following way.
I'm going to say all the elements X such that X is an element of A1.
So it can be an element of A1 but at the moment it's all of those.
And it cannot be.
X is not an element of A2.
That is my definition of subtracting one set from another.
Because it can be an A1 but it cannot be an A2.
So this little intersection is excluded as well.
A1 minus A2.
That is going to be my definition.
Now I can also say the following.
I can also write it in this way.
A sub 1 minus A sub 2.
That is going to be an A intersection with B prime.
A intersection with B prime.
That looks a bit weird.
And certainly we'll have to prove this.
And we're going to prove this by these statements.
These are our statements.
We accept that as a fact.
That is how we define.
Those are axioms for us basically.
That is how we define.
That is how we define.
And we say that these two are equal to each other.
And we'll certainly have to prove that.
Let's just look at the Venn diagram.
We've now decided that this.
So intersection.
First of all.
The intersection of B prime.
So this is B.
Everything that's outside of B.
Meaning it's all of this.
And that's why we need the universal set in this course.
So this is everything outside of A2.
Everything outside of A2.
So it's all of this.
All of this.
All of this.
All of this.
All outside of that.
It's intersection.
So the x can still be anywhere here.
So the intersection of all of that.
And A1.
That leaves that part out.
Because it can't be an A2.
So on a Venn diagram we can really see that these two things are equal to each other.
But we will have to prove that.
And our first proof is coming up.
