Next on from just drawing some simple graphs to get a visual feel of the data is just to
do some very simple descriptive statistics.
Let's go up to Analyze and Reports at the top.
Second one is for me is Descriptive Statistics and I'm going just down to Descriptives.
I'm going to hit Reset so that everything is clear.
This is what you'll see the first time and let's just select age and we can click this
button to bring it in or I can just simply take age and drag it into the variable.
That's all I want.
I want simple descriptive statistics of the age.
I can hit this option button and I can choose what I want inside of those descriptive statistics.
Certainly I want the mean.
I certainly want the standard deviation.
I would like to know what the minimum and maximum was.
I might even want to know what the range was.
It's just the difference between minimum and maximum.
It's not the interquartile range.
It's the full range.
Maximum minus minimum.
I can get the skewness and kurtosis as well.
And I'm going to hit Continue and OK.
This is the syntax that was generated by SPSS.
And right at the bottom here we see that we have descriptive statistics for the age.
It just gives us a valid end.
All 250 cells were entered so we don't have any missing data.
We see that we have 250 cases.
The range was 67 that is 85 was the maximum, 18 minimum and 85 minus 18 is 67.
It tells us the mean was 51.02 for me, yours would be different.
The standard deviation was 19.793.
We see the skewness there as far as the statistic and its standard areas concerned and the kurtosis
as well.
Of course, the closer these both are to zero, the more we have a normal distribution.
Let's go back here to our data.
What about all of these other scale or numerical variables?
I'm going to say Analyze, Descriptive, Descriptive.
I'm just going to hit Reset so that everything is clear.
And this time I'm going to take all these little scale or continuous numerical variables
and I'm going to do all of them in one go.
My options, once again, I want Minimum, Maximum, I want the mean, I want the range.
I don't want skewness and kurtosis.
Let's just say OK and OK.
And now we see we get a much bigger chart here, a much bigger table, I should say.
And we have all of them, age, temperature, heart rate, white salt count and months.
We see 250 in each of those.
And once again, we see the range that is maximum minus minimum.
We see the mean and we see the average and we see the standard deviation.
So all in one go, we can have a look at the descriptive statistics for all of our numerical
variables there.
What about the categorical variables?
I'm going to show you from, let's take diabetes versus outcome.
Let's do diabetes versus outcome.
I just want to create a little matrix that's columns and rows of values counting how many
patients survived, did not have diabetes, how many survived, did have diabetes, how many
who died, did not have diabetes, how many who died, did have diabetes.
So we're going to go to Analyze, Descriptive, down to Cross Tabs.
I'm just going to reset those.
So I want to know the diabetes against the outcome.
Now they can go in any order, so you can change those around.
I'm not going to do any statistical analysis on this.
For now, I just want a simple table that I can have a look at my categorical variables.
And then we see patients who died and who survived without diabetes, with diabetes.
So in my instance, I had 67 patients with diabetes who died, and 55 patients, I should
say, without diabetes who died, and 55 without diabetes who survived, 62 patients who died and
had diabetes, and 66 who survived and had diabetes.
So you get a nice overview here of your categorical variables.
So there we go, simple descriptive statistics.
Next up though, I'll show you how to do these, but to split them up.
We could well imagine that we have age up here.
We see the mean was 51.02 and the standard deviation was 19.
But we wanted to know what's the age difference between the survivors and those who died.
Not just the overall.
So we need to split our data set into those who survived and those who died, so that when
we do descriptive statistics on the age, we get those descriptive statistics for each of
those two groups.
