Let's do a little bit more about mappings and I just want to cement one of the issues for you
and that is just the difference between a domain and a range. So let's have the domain let's have
the domain of this set of mine A1 let's that that be the set of all natural numbers and I'm going
to use a mapping that maps the natural numbers set of natural numbers to the set of natural
numbers that is going to be my mapping and here's a new thing I'm going to give my mapping a name
and my mapping is going to be called alpha for instance and alpha maps n to n plus 2 such that
n is an element of the natural numbers so this is my mapping I'm mapping from the natural numbers to
the natural numbers because whatever natural number I put in there if I add 2 to that I'm
still within the set of natural numbers later on we'll see that has a specific meaning and let's
now just look quickly then again at the domain of A1 if that's my natural number now I'm mapping to this
and I'm going to call this A2 now let's just look at the co-domain then the co-domain so that is would
be this 2 that is also going to be the set of natural numbers I'm mapping the natural numbers to
the natural numbers by this mapping n goes to n plus 2 we note though that the elements 1 comma 2
is not in the is never going to appear in this A2 because if I start with 1 1 plus 2 is 3 so I'm going
to have 3 4 5 6 so this is never going to appear appear so that means my range for this mapping alpha
is going to appear is going to be the elements 3 4 5 6 etc up to infinity so that is really the
difference then between a co-domain and a range the next thing I just want to if was just to have a
quick look and if I have a sub 1 and I have a sub 2 and I have a sub 3 I have this mapping I'm going to
make it a B and C I'm going to make it D and E and you make F and G and we're going to map there we're
going to map there we're going to map there we're going to map there we're going to map there and
we're going to map there let's call my mapping from A1 to A2 let's call it alpha that maps the set A1 to
the set A2. All we write now is something like this. Alpha of A equals D and the alpha
of B equals E and the alpha of C also equals E. Can you remember what is this? What would
this be? That indeed is on to because at least each of the elements in the codomain has at
least one element in the domain mapping to it. So that's how we would write it. Now imagine
now we have beta that maps A2 to A3. That means the beta of D is going to be F and the beta
of E is going to be G. So what would this A2 to A3 be if you can think of that? Well there's
at least one and every one is there. So this is actually a bijection because it's both
one to one and it's on to. Now I just want to talk to you about this mapping that we have
here. We're going to call this the beta alpha mapping. That's one way to write it or I can
say alpha beta. That's almost like a conjugate there. But note that beta goes first in this
because if I write the beta of the alpha of say for instance A. Well that's that or that
that's the same way to write it. The alpha of A is D. So here I'm looking at the beta of
D and the beta of D was F. And the beta of D was F. So just a bit of this notation for you
to get used to. Now we're going to just I'm just going to mention this theorem. We're not
going to prove it yet. That says if alpha if alpha is a bijection then alpha has a unique
inverse. If alpha is a bijection then alpha has a unique inverse. Now what do I mean by
that is that I must somehow be able to get back from my codomain to my domain. And that
is going to be an inverse. And that's why we said bijections are so important. So I didn't
say it yet. Don't think about this alpha. It's not the same alpha. I'm just saying if a mapping
is a bijection then it has a unique inverse. And the other quick thing just to have a look
at. If it is a bijection and then we're going to have something like this. Alpha beta's inverse
is going to be beta inverse alpha inverse. Don't want to say too much about that now.
We're going to have a look at the proof. The important one of this. If a mapping is a bijection
then it has a unique inverse. So just to cement or just add a little bit of flesh to your understanding
of mappings before we get to do some exercises.
