In this video, I want to show you how you can split your file according to one of these
categorical variables and to get descriptive statistics on one of the numerical variables.
So imagine we wanted to see specifically the descriptive statistics of the age based on
whether the patient survived or died. What I'm going to do is to come down to data and then
all the way down I see an entry there split file. I'm going to split my file and what I want to do
is the following. I want to compare groups. I'm going to choose this second one and the outcome
is already there. Let's just reset that so I can show you exactly how to do that. I'm going to say
compare and then I'm just going to drag the outcome in or I could have just clicked on the outcome
and selected it there. And it says sort the file by the grouping variables or the file is already
sorted. We can leave that and just click OK. And if I now were to go back, I see suddenly all the
patients who died are together. And if I go down, down, down, all the survived are together. So let's
go to analyze, descriptive statistics and descriptive. Let's reset that. And we mentioned that we wanted
the age. And again, remember the normal options that we do have. I'm just going to click OK. And when I
look at my table now, I see that I have mean and standard deviation for the patients who died and the
patients who survived quite separately from each other. They are separate from each other. Now let's do one
more thing. Let's just go to graphs, chart builder. OK. And this time around, again, we just want a simple
box plot. And I'm going to bring in age right there and my axis. And I'm just going to click OK. Now you'll
see that we now get two separate analyses. So I get the died and survived quite separately. They are
still not inside of one little plot or graph for me to do. And later on, we'll see how to do that. I
just want to show you that all the analysis are now done according to the file being split as if they are
two separate files. We can go back to data, split file, and we can click the stop selection here,
analyze all cases, do not create groups. I'm going to click that. And I'm going to click OK. And if we
were to now go to analyze descriptive statistics, descriptive, let's just do the age again, I am back
just to having all of the cases analyzed in one go. So that is how you would split a file according to
some decision. Now, in this instance, it was easy. We just chose a categorical variable. But there are
many more ways to split a file. You can even split a file on numerical variables by just building in
certain ranges inside of a numerical variable to split the file along. This, though, was an easy way
just to split by categorical variable. But remember, always undo that splitting so that when you do
further analysis, we don't keep on seeing the file being split by whatever your selection was.
