I want to take a few minutes to tell you about these resources for you to help you to prepare for the College of Surgeons Intermediate Exam.
Very difficult exam in as much as the first time that you're going to face a real important oral, much more difficult to pass than your student oral exams.
And it's a very nebulous type of exam. No one's exactly sure what you should know and to what level you should know.
It's not as well defined as the primary exam, anatomy and physiology, and perhaps not as emphasized as the final exam in which you're obviously all very interested in.
But you've got to pass this intermediate exam. So I want to introduce you to this website, J-U-A-N-K-L-O-P-E-R.com.
It takes the form of a blog on a daily basis. I'll have entries mostly on review of recent articles.
So you needn't read the whole article. You might not have the ability at this time of your career to really interpret the literature properly.
So I go through and I dissect that to you. And if you keep up with reading those blogs, it makes for some great information that you can use in your aurels and really shine in these aurels.
On that website, there's also a link at the top that takes you to the intermediate exam masterclass.
And that's a series of videos that you can also find on this YouTube channel, J-H-K-L-O. So there's no H there, but there's an H there.
And that's a series of lectures. And on a daily basis, I try and add to these lectures. And we hope for eventually most of the topics covered in this exam to have lectures available.
Okay. You can watch, you can link to them from the website or you can just watch the channel. That's the first playlist on my channel. There's the intermediate exam.
Okay. Now, why do we do this exam? First of all, this forms the basis of your knowledge of taking care of a surgical patient.
And without knowing this work and knowing this work well, you're certainly going to have gaps in the rest of your career as far as taking care of your patient's eye concerns.
Obviously also for yourself. Now, I want to urge you to do well in this exam.
We sit there as examiners and we see candidates who just want to pass. And that's really not good enough.
I want to urge you to try and do well in this exam. And there's no reason why you can't. You've got to pass this hurdle and you're doing it for patient care.
You've got to pass this hurdle because you want to get to the final exams and qualify as a surgeon.
There's also some cognitive issues. If you look at academia and you compare yourself to other students in other fields,
at the same age as you are now, they're already post-doctoral students. Okay. They're contributing massively to their field and their fields of research, etc.
Okay. And you're still writing an intermediate exam for master's degree level qualification. Okay.
But that puts some importance into what you're doing. Obviously society has decided that you're clever enough to be in this position.
And other people of your age in academia are already contributing. Okay. That means you've got to take this seriously at a certain level as far as society is concerned.
So now putting all of this together, I really want to urge you to study hard and try and do well in this exam.
Not try to do. You are going to do well. And as time goes by, I'm really going to add to this resource to help you prepare.
Now you are going to write MCQ. Best fit answer. And you've got to sit on your behind. Okay. You've got to read, read, read, and reread.
I want for you to do the following Zen. Take a piece of paper. Put it on your desk or on the wall.
Write date, start time, end time. Any time that you sit and study. Look back at the previous week.
And initially you might be amazed at how little you are really doing. And I want for that to encourage you to do better on a week to week basis.
If you document how much you study, you are going to improve on the times that you are.
Remember how the human mind works. Firstly, we're going to get what we call unconscious incompetence.
You don't even know that you don't know. There's something in medicine, there's something in surgery, you have no knowledge of it.
You don't even know it exists. Then for the first time you hear it in the ward or in a lecture or you read it in a book, you become aware of it.
Now you are consciously incompetent. The first time you ever hear about it, ooh, that actually exists. I didn't even know about it.
Now you've got to find out more about it or you've got to read through that article again and you've got to make that knowledge part of yourself.
Now you're going to become consciously competent. But anytime you need to use that knowledge, you're going to actively have to think about it.
And eventually if you've used it enough, if you've read through that article enough, if you've read that chapter in the textbook enough, if you've looked at these videos enough, through repetitive use comes unconscious competence.
And that's where we want to get you. Eventually as a surgeon, many of the things that you are doing, you get to do unconsciously, competently.
You're going to perform that surgery, you're going to have that knowledge when you see the patient, you don't even have to think of it as part of yourself.
But to get from there, before you start the exam to there, I don't want you to walk into the exam at this level of being consciously competent.
I want you to walk into this exam unconsciously competent. That the answers just flow out of you. Structured answers in this oral just flows from you.
You don't even have to think about it. And that only comes from repetition. The only way a human being goes from there to there is through repetition.
So sit on your behind and document how much you study. And use these resources. Now, there's art and science to the oral.
And there's not many emphasis placed on helping you to prepare for this. Yet this is the most important part. This is where you can show what you're really made of.
Okay. And keep on watching these. There's some exciting news coming in future to help you prepare for this and walk into these exams with as little stress as possible and with great confidence.
But it all starts by sitting on your behind and studying.
Thank you.
