Welcome to this first course in linear algebra, or elementary linear algebra.
What is this course or this playlist going to be about?
Well, we're going to look at a matrix, or matrices in plural, and do some equations on them.
We're going to look at a special object within the matrix, a property of the matrix called the determinant.
There's a lot to say about the determinant, so saying anything now might just confuse you.
We're going to look at vectors. Many of you know what vectors are.
We're going to have a very brief look at Euclidean in space.
We will say very little about it.
If you understand these first three, there's going to be nothing new for you in Euclidean in space.
And lastly, we're going to have our first look into the world of imaginary numbers, or complex numbers.
Now, first of all, what is the matrix?
Well, it can do three things, basically.
It can represent physical data.
Most people know what an Excel spreadsheet is.
There's just rows upon rows upon rows, columns, columns, columns of little blocks,
and you can put any values in that block, whether it is numbers or text, and that can represent data.
The figures for a company as far as their sales are concerned, anything, some scientific research,
say medical research, where I'll have on the top all sorts of variables, and then list all the patients here,
and fill in all the blocks as far as all the values is concerned.
If you have a block system of that, it is called a matrix.
So it can represent some actual data.
I put data in blocks.
In physics, we use matrix equations.
As far as vectors are concerned, I can represent a vector as a very special form of a row or a column of data.
But firstly, we're going to look at it as a mathematical object in its own right.
It is just a number.
The whole matrix is just a number.
I can add numbers.
I can subtract numbers.
I can multiply matrices.
And as such, they represent what we call a linear set, or a set of linear equations.
What is a set of linear equations?
Well, that I write here on the board, I can have 3x plus 2y equals 4.
I can have 5x plus 2y equals 7, for instance, whatever.
That is a set of linear equations.
Linear refers to that these variables stand on their own.
The following will not be linear equations.
If I have xy plus 7 equals 4, it's a set of, but I've multiplied x by y now.
It is not a linear system anymore, a linear equation.
If I have x squared plus y equals 4, that is not a linear equation.
If I have functions like the log of x, or I have the sine of x equals 4, equals 4.
Okay, those are not linear.
Linear means this is standard.
They stand on their own and each to the power of 1.
I can take this.
I can construct matrices from this.
And now those matrices become mathematical objects and I can perform mathematical functions on them
to get to answers of linear equations.
Okay, so certainly we'll look at that.
Just four quick definitions there.
Before we get to those, I should tell you what the addresses are of a matrix.
So we denote a matrix by these square brackets and we'll have values ABC, DEF, GHI, and these
will be real numbers.
4, negative 3, 0, 5, 1, negative 6, 3, whatever the real values.
So as you put these square brackets around them, some textbooks, some people will just put
these curved braces just in brackets around them.
Okay.
Putting straight lines is certainly easier to draw on your computer, but that means something
different.
Then we get to the determinants.
So to try and put these square brackets around or these curved brackets, and that's a matrix.
So there's these entries into these different blocks.
Now, the first is a square matrix.
These lines of numbers, these are rows.
Rows.
And these lines of numbers, they are columns.
So this, and we always put rows first and columns.
So this matrix, we can call it a matrix A.
Usually we print it bold.
Okay.
This is what we would call a 3 by 3 matrix.
First one refers to rows, second one to columns.
There are three rows, and there are three columns.
And we can write this as I, J, because we can give these, and we can give addresses to
all of these.
And that's important for later on.
So we can call this first entry A11, A12, and A13.
That means row one, column one.
That's the address of that entry there.
So that was a 4.
So we can call the entry in our matrix, or the element in our matrix, in row one, column one.
Okay.
So now we're going to go to the row twos.
And then we're going to go to the row threes.
And this is column one.
This is column two.
This is column three.
This is column one.
This is column two.
This is column three.
So A33 would be the last entry, or the last element in our matrix.
And if these two numbers are equal, that means it is a square matrix.
What is the leading diagonal?
Well, it is all these values in this line, from the first one to the last one.
In other words, I can only have that in a square matrix.
If I had A14, A24, A34, that I could not have a leading diagonal as such,
the main diagonal or the leading diagonal.
What is a symmetric matrix?
Well, let's write.
Let's do one.
Always, all these are types of square matrices.
So let's just write four and three and one.
A symmetric matrix means everything off of this main diagonal is the same.
So remember, here is an opening.
There is an opening.
There is an opening.
There is an opening.
There is an opening.
There is an opening.
Okay.
So if there is a one, this one will be a one.
If that's a four, this one will be a four.
On that line, and say, for instance, we make this two and two.
So off of the main diagonal, on these diagonals, these numbers, these will be the same.
That is a symmetric matrix.
It is symmetric along this.
Lastly, a diagonal matrix.
This is the special type of symmetric matrix in which all the elements or entries off of the main diagonal,
now this can be any numbers, are zeros.
If all these are zeros, that is called a diagonal matrix.
You'll certainly see lots more and other special types, but just as an introduction,
so that you feel comfortable knowing what we are talking about when we talk about matrices.
Don't worry about any of these making any sense of how to construct the matrix from there,
or get its determinant, or see it as column, or row vectors.
Don't worry about anything like that.
This is what the course is about, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and chapters in the course.
This is what a matrix looks like.
It can represent physical data as in a spreadsheet.
It can represent a vector, and it can be a mathematical object in its own right.
If it's a mathematical object, it represents a linear set, a set of linear equations.
I could have x, y, and z, x, y, and z, x, y, and z, equals 4, 7, 3, whatever.
It's a lot of linear equations, and I want to solve them all in one go.
So all these x's will have the same value, the y's will have the same value.
Why don't we make this, make that also a 3, otherwise, okay, not a 3 at all, make that a 4.
There's a reason why I do that, you'll see later.
Okay, so I want to solve these two both in one go.
I can construct matrices from them, and I can perform mathematical operations on those matrices,
and I can give an answer, and I can give the values of x and y all in one go.
All in one go.
Quite exciting.
It's something that most students will never have done in school.
So it's a brand new, brand new concepts, and as such, it can be a bit daunting at times,
but we'll try and make it as easy, as easy as possible,
and that you see it's actually a wonderful world, and it solves so many real-life problems for you.
It's actually quite fantastic.
