Let us begin our journey into linear algebra by looking at matrices.
A matrix is a table of numbers, such as this.
The table is neatly ordered into rows of numbers and columns of numbers.
To complete the mathematical notation we put this table into brackets and we give the matrix a name.
Now in most textbooks the brackets will be square and the name of the matrix will be written in bold uppercase letters.
But what is this table of numbers?
Well basically for now two things.
The first is a representation of some physical phenomenon.
Say for instance you have three cats and over a few years they each have three litters.
Cat number one will have seven kittens then four kittens and lastly three kittens.
Cat number two will have three kittens in her first litter then four then seven and so on.
This table represents the data from an actual physical recording.
Later we will see that matrices can also represent vectors used in physics.
In this chapter though we will see that a matrix can also represent a mathematical object in its own right.
It is almost a number, a number that can be added, subtracted, multiplied and so on.
As a mathematical object it represents what is called a linear system or a set of linear equations.
But what is a linear equation?
Well here are some examples.
We see three equations each with two unknowns.
These equations can be turned into a matrix and as mentioned mathematical operations can be performed on these matrices
and we will see that this can solve our system of linear equations.
Note first though, what does not make a linear equation?
Here are some examples.
There can be no products of multiplication or division of the unknowns.
All the unknown variables must be to the power 1 so x squared here is not allowed.
And no logarithmic or trigonometric functions are allowed.
Before we can construct a matrix from our linear set we need to formulate a plan.
We need to give each space in the matrix an address.
Each address houses a single element of the matrix.
Here is our matrix again.
Because it was named uppercase A each element will be named lowercase a.
The i refers to row number and the j to column number.
So the first lowercase a in the top left will be numbered 1, 1.
It takes up position in row 1 and column 1.
If i is 2 and j is 1 this refers to row 2 and column 1.
The 3 by 3 refers to the final size of the matrix.
In this case 3 rows by 3 columns.
Let us look at some definitions.
This is a square matrix.
The number of rows and columns are equal.
This is the leading diagonal and can only be found in a square matrix.
This is a symmetric matrix.
Elements on both sides of the main diagonal are the same.
Look at the 7s, the 3s and the 4s.
And finally in a diagonal matrix all the elements off of the main diagonal are 0s.
So the comparable, the firstиниon workflow yard is 6.
Violence or 2 itself to the top left is 0.
For the邊 and anderes between ways they are 0.
That's right.
All the names are 10 to 15, 0.
