We continue our look into this wonderful world of SymPy and let's have a look at doing some integrals.
As per usual, I'm starting my first block of code here in the ipython notebook with importing SymPy and using the abbreviation SYM.
I'm going to do one or two of these video lectures also referring to it in a different way.
But we'll get to that for now.
In this namespace, I'm just going to use the abbreviation SYM, meaning I still have to refer to it there,
dot init underscore printing, open and close parentheses, so I'm invoking pretty printing here.
And I'm setting x as a symbol.
The variable x now becomes a symbol.
So I'm going to print the definite integral and then here we have the printing of an integral itself.
So it's capital I and it says integral.
Don't confuse it with integrate.
We'll get to that.
That's something different.
So I want to do the sine function.
And because I've just imported SymPy as SYM in this fashion up here, I have to refer to SymPy in invoking the sine function.
So it's SYM dot sine of x comma with respect to x.
And if it's an indefinite integral, I needn't put these parentheses here.
I can just do that.
But we'll see when we get to the definite integral.
It's a good idea just to have those parentheses there.
Let's run this block of code.
And is that not a thing of beauty?
Lovely integral sign there.
The sine of x with respect to x.
This indefinite integral.
Let's move on to the definite integral.
Exactly the same thing.
We're still going to have the sine of x.
And that's why I say get used to putting these parentheses after the comma here.
So it's going to be with respect to x.
That's the first argument.
And then your lower bound and your upper bound.
Now I want it to go to pi.
Pi, the value of pi itself, has to be invoked from SymPy itself.
So you have to say SymPy dot pi.
Let's run this bit of code.
And lo and behold, the definite integral of going from zero to pi of the sine of x with
respect to x.
Lovely.
As always, there are two ways to do it.
There's actually more than two ways.
I'll just show you this do it.
Do it, open and close parenthesis, command at the end.
So it's exactly the same.
I'm just using the integral word there with the uppercase i.
And if we run this, we're actually going to get the calculation.
So the definite integral in going from zero to pi of the sine of x dx is two.
And we get our solution there.
Perhaps the proper way of doing it is using this integrate keyword.
That's a small letter, lowercase i, and it says integrate, not integral.
Don't get confused with those two.
So it's still the sine of x.
And then my arguments after the comma here.
So just look at the structure.
There's open and close parenthesis.
There's my open and there's my close.
Within that, I have two sets of code separated by a comma.
Before the comma, I have whatever my expression is.
Here there's the sine of x.
And comma and after that is my with respect to first argument, the lower bound and the upper bound.
So if I say integrate instead of integral and then having to put the dot do it at the end,
I can just do this and we're going to get the solution of two yet again.
Remember, I'm just printing out these strings just to make the notebook look good.
So I have the print command there.
I have to have these open and close either single or double quotes.
And I'm saying print on the screen the solution to the different integral,
which is just imprinted there with the solution.
So I'm just making it look presentable.
That's all I'm doing.
Now, let's move on to the integral requiring the product rule.
Just to show you that Simpi is quite advanced.
It can do quite a bit of integrals.
There are one or two that are still outstanding.
I'm sure the brain power behind Simpi is working on the issue.
If it cannot do the integral, it's just going to reprint that integral for you
without actually calculating it.
Remember, this is capital I, so it's not going to compute the solution for me.
It's just going to do the pretty printing on the screen.
So if I run this block of code, I have now x squared times the sine of x.
It's the product of two functions.
And just to show you, Simpi has no problem in dealing with this and calculating it for you.
So in this instance, I'm using lowercase i, the word integrate.
So it's actually going to do the calculation for me with respect to x.
So this is an indefinite integral.
And if I run that, just be aware, it's going to give you the solution there, beautifully done.
But it's not going to have the plus c at the end, even though this is an indefinite integral
and you have to have a constant of integration here.
It is not added there, so just be aware.
Now, the integral can also be done as there was the product of two functions.
We can also have the quotient one polynomial in the numerator, polynomial in the denominator.
And what I've done here is I've got two variables.
One I've called NUM for numerator, other one DEN, I can call it anything I want except x.
Because remember, x is now not a variable anymore, it is a symbol.
So I've invoked this, or created this variable num, and it's x squared plus 4 times x minus 2x.
Remember, as with any Python, I can't just write 4x like that.
I've got to say 4 times x.
And I put the spaces in just so that it looks neat.
You needn't do that.
And, of course, we are going to follow the rules of arithmetic.
In other words, the power is going to be done first, and then the multiplication and division,
and then we're going to get the addition and subtraction.
So Python is clever enough to do that for you.
And then the denominator, I'm just going to have 3x plus 2.
And I'm going to just print out to the screen the numerator divided by the denominator.
So I needn't put the expressions in here itself.
And, of course, these parentheses that I put in here, they're just extraneous.
I don't really, did not really need them.
Okay, there we go.
So it's just in the main parentheses, there are two sets of codes separated by the comma.
What comes before the comma is just very simply your, it's just very simply the expression
that you want to integrate, and with respect to what's with or without the bounds being
a definite or indefinite integral.
If I run this code, very beautifully rendered there.
I have my numerator, I have my denominator.
And just to show you, no problems there in executing the code and giving you the solution
to that integral.
One important thing to note, we see the log there in Python that refers to the natural
log, not log base 10.
It's log base e or the natural log.
Just to show you or prove it to you, there we have our last example.
I'm going to get the integral.
This is just printing the integral 1 over x dx.
I can run the code.
Lo and behold, there it is.
Very neatly done.
And the solution to that we all know should be the natural log, the natural log of x.
So if it's written as log x there, please note it refers to the natural log.
Good.
