We continue our look into SymPy and we're going to deal with limits in this video lecture.
As per usual in my first block of code I'm going to import SymPy as this abbreviation
SYM so I have to refer to it. One of its functions there init underscore printing
open and close parenthesis and I'm setting as per usual the variable X as a symbol. Limit
is quite easy. Here we have uppercase L. You might imagine that this is just going to
do the printing for us as opposed to doing the calculation. It goes into opening and closing
parenthesis and it takes three arguments here. Well I've used three arguments here. It is
my expression first comma and then the variable of the limit and then what the limit is approaching
the value that it approaches. So here I have the sin of X over X but because I only imported
SymPy in this fashion later on I'll show you other ways to do this. I have to refer to SymPy
or the abbreviation that I've saved here. So Sym.sin of X over X and let's execute this block
of code and look at that. So the printing is going to be done like this one over X times
the sin of X which you can just obviously imagine is sin of X over X. But look at the beauty
here. The limit as X approaches zero of the sin of X over X. As per usual there's more than
one way to do the actual calculation. Here I'm still stuck with uppercase L so it would just
invoke the pretty printing for me. But I have the dot do it section here at the end open and
close parenthesis and if I do that it'll actually do the limit for me. So the solution to this
limit is one. The limit as X approaches zero of the sin of X over X being one. Now we can
execute it in a second manner. Here we've just used do it with the capital L but as with integral
and integrate I have the lower case L here as a limit and that is just going to do the calculation
for me. Indeed the solution to this limit is one. Now I just want to introduce to you the
infinity symbol and that's quite easy to do in SymPy. I'm going to have SYM dot capital L limit
uppercase L so that's just going to do the printing for me. One over X as X approaches infinity. The
infinity symbol is two lower case O's. So just the O on the keyboard but I have to refer to SymPy
first to do that so it's SymPy S-Y-M dot double O. And lo and behold there's a beautiful infinity
symbol there. So the limit as X approaches infinity of one over X. I'm going to execute this code to
look for an answer by using the lower case L in this instance and I have the solution to this limit
being zero as we know. Now is it really zero? Indeed we can look at the left and right hand sides as we
approach the limit from the left and the right hand side. So here I'm just going to print this limit.
I'm saying one over X and remember here in this instance of my Python notebook I'm using Python 2.7.6
So if perhaps not important here but just to remind us all of the fact that you have to put this dot
off to the one so that this one is not seen as an integer. It's not the point here. It's one over X
as X approaches zero from the right hand side. So another argument I now have one argument, two argument,
three argument, fourth argument. So after the third comma I have a fourth argument. DIR for direction
equals and then in single or double quotes I use single quotes. Plus there so I'm approaching it
from the right hand side. So when I print this out you can't actually see anything other than the fact
that this one is now represented as a floating point value instead of it represented as an integer.
So we see the 1.0. So in the printing we're not going to have anything here but now I'm going to
execute it. I've used the uppercase L there so I've got to have the dot do it if I want it to be executed.
So if I run that we see approaching the limit from the right hand or positive side now gives me
infinity and I can also approach it from the left hand side by putting a negative there as my fourth
argument DIR equals and then in in quotes negative sign and if I run that approaching the limit from
the left hand side or the negative side is negative infinity. Just on the matter of infinity how to refer
to negative infinity in your code in SimPy and here we have 1 over x squared just make things a bit
interesting doesn't matter and x goes to negative so that negative sign doesn't go there it's not
some dot negative OO it's negative SYM dot OO and if we execute that code nicely the limit as x goes to
negative infinity of 1 over x squared. So that's a look at limits prints beautifully and can be calculated
very easily.
Very easily.
Very easily.
