Now we're going to begin our study into more advanced topics in calculus.
We're going to look at vector calculus and multivariable calculus.
Now we've done single variable calculus, where we take the derivative or the integral of functions of one variable,
whether they be polynomial functions or transcendental functions like sine, cosine,
trigonometric functions, logarithmic functions, exponential functions.
Now we're going to look at vector-based functions and multivariable functions.
Let's start with a vector-based function.
Now I don't want to do a whole series on vectors.
For that we can look at my series on linear algebra and matrix equations,
which will tell you much more of the secret life of matrices and vectors
than we traditionally do in a multivariable calculus or higher-dimensional calculus course.
So let's start with vectors, a vector function.
A vector function.
Now there's some notation we have to get used to, and it will help us if we do use this notation.
When we look at polynomials or transcendental single variable functions,
we call those R functions.
So all real numbers, and it's a one-to-one ratio, one variable to one variable.
When we look at a vector, let's use a common vector.
We're going to look at a position vector.
There's different ways to write this.
R like that.
R like that.
R with a line underneath.
Various people will use various ways to write this.
I think for convenience sake, in these videos I'm going to use that.
Although it might be confusing, some people might use that for mean or average.
But let's use that, the vector R.
Now let's make the vector R dependent on some variable time.
A particle is going to move in time, and it is going to have a position vector in time.
A position vector in time.
Now let's think about this.
We might have a look down on a two-dimensional world.
We'll have the x-axis and the y-axis.
And at time zero, the particle is there, so it's going to have a position vector
with an x value and a y value.
Now the particle moves in in time two, it's there.
So it will have that position vector at time two.
So it's at time zero.
Let's make that time zero.
Time is equal to zero.
Time is equal to one.
You can also think of the fact that I've now parallelized this function of mine.
And we have x and y both of t.
Because we'll have an x of t and a y of t.
So at time zero, I'm going to have this x zero, y zero.
Remember which was that point?
With an x and a y value.
And at time t equals one.
One, one.
X one, y one.
We're going to have an x value there.
And we're going to have a y value there.
So it moves.
So we can say that this function, our vector function, is now a function of x, which is
a function of t, and of y, which is a function of t.
So we have two variables, x and y, both are variables of t, that are included in this vector function of ours.
And that is the first functions we're going to look at to see if we're going to get a derivative of this function,
which is now not a polynomial, not a Tarzan-Degel function, although I can have logarithmic and technometric functions of x and y in there as well.
And I even stop there, I might have a z, an r and s, depending on how many dimensions, for instance, for position I'm looking at.
Usually we'll just look at x, y, and z, three-dimensional, but there's no need to stop there.
So we're going to see if we can get a derivative.
Now we'll see, as soon as we can start with derivatives, if we look at a derivative, we can say that if, if a function, if this function exists at a point p, it is continuous at that point p, it is differentiable at that point, at that specific point.
Or if it's continuous and smooth over the whole domain of this function, it is differentiable over that whole domain.
Let's carry on in the next video.
Good, now let's get the derivative of this function.
In the previous video, I forgot just to change this.
And we're now looking at an R, R, M function.
So on this side of the equation, we're still dealing with a single variable.
In this instance, our time variable.
But on this side, this will be our R, R2 function.
When we say R, what is this?
You know, two function.
Because we're dealing with two terms.
Two terms on the right-hand side here.
Okay, so these are the vector-based functions that we're going to deal with.
Now, let us look at the derivative of this.
Now, there are various ways to write the derivative of this.
So, let's look at notation.
So, we can have R prime of t.
We can have dr dt.
Something like that.
And there's various other ways that we can write this derivative of that.
I just want to write formally the derivative as we did with single variable calculus.
Remember that the derivative, let's write it in this form,
is going to be the limit as h approaches 0 of R of t plus h minus the R of t divided by h.
So, you'll note that this is very similar to single variable calculus.
Where we're just going to move it in infinitesimally small position.
We're just going to make a tiny change in position.
And the smaller that change becomes, we get to the limit as h equals 0.
And that will give us the derivative.
Let's look at a quick example.
Let's have a look at a quick example.
Let's have the R of t equals, let's make 2t cosine of t comma 2t sine of t.
As I said, we can have, we can have trigonometric functions in here for two terms there as well.
This is still this function because we still have two terms in there.
And all we do now, we can do all of this fancy stuff, but we know how to differentiate if this was x, 2x cosine x.
We know how to do that by the product rule because we've got 2t times the cosine of t.
And all we can go through this whole process, but we know how to do this.
But how do we do this combined?
Well, it's easy as pi.
You do them separately.
So the R prime of t, R prime of t is going to be, let's differentiate that.
So remember, our product rule will be u prime v plus u b prime.
So u prime, let's make that u and let's make that v.
So 2t is just going to be 2 times the cosine of t plus u prime v.
That's 2t and the cosine is the negative.
So that's going to be minus 2t sine of t.
This one is going to be 2 sine of t plus 2t cosine of t.
And that's as simple as that.
So I just took each one individually.
There's my comma stall.
So this one belongs there.
This one belongs there.
I've differentiated them each separately.
And it's as simple as that.
Now, we've just used the product rule.
We've individually differentiated each term.
But what if we're looking at the chain rule?
We have a vector function R there of S, e to the power 2S, e to the power SE.
And this S, so what are we looking at here?
Just to remind ourselves of the notation.
This is to the tower 3 on the other side because we have 1, 2, 3 terms.
But S there is a function of the S of t.
So what do we get if we want this of t?
We want the chain rule there.
We want the chain rule there.
Well, that says it is going to be the R prime of the S of t multiplied by S prime of t.
So there we have the chain rule.
So what does this say?
Well, it says we're going to substitute in the S of t once we've differentiated.
So let's differentiate this.
We know now how to do that.
Let's just get the R prime of S.
Just as it stands there.
So that's going to be 2, 2e to the power 2S.
We're going to have e to the power S.
And we're just going to have a single one there.
We're just going to have a single one there.
Okay.
So that's the R prime of S.
But now we have to multiply it by the S prime of t.
Now, what is the S prime of t?
That's easy enough to get.
S prime of t is going to equal 2t.
S prime of t is going to be 2t.
So I've got to do two things now.
I've got to substitute my values of S that I have there.
And I've got to multiply each of these terms by S prime of t, which is 2t.
So by the chain rule, we're going to have R, S.
We're going to have R, S.
And that is going to equal.
Now we're going to have 2t times that.
So 2 times 2 is 4t.
E to the power 2.
But S is t squared.
So it's 2t squared.
Comma.
E to the power S times 2t.
So that's 2t e to the power S.
But S is t squared.
And we're going to have 1 times 2t, which is just 2t.
And there's our answer.
Let's just make sure that I'm correct.
That I didn't make a simple mistake.
A stupid mistake somewhere.
That's quite correct.
OK.
So what you're going to do for this, the chain rule,
is you're just going to get the R prime of S as it stands.
So each individual factor here,
you're going to take the derivative of with respect to S.
But it's S of t.
So once you've done that,
you've got to substitute each S in your derivative
with the S of t that you have there, the t squared.
And then you've got to multiply it by the derivative of this S.
So each one of them had to be multiplied by 2t.
Multiplied by 2t.
Multiplied by 2t.
Simple enough.
So we've seen it's quite simple to differentiate a vector function.
But we've got to understand what this means for us.
What can we actually do with it?
So we have a particle that moves in the x and the y direction.
Let's just go one step further.
Let's just be following our explanation.
I have a function.
F of x.
Now, I haven't drawn that,
but let's say that that would be y equals 3x squared plus 2 over x.
Now, that does not represent that function.
This graph I've drawn that does not represent that at all.
Just using an explanation.
How do I parametrize this?
Well, I can say y equals t.
t.
y equals t.
I'd probably better find this.
Make x equals t.
Let's do that.
Let's make x equals t.
t, that means y of t is now going to be 3t squared plus 2 over t.
Plus 2 over t.
So any point, as I said, this does not represent that,
but let's imagine that it does.
What I can now do is instead of this just being a curve,
it can now become a path of a particle
and it will have a direction depending on increasing values of t.
So that might be t0, t1, t2, t3, t4, t5, t6.
So I can rewrite this.
So I've parametrized it now as a function of t.
And that is going to equal for me, first of all,
x, which is this t, comma, and y of t,
which is 3t squared plus 2 over t.
OK.
With the comma there, the two functions,
so this is going to be an r2 function.
So if I take the derivative of this at any specific time,
what am I looking at?
If this is a position vector,
I'm looking at the instantaneous rate of change there,
which means I'm looking at velocity.
If that's a position vector,
that means I am looking at velocity.
But what if I want to look at speed?
Speed.
So what we've done here is we've done,
we can do r prime of t,
which is this dr dt.
And I can also do that at a specific value of t,
t equals c at any specific point.
So t can be some constant at t equals 3, for instance.
I hope you can still see in the corner here.
OK.
So that's instantaneous rate,
but I can also ask what is d,
it's usually written in as ds dt.
ds dt, and instead of velocity,
that becomes speed.
And now we've seen how to do this, actually.
Didn't know that is what we were doing.
We didn't know that is what we were doing,
but we were just looking at the norm.
We were just looking at the norm of the derivative,
and that gives us speed.
OK.
So what is that going to be?
Well, that is going to be dx dt squared
plus dy dt squared.
OK.
And remember, that was the norm.
We call that the norm of the derivative.
Or the length, then.
OK.
So we can go from instantaneous rate of change,
which was velocity,
and we can go to speed
by just taking these derivatives.
So if I took the derivative,
let's do the derivative of r,
r prime of t.
That was going to equal,
well, just of t, that's 1.
Comma, and then we were going to have
6t minus 2 over t squared.
Is this correct?
Minus 2 over t squared.
So that's our derivative.
So that's the derivative, dx dt.
That's dy dt from these two functions.
And if I square each of those
and I take the square root of that,
I'm going to land up with
not velocity, instantaneous rate of change,
but indeed with speed.
