Let's look at this example. We have a curve in R2 with this parametric equation.
x, y equals t minus 1 and t to the power 3 plus 2.
We're asked to calculate the equation of the tangent at a certain point.
Let's just get back to some basic mathematics.
How do we parametrize an equation?
What if we have the polynomial y equals x squared plus 3?
For instance, how can we parametrize that?
Well, we can just set x equal to another parameter.
Let's call it t.
And that means y equal to t squared plus 3.
Now, I've parametrized that equation into x, y.
y equals t comma t squared plus 3.
So if I were to draw this on a coordinate system that's an x squared that is plus 3,
so it's going to be 1, 2, 3 up, and we're just going to have our parabola there.
But I can also view it in this form.
It's parametrized.
All that means is that depending on a value of t, we're going to end up somewhere on this curve.
And as t increases, we're going to put a direction to this curve.
So if we see each point as a position vector, that will have a certain position in time.
So instead of this static parabola, I now have a path.
If I parametrize it, for instance, here we've done it with t, I can view it as,
or one of the uses then of parametrizing a curve is I can change an equation of a curve into a path,
which is just a set of points that indicate a position, a position vector.
And I can write it as this.
And this is nothing other in this instance.
Remember, you can use it for other things as well, not only for time and position.
But I can view this in my mind as, this parametrizeation, I can view it as a vector function.
Now, if I just wanted a certain point here, I would take the first derivative of this,
which is going to be 2x.
And whatever value of x I have, I can plug in there and I'll have the slope.
And I can just use point slope for y minus y1 equals m, which is my derivative of x minus x1.
And this x1, y1 is just a certain point I'm looking at.
But now, we are given this parametrize form, which in my mind I can say,
well, let's view this as a position vector, r of t.
Okay, with those two components, t minus 1 and t to the power of 3 plus 2,
I can convert this back into a polynomial.
I can convert that back into a polynomial.
Why not?
I can say x equals t minus 1.
In other words, t equals x plus 1.
And I can put in that in here, because I know y equals t to the power of 3 plus 2.
That means y equals, and every t is now x plus 1.
So that's x plus 1 to the power of 3 plus 2.
And there I'm back at a third order polynomial.
From polynomial to parametrization, in my mind I'm seeing it as a vector function.
Now, we know, as I said, how to get the tangent to a point there.
How do we get a tangent to this point that we have here?
Well, we know how to get the velocity vector from this.
I can do r prime of t.
Very easy to do.
That is going to be 1 comma.
And it's going to be 3t squared.
3t squared.
Now, though, how does that help me?
How does that help me with this point 0 comma 3?
Well, let's plug in this point in here.
Now, remember, x now equal to 0, which equals t minus 1.
In other words, what does that get me?
That gets me t equals 1.
If I plug in y equals 3, I should get exactly the same thing.
Remember, t equals t to the power 3 plus 2.
That leaves me with t to the power 3 equals 1.
So, t is just equal to 1 itself.
So, this is going to be, remember, I've gone from a static curve.
Now, this obviously is not going to be a parabola.
It's not a parabola.
It's going to be x to the power 3.
So, s-shaped curve somewhere in there.
So, I've gone from that as a static curve into something that's more dynamic.
And it's the path, for instance, set of position vectors.
So, remember, I can see a point as a point, and I can see it as a vector, a vector from the origin.
But that's going to be a position.
That is going to be a position at time equals 1.
Or my new parameters, not always time.
You don't have to see it as time.
It can just be a pure mathematical object.
But anyway, we're seeing it as time, time equals 1.
So, that's going to happen at time equals 1.
And what is the velocity at time equals 1?
Well, the r vector prime of 1, sorry, of 1, that is going to equal 1, 3.
And now it's beautiful.
I can just write the equation now of my tangent.
I can write x, y equals, I have a point, 0, 3, plus t times, and if I plug in one second there, I'm getting 1, 3.
Why does that work?
If you remember linear algebra, this is going to be the direction of any parallel vector.
And attach to that certain point.
Attach to that point.
So, in essence, now I have a parallel vector, which is 1, 3, which is there.
But is this going to start at a certain point?
0 and 3, it's going to start there.
But then it's also going to increase by 1, 3.
It's going to be parallel to this vector.
In other words, it's going to be there.
That is the line that is going to be...
Remember, this is another equation for a line.
This is another equation for a line.
Parametrize that as well.
Going through a point and having a certain slope.
Having a certain slope.
And as t increases, it also indicates movement along that line.
So, easy to go from parametrization, if you see it as a vector function.
So, first of all, we're going to get the slope, which is the first derivative of this vector function.
And I need to find out what the t value is.
And at that point, I can plug it in for x, in for y.
I'll get the same value for t, which I'll then put into my first derivative.
And I get a vector there.
Vector 1, 3.
And I attach that to the t because it's going to be parallel to this vector, this line.
But it goes through point 0, 3 that I was given.
Now, another example.
Still, we're dealing with differentiation of vector functions.
Now, it's very easy.
We're going to differentiate each and every element of our vector function.
Here we have a, what is this?
This will be a 3 function.
And we have cosine squared of t, sine squared of t, and cosine squared of t as our x, y, and z values,
if you want to see this x, y, and z.
But looking at domain, that's for t being an element of this closed interval 0, 4 pi.
Now, anything in the first year of calculus that you, any technique for differentiation that you learn,
polynomials, transcendental functions, all stays the same.
And we just do each one individually.
So the only thing, then, that we've learned over and above first year calculus is the fact that
this is what a vector function is and how you differentiate it individually gives you another vector.
If you saw that initial position, it's going to become velocity.
If you take a second derivative, it's going to become acceleration.
Okay, the other thing, though, that we have learned, any other thing here is, is it a continuous function on that domain?
Or is it piecewise?
Piecewise defined.
So let's get the position vector.
One more thing we've learned is, obviously, how to convert that instantaneous velocity, if we see that as a position vector, to speed.
Okay, so first of all, what, if that's position, what is the speed, what is the instantaneous rate of change, the instantaneous velocity?
What is the first derivative of the cosine squared of t?
Now, that's easy.
We're going to do that using the channel.
Okay, so that is going to be two times the cosine of t times negative sine of t.
Or sine squared of t, that is going to be two times the sine of t cosine of t.
And lastly, once again, well, just the cosine squared, yeah, was it just cosine squared?
Well, I have a problem, correct?
Cosine squared, then cosine squared, that's going to be two times the cosine of t times negative the sine of t.
And so there is our first derivative.
Now, we want to know, second of all, okay, the speed and acceleration of that particle.
Well, we can just then do the second derivative of this.
I won't do this.
It's easy to do.
We're going to use the product tool for all of these.
And then if we want to know the speed, we're just going to take the norm of this vector, of this vector, not that vector, of the velocity vector.
That's going to give us speed.
And remember, that was going to equal the square root, which we're always going to see as a positive value, absolute value included in those signs.
And that's going to be x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
And by that, I mean that is x that is y that is z.
So that's easy to see.
Now, is this a continuous function on this domain?
The two things we need for it to be continuous.
Number one is the first derivative must exist on this domain.
And whatever value of t between 0 and 4 pi that I plug in on this closed interval, remember, the first one is the must exist on that domain, on that closed domain.
So 0 must be included and 4 pi must be included.
So anything between 0 and 4 pi that I include here, I can get an answer for.
So that's 1, it's done.
But number 2, remember, in the open interval, in the open interval, so 0 and 4 pi is not included, this r prime of t must not equal 0.
And it's not 0, but the 0 vector.
So in this instance, I'm talking 0, 0, 0.
And look at that.
I have a sine t, a sine t, and a sine t in all three of them.
In actual fact, I have a cosine t in all of them as well.
Now, what about the cosine of pi over 2?
Certainly, pi over 2 is in this open interval.
Pi over 2 is not 0, it's not 4 pi.
So that's included in the open interval, the open form of this interval, open part of that closed interval, I can say.
And the cosine of pi over 2 is 0, so I'll have 0, 0, 0.
I'll have the 0 vector at least once.
You can also, you know, sine will also fall in there a few times.
So there is some instances of the value of t, which will give me the 0 vector.
So this one is not, so this is not, on this domain, this is not a continuous function.
In actual fact, it will be a piecewise function.
Thank you.
So let's get number.
Thanks.
Thanks.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
All right.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
