Now we're going to come to a very important concept called eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Eigen, eigenvalues, called characteristic values, characteristic values, and eigenvectors.
We're going to have a look at a linear set, or a linear system, whereby we have a matrix
times the column vector, remember those are the matrix of coefficients, the vector column,
which is our unknowns, and remember we used to say that that equals b, our solution on
the right hand side of our linear system, but say for instance it is some scalar, we'll
call it lambda times x. So each and every right hand side of our linear set of equations is
going to be some scalar times variable 1, variable 1, variable 2, variable 3, etc.
Now what we can do is let's manipulate this without us understanding what the definitions
of these are, what they mean yet. Just follow along. I'm going to take this to the other
side of the equation, so we're going to have lambda x minus a times x. Let me just swap it
around, so we're going to have lambda x minus a x is going to equal 0. I can take x out this,
but remember now these are column vectors, so the algebra is a bit different. If I take x out as a
common factor, I can't just write lambda, the lambda is a scalar, I can't have a scalar minus a vector. So this
is a scalar I've got to multiply by i minus a equals 0. Minus 0. Now what we are interested in,
I just want to go down my list so I don't miss anything. We are interested in the values of lambda such that we get
non-trivial solutions to this, to the linear system. This was set up because of a linear system. And we are
interested in the values of lambda that will give our linear system, non-trivial, remember that's all the variables
equal 0, non-trivial solutions. And that, those values of lambda are called characteristic values or eigenvalues. And that will only
happen if, and we'll look at an example, if the determinant of this minus a equals 0. When this determinant of the subtraction of these two matrices
equals 0, then we're going to get, then we can, for our linear system, have eigenvalues. And if you use this to solve, if you use lambda
then to solve your linear system, if you put these eigenvalues in your linear system, you're going to get a set of
solutions, and those set of solutions we call the eigenvector or eigenvectors. Now until we get more into eigenvalues and eigenvectors,
the previous video is not going to, or what I said to you is not going to make a lot of sense, unless you look at a
quick example. Here we have a linear set, as much as we have two equations and two anomes. But on the right-hand side, there is a
common scalar with the one variable and the other variable. So this doesn't equal 6 and equal 7. It is set up so that there is a
scalar value multiplied by the first variable, and the second equation multiplied by the second variable that is going to, that we need
solutions for. So if we just look back at the normal Ax equals b, let's set up these. So we're going to have, for A we're going to
have 1 and 3, and we're going to have 4 and 2. We're going to have our column vector of unknowns x2, and that is going to equal
0. We're going to have lambda x1, x2. Remember we took all of this to the other side, so it's minus this, so we're going to
have lambda x1, x2, minus, we're going to have our vector A, 1 and 3, 4 and 2, and we're going to have again x1, x2, and that is going to
equal to equal 0. We're going to take this out as a common factor, this common vector of unknowns, but we're going to
multiply this by the identity matrix. Remember, so we're going to have lambda I on this side, minus this matrix, 1, 3, 4, 2, and then we're going to
have x1, x2 equal to 0. So let's multiply this by the identity matrix. Let's move up here. So let's have, it's going to be
lambda, and we're dealing with 2 by 2 matrices, so the identity matrix for that would be 1, 0, 0, 1. And we're going to
subtract from this 1, 3, 4, 2, 1, 3, 4, 2. So this is our x1, x2, and this is going to equal 0. Let's multiply this out. So here we're going to have
lambda, lambda, 0, 0, 0, lambda. There's our matrix there, and we've got to subtract from that 1, 3, 4, 2. Let's just do this.
And then install the column vector x1, x2. Let's go to equal 0. Let's subtract these. So we're going to have
lambda minus 1. We're going to have a negative 3. We're going to have a negative 4. And we're going to have
lambda minus 2. So that's our matrix there. We're going to have x1, x2, and that is going to equal 0.
And that is going to equal 0. Now, we said that we will get eigenvalues if the determinant of this matrix,
this here, remember, it was lambda identity matrix minus A, if the determinant of this equals 0.
So this is now exactly where we are now. Let's get the determinant of this. So we're going to have
lambda minus 1, lambda minus 2, A times B minus, A times D minus B times C, minus C times minus 4,
A negative 4 is 12. And that's going to equal 0. So we're going to have lambda squared minus 3 times lambda,
plus 2. Negative 12 is going to equal 0. So we're going to have lambda squared minus 3 times lambda,
negative 10 is going to equal 0. And if we just solve this, it'll be, let's see, a negative 5,
and a plus 2. In other words, the eigenvalues, the eigenvalues for this linear system is going to be
lambda equals 5, and lambda equals negative 2. So they are our two eigenvalues for this linear system,
set of linear equations. In the next video, we're going to plug these in to get our eigenvectors
as solutions to this linear system. Good. Let's start with lambda, our first eigenvalue value,
lambda equals negative 2. And remember what we had, I just want to rewrite it here. We had
lambda minus 1, we had negative 3, we had negative 4, and we had lambda minus 2. We had our column vector
of unknowns, and that had to equal 0, 0. So let's use lambda equals negative 2. So we'll get
negative 3, negative 3, negative 4, and negative 4. We're going to multiply that by x1, x2. It's going to
equal 0, 0. So let's multiply this first row by the only column, first column. So we're going to get
negative 3, x1, negative 3, x2, and that's going to equal 0. That's our first equation. Let's just,
yeah, let's just solve it up. So we're going to get 3 times x1 equals negative 3 times x2. So x1
equals negative x2. Now this is our leading variable. This is our free variable. So let's call our free
variable x2. We're going to call it t. In other words, our leading variable x1 is negative t. Negative t.
So if we just look at x, as far as ax equals b. If we just look at our solution set there, x is going to
equal negative t for x1 and t for x2. So that is an eigenvector for this eigenvalue. Let's do that again.
And let's look at the eigenvalue of 5. So if we take the eigenvalue of 5, we're going to have 4,
negative 3, negative 4, and the 3. Let's set up our two equations. And as much as we have
two unknowns here, that's going to equal 0, 0. So we're going to have 4x1, row 1, column 1,
negative 3x2. That's equal 0. So x1, 4 times x1 equals 3 times x2. And x1 equals 3 over 4x2.
Let's call x2. Let's call x2 our free variable. Let's call that t as well. In other words, x1 is going to equal
3 quarter t. In other words, our eigenvector here is going to equal, for x1, we're going to have 3 quarters t,
and for x2, and for x2, t. So that is the eigenvector for this eigenvalue, for this special linear system
where we have a scalar multiple of the two variables on the right-hand side.
