So let's look at some of the properties of binary relations.
And the first one that I want to look at is just the reflexive property.
The reflexive property.
And we say a binary relation is reflective if the following holds.
The binary relation on a set A is reflective if A, A is an element of that relation for all elements A that are elements of A, of the set A.
So reflexive means if I take any element in that set and I look at the binary relations on that element.
So for all of them I have that this A, A is an element of that relation.
So before we saw all the relations if I had there was one that had 5, 5 and 6, 6.
If for every one is like that and certainly it wasn't true for all of those.
Then what would be true say for the first one that we had divides.
Because 1 divides 1, 2 divides 2, 3 divides 3, 4 divides 4 and 5 divides 5.
So that would have been an example of a reflexive.
Let's have a look at one more example.
If we say something, for instance, that R is equal to or greater than.
Greater than.
That is my, is equal to or greater than and my set, let's say my set is the set of all the real numbers.
No matter what real number I take, it is equal to or greater than itself.
It's always going to be equal to itself.
So every element in R, every element in R, if this is my relation that I'm looking for, is a reflexive relation.
The next one we want to have a look at, let me just put it here, it's just symmetric.
The symmetric, the symmetric property of binary, of binary relations.
That just means the following, that if I have, say, that A, B is an element of R, then B, A is also an element of R.
And this is where, this is where you have to be careful, just check what your textbook in your lecture is doing,
which way around they are, they are, they are writing it.
But if this is so and that is so for the relation on a set, a binary relation on a set,
then we're talking about a, sorry, about a symmetric set.
And the last one we're going to do is a transitive, transitive, the transitive property of a binary relation.
And then a great example that's always given in textbooks, if you consider all the lines in the, in the plane.
So I have a two-dimensional plane, x and y-axis, and I draw all the lines.
And my, if my relation is, so my set A, let's just write that, set A is all lines, lines in the plane.
Am I, that is my, that is my, that is my, or let's, let's say my relation then is, is parallel to each other, is parallel, is parallel.
That's my, now transitive means the following.
If I have the following, if one line, so line one, is parallel to line two, and line two is parallel to line three,
then what holds, well, line one is parallel to line three.
If line one is parallel to line two, and two is parallel to three, that means one will be parallel to three.
So if I have this, for all the, for all the elements that I do have in that set,
or if I have this property, then that binary relation is transitive.
So we have this reflexive property, the symmetric property, and the transitive properties,
the three properties that you should be aware of.
