Let's look at an example. Here we have a function with two variables, but it is defined by two different parts.
If x and y does not equal 0, 0, we have that expression, and if it is 0, 0, we have that expression.
And we're asked to get the first partial derivative.
The first partial derivative, remember that would be di f, di x. We can also write it as the d1 of f, since 1 refers to the first variable there, which is x plus.
Now, all we have to do in these examples is just do them separately. We'll do the partial derivative of the graph, that section, and on that section.
Now, let's do that. Now, we'll have to use, for x, y over x squared plus y squared, we'll obviously have to use the quotient rule.
And let's just review that very quickly, the different methods of doing this.
Let's make u, but remember it's u of x, is x, y, and v, but remember of x, is x squared plus y squared.
So, u prime, with respect to x, is just going to be y, that y is a constant.
Remember, y is seen as a constant, the constant remains, the 1 comes to the front, 1 minus 1 is 0, I'm just left with that.
v prime, remember with respect to x, is just going to be 2x.
y is a constant, y is a constant, and the first derivative of a constant is 0, and remember we need v, x, we need it squared, so that's going to be x squared plus y squared, all squared.
And it's u prime v minus u v prime over v squared.
So, that is going to leave us with x squared y plus y to the power 3 minus 2x squared y, and that's all over x squared plus y squared squared.
x squared plus y squared squared, and if we simplify that, that's x squared y minus 2x squared y, so we let the y to the power 3 minus x squared y over x squared plus y squared squared.
If we look at the second part, we need the first, the partial derivative with respect to x of 0, which is a constant, and that is just going to be 0, although it should be said you should actually do that by first principles.
So, that will be the limit, actually, as h goes to 0, of the f of, that is going to be x plus h comma y minus the f of x comma y over h, but we're now going to, when you do something like this, just for the constant, it's at the specific point.
So, we're going to plug these in, so we're going to plug these in, it's going to be 0 plus h comma 0, this is going to be the f of 0 comma 0, okay, which is just 0, and that's just h, and you'll see that it also comes down to 0, but you can just look at that, it's the, the partial derivative of a constant is just still going to be, it's still going to be 0.
