Now that we've looked at vector functions and their derivatives, let's move on to something else.
And that is multivariable functions.
Multivariable functions.
Now do not get confused between these and the vector function.
This is a multivariable function.
Real numbers, real numbers, to the power m to the power 1 d.
And let's have an example.
We need to have an R2R function.
So on the right-hand side, on the right-hand side we're not going to have one element, comma, another element.
We're just going to have 1.
That's what the 1 is for.
We don't like the 1.
On this side there we need to have 2.
So let's have an example.
f of x, y equals 3x squared plus xy plus y squared.
Okay, that is a multivariable function.
First-year calculus, we have dealt with single variables.
There was only one variable.
y equals 3x squared.
y equals 3x squared.
The dependent variable, y the independent variable, x.
Here we have 2 variables.
So there are 2 on this side.
These might come on the next side.
So don't get those confused with vector functions.
Don't get those confused with a vector function.
This is a function, this is a curve of a function in 3 space.
We're going to have 3 coordinates.
Because later on we'll see we can put this equal to the third dimension.
z equals 3x squared plus xy plus y squared.
Okay, and that's going to form a three-dimensional surface curve that we'll see a bit later on.
Okay, now we need to know how to take the derivative of this.
We need to know how to take the derivative of this.
And we're going to start off with taking what we call the partial derivatives.
Many first-year calculus classes, first or second level, both in first year, will do partial derivatives.
So many will be familiar with this.
We do partial derivatives in the following way.
We don't write dx, dy, or whatever.
We're going to write this funny curly d.
Some call it dy, some still call it d.
But we're going to have dx, dx, and we're going to have df, dy.
So partial derivative of this function f with respect to x and with respect to y.
And that is going to give us, lo and behold, a vector.
See already?
Up to the comma in there.
So if I want the partial derivative of this three-dimensional curve, this surface in three-dimensional space,
if I want the partial derivative, I'm going to get a vector.
I'm going to get a vector.
If I take the partial derivative with respect to x, very simply, here comes the recipe.
Easy, you treat the other variable y, in this instance, as a constant.
It might as well have been a 3 and a 3, a 4 and a 4, a 5 and a 5, a minus 7 and a minus 7.
It doesn't matter what constant you see it as a constant.
If you take the partial derivative of that function with respect to dy,
with respect to y, you're going to see x as a constant.
And if I had an r3 function, so we'll make that an omega and we'll make that plus z squared.
Now I've got 3 x, y, and z.
I was going to have a di f, di z as well.
I was going to have that as well.
Now there are various ways to write this.
We can also write this as d1f.
That means the first derivative of the function f of this first variable.
Now that depends on the order in which I wrote this.
I wrote this x, y.
So 1 will refer to x.
I could write this as d2f.
I could write this as d3f.
It just depends on what sequence I wrote this.
First factor, second factor, third, etc.
I could also write it as such.
Okay, now there's one other notation that you must be quite aware of.
And I can write it like this.
The f of x like that with a bar on top of zf.
We can use this as a vector.
There's a vector.
And that vector refers to then an x and y.
And that means I'm going to have to write this as di f, di x1.
And di f of di x2.
And if I had a third one, etc.
Di x3.
And that is just a component of my vector.
I'm seeing my vector x as xy.
That x is not that x.
This is a vector.
That's a number.
They've got nothing to do with each other.
Only in this instance I'm seeing this as my vector.
So don't get confused in many textbooks.
It can start looking very, very ugly.
Some of the ways, some of the notations that you find in textbooks.
Do not be concerned about them.
Don't get confused by them.
It just means I'm seeing this as a vector.
Here, so this x, and that's why it gets confusing.
We should never write x because that x has nothing to do with, is equal to x, y.
That x has nothing to do with that x.
Rather, see, this r equals x, y.
That from the previous videos, we're quite comfortable with now.
So that just means the different components, x, y, and z.
x, y, and z.
x, y, and z.
I've changed my example now.
I've made it into a z as well, a 3r function.
Okay.
Now let's do that with this one.
Now let's use the omega.
I should say w.
It's a lower case omega.
Let's do that.
So let's do die f, die x.
So I'm going to see y and z as constants.
So x, I'm just going to do normally.
That will leave me with 6x.
Now y is a constant.
So I might as well have had, say, for instance, 4x.
If I took the derivative of that, it would just be 4.
If I took the derivative of that, it would just be y.
Okay.
I'm going to take this one in front, which makes it 1y.
That one becomes 0.
x to the power 0 is just 1.
So I'm just left with y.
Now y0 is a constant.
Then, say, for instance, 4 squared, which is 8.
The first derivative of 8 is 0.
So there's nothing there.
z squared, there's nothing there.
There's also 0.
Okay.
So that is die f, die x.
What about die f, die y?
Okay.
That's going to be 0.
That is going to be x.
That is going to be plus 2y.
That is going to be 0.
Because this is just a constant.
Any arbitrary constant.
The first derivative of a constant is 0.
So it will be 0.
And die f, die z.
Or I can write it by 3f.
That equals.
Well, that will be 0.
That will be 0.
That will be 0.
That will be 2z.
2z.
So what is my partial derivative?
What is this whole vector of the partial derivative?
It's going to be 6x plus y, comma, x plus 2y, comma, 2z.
And that is a vector.
And you'll see later why that is a vector.
It is a vector along the x-axis.
Because remember we said now, well, this is very complicated with the z.
This becomes a four-dimensional surface.
Let's think about a three-dimensional surface.
z equals the f of x of y.
Depending on where I am on that surface, the tangent to anyone is going to be this flat plane.
But even in that flat plane, along the x-axis it's going to have a certain slope.
Along the y-axis it's going to have a certain slope at a certain point.
And this is the vector along the x-axis, along the y-axis, along the z-axis of this, in this instance, four-dimensional plane.
Or hyperplane, I should say.
Okay?
So let me get too confused.
We'll get to what all this means.
Just know how to do the partial derivative.
Let me do it once again.
Let's do it once again.
Let's do this with respect, just this one, with respect to x.
So if x, y, okay, that's to the power 1, x to the power 1.
If that was 4x, how would I, to the power 1, how do I do that?
I bring the 1 forward, 4 times 1 is 4.
I subtract 1 from there, that leaves me x to the power 0, which is just, that's just 1.
So that equals 4 times 1 is 4.
So I'm seeing y as a constant.
The 1 I'm going to bring forward, that's 1y.
x to the power 0 is just 1.
So I'm just left with, I'm just left with that y.
Okay?
But here, with respect to x, y squared is just a constant.
Seeing as a constant, if I differentiate with respect to x, there's nothing.
Nothing.
0 gets left.
The same there.
So not too difficult either.
In some courses, you might be asked to do these partial derivatives by first principle, and it involves limits.
And as for most people out there, myself included, we hate limits.
But let's do that.
Remember first, first, you know, calculus, single variable calculus.
Remember, we're going to take the derivative, or see the derivative as the limit.
This h approaches 0 of the f of x plus h minus the f of x divided by h.
That's how, that was the definition of the derivative, wasn't it?
Now, the same thing is going to happen to the partial derivative in multivariable calculus.
Now, what we're going to do there, it's going to take my cheat sheet here, because I always make a little mistake.
And I want to write it in, in this form, where we have our function f of x vector x.
Now, that vector x can be x, y, x, y, z, x, y, z, more and more and more dimensions.
That's why many textbooks write this form.
Instead of writing, for instance, f of x, y, z for three-dimensional function.
Well, that will actually be a hyperplane for four dimensions.
Anyway, okay, so instead of writing all of those out, we just write it as a vector there, meaning a vector x, y, z.
Again, that x has nothing to do with that x.
This x vector incorporates this whole three-dimension.
Please don't get confused, because the textbook's using x there as well.
Okay, might as well have been r, the vector r, position vector r.
Okay.
Now, let's write.
We want the partial derivative, i, of the f, then, of x1, x2, up to all xn.
Okay, so in this instance, x1 is x, x2 is y, and z, and et cetera, et cetera, till x to the power n.
And I want the if partial derivative, that i might be x1, it might be x2, it might be x3.
Or if I wrote x, y, z, et cetera, it might be referred to di f di x, di f di y, di f di z, it doesn't matter.
Okay, we're going to write it like this.
So that is still going to be, so I'm looking at the partial derivative of one of these, the partial derivative of any one of these.
So what's that going to be?
That is still going to be the limit.
x1, x2, and there's going to be a certain xi, xi, and to that we're going to add h, and it's going to carry on all the way to xn.
Okay, so whichever one it was, if it was x1, it will be this one.
If it was x2 or y, it was going to be the next one, minus the f of x1, x2, all the way to xn.
So all of those divided by h, divided by h.
So exactly the same as this, it is just adding the h to whichever of the factors we want the partial derivative of.
So I've purposely used this difficult way of writing it, but I think it's very clear to understand that it's just depending on,
we're going to write the exact values of all of those in this one, we're going to add the h, the one that we're interested in.
And I think maybe I should do, I should do one video, quick video, and let me clear the board and we'll do one example.
You'll see how easy it is.
All right, here we have a function.
f of x, y, z.
Remember, again, I'm going to say this a million times, that x is not that x.
It's the vector x, which has an x, y, and z component.
So a proper way of writing this would have been f of x, y, z.
Okay, so it is a vector, that x stands for a vector, but we're not really dealing with vectors,
we're dealing with multivariable functions.
So I actually don't like textbooks that use this, but many do, so you've got to get used to this.
And we want the first partial derivative, the first partial derivative of this.
The first one will be the first one in the line as we've written x, y, z.
So we're asking here for, we're asking for die f, die x.
But we want to do it by first principles.
Okay, that means we're going to use limits.
First of all, let's do it in a normal way that we might, children, we know how to do derivatives.
So let's just do it the proper way, or the way that you're going to do it.
Just this with respect to x, what is that going to be?
Well, we've seen y and z then as, we've seen y and z as, as constants.
So in your mind, quickly, just think of that y as any constant, make, make it 3.
So that was going to be x squared times 3.
That is 3x squared.
And how are you going to do that?
Well, you're going to take the 3, you're going to multiply it by 2,
you're going to get subtract 1 from that, which gives you x.
That's 3x squared, but remember now I said that,
so it's going to be y, so that's going to be equal to 2xy.
But you can just do it shorthand.
That is a constant, you're going to bring the 2 forward,
so that's 2y already, subtract 1, so it's going to be 2yx, or 2xy.
2xy.
Okay, z is a constant, because I'm just differentiating with respect to x.
It's a partial derivative, not a full derivative.
Okay, so that's my answer, but let's do it via those principles.
So that is going to be the limit.
The limit is h approaches the 0 of the f of,
now it's going to be x plus h, y, z,
minus the f of x, y, z, divided by h.
Okay, so it's just that first one,
the x1 that we're adding the h to.
It's not di f, di y, or di f, di z,
so it just gets added to that.
So anywhere that I see an x,
I've got to add, I've got to change it to an x plus y.
So it's going to be the limit,
this h approaches 0 of,
if I put x plus y on there,
how about x plus h?
So that's x plus h squared,
y,
plus z.
It's going to be that.
minus, what is the f of x, y, z?
Well, that is just x squared y plus z.
Okay, divided by h.
That will leave me with the limit.
This h approaches 0 of,
now I've got to,
I've got to do that whole thing.
x plus h squared times y,
so it's going to be x squared,
x squared,
y,
plus x times h is 2xh,
2xhy,
plus h squared,
I'm not going to,
I mean, I'm just squaring that,
and I'm multiplying y into that.
We're going to have a plus z,
I'm going to have a minus x squared y,
and a minus z,
as I distribute that negative in there,
divided by h.
Divided by h.
Where was I?
Am I going the right way?
Let's have a quick look.
Yeah.
Okay.
Now, what can we do?
We simplify,
we have an x squared y,
and a minus x squared y,
and we have a positive z,
minus z,
so we are left with,
the limit,
as h approaches 0.
Now, I can take h out,
as a common factor,
yes,
I'm going to have h,
and I'm going to have 2xy,
plus,
if I've taken an x out,
there's h y,
a y out,
divided by h.
Those two cancel,
so I'm left with a limit,
as h approaches 0,
of 2xy plus h y,
I can substitute h into that,
there's no h there,
so I'm just left with 2xy,
and if I substitute 0 in there,
0 times y is 0,
and lo and behold,
2xy,
2xy,
no problem,
so this is doing it by first principles,
as you did right in the beginning of calculus,
with single variables,
you can also do it with multivariable calculus,
anything that will catch you out,
this is this funny,
I shouldn't call it funny,
it's quite proper,
way of writing a notation.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
Aladdin.
cess willst.
Aladdin.
