So we've had a quick look how to differentiate a multivariable function.
But in first-year calculus, when we looked at single variable calculus, we had this build-up in high school
to vision this single variable function in our mind as far as the geometry of it is concerned.
And we have this pretty intuitive way of understanding what's happening.
And we have to develop the same thing when it comes to multivariable functions.
If we have a function in f of x and y, that is, let me start at the beginning.
I have a function of x, y equals the f of x, f of x equals y.
That is going to be a curve in a two-dimensional space.
Remember, we're going to draw a Cartesian coordinate system and there's going to be some curve in it with x and y values.
So this f of x single variable gives me a two-dimensional line.
If I now go to two variables, multivariable calculus, this is now suddenly going to give me not a line in three-dimensional space,
because from one we're going to two-dimensional, from two we're going to go to three-dimensional.
It is going to give me a surface, a surface like, imagine throwing up a blanket in the air and that blanket for momentarily just hangs there in the air, in the wind.
That is a, that is the curve of a two-valuable function in three-dimensional space.
Just remember that blanket that you just threw up in the air.
Okay. And this is what we're trying to do here.
Now, this, this might look horrible.
Just trying to picture, I have a z-axis, I have a y-axis, and here's, comes out of the board towards you is the x-axis.
So three-dimensional space.
And I've tried to draw this dome, this dome that hangs in three-dimensional space.
Okay. Because what happens here is, actually, remember, this is y equals the f of x.
So for any x value, for instance, for that x value, I'm going to go for that little x value, I'm going to have that y value.
This we usually write as z, and z now elevates this.
So I still have my x, y plane at the bottom.
Instead of drawing it like we usually did, we now drop that on the floor, and the z-axis gives us the height.
So for every x, y value, so I'm going to go down the x-axis, I'm going to go down the y-axis.
Where they join up, there's going to be a certain z value.
And there's a point in that curve, in that dome.
So we go from two-dimensional to three-dimensional.
Okay.
Now, you've got to imagine two other things in your mind's eye, what we try to draw here.
Here's another plane.
So instead of this dome-shaped blanket that's hanging there, we now have a rigid plane, a plank.
And it intersects the x-axis, say for instance, there, and there it stands, and x equals a.
So whether a is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, negative 1, doesn't matter, it's a constant.
x equals a is just an equation for a plane in three-dimensional space, and this plane stands
upright, facing the z-axis, facing the y-axis.
Anywhere, so imagine that with three dimensions, one-axis, y-axis, the z-axis, and this x-axis
coming straight towards you.
This is just this rigid plank, yeah, okay.
But imagine then that plank intersects, some way it intersects this curve.
Okay, so if this dome hangs here and this plane comes there, there's going to be this nice
little line where the two intersect, the dome and this plane.
And we call that the y-z profile.
We call that the y-z profile.
And here I have the y-z profile.
And imagine now, instead of the same axis as z still coming towards you, I now have a plank
standing like this.
This is the one I tried to draw here, going on the y-axis at a certain value, y equals b.
Now, this dome is going to, this three-dimensional dome is going to intersect this plank as well
in a nice little two-dimensional line, and we call that the x-z profile.
So, at y equals b, we have the x-z profile.
At x equals a, we're going to have the x-z profile.
Why do we call it that?
Let's start with this y-z profile.
And here I have to try to draw the y-z profile.
Because where this plank and this intersects, I have this nice line now.
I'm going to have this nice line.
And if I look straight down the x-axis, so this x-axis is going straight down at you,
this is the line of intersection that we're going to see.
And it is an intersection, if we look straight down the x-axis, we see the z and the y-axis.
We see the z and the y-axis, and that is why we call it, that is why we call it the y-z profile.
If I look straight down the y-axis, if I look straight down at what do I see in front of me?
I see the z, x-z axis.
I see the x-z axis.
And I'm also going to see a two-dimensional line.
That is the intersection of y equals b.
So this one will be this plane y equals b, and this is this plane x equals a.
Okay.
So we start with y equals b.
Now we have seen this line where these intersect.
And I'm looking straight down the y-axis, and all I see in front of me is the x and z-axis.
And from single variable calculus, I know I have a single variable.
I have z as a function of x.
I've taken away that third dimension, because wherever I put this y at some specific constant,
I'm just seeing this now, and I can take, I can get the slope by the first derivative.
And that is what the first partial derivative of f is.
It is the slope of the tangent line at that specific point.
And the second derivative, the second derivative is the slope of this y-z profile.
Tangent line to a certain point, to a certain point.
Okay.
I hope you get the picture.
What does the first partial derivative mean?
It is the rate of change of my function z with respect to x.
Normal single variable calculus, z is a function of x.
This is, we had y and x before, first year calculus.
Just a normal rate of change, just a slope of this line.
Okay.
So that is where my three-dimensional curve intersects my plane y equals b.
Okay.
The second partial derivative, remember that would have been di f by y, as we've written this one.
And that's the rate of change of z with respect to y.
So that's why we have the y, z, and the x, z profile.
Now, just the last thing, this is how it will be.
You'll be given a function of f of x and y.
So that's an r, 2, r function.
Okay.
And we have a point p, a point p, but we write it as a vector.
Remember, any point on this flat surface x, y, so that's on the y-axis, it'll be there on the x-axis.
Okay.
And then, obviously, it's going to have a corresponding z-value.
Okay.
Any point, a point can also be written if we have any point.
We have our vector normal, as in any point, it can be a point, a comma, b, but it can also be seen as a vector, as a vector, a comma, b.
So that's how it's written in many textbooks, the vector, a, b.
But it's nothing other than just that same point, a, b.
If that is an element of the domain of f, is a whole domain of f,
and f of a comma, b is exactly c, so we have some point on this dome, on this dome.
Then, the first partial derivative is going to be the rate of change of our function, f of x, y, or z, with respect to x.
And our second partial derivative, at that point, a comma, b, at that point, c,
we're going to have the rate of change of z with respect to y.
