Now in the previous videos we were working towards getting the equation of a tangent plane to any point, or a tangent hyperplane if we had more than just two variables x and y.
So we remember from first year calculus, if a function was differentiable, it meant it was continuous at that point, it was differentiable at a point. It was continuous at that point and there was, it guaranteed for us a unique tangent to that point.
And remember how we got this? At any point x1 and y1, we said y minus y1 equals m, m is the slope, the first derivative, and x minus x1. And that is how we did that.
Now we need to do this for a multivariable function. And unfortunately we can't just take the gradient, which is the partial derivatives, and if that exists, we can't just say that
our blanket is now continuous and there's a unique tangent plane to any point. Unfortunately we can't say that in the previous videos we looked at how to use the limits to see whether there is continuity at that point.
But we need to work out some other way of knowing that the three-dimensional curve is continuous and that I can give a tangent, an equation for a tangent plane there.
Unfortunately, if we just take the gradient, we are looking at unique tangents, line l1 and l2, at this xz and yz profile curves. If I put a flat plane there and move it forward and backward and it intersects with my blanket, there'll be unique tangents there.
But we have to look at something else. Now there's a way that we do this. We can use a cross product because those two lines, if you did the cross product of them, you'll get a third vector which is perpendicular to those.
You can look at the textbooks. You can look at the textbooks as how to do that. I'll skip that. I just want to show you the equivalent of this in the multivariable calculus.
And how we do that? Obviously, if we use an example where n equals 2, so x, f of x and y. And obviously, the plane there we'll call z. Remember, which is just the f of x comma y.
But that's not what we're interested in here. We're looking for the equation of that plane that is tangent to any point. We'll call that tangent plane for n equals 2. It's a flat plane.
And what we're going to see is the following. It's going to be the f at a certain point p. Now that's a vector p there. In other words, a certain point a comma b.
Now if I took this to the other side, if I took this to the other side, that would be analogous to my y1 where I could bring the y1 on this side.
y1 on this side plus. Now, it's usually written like this. x minus p. But vectors, so that stands for x comma y. This point p a comma b dot product with the gradient there of the f at p.
The gradient of f of p. And this now is the equation for that tangent plane at a point that's analogous to this. And I'm using this gradient here where I used the first derivative n there, the slope.
Now unfortunately, there's one more problem here. This you can learn by heart. As I say, there's a way that we can use linear algebra and we can use the cross product of those two tangent lines to this xz and yz profile curves.
We can get to this equation. We can get to this equation. We can learn this equation by heart. But there's one added problem. One added problem. And that is, it does not mean that it touches. Unfortunately, this plan doesn't mean it touches at this specific point p.
There's something else that we need to do. We need to take the limit as x approaches p. Those are the vectors, not the point x. So a comma b. Well, that's x comma y. It will be a comma b of the f of x minus all of this. Minus is z.
Minus is z. Divided by the norm of x minus p. It's got to equal zero. So what I'm trying to say, basically, is that the distance between that point that I'm interested in has got to be zero. As I move towards that point p from all directions, that limit has got to equal zero.
So this is an added part that needs to be fulfilled if we're going to use this as the equation for the tangent plane at a point. And if we have that, and this limit equals zero, that means we have continuity at that point.
All of this, instead of here, we just need a differentiability to have continuity and a unique tangent. We need all of this as far as these vectors are concerned.
There's another interesting point that we are going to get to. There's another use for this. We're going to see this equation again. There's other ways, other places where this is important, other ways to get to this.
It's called local linearization. Or indeed, if I have a series, if I just want to estimate, or I just want to, I'm just interested in my local point on my blanket, and it's too difficult an equation to work with.
So I can approximate it. So I can approximate it, or just look at it locally there, what happens to it locally. And if I have the c-dimensional curve in space, this blanket hanging there, and I have a tangent plane to it at that point, it just touches there.
In this localized area, in this localized area, the closer I am to this point, this plane of mine approximates this. Just as I had here, if I had a function in x and y, and I looked at the tangent line here, very close there to the tangent point, the tangent line, equation for the tangent line, and the equation for my curve,
that allowed me to do some work on values that were very close there. The same happens here. It's called local linearization. So sometimes this is called the T of x. Sometimes, let me see what this book uses.
Now the T of x uses, it's a local linearization, but we'll get to this concept. Keep it in the back of your mind, we'll get to it. This is the important part to remember. Z equals the f of, at that point, your function at that point, plus x minus p, x and y minus a and v, dot product with the gradient of f at that point.
And that gives you this, and as long as you know that the limit, this minus this whole thing, divided by the norm of the difference between those two vectors should be zero, and the limit as x approaches p.
Okay, here we have a multivariable function. The f of x and y equals x squared is y squared. I have a point 1, 1, and I need to know from first principles, I need to prove that f is differentiable at that point.
Then I need to find the equation for the equation for the equation for the equation for the tangent. Let's start with the equation of the tangent. Remember that z equals the f of p plus x minus p, dot product with the gradient of f of p.
Now let's look at what the f of p is. Now let's look at what the f of p is. The function at my point, I'm just going to substitute that, 1 into x, 1 into x and 1 into y, that leaves me with 2.
Plus what is x minus p? Well, that is going to be x minus 1, y minus 1. This is x and y, this is 1 and 1. I'm just subtracting two vectors from each other. Everyone should know how to do that.
And now I need the gradient at that point. Let's quickly look at what the gradient is. The gradient of f at x and y, that is going to be, that is going to be 2x comma 2y.
Now, first I'm going to differentiate with respect to y, y being a constant, then differentiate with respect to y, x being a constant. We can do that. And if I then get the gradient of f at 1, 1, that is going to leave me 2, 2.
So this is 2, 2. So this is the dot product between these two. That equals 2 plus. So that's going to give me a 2x. 2x minus 2 plus 2y minus 2. That leaves me with 2x plus 2y. 2 minus 2 minus 2 is minus 2.
So that's the equation. So that's the equation. So that's the equation of my tangent plane to that point. But now from first principles, I need to prove that that is actually so.
So I need the limit. So I need the limit. And x comma y approaches 1 comma 1 of the f of x, of the f of x, which is x squared plus y squared, x squared plus y squared, minus, minus all of this, which was that.
So I have minus 2x. So I have minus 2y. So I have minus 2x minus 2y. And I have minus 2. And I'll break that up into minus 1, minus 1, and we'll see y.
And I need the norm. And I need the norm. The norm of x minus x minus vector p, which is just going to be the square root of x minus 1 squared plus y minus 1 squared.
Remember how to do the norm. And I've got to show that this equals 0. So that's going to be the limit still.
As x and y approaches 1 and 1 of all of that. Now, the reason why I wrote that like that is that I can break this up into x squared minus 2x minus 1.
And was that a minus in the end? Let me see. 2 plus 2 minus 2. So that must be plus 1. So plus 1 because it's minus all of this. Minus 2x minus 2y plus 2 plus 1.
So x squared minus 2x plus 1 can be rewritten as x minus 1 squared plus y minus 1 squared.
So if you square that and you square that, you're going to get exactly the same divided by exactly this.
x minus 1 squared plus y minus 1 squared to the power of 1.
And all of this was to the power of 1.
So I'm going to be left with the limit as x and y approaches 1 and 1 of that exam minus that.
It's just going to be the square root of x minus 1 squared plus y minus 1 squared.
And if I now put 1 and 1 in there, that's going to be 0 squared plus 0 squared squared square root of 0 equals 0.
In other words, from the first principles, I've shown that there's no, that it actually touches.
So I can say that this is indeed the equation of the tangent plane to that three-dimensional curve at this point one more.
And if you think about it, what we are saying is that by the three-space, that x squared plus y squared,
that x squared plus y squared is going to be this three-dimensional,
and then at a point one comma one, the point one comma one,
it's going to go up to a point there, to a point there on that three-dimensional curve.
And this will be the equation of a plane being tangent to the three-dimensional curve right at that point.
