Ok, let's not get too bogged down in this theory. In the end we do need to solve some equations and solve some problems.
What we've just looked at though is if a multi-variable equation is differentiable, it implies that it is continuous.
If it's differential at a point, it is continuous. Continuity though, we've got two lines over there, does not imply differentiability.
I've tried to draw another three-dimensional surface here and it has this very sharp point up there.
So the limit as x and y go to this point a and b does indeed fall on the curve there.
So it is continuous there. The limit exists there. It is equal to the function there.
So it is continuous, but it's not differentiable at that point.
This is in single variable calculus. When we had a cusp in our curve, we could not take a first derivative.
We couldn't take a derivative. The same will happen here.
So even though it's continuous, it doesn't mean it's differentiable.
If it's differentiable at that point, it does mean it is continuous at that point.
So it works in that direction, but not necessarily in another direction.
And we had to, in the previous videos we looked at where is a multivariable function then differentiable.
Well, we need the gradient of the function at our point to exist.
And then we could use that fact in this part of the equation to get an equation for the tangent plane at that point.
And if we then had to subtract it from the f of x divided by the norm and the limit as x approaches p had to be 0,
then we know that that is actually the function of a plane tangent to that point.
But we had to go through all of this to prove or to show that a function is indeed a differentiable.
But alternatively, we can just say f like this. This is what should be remembered.
If the gradient of a function exists, we're just looking at where is a function differential.
That's all we're interested in, all the other things we can forget, other than having to memorize this equation,
specifically this part and the bigger limit to show that the point is actually tangent.
But we want to know where a multivariable function is differentiable.
Well, here it is. It can't get simpler than this.
The gradient must exist and it must be continuous at that point.
If the gradient exists and it is continuous at that point p, p being an element of the DFS, then the function is differentiable at that point.
All you need to remember.
The last concept here in the formal problems is this of a smooth function, also written there as this c with a 1, c1 function.
When is the function smooth?
Well, if the gradient of f is defined, so if I have a function, all the partial derivatives, all the partial derivatives,
are all defined and they are continuous at every point in the domain of f.
They are continuous in every domain.
Then we have what we call a smooth curve and it follows from that.
If it is smooth, then obviously it's differentiable because it will then be differentiable at each and every point.
because we just said it's continuous over all the points in the domain.
Obviously at each specific point it will be differentiable.
So that is a smooth c1 function.
