Now let's take things a little further and we're going to discuss the gradient of a function.
The grad gradient of a function. So if I have a function, here's x and y, so we're talking
to our function, I'm sorry, function, it has what we call a gradient. And it sounds fancy
but we've actually already done it. If we take, and this is how we write it, if we take
the gradient of f. So there's a line at the bottom line at the top to indicate that we're
actually dealing here with a vector. We also have a shorthand of writing it and it's this
upside down, this upside down triangle but also a vector form of f. And in this instance
it will be of x and y. If I'm given some point, some point x, now remember we've discussed
this before, this x is a certain point a comma b because it's a vector x. Okay? We can
also write p for this. Some books write a p, point p but actually vector p is some point.
Remember we said any point can be seen as a point or as a vector. We can also get the
gradient then of f at that specific point a comma b. And you wonder what is that gradient?
Well since this is a r2r function it is just simply going to be the gradient of f and x
comma y is going to equal d1 of x, x comma y and d2 of f, x comma y. Okay so it's the first
partial derivative and the second partial derivative, comma in the middle to denote that this is a
vector. And think about the profiles we've just looked at because we're going to have
two vectors in the two profiles. Okay? And those were the slopes. Those slopes. And if you combine
those two, you add them, you're going to get a resultant vector. Okay? And that becomes then
a gradient vector of the two-dimensional function. And what we're actually going to see, what is
going to happen here, remember this blanket that I threw up in the air? At any certain
point, three-dimensional, so it's not just going to have a line as a tangent, it's actually
going to have a whole completely flat plane that is tangent at any one point. If my blanket
is here, at any one point, there's going to be this tangent plane. And this resultant vector
we're going to get is actually the slope of that, is actually the vector slope, if I can
call it that, of this tangent plane to the three-dimensional surface. Okay? But first of all, we're going to get
two vectors. Remember, one was z with respect to x, the other one, z with respect to x, z with respect to y.
Those are going to be two vectors tangent on a certain point to those profile curves.
Okay? So this is the gradient of a function, and it is simply, you take each individual variable, you take the first derivative, the second derivative, and you make it into a vector.
But you understand how that ties in, actually, with eventually getting to the concept of the three-dimensional surface. And if it's three-dimensional, there's not just a line. If you just look straight down with the x-axis or straight to the y-axis, certainly those are going to need two tangent profile lines, tangent to that point. But in actual fact, we're trying to see this whole thing as a three-dimensional surface, and we're going to have this three-dimensional plane that's tangent. And we needn't stop there. We cannot
only have a three-dimensional surface, but we can have a hyperplane as well. And obviously, that will have a three-dimensional surface as tangent to the hyperplane. And we can carry on with as many variables as we like. We can go to tenth dimensional space if we really wanted to.
So let's do this very simple. We're going to do a few problems. Let's start as simple ones as to remind ourselves how to get the partial derivatives. We have a function there, a two-variable function, x plus y of both of them squared.
And we want the first partial derivative of our function, f at a point 1 comma 2. How do we do that? Well, first of all, let's just take the partial derivative with respect to x. In other words, die f, die x.
That is going to be, we're going to bring the two forward, so that's 2x plus y. And then through the chain rule, also the partial derivative of the inside.
x is to the power of 1, so this is going to be a 1, so it's 2x plus y. Now the partial derivative with respect to x at that point, 1 comma 2, we're just going to put in 1 plus 2, that's 3.
2 times 3 equals 6. Okay. In some courses, you might be asked to do this by first principles. Let's look at first principles. First of all, let's get the derivative.
Do that before we substitute our values. So it says that the limit, this h approaches 0 of the f of, now this is first derivative, so it's going to be x plus h, comma y minus the f of x, comma y divided by h.
So what are we going to have here? Well, we're going to have the limit, this h approaches the 0 of, of the following.
Now we're going to put x plus h into every place we have x there, so we're actually going to have x plus h, and then plus y, that's my x plus h, instead of the x, and plus y, and this is squared, minus the f of x, y is just x plus y squared, which is x squared plus 2xy plus y squared, all divided by h.
And you can do this, so you can multiply those two out, subtract all of these, and what you're going to be left with is 2x plus 2y.
You're going to be left to say with 2x plus 2y, and if you then plug in the point 1, comma 2, that's going to equal 2 times 1, plus 2 times y is 2, and that also equals 6.
Okay, one more, we have now a function in three variables, f of x, y, z, and that equals x, y, and the square root of z, and we want all three partial derivatives.
Well, and let's add to that, let's look at what the domain is of each of those, so the first partial derivative of x, of f of x, y, and z, that is going to be, all the others are just constants, so y squared of z are constants, x is to the power 1, so we're just going to be left to the wall, z, y squared of z,
and the domain of z, and the domain of this partial derivative, the domain of this partial derivative, is this going to be equal to x, y, z, those are elements of r3, such that, such that, oops, all we need actually is for z to be larger than, or equal to zero.
It's going to be, it's going to be that domain, and z cannot be negative, otherwise all values of y are allowed as well.
Let's get the second partial derivative, it's just as simple, of x, y, and z, that is going to be x and square root of z are now constants, y is to the power 1, so we have x square root of z, and we're going to have exactly the same domain.
The domain is going to be all values of x, y, and z, all being elements of r3, because there are three variables, and we're just going to have the fact that z, again, has to be larger than or equal to zero.
And the last one, this is slightly more interesting, the third partial derivative, now x is to, z is to the power half, so that's going to go in front, so that is going to be half, x and y is just constant, and we're going to have z to the power negative 1 half,
which is just constant, and we're going to have z to the power negative 1 half, or square root of z at the bottom.
Now, that domain is slightly different, the domain of this is also going to be all values of x, y, and z, all elements of r3, such that, remember I said this, this comes from a fact that there are three of them.
Now, z must, again, be larger than zero, or equal to larger than zero, but it can also not be zero, so in this instance, we're just going to have z larger than zero.
So, none of the others matter, x can be intervalued, y can be intervalued, for that expression still to be valid.
Okay, here we have a very long, winded, but very easy problem, we have a function of x, y, and z there, being x times y times z times e to the power x plus y plus z,
and we want the gradient of f at a certain point, 1, 1, 0.
So, what is the gradient of f?
Well, it's going to be the first vector containing the first partial derivative, the second, and the third partial derivative.
So, let's just make things easy, let's just do the first one.
Suppose there's various ways to get this partial derivative, we're going to get it at x, y, and z,
and that is going to equal, well, I suppose you can see, it's that u equals x, y, and z,
and v equal to e to the power x plus y plus z, if I then take u prime with respect to x,
this is going to be y, z, if I take d prime with respect to x, it's going to be e to the power x plus y plus z,
I hope you can see in the corner, and then x plus y plus z by the chain rule, it's just going to be 1.
So, with u prime e plus u prime, that is just going to leave me with y, z, e to the power x plus y plus z,
plus x, y, z, e to the power x plus y plus z.
So, I've just used the product rule, and I've seen this is my f of x, that is my g of x.
Remember, this is now a single variable, because we're taking partial derivatives, y and z are constant.
If I plug in the values here, remember y is 1, z is 0, y is 1, x is 1, y is 1, z is 0,
so this is going to be 0 plus 0, that is going to equal 0.
So, my first part of my vector is going to be 0.
What does that mean geometrically?
Well, if down the x-axis, I'm looking at the y, z profile,
so, or what we're looking at is the rate of change here we're going to have,
where we can't write z's already there, we usually write an omega equals that,
so, there's the rate of change of omega with respect to x,
the x-axis is just going to be 0, okay?
And the second one is going to be exactly the same,
except here we're going to have x, z, we're going to have x, z,
and then it's still going to be 0 and a 0,
so the second one is still going to be 0,
and when we get to z, things might be a little bit different,
let's see the 3 of f of x, y,
that is going to be,
x, y, z is going to be x, y,
x, y for u, u prime equals,
u equals x, y, z,
v equals e to the power x plus y plus z,
v prime is going to be e to the power x plus y plus z,
and in other words, we're going to have x, y,
e to the power x plus y plus z,
plus x, y, z plus,
e to the power x plus y plus z,
if I plug in my values,
now that's going to be a 1,
that's going to be a 1,
that's going to be a 1,
that's going to be a 1,
that's going to be a 0,
there's a 0 in there,
so that'll be 0,
this will be 1 times 1 is 1,
e to the power plus 1 is 2,
this is going to be e to the power of 2,
so we'll have an e to the power 2
ok so I've just
just did the 3 partial derivatives
and I could have written
them all in if that was the gradient
of f of x, y and z
and then I can just replace
x, y and z with 1, 1 and 0
x equals 1, y equals 1, z equals 0
and you'll get this
answer so
along with the problem it's actually easy
just to show you what the gradient is going to be
at that point
and each one is going to be
so this will be
di w, di x
the rate of change of our
function
with respect to the x
axis so this is going to
be not a
surface in 3 dimensional space
it's actually going to be a hyperplane in
4 dimensional
space which
is very difficult for human mind
to visualize
objects
so this is going to be a hyperlinked
and it's going to be a hyperlinked
with respect to the x
success
