Now let's get some examples of these example problems. Let's try and solve them and you'll see
I just showed you one way of doing it. I need to show you some more. So I've got my function
z equals the f of x of y and it's x plus y and x minus y. Now remember the domain of x
the domain of f equals all x and y elements of R2 such that x does not equal y. Because
if x equals y we'll have 0 in the denominator. So we can't have that. That's our domain. Now
I want to know can I get a tangent equation for tangent plane at this point 0, 0. Now
we said well let's construct two curves along those two curves. I'll have a curve c and let's
call that now in the previous example you saw I said y equals the two of x. But that's not
going to work here. You can try putting that in. It might work but anyway here's another
way. And we're going to set a line y equals 0. I can do that. Now I'm going to have that
the limit as x, y approaches 0, 0 of the f of x and y equals the limit as x goes to 0 of
the f of x. Remember this is now the g of x of x comma the g of x. That equals the limit
as x approaches 0 of well the g of x y is now equal to 0. So that is going to be x plus 0
over x minus the 0. The x's are going to cancel out and my answer equals 1. Now let's do and
remember most importantly this is where most of the mistakes go. This curve that you set
has to go through that point. You can't just choose anything arbitrarily that's not going
to go through that point. I could also not choose that because remember that's not in the domain
of this function. Okay so it's got to these curves that you guess at. Okay it's got to go through
that point and it's got to be in the domain of your function. I cannot choose y equals x.
Now one thing that I thought of after the previous recording was you might say well you just have
this line going through your I'm going to repeatedly use this blanket hanging in mid-air as my curve.
You just have this line through there. That line does not go all the way along the curve.
Okay but neither does the x-axis or y-axis. What we're trying to get at is that very near that point,
the point that we're interested in, and this line that we drew, if we could go in in a microscope and
just look at a tiny little spot near that point, they are with each other. They are intimately
involved at that point and it's only coming from those directions near that point that I'm interested
in. So don't let that put you off. Let's construct another curve. Now here's the difference
and the difference comes in. Now I can construct a function h of y that equals x, that equals 0,
x equals 0. So instead of, first of all I have y equals 2x, y equals 3x, here y equals 0. Okay
and I call this the g of x so that I can write it neater there, or to make sense. But yeah,
I have x equals 0, not a y equals a function of something, but x equals a function of something.
And x could also have been x equals 2y, for instance. I can write it as x. Now the limit
isn't slightly different, and just look at this carefully. x comma y approaches 0 comma 0 of the
f of x and y now becomes a long d. A long curve d becomes the limit, now not of x approaching 0,
because I've used x there, it's y approaches 0, of the f of, now it's the h of y comma y.
Okay, so here I put the g of x in place of y, now I'm putting h of y in place of the x there. Okay,
that equals the limit, this y approaches 0 of, now instead of x, instead of x I'm going to put the
h of y, which is 0, so that is going to be 0 plus y divided by, is that correct, is that what I'm doing?
And let me just see if that was the example, if this looks weird to me now, is that, am I following
the example that I was going to show you? Let's have a look. Yes, sorry, sorry about that. And now,
instead of x I'm going to have 0 minus y, so here I'm going to be left with negative 1. I'm going to be
left with negative 1 and certainly negative 1 and 1 are not the same. In other words, that limit does
not exist and I can't get the equation of a tangent plane at that point as far as that curve is concerned.
good. Another example. I have my z equals the f of x and y which is x minus y and x plus y. What is the
domain first of all? The domain of my function of f equals all x and y. There's an element of 2 such that,
that, well, that's it basically because there's no constraint. Well, there's a constraint, same.
x comma y does not equal 0 comma 0. Because if it was 0 comma 0, we'll have 0 in the denominator.
Okay, so that's the only exclusion. Let's have a look.
As long as they both not x, one of them can be independently. Just be mindful of that. That
doesn't mean I can't use x equals 0 as my term because if x was 0, if y was something other than 0,
that will still work. Okay, so I can still then use a relevant curve. We're going to use the h of y
equals x equal to 0. Certainly that does go through my point. x equals 0 goes through my point. And now
let's look at that. If I take now the limit as x comma y approaches 0 comma 0 of the f of x comma y,
I'm now going to get the limit. Now what is that? Remember I used x here. So that's y approaches 0 of
So in place of every x, I'm going to put a 0. So that's 0 minus y. And at the bottom I'm going to have what am I going to have?
x equals 0. So that's y squared. I'm just going to have y squared. In other words, I'm going to sit with the limit
as y approaches 0 of negative 1 over y. Negative 1 over y. And if we look at that, well that depends.
If I come from, does this limit exist? Remember now I've got to do if the limit as y approaches 0 from
the negative side of minus 1 over y. What is that going to equal? Well that's going to equal infinity,
positive infinity. But if I have the limit as y approaches 0 from the positive side,
I'm going to have negative infinity of negative 1 over y. So I'm going to have negative infinity.
So the limit there doesn't exist. In other words, I don't even have to look for a second curve.
negative. If one of my limits does not exist, but don't suddenly throw away all your first year
calculus. When you get to this stage, you still have to then do, I've reduced it from two,
two dimensions sort of into, into, into, from two, two variable calculus into one variable calculus,
I should say. I must still do this proper stuff then of looking at the limit from both sides and
we'll see where it's not, it's not the way it is. There's no limit there. I don't even have to get
a second curve. It already does not exist. But this remember also from the domain. As I said,
you can't use something that's excluded from the domain. But this says both x and y has got to not
equal zero. In other words, I can now still use this as a, what we call, a relevant curve.
