Let's do an example where we use method number two. So again, I have, let's just remind ourselves, so this is going to be this function, and each of those x, y, and z are indeed functions of t, so I might as well have replaced all of this with r of t equals t to the power of three, t squared, and t.
And t, I might as well have done that. And I can use method one where I'll get the gradient of f, and then I'll get the gradient of f, and I'll replace x, y, and t with these, and I can get the first derivative here of this vector r, and I can get the dot product of those two.
Okay, so what indeed has, is what we are asking here is this combination of f of r, it's prime with respect to t. That is what we're asking.
Another way that you can be asked is then just get the derivative, well, the f, p, t. The f, p, t. So those would be, I just want to see how the book asks as well.
Kind of partial, because remember, because remember, we said if we do this combination, if we do this combination, just f and r, remember, that is going to equal just an rr function.
And with one, with a specific value of t, with a specific value of t, that is just going to be an rr function in t.
Okay, so this would be the same way to ask, this will equal that. It's the same way to ask it. So let's use method two.
So what do we need? We need di f, di x, we need di f, di y, and we need di f, di x, sorry.
And then we need dx dt, dy dt, we need dx dt, we need dy dt, and we need dz dt.
And if it wasn't neatly written for us like this, if we had a document like that, we know that in this combination, this is x, this is y, this is t.
Let's do that. So di f, di x, so y and z are, y and z are constants, x to the power 1, so that's y and z.
For y, that is going to be xz. And for z, it's going to be xy. This is going to be 3t squared.
Oops. This is going to equal 2t. And what was that? That was just going to equal 1.
But remember here, I have to replace y and z with that, so y is going to be, yz is going to be t to the power 3.
xz, xz, x and z is going to be t to the power 4. And xy is going to be t to the power 5.
So if we just multiply these out, and we just add them, because remember it was the sum of i equals 1 to n of di f, di xi, times di xi, di t.
Remember that. Method 2. So it's just going to do this. So this is going to equal in the n 3t to the power 5, plus 2t to the power 5, plus, last one's just going to be, what was it, just 1 there, 1t to the power 5.
So that equals 6t to the power 5, by method 2.
Let's do one more example, and we'll use method 1, but please also use method 2. You'll see we'll come to the same answer.
I have the f of x, y, and z equals xy plus yz plus zx, and then the vector r equals sine squared t, cosine squared t, and just t, comma t, and I want this combination of f and the vector r, its first derivative at a half pi.
So let's use method 1. First of all, we need the gradient of f. So the first one will be with respect to x. So y and z are constants, so I'm going to be left with y plus z.
Why is that so? Remember, y is a constant, and z is a constant. Y and z are constants, so that's a constant. The first derivative of a constant is going to be 0.
Here y is a constant, so it might as well have been 3x. The first derivative of 3x is 3. So it's just a y. The same applies there.
Now, comma, because it's partial derivatives now with respect to y. So x is going to be a constant, so that's x.
Z is going to be a constant, and both z and x are constants, so we left with nothing there. And then z, there we're left with nothing.
Here we're left with y, plus here we're left with x.
Now, let's get this gradient of f at this vector function of ours.
So now we are going to be left with what is y, that's cosine squared of t, plus what is z, that's this t, comma, what is x?
It's the sine squared of t, plus what is z, that's this t, comma, y is the cosine squared of t, plus the sine squared of t, but remember the cosine squared of a value plus the sine squared is just 1.
So I can use my trigonometric identities just to make life easier for myself.
Now I need the r prime of t, this vector's first derivative, that's easy enough to do.
Remember that it's going to be 2 times the sine of t's, chain rule, times the derivative of sine itself, which is cosine.
So that's going to be 2 sine of t cosine of t, which is just the sine of 2t.
Once again, using my trigonometric identities.
Remember, first I'm going to do the outside, so the 2 goes in front, so that becomes 2 sine of t, but then I still have to differentiate the sine of t, which is cosine of t.
So 2 times the sine of t times the cosine of t equals just the sine of 2t, got to know those.
Okay, so the second derivative here, that's going to be 2 times, the first derivative, 2 times the cosine of t times negative, so that is just going to be negative sine of 2t, and then the first derivative of t is just 1.
Let me just do this one properly for you, so that's cosine squared of t, this 2 goes in front, that's 2 times the cosine of t, but I still have to differentiate the inner function, which is the cosine of t, and that is negative the sine of t, so I can bring that negative out, and negative, make that a positive.
So negative 2 times the cosine of t times the sine of t equals then just negative cosine of 2t.
Okay, okay, okay, now I have to get just the, I just have to get the dot product between these two, so it's going to be first term times first term plus second term times second term plus third term times third term.
So now, I am left with the sine of 2t times cosine of 2t times cosine of t plus t, and I'm going to add to this one, but there's a negative, so that's going to be negative.
So we have sine of sine of 2t times sine of 2t times sine of 2t times sine of t plus t, and plus 1.
Now, now, we want to evaluate that this is pi over 2t times pi over 2t times sine of pi is 0, so this is going to be 0, sine of pi is going to be 0, and I'm just left with 1, just left with 1.
So this is by method 1, but you can certainly also use method 2, remember asking this would be the same as asking df dt evaluated at t equals 1.
Oh, not 1, sorry, it's pi over 2, pi over 2.
So that's going to be the sum of i equals 1 to 2, 3 in this, yeah, 3 in this instance, 3 in this instance, and we're going to have die f, die xi times dxi dt,
dxi dt, where x1 is x, x subscript 2 is y, x subscript 3, x subscript 3 is going to equal z.
So in effect, I'm going to have die f, die x times dx dt plus die f, die y times die y, die t, plus die f, die z,
dx dt, dz dt, and I know that this is x, that is y, and then z for the dx dt, dy dt, and dz dt.
