Good example time, and this is a beautiful example because right at the end I'm suddenly going to expand your understanding of first calculus equations in two space.
Just x equals, y equals a function of x, and you'll see, it's a little surprise at the end.
So here I have a graph in three space, a two-variable multivariable equation, f of x and y equals the sine of x times y at a point p of 0, pi.
If you've got a detail, it's 0, pi.
And I want to use both methods to get an equation for a tangent.
What will it be? It will be a tangent plane because this is in three space, so the tangent in that point will be there.
And I've got to use both methods. First of all, the method that we're used to, let's write that down.
We can call it z equals the t of x equals the f at my point d plus vector x minus vector p dot product with the gradient of f at p.
So let's quickly see what we need. We need the f at p.
So what is the sine? What is x times y at 0 times pi at 0? The sine of 0 is 0.
So this first one is going to be 0 plus, so z equals 0 plus.
But it's x minus p. Well, that's this x minus 0 and y minus pi.
So this x comma y minus pi.
And I've got to get that, the dot product with the gradient.
What is the gradient going to be?
Let's just do that separately here.
The gradient, as you can see there, of f vector x is equal to what is the first partial derivative of the sine of x of y.
Well, you have to use the chain rule.
That's the sine of x and y becomes the cosine of x and y.
And then if the derivative of x of y with respect to x is just y.
So that's y times the cosine of x and y.
And that will be x times the cosine of x times y.
And if I get that gradient at, what is the gradient now at that point?
0 comma pi.
So this is the cosine of 0 times pi is just pi.
So that's going to be pi comma.
And x is already 0, so that's 0.
So I've got to get that product.
Let's take this away.
So z equals x times pi.
That's pi x.
And that times 0, 0.
So z equals pi x.
That is the equation of a tangent plane to that curve.
Let's use the method of the contour.
In other words, I've got to see this as a contour of a higher dimensional function.
In other words, I'm going to say g of x, y, and z is now going to be the f of x, y.
That's the sine of x, y minus z.
Now let's get the gradient.
Let's get the gradient.
The gradient of g at my point x, y, and z.
Well, it's going to be exactly the same as y cosine of x, y.
I'm not going to explain how to do this.
By now you should know.
x times the cosine of x, y comma, and that will be negative 1.
Okay, but now I need a point, because I need a value for z.
But remember, this equals z as well.
Don't confuse that with this z of the tangent plane.
But anyway, if I just plug that in, 0 times pi 0, the sine of 0, 0.
So my point P now has become 0, pi, 0.
So if I now get the gradient of g at my point P, I'm going to end up with exactly where was I before.
So let's put that in, y, if I put in 0, it's 1, y is pi, comma, that will be 0, comma, that will be negative 1.
Okay, and I need to do that.
I need to get the dot product between that and another vector.
And I can easily get that other vector by saying x, y, and z minus point, a point on that.
Let me see if I can make a silly mistake anyway.
Why do I get the feeling?
What, no, that's quite correct.
So that's going to equal x, comma, y minus pi, comma, z.
So I just need to get the dot product between these two.
Let's do that.
And I've got to set that equal to 0.
I've got to set that equal to 0.
Remember, this is the gradient, which is perpendicular to the contour.
This is a vector in the plane of the contour.
So the dot product between those will be pi x, the 0, minus z.
I'm going to set that equal to 0, and lo and behold, z equals pi x.
Z equals pi x, z equals pi x.
Now I want to know what is the equation of the tangent line to the contour of this.
To the contour of that, let me just say, what exactly was it?
The contour at 0.
So the contour at 0 of f.
The contour at 0 of f.
So I've got to set that equal to 0.
Sine of x, y equals 0.
Sine of x, y equals 0.
Now, that is a two-dimensional.
That is a curve in two-space.
In other words, two-space.
The good old-fashioned y equals f of x.
Okay, and we always had, in first year and in high school, you always had functions that
you can separate y and x from each other.
You can't separate y and x from each other, then.
How are you going to get y on the one side and x on the other side?
You can't, but it's still a function of x and y.
It's still a function of x and y.
Okay?
In other words, you know, it is still in this form, but you can't.
So how, if you can't separate x and y, are you going to get the first derivative of this?
Because, like, there's no way that you now can decide y prime equals f prime of x.
But, it is a function with x and y.
Okay?
It is in two-space, just like this one is in two-space.
And how, at a certain point, am I going to get the equation of a tangent like,
ah, you could never do that before.
But now, of course, you can, because now I can get the gradient of f.
The gradient of f at x.
We'll chalk.
That is going to equal, again, this y cosine of xy and x cosine of xy.
Okay?
Let's just make some space here.
Okay, now I can get the gradient at that specific point.
What is the gradient at that specific point?
It's null of this y.
That's pi comma zero.
Pi comma zero.
And, ah, what do I need?
That is now perpendicular to this tangent to the contour that I'm interested in.
Now, I just need another vector, which is in the plane, which I'm just going to use x and y,
minus a point that's in there, zero comma pi.
So, that is x comma y minus pi.
x, y comma pi.
Now, I need to get the dot product to these two and set it equal to zero.
So, that's pi comma zero, so that's pi comma zero dot product x comma y minus pi.
I set that equal to zero.
So, I have pi x, zero times that, zero equals zero.
In other words, x equals zero.
x equals zero is now going to be a line, a line, the equation of the tangent line to the contour
of this function at zero, contour zero at this point.
Okay, and I have now got an equation for, well, it's worked out like x equals zero, but it's
not that needn't have been that I might have had a y and an x in there, and I would have
had y equals the function of x as my first derivative.
I now got an equation for my first derivative in a normal first-year equation, which I could not
just use the calculus that I'd spent so long to learn how to do, get the first derivative.
I would never get the first derivative at a point if I didn't know this method of using a contour.
