Now, let's cement this understanding. I have a function in two variables. So my graph, this is the function that I have, say n, with n equals 2.
So my graph is going to be n, n plus 1, that is in 3 space. My contour curve is going to be in our n that equals our 2 space.
And remember, just think back to high school, to first year calculus. This is a normal line of the curve of a function in 2 space.
If it is in 2 space, its tangent line at that point is also in 2 space. So the tangent, so the graph is in 3 space. The tangent of the graph is also in 3 space.
We're not talking the tangent to the contour. The tangent to the contour will be a line in 2 space.
Now, I scribbled it down here and I went into some other text. So let's just rewrite it nicely. I want the local, we call it the local linearization, okay?
But it's actually, it is actually also, we'll get to why it's called the local linearization later. But we know it for now as the equation of a tangent, in this case the tangent plane,
because we're talking 3 space, because we're talking 3 space, to that 3 space curve, equals the f at a certain point, plus the difference between the x, y, and z, and the points, dot product with the gradient of f at that point.
Remember that. And then lastly, we had to show that the f of x minus this divided by the norm of vector x minus vector p, and the limit as x goes to 0, as x goes to p, I should say, vector x goes to vector p,
if that equals 0, if that equals 0, then I can call this the tangent, and we write it out, and here it was, then I had to do this, and then I still had to show that the limit as x approaches p of the f of x minus this t of x divided by the norm of x minus p equals,
if that equals 0, then I can say that that is the tangent plane. So let's do that for that example, let's do that for that example of us.
So what do we need? We need the f of p. The f of p, I don't know, it'll be p. Let's make p really simple. Let's make it 1 comma 1.
Okay, so the f of p is going to be 1 squared plus 1 squared is 2. So this is going to be 2. So let's write it here, 2 plus, what is x minus p?
Well, that's x minus 1, x minus 1, and y minus 1. And I've got to do that for the dot product of another vector, and that's the gradient vector at p.
What is the gradient? The gradient of f at x and y equals 2x comma 2y. So very simply, the gradient of f at p, this is going to be 2 comma 2 as I substitute 1 comma 1 for the x and y.
So this is going to be 2 comma 2, and that equals t of x still. Now, remember, we can call that z as well.
z, because remember, I could have called this z as well.
Okay, we usually do that x, y, and z, and if we have x, y, and z, if it was a function of x, y, and z, we usually make that w, or we make it lowercase omega, which kind of looks like a w.
Okay, here we make it a z.
Now it's going to be 2 plus this dot product.
So that's 2x minus 2 plus 2y minus 2.
So I'm left with z equals 2x plus 2y minus 2.
Is that right? 2x plus 2y, 2 minus 2, yeah.
2x plus 2y is 2.
Okay, so that is the method that we know to get the tangent plane, and note that this is in 3 space, just as the original was in 3 space.
But now in the next video, I just want to clear the board, we're going to show you a method that I can get to this by using the tangent,
whether that be tangent line, or tangent plane, or tangent hyperplane, to get to the contour, how to use that to get to this tangent to the original graph.
Now let's see if I can use the concepts of the tangent to the contour to help me work out this tangent to the curve.
Now, what I would have to do is quite simple.
Remember how we did that?
We had the normal, or the perpendicular vector, we got another vector along that, and we got the dot product, we set it equal to 0.
We want to use that exact same method.
So, how do we do that?
We don't get our functions contour, we make it the contour of a higher space function.
So I'm going to construct from this a higher space function, and I'm going to call it g, and I'm going to set that as the f of that vector x,
which for us would be x and y this time.
This will now be x, y, and z, and I'm going to say minus z, because, let me rewrite that properly, so there's no confusion,
that's the g of x, y, and z equals the f of x, y minus z.
Okay, now, if I set z equal to, if I set z, which is a function in itself, equal to that, I get 0.
So what do I have in effect?
I have now that the g of x, y, and z equals 0, equals 0 if those two are equal to each other.
So, what is that?
Well, that's just the contour at 0.
It's just the same, remember, this was the contour of, this is where you put a seed in there.
Now, for g, this is 4g, I'm getting the contour at 0, and if it is 0, that equals just the f of x and y.
That equals just the f of x and y.
So, I've constructed this thing, and I've made it into that, and I've taken the contour at 0, and that just brings me back, right back there.
How does that work?
If you don't fully understand it, let me show you.
First of all, we have a point there, so, we need another point, because now we're dealing in 1, 2, 3 variables,
and I only have 2, but I can put that in there, 1 squared plus 1 squared is 2, so my new point, my new point becomes 1, 1, 2.
I've simply put that, I've simply put that in there, okay?
So, what do we have now?
Now, we have that the g of x, y, z equals x squared plus y squared, let's say, minus z, minus z.
Okay, what do I need from my method with the contour, tangent to the contour?
I need the gradient of g at x, y, z.
What is that going to be?
2x, 2y, negative 1, minus z, that's negative 1.
I need it now at this point, the gradient of g at my point, 1, 1, 2, so that's going to be 2, 2, still negative 1.
That is the gradient there.
And what else do I need?
So, there I have my perpendicular vector to what is the contour of this at 0, the contour of this at 0 equals the f of x, equals the f of x.
I just need a vector along the plane, I can choose any arbitrary point, x, y, and z.
And I subtract from that a point that I know is on the contour in the graph, 1, 1, 2.
So, what do I have?
x minus 1, y minus 1, z minus 2.
And all I have to do now is get that dot product between those two.
Get the dot product between those two.
And what do I get?
2x minus 2 plus 2y minus 2 minus z plus 2.
And I've got to set that equal to 0 because those are perpendicular, remember.
So, what do I have?
Take the z over to the other side.
I have z equals, z equals 2x plus 2y, 2x plus 2y minus 2, minus 2, plus 2, negative 2.
Exactly the same equation as I had with my local linearization equation in the method that we know.
Now, we know two methods to get the tangent to the curve.
I can either use this or I can see this as a contour of a one time, 1 plus, plus 1 higher dimensional curve.
I can see that as the contour at 0 of a curve that is even higher dimensioned.
That's actually quite a neat mathematical method.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
