Now let's do one long problem by trying to get the potential function of a vector field.
Here we have a vector field in three dimensions with three variables.
And if you can't read it there, the first is 2yz plus half y squared plus xz squared.
The second one, the second partial derivative would then be 2xz plus half yz squared plus xy.
And then 2xy plus half y squared z plus x squared z.
Stop the video, write it down, and see if you can solve.
First of all, there is a method that I can use to do something to this first
and see if it will have a potential function before I start looking for the potential function.
But in order to do that, we need to know what the Jacobian matrix is.
We don't know it yet. We're going to do it in a few videos time.
So let's skip that. We take it for granted.
There is a potential function here of this vector field, and let's get it.
What we do know is that this is the partial derivative of a potential function with respect to x.
x. So that equals 2yz plus a half y squared plus xz squared.
Now, I can take this to the other side.
So this is, right, so on this side I can take the integral of both sides.
So on this side I'm left with the f of x, y, and z.
Now, what is the integral of 2yz with respect to x?
2yz here, with partial respect to this x, if I can use those terms, that means these are constants.
So it's actually 2yz, a constant I've brought outside of my integral sign dx.
So that's going to leave me with 2xyz.
Just think about it, if I differentiate that with respect to x, partial derivative with respect to x,
2y and z are constants, it's going to become 2yz, 2yz, exactly what I have there.
This is going to be a half xy squared, and that is going to be a half x squared z squared,
plus something else, not a constant, some other function, because this was a partial derivative.
So that's going to be a function, let's call it g, and it's going to be of y and z,
the other two that are now left behind.
Because, look at it, if this is my function f, and I take a partial derivative with respect to x,
then g has only y and z and no x,
so that's actually a function that we can see as a constant with respect to partial just to x.
And if I take a partial derivative of this with respect to x,
I'm going to have exactly that.
I'm going to have exactly that.
Now let's take the partial derivative of this function that we have now with respect to y.
So if I take that with respect to y,
2x and z are constants.
With respect to y, that comes forward, so that's going to be xy.
There is no y in there.
And if I take the partial derivative of this with respect to y,
I'm left with di g, di y.
I'm just taking the partial derivative of that.
Just the partial derivative of that.
But I know what di f, di y is.
There it is.
It's the second partial derivative.
So that equals 2xz plus a half y.
That's a half yz squared plus xy.
I don't want to make a silly mistake.
So this equals that.
These two cancel.
These two cancel.
These two cancel.
So I'm left with the fact that di g, di y equals a half yz squared.
A half yz squared.
Once again, I can take this di y to the other side.
If I do that.
And I take the integral of both sides.
I take the integral of both sides.
The half and the z squared come outside of my integral side because they are constants with respect to this.
So I'm left with the fact that the g of yz equals a half as it comes out.
Z squared comes out.
So the integral of y with respect to y is a half y squared.
So this becomes a quarter y squared.
A quarter y squared plus something else.
A constant.
But this constant is not just a constant.
It's actually a function y of z.
H of z.
Let's call it h.
And it's this of z.
It's the only one I have left.
Just as here I have the last two left.
Now I only have this left.
Because think about it.
If I take the partial derivative of this function with respect to y.
There's no y in there.
So that falls away.
With respect to y, this two is going to come forward.
So that's going to be a half yz squared, a half yz squared, exactly what I have there.
Now I have something that I can plug in here.
I now know what the g of y and z is.
It's plus a quarter, a quarter y squared z squared plus the h of z.
Okay.
Now.
I'm building my f of x.
I only need that to go.
So let's take this with respect to z.
Which is going to be 2xy plus there's no z in there.
Nothing happens there.
There is a z in there.
The two comes to the front.
So that's x squared z.
Plus there's a z in there that comes to the front.
That's a half y squared z.
Plus if I do this with respect to z.
That is only a function of z.
Nothing else.
So it's a normal derivative with respect to z.
Equals.
I know what it is on the other side.
2xy plus a half y squared z.
Plus x squared z.
Let's see.
2xy cancels.
2xy cancels.
X squared z cancels.
X squared z cancels.
Half y squared z cancels.
Half y squared z cancels.
So we're left with dh dz equals zero.
What function of h, when you take its first derivative, will be zero?
Well, that can only happen if h equals a constant.
Because the derivative, first derivative of a constant is zero.
So that can only be a constant.
So now I know that h of z is just a normal constant.
And there I have my potential function.
All done.
That is my potential function of that vector field.
And do that.
Take the partial derivative of this with respect to x.
You'll get exactly that.
With respect to y, you'll get exactly that.
With respect to z.
The whole thing with respect to z.
You'll get exactly that.
No problem.
No problem.
