Okay, now this is a very important video. We're going to discuss potential functions. To do a potential function, we need to go one step back and explain a certain concept.
If I have a function in three space, f of x and y, we all know now that's going to be some curve in three dimensional space. Everywhere, everywhere on that curve, I can get a gradient. I can get a gradient. If it's continuous and differentiable, so I can get all the partial differentials, we've gone through all of those requirements.
But everywhere, I can get a gradient. And that gradient, remember, is a little vector. A gradient is a vector. A gradient is a vector.
So if I have all those little vectors drawn through three space, I have in effect what is called a vector field. That is what a vector field is.
It is a space, whether it be two space, three space, four space, five space, it doesn't matter. It doesn't matter what space it's in. It can be any value. One or more of the natural numbers.
Now, all those little vectors combined means in that whole space is permeated by a field, a vector field. And what we are saying is that if I have a vector field, in other words, this gradient, can I work my way back to the original function?
The original function. So here we are going to have a very specific gradient and I'm going to get the function from that. But in broader terms, we say every vector field, not every, let's say a vector field has a potential function.
So if I have that the gradient of a function equals that vector field, that means f is a potential, might exist, potential function of the vector field.
So I want to get this, I'm just doing it in small, I'm not seeing it in this broad term. I've got one specific vector there, one specific gradient and I want to get from that gradient, I want to get this potential function.
But see it in the broader terms. If I have a vector field, say three dimensional space, and say for instance, some wind blowing at each and every point, there's a little vector because that air molecule is now going in that direction at that velocity.
Okay, so I have a vector field. And if I put all of that, the vector field together, it has a potential function, I can get a function out of that. So how do we do that? So we've learned now that the gradient of a function, a multivutable function, is actually just a vector field. Lots and lots of vectors depending on what value I put in for x and y.
Okay. Now, I mean, I can put in any values here for x and y, I'm going to get a vector. So it need not lie only on my curve, I can get a whole space filled with vectors, but in all of that space there might be a specific function.
Now, how do I do that? Well, I've got to remember what these separate parts stand for. And that is where Leibniz had one over, I'm not a historian, but that is where Leibniz had one over Newton in as much as the notation that was used.
Where Newton used a prime notation, Leibniz used this notation. So I'm going to say die f. As I say, I'm not a historian, but I don't know exactly how far they got in the development of calculus.
But anyway, die f die x equals y to the power 3. And die f die y equals 3xy squared minus 4. Okay, and this is where it comes from because this is just a fraction.
And I can multiply both sides by die x. So I have die f equals y to the power 3 by x. Now, whichever way you want to start writing these things now, that's up to you.
What is very clear is, I can take the integral of both sides. Okay, I'm transforming both sides of the equation with an integral side. I'm going to take the integral of both sides.
So if I just had the integral of a function, what I'm going to end up, the integral of the derivative of a function, the integral and derivative cancel out, and I'm just left with f.
But remember, I'm looking for f of x and y equals what now? Now remember, this integral is taken with respect to x.
y, as far as this equation is concerned, is a constant, so that can come outside of the derivative. You take a constant outside of the derivative, die x.
Okay, so what is going to be left here? Well, y3 says there, that is 1 die x, so that becomes an x.
x, y to the third power plus, but plus y. Plus y. Not a constant. Not a constant now. Some function of y. G of y.
Why is that so? Because now, just think about it clearly. If I take now the partial derivative of x with respect to,
the partial derivative of f with respect to x, that's going to be 3, 3xy squared.
Where am I now? Where am I done? So if I take the partial derivative of f with respect to x, okay, y to the power 3 is a constant.
I'm just going to be left with y to the power 3, y to the power 3, but there's nothing there.
There's no plus something else. This is y to the power 3. But if I just had a function of y attached to this g of y,
and I took the partial derivative with respect to x, this is seen as a constant, and the derivative of a constant is 0.
Okay, so if I have to add this g of y, you can understand. Take the partial derivative with respect to x.
Take df dx of this. It's going to end up being y to the power 3 plus 0, because this is a function purely of y.
Okay, so let's do that. Let's see. Let's now do, not di f, di x, but di f, di y.
Why do I do that? Because I know what di f, di y is. I haven't there.
But let's do it of this function. I have a function of f. Let's do it of y.
That's going to be 3xy squared plus, now this is purely a function of y.
If I would differentiate it with respect to y, there's no x's in there. There's no x's in there.
So it's just dg dy. Okay, not partial derivative, because there's nothing else in there except y.
If there was something else in there, if there was an x in there, and I took the partial derivative of something with an x in,
I would have added something there to that y to the power 3, which we don't.
So it's just that, but remember, we already have di f, di y. There it is. 3xy squared, sorry, minus 4.
So these two cancel out, and I have the fact that dg dy equals negative 4.
dg equals negative 4 dy. I'm just taking the dy in the denominator over to the other side.
Actually, now I have the differential. We'll get to that later.
I can take the derivative of both sides.
So here I'm going to be left with the g of y equals negative 4y, but now plus c.
Okay, now I can put in plus c.
You know, you can understand why I couldn't put in plus c there.
It had to be a whole function, but now there's nothing left with the end of the line.
This was a function just in y, so I'm left with that.
And now I can plug in there, that there.
So I'm left with the x of g of, f of x and y equals x, y to the 3 plus the g of y.
And what is the g of y? Well, it's negative 4y plus some constant.
Okay, so if I take this and I take the gradient of f now, I'm going to get exactly that.
So let's take it with respect to x, that is just going to be y to the power 3, nothing else.
If I take it with respect to y, it's going to be 3xy squared minus 4.
So I've gone from this.
This is a potential function of this gradient, potential function of this gradient field.
Now, the next one we're going to do is x, y, and z.
Now it becomes a bit more complicated.
Well, I think maybe let's do, we're going to do another type of example first,
where we're going to have a gradient field with no potential function.
No potential function.
Let's do that.
Then we'll go on to a higher space.
So we'll go on to a 4 space with a function of x, y, and z and see that becomes a bit more complicated.
Now, this is just the first step in doing this, getting this potential function from there.
There are certain limitations on this.
And that needs to, then you need to know the concept of a Jacobian matrix.
And we'll get to that a little bit later.
So, and I just want to warn you for now, this might not be the truth.
Okay, there's certainly, there's certain constraints on this.
There's certain limitations on this.
Things that have to be shown first as well.
Remember, when we got the t of the vector of x, the local linearization,
we had to show that the limit as x approaches p equals 0.
Before we could really say that that was the tangent.
There's something similar to that here.
Not similar, but I mean, we need something to do too as well.
Before we can really say that this is the potential function.
And as I say, you need the Jacobian matrix for an equation.
And we'll get to that later.
Okay, in the next example, I'm going to show you a vector field.
A vector field without a potential function.
