Could I warn you, this gradient, this vector field, does not have a potential function. Let's see why.
So I know what di x is. It is 3x squared y.
3x squared y. Let's take the di x to the other side, which is in fact what we do.
That is going to equal, but it's with respect to x, so anything else is a constant.
3 and y is constant. So I'm going to have x squared, and this is all di x.
I'm going to take the derivative of both sides. I'm just cheating a bit.
I'm writing it like that. I've already taken the 3y up because there's a partial derivative with respect to x,
so y would be a constant. So on this side, I'm left with an f.
f of x and y equals. That will come forward. That will cancel out.
So that's x to the power 3y plus, yes, g of y.
Because remember, this is f of x comma y.
And if I took the partial derivative with respect to x of this, this is a pure function of y.
So if I took the partial derivative, there would be nothing left.
And certainly with respect here to x, I'm going to have 3x squared y, 3x squared y.
Okay. Now let's take the partial derivative of f, this f that I know now with respect to y.
And what am I going to get? I'm going to get an x to the power 3.
x to the power 3 because it's with respect to y.
x to the power 3 is a constant.
Plus dg dy.
dg dy because this is just a function of y.
But I know what di f di y is.
There's di f di y.
And that equals x y.
Now, if I get this on the one side, dg dy, that equals x y minus x to the power 3.
And you can see the problem because dg, okay, the differential of that is going to be x y minus x to the power 3 dy.
And I can now see that dg dy is now not, is not a function just of y.
There's x's in there as well.
So this, this is just nonsense.
Just nonsense.
And I can't go any further.
Okay.
I can't go any further because I can't separate them now.
And I can't, these are not partial derivatives.
This is a proper derivative.
And now, where do I go from there?
Okay.
I've got nowhere to go.
This had to be a pure function just of y.
And it's not.
It has x's in it.
False flat.
So this gradient, this vector field, does not have a potential function.
Okay.
Let's crank things up a bit.
I have this vector field now.
Gradient of f of x, y, and z.
Okay.
So now we're in four space.
Remember, it can also have been written like this.
f equals the vector field f.
f, and I want the potential function of that.
So how are we going to deconstruct that?
It is basically what we had before.
We're just extending it, and we just have to be awake a tiny little bit.
I know what die f, die x is.
It is equal to 2, x, y, z.
If you can't read that, that's 2, x, y, z.
Let's get the die f on its own, and that equals die x on this side.
I'm just going to put the x there.
I already know 2, y, z.
2, y, z are constants.
I'm taking the derivative of that side.
The derivative of that side, I'm just skipping a step.
y and z, y and z are constants, so they fall outside of my derivative.
So I'm going to have the f of x, y, and z.
Now is the time to be slightly awake.
The integral of x.
Now we're doing a little bit of integration here,
but the second part of this course will be about multivariable calculus
as far as integration is concerned.
But now I'm just dealing with derivatives,
but we've got to do a bit of integration here.
Okay, so that's going to come out as a 2, 2 over 2 is 1.
So I'm going to be left with x squared of y, z.
x squared, y, z.
And now what am I left with here?
What is this going to be?
What is this going to be?
Because now it's not only just a function of x and y,
there's an x, y, and z as well.
This is what you do.
The next one will be g,
which is now going to be a function of y and z,
plus I'm going to have a function just of z.
A function just of z.
Okay, that's the only addition you're going to do.
And if you have more variables,
you're just going to build the same sort of thing.
Because now let's do die, f die, x.
If I do die, f die, x.
Now this one has an x in it,
so that's going to be 2, x, y, z.
2, x, y, z.
There's nothing else.
But remember now this is a function of y and z.
And if I take a partial derivative with respect to x,
this is going to be 0.
This function only has z in it.
So if I take the partial derivative with respect to x of this,
that's also 0.
So this leaves me exactly there where I want it to be.
Exactly there where I want it to be.
Now we move on to the second die, f die, y.
Still have to be awake for this one.
Die, f die, y.
Now there's my f.
Let's take, okay, with y.
It's going to be x squared z.
x squared z.
Plus, what's going to happen here?
There is a y in this function.
So I'm going to do a d die, g, die, y.
That is what I'm going to have there.
I'm just going to differentiate this unknown function of mine with respect to y,
but just a partial derivative.
Now this one contains no y, so that's just going to be a 0.
That is just going to be a 0 because there's only z's in there,
and I'm taking partial derivative with respect to y, so that's a constant.
But I know what die, f die, y is.
There's die, f die, y.
It's x squared z.
x squared z.
Now I take die, die, die, y.
That equals, I'm going to bring this to the other side.
They cancel out this 0.
And the only way that a partial derivative of a function is 0
is if that function itself equals a constant.
So let's call it constant 1.
It's not always going to work out like this.
I might have a plus 1 there,
which means I'm just going to have a 1 there,
which means I'm going to have a g left.
But in this instance, it works out like this.
It's not always going to work out like this.
But remember, the only way that any function can be this to the 0
is if that's a constant.
So I know that g is going to be a constant.
So now I can build on this.
My f of x, y, and z is now going to equal x squared y, z.
I know now that my g of y and z,
I think we'll do a problem where I don't let this equal 0,
so you can see it meaning be 0.
But that's going to be plus some constant,
because g of y and z is just a constant,
call it constant 1,
plus I still have this h of z,
which I don't know what it is.
But at least I've solved for that now.
We know die f, die y.
Die f, die y.
Let's do this or this.
So it's going to be x squared z.
The partial derivative of z.
The partial derivative of a constant with respect to z
is just going to be 0.
And here it's only a function of z, nothing else.
So I can say dh with dz.
And that equals, well, I know what die f, die z is.
It's x squared.
x squared y, where did I make the mistake?
It's with respect to z.
With respect to z.
x squared y plus 1.
There it's die f, die z.
Partial derivative.
So now these two will cancel out.
So I'm left with the fact that dh dz equals 1.
In other words, dh equals z.
What is dz?
That means h equals.
I take the integral of both sides.
It's going to be z plus some other constant.
Let's make a constant 2.
And I can now plug that in for the h of z.
I know where h of z is.
Plus z plus some constant 2.
So there is my potential function.
Right there.
Okay.
So the only thing that you have to be awake for
is you have to keep on building it.
Just a function of z, a function of y and z,
in a function of x, y and z, in a function of x, y and z.
So you have to build it down until you get to a single
variable function right at the end.
Okay.
And remembering when you take this function
as you have it here,
if you take this with respect to y,
there's a z in there as well.
So you can't just take dg, d y.
I have to take the partial derivative
because it's still in the end.
And here I take the derivative itself
because it's only a function.
It's only a function of z.
Okay.
Nothing else.
So those two constants,
you just can write them singly as a...
as a...
let me just see...
Where were we?
Where were we?
Plus one.
I actually think the problem I had...
I had written it down incorrectly.
Have I?
No.
Sorry.
It was plus one.
I thought it was minus four.
You know, it was plus one.
It doesn't matter.
Okay.
So this is how you build it for space.
It's not a lot.
I think the problem,
It's not the problem.
It's not the워서.
It's not the truth,
it's not the virus.
Because the problem I have written for space.
It's not the発.
It's okay.
