Now the next topic is extremely easy. Just as we had second order, third order, fourth order, etc.
derivatives of a single variable function, we have higher order partial derivatives as well.
It's mostly about the way that we write it, the notation.
Now remember if I took the first partial derivative there, it would be di f di x.
But I can write it in a different form, d1 of f.
And I can say of x of y, and I can say d1 of f, or I can say d1 of f of my vector x there.
And it's all the same thing.
Now this is probably the easiest way to write it.
So let's take the first partial derivative of x, of the function f.
In other words, the partial derivative with respect to x, everything else is constants.
So that's going to be 2xy sin of z.
Now, you can well imagine, what else can I do to this?
I can take the first partial derivative again.
So I can have d1 of d1 of f.
We commonly write it as d1 squared of f.
That means I've got to do it once.
I've already done it.
We need to work from the inside out.
So I've already have that.
That's there.
This part I have there.
And now I'm going to take the first derivative again of that with respect to x.
So y and z are constants.
I'm left with 2y sin of z.
I'm left with 2y sin of z.
What if I am asked to get the following higher order partial derivative?
So 1, first squared, let's do that, of d2 of d3 of f.
So it's the first partial derivative of the first partial derivative of the second partial
derivative of the third partial derivative of f.
So all you're going to do is you're going to work from the inside out.
The first thing we need is the third partial derivative of f.
Okay, so let's do that.
We're going to say the third partial derivative of f.
So that is with respect to third one there.
That means z because this is our order, first, second, third partial derivative as we've written
it there, so I'm left with x squared, y, and then the sine of z becomes the cosine of z.
These two are constants, so again if I wrote this, I might as well have written 3 sine of z.
The first derivative of that with respect to z is going to be 3 cosine of z.
Same happens here.
Now I need d2 of d3 of f.
That means d2 of this.
d2 of this, that's with respect to y.
y is going to fall out, so 2x squared cosine of z.
Now I need the first partial derivative of the second partial derivative of the third partial derivative of x.
So it's this that 2 comes forward, so that's going to be 2x cosine of z is just a constant.
And now again, I can just write a 2 there because I'm doing it twice.
Of d...
There shouldn't have been an f there, should there?
Of d2 of d3 of f.
So we're going to do that again.
So that's going to be 2 cosine of z.
And the problem might ask that you want this.
d1 squared of d2 of d3 of the f at some point p.
So that point is 1, 1, 0.
So I'm just going to place that 0 in there, because I'm 0 is 1.
So the answer is just going to be...
The answer is just going to be 2.
So high order partial derivatives, there's absolutely nothing to it.
I suppose we can say you're going to be asked, get all the third order partial derivatives of.
So if I have a function f of x and y, just a function of f and x and y, I can have d1 squared of f, I can have d1 of d2 of f, I can have d2 of d1 of f, and I can have d2 squared of f.
Those would be the four possibilities.
And we're going to see there's something special.
There's going to be something special about these two.
Not always, but at the time there's going to be something special about these two.
So I can...
I have...
These would be all the possibilities for the second partial derivatives.
So in single variable calculus, I just had one single second derivative, one single third derivative.
But here I can combine these in a specific order.
And I will get different types of second order partial derivatives.
Very quickly, I alluded to it in a previous video as to when some of these partial derivatives are equal to each other.
Let's remind ourselves, I have a function in two variables.
So my possibilities for higher order partial derivatives.
Second order will be d1 squared of f.
It'll be d1 of d2 of f.
It'll be d2 of d1 of f.
And it'll be d2 squared of f.
Now, of course, I can go to third order partial derivatives.
I can get d1 of d1 of d1 of f.
Okay, but let's just stick here.
These two are called mixed partial derivatives.
Mixed partial derivatives.
It's d1 of d2 of d2 of d1.
And I alluded to most of the times and the problems that you'll deal with, they will be exactly the same thing.
But there are certain circumstances that they're not.
What we say is, if all the second, now, in this example, we're just keeping with the second order partial derivatives.
If all the second partial derivatives of f exist, and they are all continuous.
So in this instance, these two, so both of them exist, and they're both continuous, they are going to be equal to each other.
So it's only when one of the two of them does not exist, or one of them, or they're not continuous, obviously, then they're not going to be equal to each other.
But if they do exist, and they are continuous on the domain of the original function f, then they are, they will be, these two mixed partial derivatives will be exactly the same.
Let's do a problem.
I have the f of x of y equals x squared of y squared, and I'm asked to get all the partial derivatives, the high over the partial derivatives.
And you might think to yourself, well, I can land up with d1000.
Well, not really.
So what I, what I suggest you do is, let's get, let's get all the partial derivatives first, d1 and half f, and there'll be a d2 f.
There's no three, inasmuch as this is only a two variable function.
So with respect to, the first derivative, partial derivative, with respect to x, that's going to be 2x, and on this side you're going to have 2y.
Now, what, what can I do to this?
I can get a d1 of d1 of f, otherwise known as d1 squared of f, or I can get a d2 of d1 of f.
Those are my possibilities there, here my possibilities are, I can get a d1 of d2 of f, and I can get a d2 of d2 of f.
So work it down in that hierarchy.
So I have, this is my only two possibilities, I rewrite it, I rewrite it, I rewrite it, I rewrite it, and what can I do to it?
Again, start from the beginning, I can do a d1 and a d2 too.
So let's do that.
If I take another partial derivative of that, that's going to equal a 2.
If I take that with respect to y, I'm going to get a 0.
Now I'm going to get a 0 on this side.
If I now take this with respect to, if I take this with respect to, to x, because that's 1, that is going to be a 0, and that is going to equal a 2.
And see that these two mixed partial derivatives are exactly the same.
And I can tell you now, once you start getting to 0s, you obviously can't go any further.
Once you start getting these 0s in the mixed, you can't go any further.
So let's take this, what else, what can I do to this?
Well, first of all, I can get the d1 of, d2 of d1 of f, or I can get a d2 of a d2 of the d1 of f.
But these are already 0s.
Those are already 0s.
Okay?
So no matter how further down you go, that's not going to work for you.
That was the 1.
I did these two too.
Now let's take this one and do two things to it.
I can have d1 of d1 of d1 of f.
I can have the d2 of the d1 of the d1 of f.
But those are already, that's already a constant.
So that's going to be 0.
That's going to be 0.
The same is going to happen to this side.
And as I said, once you get to all 0s, there's no point in going any further.
So the only partial derivatives that you are going to have is up to second-order partial derivatives.
And as much as there you still have an answer, even though you don't, there you still have an answer,
even though there, well, you still do, but it's 0.
So you don't have third-order partial derivatives of any kind of value in this original function.
Now this can become quite long if we ask to get all the high-order partial derivatives of this,
or let's rather ask that we just get up to the second-order partial derivatives.
So first, first thing, first I was going to do two of them, d1 of f and d2 of f, of x and y.
So if I do the partial derivative of this with respect to x,
now remember I'll have to use, I'll have to imagine the y as a constant,
and I'll have to use the chain rule that we learned in elementary calculus.
So first of all, of this outside function, that's going to leave me with the cosine of 3x minus 2y.
By the way, that's the sine of 3x minus 2y.
And then on the inside, but just with respect to x, it's going to leave me with a 3.
And if I do this with a y, that is going to leave me with negative 2 times the cosine of 3x minus 2y.
Now what can I do now?
Well, I can do a d1 of a d1 of f, and I can do a d2 of a d1 of f.
So if I do this again with respect to, cosine is going to be a negative sine.
So there's going to be a negative, there's going to be a sine of 3x minus 2y.
And that is, with respect to x, is going to be another 3 that I have to bring forward,
multiplying by this 3, so that's a negative 9.
If I do this with respect to, if I do this with respect to y,
cosine is going to become negative sine.
There's a negative sine, but there's a negative 2 that's going to come in here,
which means positive 3 times 2 is 6, sine of 3x minus 2y.
Okay, I'm just doing it all in one step, but you can rewrite, you can do multiple steps.
Of course, it's going to be negative 3 times the sine of this,
multiplied by another negative 2.
And on this side, again, I can do a d1 of a d2 of f.
So if I do this with respect to x, cosine is negative, is negative the sine,
so that cancels out, so I'm going to be left with the sine of 3x minus 2y.
When I have 2 in front, I've got to still do this with respect to x,
partial derivative, which will just be a 3 that equals 6.
And look at this, my mixed partial derivatives are exactly the same.
Why? Because they do exist.
And it is continuous on this domain of f.
And then what else can I do?
d2 squared of f.
Now, these two are not mixed partial derivatives, they're not going to be the same.
So they are going to be left with...
I'm going to be left with cosine is negative, that's sine, it's 2, it's 6.
But also 6 if I do it with respect to...
Now, I'm doing it with respect to y, apologies.
d2 again, so with respect to that, so sine, cosine becomes sine of 3x negative 2y.
And that is still my 2, but it's negative, that cancels out,
but I'm bringing another negative in there, so it's negative 4.
Negative 4 times the sine of 3x minus 2y.
So it's so nice!
I'm going to do that for now and I'm on!
So thanks BM and how solid andppy chase.
If you guys find normal fall, I think I save a 15.
Well that hasn't left in aHola house, and you're not sure if there's no shell in there,
And you're going to do the same job, you're going to do something to do today.
So there's a notebook together with the same location that makes it better use by making a major video.
So at this moment, did I just Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin Martin?
