Now, very quickly, let's look at the concept of a conservative vector field.
It's very important in physics to know when you're dealing with a conservative vector field.
And all of this is slightly confusing.
It's best to write it out for yourself, type it out, print it out, put it on a wall somewhere,
and stare at it often.
Because it gets confusing.
Remember when we had a multivariable function?
Which is this type of function, f of z equals the f of x, y, for instance.
Now, this means n equals 2.
We said it's a smooth function if each partial derivative existed and was continuous at each point in the domain of f.
Then f was a smooth function.
Now, we have to also define a smooth function for a vector field function.
So, all in a way, we're going to work all the way down to get back to what is a conservative vector field.
Not all the way down.
We'll do 1 and 2, but then it has certain consequences if something is conservative.
So, when is a vector field smooth?
Remember, I said this function is smooth if each partial derivative exists and is continuous at each and every point in the domain of the function.
So, when is a vector field function smooth, not conservative, smooth two things?
It has to be smooth for this.
Each of the n partial derivatives of each of the n component functions is continuous at every point in the domain of f.
So, remember if I noted it as f equals each component was, sorry, f1, f2, until fn.
Each component, each component, so each of the n partial derivatives, that one will have n partial derivatives, that one will have n partial derivatives, that one will have n partial derivatives.
So, each of the n partial derivatives of each of the n components of the function is continuous.
So, if you get all of those and they're all continuously and they have a discontinuity somewhere at every point in the domain of f.
then the vector field is smooth.
Then the vector field is smooth. So that's when the multivariable function is smooth.
This is when the vector field is smooth. Okay.
And if I have a smooth vector field, and the curl of that vector field
equals zero, those two combined means the vector field is conservative.
Those two combined mean the vector field is conservative.
That has certain consequences.
If this vector field f has a potential function f,
so if I could write a function like this, and I could work back a few videos back with it,
we got the potential function of a vector field.
So if I could get a potential function out of it, it means f is a conservative vector field.
So if you were given a problem,
if you get the potential function,
and you can get a potential function, it means that f is a conservative vector field.
So if these two exist, or this one exists,
those are two different ways.
Those two combined, or the existence of this one,
it means we have a conservative vector field.
It doesn't always work the other way around, though.
This is where it gets a bit difficult.
If it is a conservative vector field,
it doesn't always mean you can get a potential function.
It doesn't work that way around.
Most of the time, and the problems that you will deal with,
it does have, because we say,
if the vector field is a smooth vector field,
and we know when it is smooth,
whose domain is a simply connected region,
then f has a potential function if and only if.
If is a conservative field.
And when is it a conservative field?
If those two exist, or that is there.
Now, we've already said it is smooth,
so the only thing that is left is the curl must be zero.
Okay, so within smoothness,
we already have this part of the conservative.
So the only other thing,
so we already have this.
If we already have smoothness, we already have this.
The only other part we need is the curl of zero.
So in code, I can write this actually means
the curl of f equals zero.
So let's revisit this.
This consequence will only go both ways
if this one exists.
And remember there I said we did the potential function,
but we missed something,
and that was the curl equals the zero vector.
Zero vector.
And that's when I said we still need to get
to what a Jacobian matrix says.
So let's look at this last consequence again.
If the vector function, vector field function,
is a smooth vector field,
you know when it's smooth.
Because the main is a simply connected region,
I'll get to what that is.
Then, the vector field function has a potential function
if the curl is the zero vector.
So you're going to do problems in your homework,
in your exams, or whatever.
You're going to check for the curl equals zero.
You never know there is a potential function.
You're going to work out the potential function.
And you're going to forget all these little subtleties
that go with it.
You've got to have all these other things being there.
Otherwise, one day, if you use this in practical application,
you might just see this is zero,
but there never was a smooth vector field there,
or it was never a simply connected region.
The domain wasn't simply connected.
And it's going to look like there's a potential function,
and obviously, you'll have made a mistake.
So as I said, you've got to see this all in context.
Remember how it's connected.
Remember all its subtleties.
Okay, but practically,
we're just going to say curl equals zero,
the zero vector.
Therefore, it must have a potential function,
and we can then,
we already know how to get the potential function.
Last thing, what is a simply connected region?
Well, it's a region in many-dimensional space.
This will not be a simply connected region
because there's this gap.
The two regions are not touching.
There isn't a simple function that I can draw
that connects these two.
Neither is this a simply connected region,
because there's a hole in it.
Okay, simply connected region,
visually, something like this.
There's no holes, no gaps,
no things that are disconnected.
That is a simply connected region.
So you've got to know that your domain
is also a simply connected region.
Just a quick shortcut
as to when the curl of a vector field function
equals the zero vector.
If I set up,
oh, this is going to be capital F's.
No, okay, that's great.
If I set this up as
F1, F2,
Fn,
the component functions,
so i equals from 1 to n,
j equals from 1 to n,
if the i-th partial derivative of the j-th component function
equals the j-th partial derivative
of the i-th component function.
It's all like that.
So if I have
D1,
F3 equals
D3,
F sub 1,
and all of the other combinations,
if those are so,
remember how we did our cross product,
then you're always going to end up with a zero vector.
So if the curl,
this is a shortcut way
to very quickly see
if your curl
is going to be
the zero vector.
If a curl,
if you and I have a curl
you're always going to be
the curl
of it,
and I een
then eer
9
eer
