Now let's move on to a new concept. We're going to look at the three types of derivatives of a vector field.
Now here we have a function, the vector field. Remember we put the capital F there.
We've just, in a video or two ago, we looked at the potential function.
So this is our vector field, capital F. And it consists of different functions.
And we can do that in here, function 1, function 2, function 3.
And remember if this 1 refers to actually that being the first partial derivative,
the second partial derivative of our potential function F that we had originally.
So we're going to look at three different types of derivatives of a vector function.
First one is the derivatives matrix, also known as the Jacobian matrix.
The Jacobian matrix, we're also going to look at the divergence and the curl of a vector field.
So imagine here we have our vector field now with these functions, second one, how many there are.
So what is the Jacobian matrix?
And this is how we write it.
It's the Jacobian matrix of F in X, Y, Z, whatever it is.
And how we're going to construct that is, we're going to forget the fact that this is already
a partial derivative of our original potential function.
Forget that.
It was just to remember what these are.
But in the matrix, in the first row of the matrix, this first row,
we're going to look just at this first function.
And we're going to take this first partial derivative of just that one.
Then the second partial derivative just of that, etc., etc.,
until we get to the nth partial derivative of F1, 1, okay.
And remember, if this was a function like this, it was going to end up being this function.
There are going to be as many variables on the left side as on the right-hand side of the equation sign.
So that goes to n.
This will go to n as well.
In the second row, we go to the second function.
And we start again with its first partial derivative of that second.
The second partial derivative of the second until we get to the nth partial derivative of the second.
So each row refers to one of these functions.
F1, F of 1, F of 1, okay.
And so we're going to go down until we get to the first partial derivative of the very last one, F of n.
The second partial derivative, F of n, until we get to the nth partial derivative of the F of n.
Still, F of n, F sub n, F sub n.
And we put our nice brackets around to denote this as a matrix.
So that is called the Jacobian matrix.
In the next video, if we make some space, we'll look at an example of how to do...
We'll look at an example.
So let's get the Jacobian matrix of this vector field.
X, Y, and Z.
We have X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared.
We have the sine of X and Y and just Z.
So let's construct the Jacobian matrix.
The Jacobian matrix of the vector field F and X, Y, and Z is going to equal...
So first of all, I said we start this function, F sub 1, F sub 1, F sub 1.
Now, our first one here is X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared.
The first partial derivative of that, that means di F, di X.
Then, if you write this, we need to make this.
That's going to be our F1.
This is going to be our F2.
And this is going to be our F3.
There's our F1.
There's our F2.
And there's our F sub 3.
So the first partial derivative of X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared.
This is going to be 2X.
Seeing that Y and Z are constants, the second partial derivative is going to be 2Y.
Now, we're spacing them out.
That's 2Y.
The third partial derivative, remember in this instance, we're dealing with this function.
3, so there should be 3.
And the last one's going to be 2Z.
Now, we take the second function, sine of X and Y.
The first partial derivative of that is going to be Y cosine XY.
Y cosine XY.
It's going to be X cosine XY.
And that is going to have a 0 in it.
That is going to have a 0 because there's no sine of XY with respect, partial derivative with respect to Z.
There's no Z in there.
Z in there.
So that's 0.
And if we look at the first one, the third one, just Z, that's going to be a 0, 0, 1.
So there is our Jacobian matrix.
There is our Jacobian matrix.
So each of the rows is just that one.
First partial derivative, second partial derivative, third partial derivative.
There's our row.
The next concept, I'm just going to make some space for the next video.
We're going to look at the determinant of the Jacobian matrix.
By doing the determinant, the determinant of the Jacobian matrix of a vector field, you need to know your linear algebra.
You can't take, you can't take multi-variable calculus if you don't, if you have not already had a course in elementary linear algebra.
Now, so I'm not going to, there are videos on this, on my channel.
So what we're going to do is to take the easiest row or column here.
It looks to me as if row number 3 would be easiest.
And all we're going to remember that we have plus, minus, plus here.
So that's going to be 0 times the determinant of the left over 2 by 2, 0 times the left over of the remaining 2 by 2.
And then we're going to have plus 1 times this.
So the determinant of the Jacobian of the vector field F is going to equal 1 times, well as left, 2x times that.
So that's 2x squared, 2x squared, 2x squared cosine, xy minus 2y squared, 2y squared cosine of x and y.
I suppose we can, x and y not, x squared, we can simplify that a little bit.
But that is just the determinant.
And we'll see later where we use this, the determinant of the Jacobian matrix of a vector field.
Next we get to look at the divergence, the divergence of a vector field.
Now we can use it in physics, before I show you what it is, in fluid dynamics.
You don't need to know this for the physics class.
If F is a velocity vector field.
So if I have a fluid and each point P, each point P is a vector.
And that means that is the velocity of that fluid particle at that point.
So that if we get the divergence then of this vector field, it gives us the outflow per unit volume at each of those points.
The outflow.
So if the divergence equals 0, we say that this vector field is divergence free.
And if it is 0 over the whole domain of the vector field, then we say it is divergence free.
And for us that means the fluid is incompressible.
Okay, we don't need to know that for this class though.
So let's get the divergence.
The divergence, we write that the divergence of a vector field equals the dot product between the del operator and the vector field.
Del operator.
And once again if we're dealing with this vector field function,
the del operator is going to equal D1 comma D2 comma Dn.
That is going to be the del operator.
And if our function F, our vector field function is F1, F2, Fn, that means the dot product between those two, the divergence of the vector field function is going to be
D1, F1 plus D1, F1 plus D sub 2, F sub 2 plus D sub n, F sub n.
So it's just those two multiplied by each other as you would do the dot product of any, the dot product of any function.
And what we can see here is that we're looking at the main diagonal of the Jacobian matrix actually because this is D1, F1, this is D2, F2 and this is D3, F, D sub 3, F sub 3.
So we're just taking from the Jacobian matrix the main diagonal.
That main diagonal gives us, if I just add the values in the main diagonal of the Jacobian matrix, I get exactly this.
So for instance if I wanted the divergence of our function F here, it's going to be the first partial derivative with respect to X of this,
the second partial derivative with respect to Y of this, and the third partial derivative with respect to Z, that is, of that.
And it's going to be exactly that, 2X plus X cosine XY plus 1.
That would be the divergence of that vector field function.
The last type of derivative of a vector field function we're going to look at is the curl, CURL.
And once again in physics, we don't need to know that, it's in fluid dynamics again, if our vector field function again is the velocity at each point P,
then if the curl is not 0, I remember at each point P, at each point P, so if I put X, Y, and Z there, I'm going to have a vector at that point.
And if I draw that vector and I look at movement around that vector in an anticlockwise direction, it's going to give me the velocity in the anticlockwise direction.
But then the curl must not equal 0, if the curl equals the 0 vector, if you remember, 0 vector, 0 vector, so if it was X, Y, and Z, 0, 0, 0, not just 0,
can't write the vector just as 0, then it's called irritational fluid, or an irritational fluid thing.
So let's look at the curl, now where it's the divergence, because of dot products we get a number, with a curl we're going to get a vector.
So we write the curl of F, and we put those lines in underneath, on top, whatever the convention is in the class that you're taking.
And that equals the cross product of the del operator and the vector field function itself, the cross product of those two.
There's various ways to do cross product, once again you need a course in elementary linear algebra, that will help you to do the cross product.
And I would do it in different ways.
What you're going to end up seeing is, whereas we use these values off of the main diagonal of Jacobian, we're going to use, here we have a three, we have a function in three space,
we're going to use in the six terms off of the main diagonal, one, two, three, four, five, six, you're going to see that's what we're going to end up with.
So how do we do this?
There are various ways to do the cross product, I usually write it out like this.
I'll have an eye roof, negative, this comes from my enjoyment of using this in physics, cross products.
So then we're going to do the del operator, which is going to be a fast d1, d2, d3.
I'm now just using this example, where n equals three, n equals three, otherwise obviously you'll have more.
And now we will have f1, f2, f3.
Now remember, the cross product does not commute, the del operator cross product, the vector function, is not going to equal the vector function cross product, the del operator.
Okay, so del operator is just as you say, DEL, the del operator.
Okay, so we're going to just do this, take this little matrix, and so the first one that we're going to use, this is how I do it, or this is one way to do it at least.
So the first one we're going to take in the eye direction, so we close off its row and its column, so we're left with this determinant.
So we're going to have the second partial derivative of f3 minus the third partial derivative of f2, that is going to be in the eye direction.
Now remember, that was plus, minus, plus for your matrix of coefficients.
So that now we're going to have a negative, so we close this row and its column, so it's d1, d sub 1, f3 minus d3, f1, d3, f1, that's in the j direction, plus in the end, we're going to close off this row, this column, so we're left with that, so that's d1, f2, minus d2, f1.
And what you're going to see is that you are, that's in the k roof direction, which means in the end you're going to sit, we're not going to use the physics notation, we're not going to use the i roof, j roof, k roof, we're going to do something else.
Okay, so let's get this for our vector field function that we have there, so the second partial derivative, so that's with respect to y of f3, that is going to be 0, that's there.
minus, so here's that one, minus third partial derivative of f2, there's f2, third partial derivative is another 0, so that was going to be 0, 0, 0 minus 0.
Now remember, we're left with this negative, so what are we going to have, this partial derivative of f3, so di f, di x of this, of di z, of
partial derivative with respect to x of this, that's 0, that's another 0 there, minus
d3 of f1, so this is 2z, 2z, and lastly we're going to have d1 f2, d1 of f2, so this with respect to x is going to be y cosine, y cosine xy, y cosine xy, minus d2 of f1,
minus d2 of f1, d2 of f1, d2 of f1 is 2y, minus 2y, there.
So I'm going to be left with the curl of my vector function f is going to be 0, 2z, y cosine xy, minus 2y, and you'll note that all of these, 0, 0, 0, 0, they all refer to values that lie off of this
main diagonal, so this one, this one, that one, that one, that one, that one, that one, that one, okay, so they work in a funny sort of order, this one minus this one, this one minus this one, and then lastly, this one minus that one.
Okay, so it's got to be, am I, am I great, actually it's not, it's not so nice, this one minus this one, this one minus this one, this one minus that one, that's good, okay.
So that's the order in which it goes.
Here, well, you can just check if you write it out, I'm not going to do it now, just carefully see where each one of these fit in, but you've got to know some ways, you've got to have some method of taking, of doing, here I'm using the determinant along the first row, this is the method I'm using the determinant along the first row of this matrix, this is my method of doing the cross product.
cross product.
