Now we've learned a lot about matrices, the determinant, we're going to step away from
that now and just look at a vector. Before we just look at vectors, the reason why we
make this jump is just the following. The reason why we can do this and why we want
to do this and should do this is that a vector can be represented as a special type of matrix.
Now that we know a lot of stuff that we can do with a matrix, once we've discovered what
vectors are and how we can manipulate them, then we'll finally see that we can use our
knowledge of matrices and apply it to vectors inasmuch as, and I'll show you later, you can
write a vector as a special type of matrix. And that is what matrices and vectors, at least
for now, have in common and why we do two seemingly very weird different things together.
Now, first of all, what is a vector? A vector, let's start with a scalar. We'll start just
a discussion with a scalar. And the scalar is a fancy word for a number. The temperature
in this room is 22 degrees set by the thermostat, for instance, on the air conditioning unit.
So a scalar is just a number. Temperature is just a number, 22 degrees. So let's put some
examples in. Temperature would be one. What about the speed shown by the speedometer in
your car? If I drive in that direction down the road at 50 kilometers per hour, that number
is 50. If I then turn around and drive 50 kilometers per hour in that direction, the number is 50.
Okay, so nothing to do with the direction. Why do I mean, why do I talk about direction?
Because secondly, I want to define a vector. A vector is a quantity such as a force or velocity.
In other words, it's going to have a number, a magnitude. These numbers, if the room was
22 degrees, that 22 degrees is a magnitude. The temperature has a magnitude. I could put
energy there as well. Now for vector, I'm also going to have a magnitude, velocity. My car
is driving 50 kilometers per hour. That is its magnitude of the velocity, but it also has
a direction. If I take driving that direction, which is north, as this room faces, if I take
that as a positive, that means I'm driving plus 50 kilometers per hour. If I now turn around
and drive in that direction, I'm driving at negative 50 kilometers per hour, and that negative
denotes a direction. So a vector is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction. A scalar
has earthly magnitude. There's no direction to temperature. There might be a direction
to change in temperature. 22 here, outside there's 25, there's a difference. But the absolute
temperature here in the room has no direction. There's no direction. Okay. Number three, how
do we, seeing that it has direction, how do we write it on paper? What symbols do we use?
Well, we just use an arrow like this. It will have a certain length. And just as when you
have a map, there's a little scale to the map. One centimeter on the map equals 10 kilometers
out there in the real world. This will also have a scale. I'll say that this thing is two,
it's two units long. That'll be my magnitude. And it points up in that direction. It has a direction.
And that's how we can go a vector. Okay. Equivalent vectors. Say for instance, I do one here. And I hope it doesn't come out too bad. And I do another one here. And say they are each of equal length and they're each point in exactly the same direction. Those three vectors are for all intents and purposes absolutely identical. Even though they are drawn in way different spots on the board, I can draw down one down here. And they're all
here. If you point in the same direction and it has the same length. Okay, I'm trying to draw them in the same direction and the same length. These four vectors are equal in all respects. No matter where on this board I draw them. Okay. That brings us to the point of just
denoting a vector like this. This will be its initial point. Initial point. Initial point. And there are different terms for this. And this is a termination point. Or
ooh, they're different. I think textbooks use different, all different, the start point, the end point, initial, terminal. Okay, but it starts somewhere and it ends. It starts somewhere and it ends somewhere.
Now, I just need to see what if I do very simple arithmetic on two vectors. What if I want to add that vector to this vector? What do I do? I want to know, can I add these two vectors? Yes, I can.
All I do is I do is I draw one and then the second one is also called tails and heads. I put the tail of that one and the head of that one. Okay, and this resultant is
here. So from the tail of this one to the head of the second one, this will be, this one is called V and you put that in there. Textbooks might not do that. They will print that V in bold which
denotes a vector. And if it's just a normal V, it'll denote a scalar. I can't draw a thick and a thinner line with this piece of chalk so I'll put my arrow on top to denote that's a vector. So that's vector V and that's vector W. This will be vector V plus W.
Okay, very simply, if I drew this one. Okay, very simply, if I drew this one first and then I drew this one. So I've put this one's tail by this one's head. So this one is V and this one is W. So I'm taking V.
Oop, let's do that. This one was called W, wasn't it? The downward one was called W. Apologies for that. This one was called V. So now I'm going to have
W plus V. And remember I said it doesn't matter where on the board they are. These two are of equal length and they point in the same direction so they're exactly the same. So V plus W
V equals W plus V. So there's also a vector called the zero vector. If I have V plus zero, this is nothing. So V plus zero, this stays V. This stays the vector V. Now, what if I have V? What if I have negative a vector? Can I have negative a vector? This is V. What is negative V? Well, it'll have the same magnitude as that. It'll just point in exactly the opposite direction.
That'll be V. That'll be V negative. And that's how we do subtraction. So if I wanted V minus W, that is just going to equal V plus minus W. So this W I need to turn around. So that will be negative W now. So I'm going to have, if I draw a V, if I draw a V there, and now I'm going to draw a negative W.
And negative W and negative W will be there. So that's V and that's a negative W. And this new vector will be V minus W. V minus W. So from where I started to where I ended, I'm just adding two with each other.
So I'm adding negative W to V. So this was negative W. So its tail goes to the head of the first one. Very easy.
Okay. Okay. Lastly, quickly, we do need a coordinate system. Because on my board I'm just pointing in some odd direction. So what we do need for vectors is a coordinate system.
Okay. I'm running through these things very quickly because they are very basic. Okay. I have a vector in two space, two dimensional. I will draw an X and a Y axis. And I have a vector here.
Now what we tend to do is we'll put the tail of a vector at the origin. This is the normal thing to do. So if I have a vector in this direction, I can now say, well, it will have a magnitude.
I can use Pythagorean theorem. And that's exactly what we'll do next. We'll deconstruct this. So you can look at the magnitude of it and you can say it has a certain direction because it makes this angle with the positive X axis.
So you can have magnitude and direction based on this line here from the origin to the positive X axis being my zero degree line. And I can say this one is at, say, 40 degrees.
40 degrees. Okay. There's a better way of doing things. Although certainly we'll see we can use this. Is to deconstruct this vector, can't we? Yes. We can just draw a line down here. We can draw a line down here. And we'll get an X component and we'll get a Y component for, we'll get a Y component for this vector.
And if we have that X component and Y component, that just denotes this point P here, doesn't it? That point P is X, Y. If this is zero. If this is zero. What if I had drawn it here, though? What if I had drawn that vector there, though?
So now we'll have a point A, X1, Y1. And we'll have a point B, X2, Y2, where it terminates. Okay. I can denote this vector. If this vector was V, I can denote this vector V as well. Same direction. Same magnitude.
Same magnitude. So I can denote. So I can denote this vector V here as vector AB. Vector AB there. And that is going to equal then, well, if this one was X2 and this one was X1, what is the two, what is the difference going to be?
Well, that's X2 minus X1 comma Y2 minus Y1. Y2 minus Y1. And that is going to give me this vector AB. And you're going to see that that is going to be exactly X comma Y.
Good. Apologies there. The memory card was full. And I don't exactly know where we stopped. But that does bring us to the next point. And that is just going to be the deconstruction, the deconstruction of vectors.
Okay. Where we were last is that V and this vector AB are exactly the same inasmuch as they're the same magnitude in the same direction. And I could get vector AB as X2 minus X1 and Y2 minus Y1.
And you've seen that in the very basic algebra, there won't be any problems as far as this vector is concerned. And that will be exactly the same. You'll get the same answer, X1 and Y1.
And this one is actually vector P0, vector 0P as much as it will be X1 minus 0, Y1 minus Y0.
So if we do deconstruct a vector like this, and by placing the tails always at the origin of our coordinate system,
that means that means I can write vector V as V1 and V2. V1 comma V2. And that is going to be my X and Y coordinates here. And if I write another vector W,
I write that vector as W1 and W, sorry, W2. And I just want to add vector V plus vector W, that is just going to equal V1 plus W1 and V2 plus W2.
Okay, where this also denotes its XY coordinate on the XY coordinate system, the X and the Y component if they are both here.
So that was, if W was there, W would have been some X value and 0. Now to add those two, remember, vectorially, I was going to draw W there, and I was going to get this answer.
Okay, that's not what we do here. If we're just going to use these components, we write them both here at the bottom.
And what you'll actually see is that we complete a parallelogram, and that is where the determinant is going to come in, but more about that later.
So I've just put the tail of the one at the head of the other one, and that finishes my, or actually if I said V plus W, I need it to do W up there.
But the answer is going to be exactly the same. So with the components, I can only use the components.
Remember that in the back of your head, both have their tails at the origin.
Otherwise, you can't draw in V1 if it was like this.
You've had to have written V1 as X2 minus X1, and V2 as Y2 minus Y1.
Okay, that makes complete sense. And this is just some two space. If we went into three space, three dimensions, there will also be a V3 for the Z component.
Just along that, if we do look at, if we do look at three space, we always use, in this lecture series, we'll always use the right-hand coordinate system.
And as much as if I make this X, and I make this Y, for instance, here.
Now, imagine to yourself that this comes directly at the board towards you.
So I'm going to point. There's a corkscrew rule. I like to use the right-hand rule.
Always the right-hand pointing in the direction of X, which is now straight at you.
This X, it's trying to draw three dimensions, so this X-point strategy, towards Y, swing your fingers out towards Y.
So from X towards Y, the thumb points up in the Z direction.
So this will make this a right-hand coordinate system that I chose, a right-hand coordinate system.
If I did this, and I call this Y towards you, and I call this one X.
So my fingers were pointing towards X, I'm swinging them towards you, directly towards X, swinging them towards you at Y.
Because Y is now directly at you, my thumb points down.
But this Z is, my thumb points down.
That would have given me a right-hand coordinate system, because it works on my right-hand.
But I've made this point upwards.
That means this is a left-hand coordinate system, and we're not going to use that, because that makes life quite difficult when you do this sort of thing.
Okay.
So this would have been a right-hand coordinate system, but this, for Z, would have been a left-hand coordinate system.
And I always want X towards Y, points up, because exactly what is this right-hand coordinate system.
