Just two things to end off here. If you are given a point P as x1, then y1, just a bit of repeat, and you're given a point Q, and that is going to be x2, y2, and you need to do something, you're given those two points, and you're given another vector W, and you're told W equals, say, 3, 3.
That means, if I just write it like this, remember that means that the tail, the initial point is at the origin. For this vector PQ, they want now vector PQ plus vector W.
Let's make it more generic. Let's make this W1, W2, as we do to a convention. I want to know PQ plus W. What am I going to do?
This is not given with its tail at the origin. This is sitting somewhere, say, for instance, in the first quadrant of our Cartesian two-dimensional coordinate system, two-space coordinate system.
Well, remember, PQ, you're now going to write as, it's going to be x2 minus x1, and y2 minus y1. That is how you're going to write that.
And now, PQ plus W, plus W is then going to equal, what is that going to equal?
Well, it's going to be this one plus this one, and that one plus that one. So, look, we're going to have x2 minus x1 plus W1, and we're going to have y2 minus y1 plus W2.
Okay. So, that is going to be the addition of this vector W1.
Quick last thing. If I have this vector W, and I multiply it by some scalar, what will that be?
Well, I'm just going to multiply each one by those. In other words, I'm going to have kw1, and I'm going to have kw2.
Okay. So, that's easy enough. In as much as, if I have this vector, I'm just multiplying it by three, so I'm making it three times longer.
If I'm multiplying it by negative one, I'm just going to get the opposite. So, I'm going to get this vector, or I'm going to get this vector.
So, this should all be straight. So, if this first one was v, this one's going to be 3v, and this little one here is going to be negative one times vector v.
So, all I did is I can just multiply each component by that scalar. One more concept is the parallel translation of axes.
What that means is, if I have an xy coordinate system here, that is my x axis, that is my y axis, and I have my origin here at 0,0.
Sometimes, it's easy to solve problems if I have a vector. Let's put that vector there. Let's put that vector there.
Sometimes, in the books, we'll just translate so that the new coordinates are at the trail, but let's be slightly more difficult.
If I just translate, now, it'll be better if you do translate there, but that's for argument's sake. Say, I translate, I make a new coordinate system.
I make a new coordinate system there, and I call this coordinate system x prime y prime.
And my new coordinate system, my new coordinate system, has an origin inside my old coordinate system.
And let's make that inside the old coordinate system. We'll make that point k, l.
That is the origin of my new, the coordinates of my new coordinate system's origin in the old coordinate system.
Now, how do I translate? And these are parallel there. I haven't, I haven't angulated this new one.
It's parallel, y prime, and y parallel, x prime, and x are parallel.
So, in the old system, this is point p and this is point q. In the old system, in the old system, what would p and q be?
What would p and q be? Well, point p would have had an x and y coordinate system. Point p would have had an x and a y coordinate system.
Now, what is it going to be? Let's just look at the x. Let's just look at point x.
So, it's going to be there as far as our new coordinate system is concerned, and it was going to be there as far as our old coordinate system was.
So, I need just this little bit here for the new p prime, p prime. I want x prime, y prime. So, what would it be? It's coordinates in the new one.
Well, in the old one, it was this length x. And in the new one, it's just this little bit. But remember, this little bit is k. Okay?
So, what is it going to be in the new one? Well, in the new one, it's just that little bit there, which is x minus k.
So, my x prime is just going to be x minus k. The exact same thing is going to happen here. I'm going to have a y and I'm going to have a y there. Okay?
So, in the old coordinate system, this was y. We know this length is l. This length is l. So, what is this length, which is the y component in the new coordinate system? Well, it's just y minus l.
So, y prime is going to be the old y minus l. So, if I translate, and you can always explain it to yourself in this fashion, but if I translate, as I say, you can draw this whole thing and remind yourself what this is all about.
But, but, but, but, please remember, x prime is going to be the x coordinate of the old system. Let's write the x coordinate of old system minus minus x component of the origin of the old system.
of the new system within the old system. The x component of the origin of the new, new system within the old system.
Okay. So, this x component of that within the old system. Within the old system, that was k comma l. 0 comma 0 in the new system was k comma l in the old system. And that's the k. So, you take the x coordinate of the old system.
So, that was point p, x comma y and you subtract from that the x component of the origin of the new system within the old system. You can clearly see that x minus k is going to give you that little bit. And y minus l gives you that little bit, which is the p prime, x prime, y prime. So easy to do. You can do the same for q.
And when you subtract those though, you are going to get exactly the same. You are going to get exactly the same because the two vectors are the same magnitude and in the same direction. Okay. But this is this translation, parallel translation of the axes.
To illustrate by an example, remember our equations. If I translate to a new coordinate system in which its origin in the old coordinate system, kl was 4, 1. Translate the point p into p prime.
What will the coordinates be in what will the coordinates be in the new system? Well, remember that is just going to be x, which is 2, minus k, which is 4.
And I'm going to have y, I'm going to have y, which is Y, which is 0, minus 1, minus k, which is 4. And I'm going to have y, which is 0, minus l, which is 1.
So p prime for me is going to be negative 2 comma negative 1, negative 2 comma negative 1.
So it's really simple to do.
Let's just carry on with this though. I know it's simple, but let's just do point q.
I want to show you something. So what's q prime going to be?
Well, that's 3 minus 4, which is negative 1, and 6 minus 1, which is 5.
Now let's look at what pq is, vector pq. Vector pq is going to be, there's p, there's q, it's 3 minus 2 is 1, and 6 minus 0 is 6.
Let's do that for p prime, q prime, because that should not have changed our vector.
Same magnitude, same direction. Is it the same? Well, p prime, q prime is here, negative 1, negative 1, where is q prime?
Negative 1 minus minus 2, that's this 1, and 5 minus minus 1, that's 5 plus 1, that's 6, and I end up with the exact same thing.
Can I go from negative 1, 5 to 3, 6? Well, yes. I want x now, so what's x going to be?
x is going to be x prime plus k, and y is going to equal y prime plus l.
So if I want x, I'm going to take x prime, which is negative 1, I'm going to add 4 to that. 4 minus 1 is 3.
And if I take y prime, which is 5 plus l, that gives me a 6, and I'm back at 3, 6.
So for parallel translation of the axes, please remember these two. If you can't remember those two, draw a simple graph.
Just move it up to k and l, and it's so easy to see that for x prime, you just need the x minus the k,
and for y prime, you're just going to need the y minus the l sometimes.
