Let us run quickly through some vector arithmetic. Some of these we have done before. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Let's just look at them. U, vector U plus vector V equals vector V plus vector U. We've done that.
We can associate some of them. We can first add vector U and V and that resultant we can add to vector W.
That will be exactly the same as first adding vector V and W and then the resultant of that added to vector U.
So I can associate any ones I want. Vector U plus nothing equals nothing plus vector U.
This is vector U. Vector U plus negative itself. That's going to give you a zero. We've seen that before.
We can distribute things like this as well. We have a scalar K. But first we multiply scalar L with vector U.
We might as well multiply these two scalars with each other and then multiply by vector U.
I can distribute things like this. I have a scalar K and then I have the addition of these two.
So I'm going to add these two vectors first and then the resultant of that multiplied by the vector and the scalar.
I might as well just multiply the scalar first with each individual one and add those two.
I can do it this way around. If I just add the two scalars first and I then multiply it by the vector.
I might as well multiply K times the vector and then L times the vector and add them.
And obviously one times a vector is the same vector. It's one times and then vector.
Now we're going to get to a concept called the norm. The norm of a vector.
And I'll first of all show you how we write that. Usually it's two lines, vector V, two lines.
And what that means is the length of a vector.
Now just look in Euclidean 2 space.
I have a vector there, vector V, that obviously has an X component and it's going to have a Y there, a Y component.
And I can use the Pythagorean theorem to determine the length of this.
And as much as the length or the magnitude distance of this V,
this is going to be the square root of X squared plus Y squared.
And if I have a point here, point P being X and Y,
this is going to be X squared plus Y squared.
And that is what is denoted by this.
This is the length.
This is the length of this vector, the norm of this vector.
So if a vector, if I write vector V as V1 comma V2,
if I get the norm length of that vector,
that it'll just be the square root of V1 squared plus V2 squared.
And as much as the V1, V2, remember the notes, X and Y,
if the initial point or the tail of this vector is at the origin.
What if it's not at the origin?
What if I have point P1 here and I have point P2 there?
Remember, this one will be X1, Y1.
And this will be X2, Y2.
I hope you can see the corner there.
For the length of that, well, we know how to determine this vector
or write it so that this is at the origin.
And as much as vector P1, P2 is now just going to equal X2 minus X1
and Y2 minus Y1.
If I want to then determine the norm of vector P1, P2,
this is then going to be the square root of this X2 minus X1 squared
plus Y2 minus Y1 squared.
OK, now the same will happen if I have a vector in three space.
If I have a vector V, and that equals V1, V2, and V3,
it's now X, Y, and Z.
The norm of this vector V is just going to then equal the square root of
V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
So you just keep on squaring no matter how many dimensions you add to this.
This is in three space, three-dimensional.
You just add the components there for the length.
That brings us to the length of vector K times vector V.
The vector scalar times that vector V.
What is that equal to?
Well, length is always going to be positive.
We square all these values.
So even if this vector was down here,
you know that it's going to be negative V1, negative V2.
But you square all of those, you're always going to have a positive N.
We, the length of that vector, we always denote as a positive length,
even if it goes down in this negative direction as far as X and Y are concerned,
and even Z if it went backwards, Z if it went backwards.
But it's always positive.
So for this vector, because K might be negative 3, what if K is negative 3?
Well, this equals the absolute value of K.
The absolute value of K.
I'm leaving a little space for myself here.
That's the absolute value of K times the norm of that vector V.
So you have to use an absolute value there.
This we always denote as positive,
and the length of a vector to stay positive there will have to be the absolute value of that.
So nothing really groundbreaking here.
Nothing too difficult.
The norm of a vector.
Okay, let's do an example.
I have a vector V here.
And I've written that vector V is V1, V2.
Now because I've translated this into a 2D coordinate system,
two space coordinate system,
if the origin is at 0, 0, the tail,
then this X or Y does refer to V1 and V2.
So that'll be V2 and V1.
Now what I want is an expression for V1.
V1 is already just a magnitude.
V2 is just a magnitude.
It really has no direction.
But we write it as such in as much as we mean
an X and a Y coordinate system.
So if I look at the co-scientists of theta,
I am looking at adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
Now I can't divide by a vector.
I must divide here by the length of the vector.
This is just a magnitude length.
So it was divided by the magnitude there,
which is the norm of that vector.
In other words, V1 equals the norm of vector V
times the cosine of theta.
In other words, that is going to be the square root of
V1 squared plus V2 squared times the cosine of theta.
That will give me V1.
Similarly, V2 is going to equal,
that is the sine of theta is opposite divided by hypotenuse.
So that is going to give me the norm of vector V
times the sine of theta,
which is going to be this exact same thing,
V1 squared plus V2 squared times this time
the sine of that angle between them.
So those are two equations.
It's a nice example,
a nice problem to solve.
Equations for V1 and V2,
the components of vector V.
It is the norm times that cosine of the angle,
norm times the sine of that angle.
Okay, we have two points.
It's another problem.
We have point P0,
which is denoted by x0, y0, and z0.
And I have a point P in three space,
which is denoted by x, y, and z.
I want to know the description of all the terms x, y, and z,
for which the norm of P minus P0 equals 1.
What am I asking?
What am I being asked here?
If I have two vectors,
or two points,
there's my point P0,
there's my point P.
That's any way you want to draw it.
P, 0, and P.
I am asked,
first of all,
I'm going to take
P minus P0.
P minus P0.
What can I do with that?
Well, let's change this P and P0 into vectors.
Let's change them into vectors.
Just for instance,
I'm going to have vector P0,
and I'm going to have vector P.
So I'm asking for P minus P0.
That might as well better than be P,
plus the negative of P0.
Okay, the negative of P0 is going to be this vector.
So I'm going to add that one.
I'm going to add that one there.
Okay, and that will give me this result of vector here,
which is vector P minus P0.
This vector.
And this vector has a norm of 1.
A norm of 1.
In other words, this length is 1.
In other words,
anywhere on this circle.
Anywhere on this circle.
Anywhere on that circle with a radius of 1.
All the x, y is actually,
remember this is in three spaces,
so it's actually a sphere.
Any point in that sphere
is then a solution of x, y, and z
for this norm.
For this norm.
Okay?
And looking at it in another way,
if I have P minus P0,
I'm not looking at it as vectors.
So what is that going to be?
That is going to be x minus x0,
y minus y0,
and z minus z0.
And if I want the norm of that,
actually, when they do that,
it has to be a vector.
It's only a vector that has a norm.
Okay?
So we've got to see this as a vector.
That is going to be the square root
of this squared plus,
this squared plus,
this squared.
And this is going to equal 1.
This is a square root,
so I can square both sides of all of this.
x minus x0 squared
plus y minus y0 squared
plus z minus z0 squared
is going to equal 1.
Okay.
It's going to equal 1.
What this is telling us, though,
is that this is all sitting at the sphere,
at the radius of the sphere.
And what would be an equation?
Well, just for a circle,
you know that would be x squared
plus y squared equals a squared,
whereby a is the radius,
which has been told the radius is 1.
We can add the z squared,
and then it's going to equal 1.
Okay.
So that's a description
of all the points x, y, and z
that are on the surface
of this sphere,
which is exactly what this means.
means?
So that's the thing,
so that's it.
So that's to the center I mean it.
So that's my Pokémon.
Thank you very much.
So...
So that's going to work.
