In this section of linear algebra we're going to start looking at what is called the dot product of two vectors.
The dot product. And it has various uses.
So I'm going to take one vector and I'm going to dot product it with another vector.
Also called the Euclidean inner product.
And the way that we write it is if we have two vectors we're going to write it vector u
and then you put a dot there in the middle and vector v.
And we're going to define that as the following.
That is going to equal this.
It's going to equal the length of vector u times the length of vector v times the cosine of the angle between them.
Cosine of the angle between them.
And then we don't want u or v to be zero.
So that mustn't be zero and theta must not be 90 degrees.
And it is zero if either of them are zero or if theta is 90 degrees because the cosine of pi over 2 is zero.
Okay so that is how we, certainly how we define this.
There's another way to define the dot product.
If I make u equal to, let's make it in three space, so that's u1, u2, u3.
And I make v also in three space.
And I make v also in three space.
And I make v1, v2, v3.
And then I will write that the dot product.
The dot product of u dot v is then going to equal u1, v1 plus u2, v2 plus u3, v3.
And as you can clearly see length, length times the radius is going to give you a scalar.
And we have multiplication plus a multiplication plus a multiplication just of numbers.
And that's going to give you a number.
In other words a scalar.
So the result of a dot product is just a scalar.
Now how can we prove this?
You can do it for yourself.
I won't run through this whole thing.
It's quite easy to do.
Let's just draw any, any triangle.
Let's make that our triangle.
Let's call the angles of this triangle.
Let's call this A.
Let's call this B.
Let's call this C.
We can also call this angle here theta.
Okay that makes that A.
That makes this C.
That makes that one B.
And we know from the law of cosines.
That A squared.
That A squared is going to equal B squared plus C squared minus 2BC.
Cosine of A.
Cosine of A.
Now what if I told you we did the following.
We made this the Euclidean Cartesian coordinate system here.
X and Y.
So I'm going to call this B.
I'm going to call vector U.
And certainly hope we're going to have a point there.
Which is going to be U1, U2.
And let's just do it in 3 space but it works for 2 space.
It works for 3 space as well.
This makes this vector.
Let's make this vector B.
This AB is now vector B which will be B1, B2.
And then there is this vector A.
This A is vector CB.
CB.
And we know CB is just going to be, and you can check that out for yourself, that it's going to be vector U minus vector B.
So if I take vector B.
So if I take vector U and I add to that the negative of vector B.
So I'm going to put it there.
I'm going to be left with this vector here and remember this vector here.
Same magnitude, same direction.
It's going to be vector CB.
Okay.
So let's write this A squared.
This A squared is CB squared which is that.
So that's the length of vector U minus vector B squared.
Because what is B squared?
That's the length of U squared.
Remember I'm talking about lengths because this is now using the cosine rule for these triangles.
For these triangles.
And to solve this we just need the lengths of these.
Just the lengths.
So this is going to be the length of V squared minus 2 times U, V, all the norms of these, cosine of an angle we call theta.
Now what you can do is just bring this on its own and get rid of that 2.
So I'm going to have U, V, first sinus theta and equal a half.
The board is this side and on this side then we're going to have U plus V minus U minus V.
There we go and that's all to a half.
Now we've just defined this.
We call this U dot V.
So this is going to be U dot V.
And now instead of this, remember how we defined the norm.
So instead of U squared I'm going to write U1 squared plus U2 squared plus U3 squared.
Because remember the norm without the square was just the square root of all of these.
But I'm squaring this so the square root disappears.
It seems that I forgot some of my square roots.
My square roots you have a minus square there.
Oh, squares.
Square there.
And U minus V.
U minus V.
I remember it was on, where did I find it?
2 times BC U minus V.
And what I want to do with that U minus V.
Let me just have a quick look.
U minus V was the side U minus V squared as well.
I apologize for that.
I saw something telling me what was wrong.
The square for all of it.
And this will be this one.
Let me just write that one for you.
U minus V squared.
It's just going to be U1 minus V1 squared plus U2 minus V2 squared plus U3 minus V3 squared.
And if you write this, if you multiply this out, it's going to be U1 squared minus 2 times U1 V1 plus V1 squared.
And if you write down all of these, you'll see that these is going to be a positive U1 squared and a negative U1 squared.
Because we're multiplying out here by this negative.
So they're all going to be cancelled out.
All you're going to be left with is a 2 U1 V1 plus 2.
All these plus, all these 2's.
As you square this, you're going to have U1 squared minus 2 times U1 V1.
And those 2's are going to be cancelled out by this half.
And you are just going to be left with, you are just going to be left with this equation here.
So then do it for yourself, it's a bit boring.
But you'll see everything cancels out in your left here.
And we just started with this cosine.
Draw four triangles.
Okay, so we have these two equations.
We have these two equations for.
And it will be 0 if I of U equals 0 or V equals 0 or theta equals pi over 2.
Or suddenly get a 0.
So this is the dot product of two vectors.
Okay, I have two vectors here and I want to know what the angle is between them.
It's going to be very easy to do.
If I want the angle between them, I can just look at their dot product.
And I know that that equals the length of the one, the norm, times the norm of the second one, times the cosine of the angle between them.
That makes the angle between them, the arc cosine, it's never really done this way but let's do it this way.
The arc cosine of the following.
U dot V dot product V divided by the norm of U times the norm of V vector V and that's it.
Okay, we know how to get this.
Let me just write that out for you.
So that's going to be the arc cosine of.
On top we're going to have U1 V1 plus U2 V2 plus U3 V3.
And the bottom we're going to have the norm of the first vector is going to be 2 squared is 4 plus negative 1 times negative 1 is 1 plus 1 times 1 is 1.
And that is to the power of half, remember, it's the square root of that.
The second one is going to be 1 plus 1 plus 4.
Yeah, it's exactly the same.
So we're going to have 4 plus 1 plus 1 also to the power of half.
So the square root of 6 times the square root of 6 which is the 6.
So here we're going to have the arc cosine of.
We're just going to have 6.
And on the top we're going to have 2 times 2 is 2.
Okay, plus negative 1 plus 2.
That's going to give us 2 plus 2 is 4 minus 1 is 3.
That gives us 3 over 6 which equals a half.
And what would that be?
Remember your triangles.
So that will be pi over 2.
That's pi over 6.
That's pi over 3 which gives you 1, 2, square root of 3.
So what angle gives you a half?
The cosine of what angle gives you a half?
Which is adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
It's this one.
So theta equals pi over 3.
Theta equals pi over 3 which is also known as 60 degrees.
So simple enough to work out the angle between two vectors
if you're given the two vectors in component form.
So far we're going to keep the square root of 3.
So it should have which icon is just advanced.
And if past icon.
Right?
So this one in there.
So let's go to hit the top.
So second.
So first.
ascend in the square supremac production.
Hello, So what angle do we do you do?
All right.
For this one.
So thank you.
Nice to therange total.
Thank you.
So thank you so today.
