Some quick dot product arithmetic, u dot v equals v dot u, remember because that is just u1 v1 plus u2 v2 plus u3 v3, which will be exactly the same as v1 u1, because I'm just multiplying those with each other, so there's certainly no difference there.
If I have a dot product and I add those, it will be the same as u dot product v plus u dot product w. Those two will be the same, so I'm just distributing this u.
If I have this scalar multiplied by this dot product, that is going to equal k, that dot product with v, and that will also be equal to u dot product k with v.
Okay, so those two will be equal. It's not both of them, I can't have k for both, it's not a plus, it is a dot product.
And this is always going to be larger than zero inasmuch as, except for, let's just say, except for when v equals zero.
If it equals zero, if it equals zero, then this dot product will be, the dot product will be zero.
But if it's not zero, if it's not zero, it will always be more than zero, because remember, it is just the norm of that vector squared.
The ending square is going to be positive. So, a vector dot product by itself is always more than zero, unless, of course, it is zero, then zero dot product zero will be.
The zero vector dot product will be zero.
In this section, I want to discuss the projection of one vector onto another.
It sounds, it sounds very difficult, but it really isn't, and I'll show you where it comes from. It's very easy.
And the reason why we want to do that, we want to decompose a vector into the sum of two other vectors,
of which one is parallel to a second nonzero vector, and the other component is orthogonal, and orthogonal means perpendicular to that vector.
So, what are we going to do? I have two vectors. I have two vectors there and there, and what I'm saying is I want to decompose the stop vector.
I want to decompose the stop vector into the sum of two other vectors. And those two other vectors have to be such that one of them is parallel to some other nonzero vector, and the second component is orthogonal or perpendicular to this other vector.
So, it's very simple. Remember, remember, remember, remember, if I just have a Cartesian coordinate system, and I have a point up there, point x comma y, there's point p, and there's x comma y, what am I doing?
I can decompose it into two parts, and this is my x, and this is my y, so I can say, well, I'm going to go across x amount, and then I'm going to go up y, and if I do that, I add those two, I'm going to get to there.
In other words, if this was a vector, and if this was a vector, this vector, plus that vector, this one, to that one, it's going to give me an old one.
So, I'm decomposing this vector into two other vectors, two other components. And those components, one of them is along another vector.
So, in this case, it is this vector, a longer vector, say, for instance, along the x-axis. So, this one would be this one of mine, this vector x, long one, will be this one.
So, I'm just composing this vector into a component. I'm going to decompose it into two parts, which together, if I add them, plus them, they've got to equal the original vector.
And the one component has to be parallel to some other vector, non-zero vector. And the second component must be perpendicular.
So, what do I need to do? I certainly need to have this. I need to have this. This is the crucial bit. I need this 90 degree angle.
I need this 90 degree angle between the perpendicular one, because it has to be perpendicular to the other one. So, what can I do here?
Well, this is the one along which I want to do it. Now, it can be shorter or longer, but let's just draw a line along it.
Okay? It can be shorter or longer. One can be shorter or longer than the other one. That doesn't matter. It just has to be along that other non-zero vector.
So, I need to do a perpendicular line there. A perpendicular line there. Okay? So, this vector here along this one and this vector here perpendicular to this vector will give me this one.
Thank you.
...
