Now in this video I want to discuss orthogonal projections. It sounds horrible but what I want to do is if I have two vectors here, let's call the top one vector u and the bottom one vector a.
I want to project a component of vector u onto vector a.
And it's difficult just to think about it in free space here without putting a coordinate system to it.
We know full well that if we have a vector u here in this two space Cartesian coordinate system, I can deconstruct this vector u into two components.
This x-axis component and the y-axis component. So much so that vector in the red there w1 plus vector w2 is going to give me, let's write that down.
We have vector w1 plus vector w2 is going to equal vector u.
I just want to write an equation because you might need it later in explanation. I'll see how we go.
Vector w2 equals w1 minus vector u. Just simple algebra.
That's the wrong way around, isn't it? Let's just correct that.
So, vector w2 is going to be vector u minus vector w1. That's correct.
Okay, simple algebra.
Now, fortunately for us, I've drawn vector a such that it does fall on our x-axis here.
Because to project one component of a vector onto another vector, what we want to do is for these two components to be such that
the first component w1 has to be on top of or parallel to some other vector, in this instance vector a.
The second component has to be orthogonal or perpendicular to the other vector.
So, if it was like that, what you had to do is to just twist it a little bit so that one lies on the x-axis.
And what you see by doing this orthogonality component format is just you decomposing the one vector onto the other one as if the other one lies on an xy coordinate system.
Nothing other than that.
Now, if I were just to take the cosine of this angle with this vector, let's just take the cosine of theta.
Cosine is adjacent which will be the length because I can't do vectors now.
It's got to be the length of vector w1.
Length of vector w1 divided by hypotenuse which is the length of vector u.
I can't divide one vector by another one, but certainly I can with the lengths.
Something else that I do know is if I take the dot product of vector u and vector a, I'm going to get the normal, the norm of vector u, the norm of vector a times the cosine of the angle between them such that the angle is between an inclusive of zero and pi radians, 180 degrees.
So, I can use simple algebra and I can write the cosine of theta being u dot a, vector u dot vector a divided by the norm of vector u times the norm of vector a.
Now, I have two cosines here.
Now, I have two cosines here and I can equate these two right hand sides to each other.
What I am going to lose though is this in the denominator.
So, I am going to have the norm of vector w1 equals vector u dot vector a divided by the norm of vector a.
Let us look specifically at this length, at this vector w1.
It lies right on top of vector a.
So, what is an actual fact if we just look at magnitude, if I just look at magnitude, is that not going to be k times the norm of vector a?
If it was longer, then that k is going to be more than one.
If it was shorter, it was going to be a fraction.
If it pointed in the other direction, it was going to be negative.
But, we know the properties of vectors now.
Those are the two same vectors.
They only differ by some scalar.
They only differ by some scalar.
So, this, I can equal to k times the norm of vector a.
Let us solve for k, the scalar k.
The scalar k is going to be u dot a, vector u dot a.
And, I am going to bring this to the other side divided by the norm of vector a.
That is going to be the scalar.
Let us write vector a with respect to vector w1 in a different format though.
We can write vector in full vector form.
It is going to just be k times vector a.
Again, they point in the same direction.
These two things mean exactly the same.
The magnitude is just going to differ by some scalar.
But, the vectors themselves, as far as the direction is the same anyway.
So, they are just going to differ by this.
So, let us write this.
Equals k.
We know something about k now.
That is k.
Let us write k.
Where were we?
I just want to see.
Ok, I put k in there.
So, this had to be k squared.
I had to bring this down.
So, it was going to be k squared.
I thought I forgot to square somewhere.
So, this being equal, I just wrote k on its own there.
Bringing this one down.
For k, it had the norm of a squared.
Okay.
So, that is going to equal k, which is this.
U dot a over the norm of a squared multiplied by vector a.
And, this is exactly what we have here.
We just write.
We can't write vector w1.
We write it in this form.
What this form says is that vector w1.
This one, because it is not always going to be nice on the coordinate system.
You know, what about this?
You are, in actual fact, going to construct a coordinate system in this fashion.
Directly with the bottom vector there.
So, it is called the orthogonal projection of vector u along vector a.
And, that equals what we see there.
Exactly what we see there.
So, you have to memorize that and see how easy it was for me to derive that.
Now, the component of vector u orthogonal to vector a is that vector w2 there.
And, look now.
Vector w2 equals u, vector u minus this.
The projection, orthogonal projection of vector u along vector a.
And, there is our equation for that we have just written here instead of this.
Obviously, you just write all of that.
But, that is our second.
So, you are deconstructing one vector along another such that one component is parallel to the other vector.
And, the other component is perpendicular to that second vector.
And, if you then add these two components.
If I add u minus this projection plus, where are we with w2?
If I had, if I had, if I added these two.
Remember, w1 was just the projection, orthogonal projection of vector u along vector a.
So, if I added those two, it will be u negative the projection plus the projection.
That's just going to leave me u exactly where I started.
One more thing quickly.
And, let's just look at the norm of the orthogonal projection of vector u along vector a.
That must just be the norm of vector u dot product vector v divided by the square of the norm of vector a times vector a.
Now, what does that equal to?
Well, remember, this is a scalar, this is a scalar, and that is a vector.
So, this scalar, we can just write the absolute value of u dot v.
Why can I do that?
Well, I have to do that because we are just talking about length.
Length is like speed.
50 km per hour in that direction, 50 km per hour in that direction, still both positive.
We are just talking a scalar, just a magnitude, no direction involved.
And, at the bottom we still have the squared.
I seem to always forget that square.
Times.
Now, I want this.
Also, just the length of it.
I just want the length and the norm of this projection.
And, those two will then cancel, so I am left with the absolute value of the dot product of...
Well, I don't know why suddenly I changed that to a v.
It's got to be a.
Please forgive all my v's that I have written here.
Okay, divided by the norm of vector a.
The norm of vector a that has also had to be an a.
Suddenly all my a's turned into v's.
So, there is one more way to write this.
There is one more way to write this.
And, that is the fact that I can rewrite vector u dot product vector a.
I can certainly write that as the normal vector u times the normal vector a times the cosine of the angle between them.
And, if I take this and I replace it in there, what am I going to get?
This absolute value of normal vector u, normal vector a times the cosine of the angle between them divided by the norm of vector a.
So, where does that leave me?
Those two will cancel, so I am left with...
I am left with the normal vector u.
Remember these norms are always positive.
It's the square root of something squared plus something squared plus something squared times the absolute value of the cosine of that angle.
I want positives for both. I am talking about length here.
So, the length of this.
Which actually, if you think about it, this is very satisfying.
If I have a triangle and I make that theta and I make this the hypotenuse.
Apologies there, the card was full.
I was about to say that this is a very satisfying equation because we are talking about the length of this.
Imagine we call it just w1 and w2.
So, I am not talking about vectors here.
It's only length.
If I take the cosine of this angle, it is going to be adjacent divided by hypotenuse.
In other words, w1 is going to be hypotenuse times the cosine of that angle there.
And is that not exactly what we wrote here?
The length of this vector equals h, the length of that, which is the length of vector u times the cosine of that angle, the cosine of that angle.
So, it's a very satisfying way of looking at this.
And just doing this, I could have gotten to this knowing that I am going to call this the orthogonal projection of vector u along vector a.
So, just to reiterate what we are dealing with, we are decomposing one vector, but we are choosing those two components along which we decompose it.
And remember, the addition of those two components must give me back the original vector.
But I am choosing it such that the first component is parallel to some other vector and the second component is orthogonal or perpendicular to that vector.
And that is what this section is about.
This section will be associated with the top of and into the bottom.
This section will also acrylic image.
