In this video I want to show you that a vector n, in this component form, is orthogonal or perpendicular to a straight line equation which we have here if the coefficient of x is a and the coefficient of y equals b.
If I use that a and b and I change that into a vector I can show you that these two are perpendicular or orthogonal.
So if I have a line, I've got to show you, or what I have to show you in other words, is if I do the dot product between, if I could change this into a vector and I did the dot product between these two, my answer has got to be zero.
How can I do that? How can I do that? First of all, I can change this into a vector by just making two points on that vector.
Let's have point P1 and point P1 is going to be at x1, y1.
And I have point P2 which will be at x2, y2 such that these points fall on that line.
So I'm going to have, I'm going to have the following.
A x1 plus b y1 plus c equals zero and I have a x2, let me write that the other way around, let me write that on top.
I'm going to have a x2 plus b y2 plus same c equals zero.
So both these points, I want them to satisfy my original equation.
What if I subtract these two from each other though?
What would this minus this be?
Well, I can, so I'm just subtracting the left hand side from the left hand side, the right hand side from the right hand side.
And since they're all equal, I'm not changing anything.
So I'm going to have a x2 minus x1 and I'm going to have plus b y2 minus y1 and c minus c is zero, zero minus zero is zero.
That's all I have.
Now I can rewrite this in a different form and this is what is so important.
I can rewrite this in a different form.
I can rewrite this as a comma b dot product with x2 minus x1 and y2 minus y1.
I can write it in vector form like this because is this not going to end up being that equation?
Remember the dot product of two vectors and all I've done is I've written two vectors in component form.
So it'll be the first component times this first component, which is exactly that.
The second component b with this second component added to the first lot, which is this there, equals zero.
So I've written this equation in as a vector.
And what is this a, b?
Well, I told you that's vector n.
And what is this vector?
Well, let's make a vector.
Let's just make a vector out of point P2, P1.
Okay, so vector P1, P2, that is going to equal, well, x2 minus x1, comma, y2 minus y1.
And is that not vector P1, P, P1, P, P2?
And that equals zero.
So the dot product of these two vectors equals zero.
So, showing you that this vector, using A and B as components, is indeed orthogonal to this straight line.
Good.
Now we're going to show that we can get an equation for the distance d between a point and a line.
We'll call the point P0, x0, comma, y0, and we'll call the line AX plus BX plus C.
Now what we are doing, the shortest distance between a point and a line is obviously going to be a perpendicular distance, perpendicular to the line.
So we're going to choose a point, first of all, we're going to choose a point Q that is on the line, x1, comma, y1.
It is on the line, and then, just as we did before, remember, there will be this perpendicular vector.
There will be this perpendicular vector, A, comma, B.
We've shown that any line like this, now this, sorry, this has to be, this has to be, um, equally, uh, equal to zero.
So we showed if that's equal to zero, that we can construct this perpendicular vector.
We can construct this perpendicular vector.
And let's call this distance, let's call this distance, um, let's draw a line of that.
Let's first do that. Imagine just, just an arbitrary line. Imagine that was the line.
I'm going to choose a point Q on it.
Here's my point Q, such as we have these coordinates that fit on that line.
And we're going to have this vector N that is perpendicular to that. We've just shown that.
This vector N is perpendicular to that, and this vector N has components A, comma, B.
And there we go.
So, now we have this point somewhere in space, P0, as much as it's X0, Y0.
And we can draw this vector.
Now, this is going to be X1, Y1.
We can draw this vector.
Now, if we can show
that the distance D is equal to the length,
of, well, this distance D is equal to the length of the orthogonal vector,
um,
the orthogonal projection
of Q, P0, onto A.
Of Q, P0, onto A.
And what is that?
If we do that, we do deconstruct it like this.
Remember, that now, this will be our component parallel to.
In essence, that was going to be our W1.
In essence, that was going to be our W1.
And this is what we want, because the shortest, we've shown that this is perpendicular to this.
In other words, if I decompose this one along that one,
this will also be perpendicular.
And that is going to be the shortest distance between, between this.
So, what do I want?
I want D to be this norm of the orthogonal projection of this vector.
Q, P, Q, P, that vector.
Along vector N.
Along vector N.
This is what I'm looking for.
The orthogonal projection of vector Q, P, along vector N.
I'm not concerned about this W2,
the component of Q, P perpendicular, orthogonal to N.
I'm looking for the orthogonal projection of Q, P along N.
And that is one of the uses of the orthogonal projection of one vector onto another vector.
And remember what an equation for this is.
That the orthogonal projection of vector Q, P along vector N.
This is equal.
Remember what that equals.
That equals the dot product, absolute value of the dot product of Q, P.
Vector N divided by the norm of vector N.
Divided by the norm of vector N.
Now, what is vector?
What is vector Q, P?
Well, Q, P0 I should have been saying all along.
P0.
Vector Q, P0 is going to equal this component minus that component.
I'm going to have X0 minus X1 and I'm going to have Y0 minus Y1.
And my vector N I know is AB.
And let's do the dot product, the absolute value of the dot product of this.
Absolute value of this times that.
Of this times that.
Well, I'm going to have A and then X0 minus X1.
And I'm adding to that B and Y0 minus Y1.
And the norm of this vector N is going to be the square root of A squared plus B squared.
A squared plus B squared.
Now, since the point Q, this point Q lies on this line.
Its coordinates do satisfy this equation.
And there's our equation.
So, I'm going to have AX0.
I'm going to have BX1.
I'm talking about X1.
I'm just satisfying this equation because this point is on that equation.
BY1 plus C equals 0.
And I have the fact that C.
I have the fact that C now.
Is getting C on its own.
Equals negative AX1 negative BY1.
So, I'm still satisfying this equation with this point on that line.
And I can now substitute.
Let me substitute that into this equation.
Because let me just rewrite this equation.
It's going to be the absolute value of AX0 minus AX1 plus BY0 minus BY1.
Over the square root of A squared plus B squared.
And look here.
Lo and behold.
I've got a negative AX1.
Negative AX1.
Negative BY1.
Negative BY1.
And that equals nothing but C.
So, the distance.
This distance.
Orthogonal projection.
Of vector QP0 onto vector N1.
Is the absolute value of AX0 plus BY0.
Plus those two make up C.
Divided by the square root of A squared plus B squared.
Which is an equation in two space.
For the shortest distance between a point and a line.
And you can see that that has to be the orthogonal projection.
Of any point.
Any point on the line.
To point P0.
If I construct that as a vector.
And I construct another vector from that same point.
Such as that I know.
And I've just showed that in the previous video.
It is perpendicular to this line.
This vector is perpendicular to that line.
So, if I deconstruct this.
Onto that.
The orthogonal projection.
Of vector QP0.
Onto vector N.
Is going to be this distance for me.
And there is an equation.
There is an equation.
For this.
In the next video.
We'll remember this equation.
And we'll do a problem solving this distance.
I want to know the shortest distance between that point and that line.
I know the equation for that shortest distance.
I know that that's the absolute value of AX0 plus BY0 plus C.
And I divide that by the square root of A squared plus B squared.
But what is A?
What is B?
What is X0?
What is Y0?
Well, very easy for me to do.
Let's just put this in a form that we can recognize.
I'm going to multiply 4 there.
Equals 6 minus 3X.
In other words, 3X.
In other words, 3X plus 4Y minus 6 equals 0.
So, I know what A is.
And I know what B is.
And this becomes a point.
A point.
My point with X0, Y0.
Remember that.
We had this point.
And we called it point P0.
With coordinates X0, Y0.
So, let's solve for D.
That's going to be the absolute value of A.
Which is 3.
Times X0.
Which is just 1.
Added to that, I'm going to have 4 times negative 2.
And in the end, I'm going to have negative 6.
And I'm having all of that over the square root of A squared.
Which is 9.
Plus B squared.
Which is 16.
So, here I'm going to have the absolute value of 3.
Minus 8.
Minus 6.
And divided by.
That's 25.
That's 5.
And this is negative 11.
Negative 14.
Negative 14 plus 3 is negative 11.
But it's the absolute value of that.
I just want length that is 11 over 5.
So, it's just about realizing.
A and B is quite easy.
But realizing which is X0 and which is Y0.
Well, that is just the point.
I won't change it.
Though it isn't 10 more times, I've been able to adjust the moment.
There is a problem that you can't understand on the body that you can tell it about.
Now, it's peace going on your own.
And it's just the speed of thinking.
It's beautiful.
That's not it.
That's not it.
6-8.
Day 25, we've used the speed.
Hot 28.
It's cheap.
thôi.
By our輪 Munro.
High five times is $25.
All for y люб Bauns doing good.
That's 3.
Sometimes a month is like 7.
