Now, I have three unit vectors. Unit vector, and we write that with this roof, as these coordinates.
So, it's on a right-hand coordinate system. So, this is going to be in the x-direction, y-direction, and k-direction.
And a unit vector means they have a length of 1.
Then, I have a vector v, in as much as it is components are a, b, and c in three space.
And I'm saying that the angle between vector v and i roof is alpha, between v and j roof is beta, and between v and unit vector k is gamma.
I need to show that the cosine of alpha equals a divided by the norm of vector v.
How can I do that?
Well, alpha, I note, is this angle between these two.
So, I think if I can write vector v dot product vector, unit vector i, what is that?
That's going to be the normal vector v times the norm of the unit vector i times the cosine of the angle between them, and the angle between them is alpha.
So, if I solve for the cosine of alpha, what am I going to get?
v dot i.
Let's do that.
v dot i, so it's a times 1 is a, and then b times 0 is nothing, c times 0 is nothing.
So, nothing happens there, divided by, what is the unit length, what is the norm of the unit vector i?
Well, it's the square root of 1 squared plus 0 squared plus 0 squared, which is just 1.
So, there will be a 1 here, and we'll have the norm of vector v.
And that's exactly what I wanted to show.
And you'll very quickly note that the cosine of beta equals b over the norm of vector v, and the cosine of gamma equals c divided by the norm of vector v.
Now, next, I might carry on in the next video.
In the second part, though, let's see if we still have time.
In the second part, we want to show, um, let's show that v over, vector v over its norm, vector v over its norm equals, what can we show?
So, it is the cosine of alpha, cosine of beta, cosine of gamma, cosine of all of those.
Let's have a quick look.
So, this is indeed 1 over the norm of that vector, times the vector.
So, it's a scalar times a vector.
Now, what is the, what is, uh, vector v in component form?
Vector v in component form.
So, that's going to be 1 over, uh, the norm of vector v.
And that's going to be, we're going to multiply that each out by, by, um, a, comma, b, comma, c.
So, I'm going to have a over the norm of v, no, b over the norm of vector v, and I'm going to have c over the norm of vector v.
It's just a scalar multiplied by that vector, and a over vector, uh, a norm of vector v.
I've already shown that that equals the cosine of alpha, and that will be the cosine of beta, and that will be the cosine of gamma.
So, problem solved.
Next, I want to show that, uh, next I want to show that, uh, next I want to show that the cosine squared, cosine squared of an angle plus the cosine squared of beta plus the cosine squared of gamma equals 1.
Let's see if we can do that.
Well, what is the cosine squared of alpha?
We've, we have looked at it in as much as it is a over the norm of vector v.
And squared means that is squared and that is squared.
So, I'm going to have b squared over, again, the norm squared, and I'm going to have c squared over the norm of that vector squared.
I can get a common denominator squared there, which is going to leave me a squared plus b squared plus c squared.
a squared plus b squared plus c squared.
And, if I take the square root in the numerator and I take the square root in the denominator,
um, remember this equals 1, this equals 1, and I take the square root of that side as well.
Let's do that.
What else is this but the definition for just the norm of that vector?
Okay, and in the bottom I'm taking the square root of the norm squared, which just leaves me with v, the norm of v, and the square root of 1 is 1.
In other words, these are indeed equal to, these are indeed equal to 1 in as much as 1 equals, 1 equals 1.
So, that is quite correct.
