Let's just look at some of these orthogonal projections.
We want the vector component of u orthogonal to a.
In other words, that is our vector w2.
And I have my two vectors here, and what would be the equation for this?
Remember that it's going to be vector u minus the product of vector u dot product of vector a
divided by the norm of vector a squared times vector a.
This is going to be a scalar times another vector.
Let's do that for here.
What is u?
That is going to equal 1.1 comma 0 comma 0 minus.
What is the dot product between these two?
1 times 4 is 4 plus 0 plus 0.
That is going to equal 4 over.
What is the norm of vector a squared?
Remember the norm of a vector is the square root of component squared plus component squared
plus component squared, but we're squaring it, so we just get rid of the square root sign.
Do not forget to do that.
It happens often, so that is going to be 16 plus 9 plus 64, and that must still be multiplied
by vector a, which is 4 comma 3 comma 8.
So indeed, these belong together.
This is going to equal 1 comma 0 comma 0 minus.
All of that, if you add all of that, I get 89.
89, so that is 4 over 89, 89 times 4 comma 3 comma 8, still there.
So I'm going to have 1 comma 0 comma 0 minus 16, since yeah, 16 over 89, 16 over 89 comma 12
over 89, 32 over 89, 32 over 89, and I have these, and if I combine all of these, 1 minus 16
over 8, that is going to equal 73 over 89, this is going to equal 0 minus this negative 12
over 89, over 89, and this is going to equal 0 minus 32 over 89, as simple as that.
The only important thing in this is to know that you're taking the square root of something,
the null in a square, so don't forget that square, don't write square root of 89 over here.
All of these problems are basically the same, and I don't have to repeat too many of them.
I'll do a few just for exercise.
Okay, here we have two vectors in component form, we want to know are they orthogonal,
are they perpendicular to each other.
To do that, the simple way to do that is, oh, that's W, not V, is to just do their dot product,
and if that dot product equals 0, we know they are orthogonal.
You can also do it geometrically, I can draw this on a Cartesian coordinate system, and you'll
see the definition for this would be V1W1 plus V2W2, and for us here, in this example, we
are going to get A times negative B, that's negative AB, plus B times A, or AB, and that
equals indeed 0.
So the next question then is, if vector V is a definite vector, and it has coordinates
negative 3,4, find two other vectors that are orthogonal to this.
Now look at this, if this was vector, well, it was negative 3,4, say for instance this
was a vector, two vectors that will be perpendicular to that will be this vector, this is the origin,
and this vector, both of them would be perpendicular, so going according to what we had here, showing
that they are orthogonal, we'll get W1, the first one orthogonal to that is going to be
negative B, so there's negative 4, comma, A, which was negative 3, so that might be this
very first one of ours, negative 3, negative 4, so what will be the, what we want now is
the negative of this vector, the negative of this vector is going to give us another vector
which will also be orthogonal, so W2, so W2 is going to be negative W1, and that's going
to equal 4, comma, 3, that's just going to equal 4, comma, 3, and let's do that, let's
do V dot W1, and that's going to be negative 3 times negative 4 is 12, plus, we're going
to have 4 times negative 3 is negative 12, negative 12, and V dot equals 0, so that one
is orthogonal, and V dot W2 is going to equal negative 3 times 4 is negative 12, plus 4 times
3 is 12, negative 12 plus 12 is 0, so there we have our two vectors orthogonal to this vector.
that are the 말고 we have in a diagonal.
That's the answer.
You see, I'm going to 84 and I care about V dot U dot in total.
Ok, so we got enough space now available.
But all of these, there's adaptations in what we are totally different, there is a
reliable trough to create just for us to try.
We want to try to link it to our website Twitter nd the next one, and we want to create
a blank tag, with that one Globie is actually interested in the Kalabababa, you'll surely
get some optimism, according to our Putin right now, don't forget that, it
obviously issues from the top.
So that would use with this design, assuming that we have a bit more
