Good, this is a wonderful example and we're going to learn something quite fantastic which
doesn't actually make up, I think, part of this chapter in the textbook that we're working
from but we're going to learn something fantastic for later on.
So I have three points on a 2D coordinate system and points A, C, and D and what I've
done is just for us to visualize in our mind what's going on, I've named them A, C, and
D. And we want to know, this is the vertices of a triangle and I've drawn the triangle in,
what is the area of this triangle? Well, the area of a triangle, the area of a triangle
equals half of the base times the height. Now, what is going to be the base? Let's choose
this as the base and let's choose this as the height. We could have also have chosen
this as the base and then we'll do a height but it's got to be perpendicular. Okay, perpendicular.
And what do we know? Well, we've just learned that there is an equation for a distance between
a line and a point. And that shortest distance is this so that this is a perpendicular line.
So if we want this distance here, we know an equation for distance when we have a line
and a, now this D has got nothing to do with this D, I'm just saying distance, that is going
to be the absolute value of AX0 plus BX plus BY0 plus BY0 plus C divided by the square root
of A squared plus B squared and all we need to now know is what is A, what is B, what is
X0, what is Y0 and what is C. First of all, we need to convert this equation, we need to
convert this into a line. We need to convert this into a line. And the way to do that is we
know that Y minus Y1 equals M which is Y2 minus Y1 over X2 minus X1 times X minus X1. So this
is this M, the slope of this line. So we need to have these two points A and C, so let's do
that. Y minus Y1, let's choose, let's choose which point will we, let's just choose point A. So Y1 is Y minus 3, that's going to equal Y2 minus Y1, so 7 minus 3 is 4, divided by 4, divided by 2 is 2, and X minus, since we chose this point, it's X minus 2. So we are left to Y minus 3,
Y minus 3 equals 2 times X minus 2. That will leave us with, let's say Y minus 3 equals 2X minus 4, 2X minus 4, but I need to write it in this, I need to write it in this format. So we are going to have 2X minus Y minus 1 equals 0.
Okay, and let me just quickly show you, this has become my A, this negative 1 has become my B, and now I need, I've got this line now, I've got this point D, this is my point D, for which I will now have an X0 and a Y0.
So there's my X0, so there's my Y0. So let's do this distance, this distance D, it's not D, nothing to do with D, I'm just saying distance. So that's going to be the absolute value of A, which is 2,
times X0, times X0, X0, which is negative 5, plus B, B is negative 1, and Y0 is 8, minus 1, minus 1, that is from the equation for my line.
Divided by the square root of A squared, which is 2, 2 squared is 4, plus negative 1 squared, negative 1 squared for my B there is plus 1,
so I'm left with D equals the distance equals, this works out for me, just looking at it quickly, negative 10, negative 18, negative 19,
the absolute value of that is 19, divided by the square root of 5. So that is going to be this distance D to this point X, Y, okay, to that point X, Y.
Alright, so that's one way of looking at D. Now, I want to have half of the base, what is going to be the base? Well, if I change this into a vector, if I change that into a vector, certainly I could do the norm of that vector, which would be the length of that vector, that would be one way of doing it.
Let's do that. Let's just create a bit of space for ourselves.
Okay, let's do that vector AC. That vector AC is just going to be 4 minus 2 is 2, and 7 minus 3 is 4.
So that would have been a vector AC. So that would have been a vector AC, if I had done this as a vector, and I had transplanted it so that it is, its tail A is at the origin, it would have been a vector 2, 4.
If I get the norm of that vector, then this is going to be the square root of 2 squared, which is 4, and 4 squared, which is 16.
That's the square root of 20. That's 2 square root of 5.
Okay, because 2 squared is 4. If it's 4, then 4 times 5 is 20. 2 squared root of 5.
So for the area of our little triangle here, we're going to have half of the base.
This was my base. I'm going to have half of 2 square root of 5 times the height, which we've just done in the distance, which is 19 over square root of 5.
That's going to equal square root of 5 goes, 2 goes, I'm left with 19. 19 units.
So this was one way that I could do the area of this triangle. Okay, let's get rid of all of that, because the excitement is still to come.
So we said the area, we now know the area of our triangle, the area of our triangle ACD was 19.
Now I want to know, if I converted this to a quadrilateral parallelogram, so I need another side to a point B,
I need another side to a point B, which will turn this into a parallelogram, and I want the area of that parallelogram.
The area is going to be very easy inasmuch as it's still going to be height, it's still going to be the base times the height, but not half,
because the parallelogram is actually going to be these two identical triangles.
So I already know that the area of my parallelogram ABCD is going to be 2 times 19, which is going to be 38.
Which is going to just be 38.
Which is just going to be 38.
Now, I want to, there's a question usually we'll ask, what are the coordinates, what are the coordinates of B?
Well, if I had two vectors AC and BD, they've got to be exactly the same.
So AC is going to equal vector BD.
There's no, there's no doubt in that because these two sides are parallel and they've got to be of equal length.
In other words, they'll be the same as far as vectors are concerned.
AC, we've done before, I just erased that AC was 2,4.
So that's going to equal BD.
That's going to equal BD.
So we're going to have, it's going to be, if this was just X and Y, I don't know what it is.
So BD, that's going to be negative 5, negative 5 minus X, and it's going to be 8 minus Y.
That leaves me an X value of negative 7, and that leaves me a Y value of 4.
A Y value of 4.
So this point B would have had to be negative 7 comma 4.
I think if we went 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 1, 2, 3, 4 up, you know, we would have gotten 4 up.
4 up, negative 7, negative 7 across, we would have gotten this nice parallelogram.
So certainly that was, that was a, you see that I get negative 7, 4.
That's correct.
Okay.
And twice that is, twice that equals 38.
Because these will be two identical triangles.
But I want to show you something, I want to show you something very spectacular in the next video.
Apologies for that interruption.
Let's continue where we left off.
I was just going to show you, we had these three vertices of our triangle.
We had the three vertices of our triangle, and we made, we calculated the area of that triangle,
or then we got a point B, so that we formed a parallelogram, and we got the area of that parallelogram.
There is a connection between this and matrices though, and I want to show you that connection.
Remember, we said that the triangle had an area of 19, and then twice that for the parallelogram of 38.
Now I'm showing this, this example, and I am jumping slightly ahead because we're going to look at the cross product next.
The cross product is going to give us all of these answers.
But I just want to show you for two dimensional space, for two space.
So this is just two.
I'm going to make two vectors out of these.
Remember, I had my three dots, and two of them make up these two lines.
And I'm going to make two vectors out of them.
So that was going to be vector A, and that was C, and that was D.
So I'm going to make vector A, C. To make vector A, C, I'm going to have four minus two is two.
And seven minus three is four.
And I'm going to have vector C, D.
So if I had a parallelogram, I would have to choose two sides that do connect somewhere.
And I'm changing them into vectors.
I'm changing them into vectors.
If I had my coordinate system, I was just taking this vector and I was moving it,
same, it was parallel, same length, it's the same vector.
I'm just moving it down so it's tails at the origin.
C, D, I'm going to have negative five minus four is negative nine.
And eight minus seven equals one.
So I've got these two vectors.
I do have these two vectors.
Now, in matrix equations, just in matrices, if I had a matrix A1, A2,
I called that another name for that.
And you might recall this from your textbook.
That was called, also called, this is a, let's just put it one, one row times two columns.
That is a one by two matrix.
That equals a one by two matrix.
And it had another name if it just had one row and that was called a row vector.
And if I wrote a matrix like this, A1, A2, I called this a two by one matrix.
Two rows, one column, two by one matrix.
And that also had a different name.
It was called a column vector.
And the reason why we called that is that we can change this into either a row vector.
We can change this either into a row vector or a column vector.
So if I made it into a row vector, it would have been two, four.
And this one would have been negative nine and one.
Or if I wrote it in this fashion, I could have had these two matrices, negative nine and one.
Now what if I change those into just a matrix?
Let's call this matrix, matrix F equals two, four, negative nine and one.
What will be the transpose of this matrix?
Well, that would just be two, four, negative nine and one.
So look what I've done.
I've just written them as column vectors.
Two and four and negative nine and one.
And I've combined it.
And look what happens if you take the determinant of F.
Let's take the determinant of matrix F.
So it's going to be two times one is two minus negative 36 equals 38.
And the same is going to be here.
The determinant of vector F transpose.
And that is going to equal also, we'll see that also equals 38.
That also equals 38.
And herein lies the connection between vectors and matrices.
Now, please, we're going to move on to dot products.
We're going to expand on all of this.
So this is an example in two space of two vectors.
And if I write them as a matrix as such using the vectors,
it's either a combination of two row vectors or written them as two column vectors.
And one is just the transpose of the other one.
If I combine them, it's not an addition.
I haven't added them or multiplied them or anything.
I've just written them as one matrix, as one two by two matrix.
And if I take the determinant of that, I'm going to get the area of a parallelogram formed by these two vectors.
And they're the sides.
And if I take half of the determinant, I'm going to get...
So we're only doing two sides as vectors.
If I take half of the determinant of making those into matrices, I get the area of a triangle.
And that's quite stunning and beautiful.
Now we'll move on to cross products.
And you'll see us expand on all of this.
So if you remember this, remember this was only for two space and these two vectors.
We are going to look at quite a different way of getting to the area of a parallelogram using a cross product.
But this in two space, because that will be for three space.
And this is just for two space.
I can use this two by two, the determinant of these two by two matrices.
So you can either forget this, just remember what I'm going to say next about the cross product.
Or you can remember this for a flat surface, two dimensional surface, two space, as far as the area of a parallelogram or the area of a triangle is concerned.
