Let's move on to the cross product of two vectors.
And the way that we write it is vector u
and we make an old-fashioned multiplication sign as we learned in school.
Vector u cross product with vector v. Whereas the dot product
gives us a scalar, the dot product between vectors. The cross product
of two vectors gives us another vector. And the place that we
do use it is if you have two vectors and you take the
cross product. The third vector, if these were both on the plane of the board,
the third vector, the answer to this cross product
is always perpendicular. It's always perpendicular to the plane formed
by those two vectors. In many places in physics,
we're looking for a vector perpendicular to the plane formed by
two other vectors. And the way that we do get that is by taking the cross product.
Now before going any further,
I'm just going to show you a method
of determining the answer to a cross product.
Now I want you to memorize this.
There's different ways of doing it, but I find
that this way is quite the easiest.
Now we're going to do this
example only for
vectors in three space.
I'll show you how to expand this
to two vectors in two space.
So let's make vector u
in component form will be u1, u2, and u3.
And we're going to have vector v
is going to equal v1, v2, v3.
This is our vectors in component form.
Now to get, you'll see a long equation.
u2, v3, minus u3, v2, plus, etc, etc.
It becomes long and difficult.
In the books, in most books,
you'll find a nice shortcut.
What you're going to do is take these,
and you're going to write them as such.
k-roof, j-roof, and k-roof.
And then we're going to have u1, u2, and u3.
And then the second one is v1, v2, and v3.
And we write this as a matrix.
And we're going to take the determinant
of that matrix using the first row.
And remember when we took the determinants,
we went to the matrix of minus,
then to the matrix of cofactors.
And remember for the matrix of cofactors,
we had a positive, negative, positive.
Please go back to those videos and remember it was
plus, minus, plus, minus, plus, minus, plus,
plus, minus, plus.
Okay, that is how you went from the matrix of minus
to the matrix of cofactors.
You just multiply the signs up
to get the matrix of cofactors.
So we're going to get the determinant
using the first row.
So let's go.
First we're going to have iRoof.
So it means we take away this row and this column.
So we are left with u2, v3, minus.
So we've taken away this row, this column, u2, v3, minus, u3, v2.
u3, v2.
And we're going to say that's iRoof.
So, jRoof has a negative sign in front of it.
So that's where that minus comes in the log equation
in your textbook.
So we take this row, this column.
So we are left with u1, v3, minus, u3, v1.
And that's kRoof.
And that's kRoof.
There's a positive for...
kRoof.
jRoof.
jRoof.
There is a positive for kRoof.
So I take away this and that.
There's a positive.
So I'm left with this getting the determinant of this 2x2 matrix,
which is u1, v2, minus u2, v1.
And that is in the kRoof.
So that would be your answer.
In your answer, you're going to have another vector.
This vector u cross product v is my new vector.
And that's going to...
If I just write it on component form,
it was going to be this, comma, minus this, comma, that.
You're not going to write the a, j, and k.
But remember, these are just unit vectors.
If I multiply those up, I'm not changing anything.
It just gives me...
It just gives me a component form, the directions.
And I am doing this with a component form,
with a component form of these two vectors.
And you will see that the answer is always going to be
perpendicular to the plane of these two.
And how would we know it's perpendicular?
Well, if I take this resultant vector,
and I did the dot product of any of these two,
any of these two, I've got to get zero,
because they are perpendicular to each other.
This is the equation to...
You can learn this by heart,
or you can draw the simple matrix,
and take the determinant,
remembering our pluses and minuses
for the matrix of cofactors,
and you can write this out without having to memorize it.
As promised, I just wanted to show you quickly
how to convert this method that we've just learned
to vectors that are just in two-space.
This does not work for vectors in four-space and up.
It's only for two and three,
which is the vast majority of the problems
that you will deal with.
I'm still going to write A roof, J roof, and K roof.
I'm still going to remember my matrix of cofactors.
And then I'm going to write U1, U2,
and there is no U3, so I write zero.
There's nothing.
This is in two.
These vectors are in two-space.
So they're only, for instance, here in the plane of the board.
So I'm going to also have V1, V2, and 0.
And if I take the cross-product of these two vectors now,
these two vectors now, what am I going to get?
For I roof, I'm going to close this row and this column,
so I'm left at 0 minus 0,
so I'm going to do nothing in the I roof.
I'm going to remember my negative.
And now I close off those,
so I'm still left at 0 minus 0 is still 0 for the J roof.
And for K roof, eventually we're going to have the determinant of this,
U1, V2, minus U2, V1.
And that is in the K roof direction.
And look at that.
If I have two vectors,
we've just had this one vector and another vector.
And I see if we take, and this is on,
they both have their tails at the origin.
That's how we do vectors.
The third one would be the resulting vector.
The resulting vector is not going to have anything in the xy direction.
It's going to be at that spot,
and it's only going to come out or go into the board.
It's only going to have a magnitude in the K roof direction,
which shows you immediately that this resultant vector
is going to be perpendicular to the plane in which these two are in.
Okay, so that's the method of using,
this is the way we use the method that we learned
to do vectors in two space,
how to get their cross product.
Let's do an example using the cross product of two vectors.
And I've already set that up as my three by three matrix.
And I'm looking for U cross product B.
So I've got my I roof, J roof, K roof,
so that I can get my three directions,
my three components.
And it is U and then B because it is first U and then V.
Let's do that.
I'm rendering my positive, negative, positive for my matrix of cofactors.
So for I roof, I close that row, that column.
I'm going to get two minus zero is two in the I roof direction.
Minus, for J roof, we're going to get one,
we're going to get negative seven.
Oh, let's see.
I'm going to get one minus negative six.
That leaves me positive seven in the J roof direction.
Positive for K roof, and that's going to be zero.
That's going to be a negative six for the K roof direction.
So to write that in component form,
like these vectors are in component form,
my answer is going to be two comma negative seven comma negative six.
Now let's take vector U dot product with this new cross product.
vector of mine.
I'm also going to get two for yourself.
You're also going to get zero.
Showing you that this new resultant vector,
is perpendicular to both of these or then to the plane that the two of them form.
in three space.
So,
that's going to be two.
And then,
that equals zero.
So,
indeed,
that and this new resultant vector are perpendicular.
And you'll see if I take V dot product with this new cross product vector of mine,
I'm also going to do it for yourself.
You're also going to get zero.
Showing you that this new resultant vector,
is perpendicular to both of these or then to the plane that the two of them form in three space.
the many days.
The firma is doing all three parts of my moon.
I mean,
when it comes to the mountain at the mountains from the mountains,
it's a river to a football to Earth.
Sam.
Here's my energy.
And that cognego has moved to comme à la prison.
Are you putting a positive,
a bolivia seem aktivant to the Hauts?
From the east side of thesecond mankind,
he said,
that became an illustrator crying.
A building of the saw in the 2 pthey are going in 10 six years.
A building of these cores.
There's a place in 200 programs that are sending the answers to his communities.
So,
there's no plan.
I'm going to continue to r humiliation.
Hi,
I'm going to pass.
