Just some quick five equations that we should take note of and this relates dot product to the cross product.
The first one we've already seen, the first and the second one.
So if I take one vector and I do the dot product with a cross product of that very same vector times
cross product another one will be zero because this and that is perpendicular,
the same goes for this, they're perpendicular so the dot product should be zero.
The third one is something new, it's called the Granger's identity and it says that the norm of this cross product squared
because the norm of the one vector squared times the norm of the second vector squared minus the square of the dot product between them
and then these two are the real relations, shows the relationship between dot product and cross product
and look at this, I've got vector U cross product with the cross product of vectors V and W
and here I've got the cross product of vectors U and W, or U and V and I do with that result a cross product with W
and you'll see vector U dot product vector W which is now a scalar times vector V minus, so this was going to be this U,
this cross product with the last one then multiplied by this, then the U with minus the U with the first vector times then,
which is again, which is again a scalar because this is cross product then multiplied by that vector.
And if I do this U and V cross product first and that result in my cross product with W,
I'm going to get initially the same thing U dot product W times vector V scalar times vector V minus,
now we're going to do, so there's U, W with V and now I'm going to do V, W then with U.
So those are just ones that you should probably just memorize, although you can look in the most textbooks for the proof of these relationships.
Just as we have the properties of the dot product, we also have the properties of the cross product.
First of all, U cross V equals the negative of V cross U as we switch around in our 3 by 3 matrix with I, J, K roof,
we're going to get the negative of, so if you have two vectors, the resultant will be on this way,
if you cross product then the other way round, your vector, your perpendicular vectors is going to point exactly in the opposite direction.
If I add these two first and then the cross product or vector U times that addition, that equals,
I distribute this in U cross product V plus U cross product W.
If I have them first, I can distribute again, the vector W in there, so it will be U cross product W plus V.
But this time these are in front and the W is at the back.
If I have a scalar times the cross product of two vectors, I can only put that scalar in with one of them.
If you had a times bc, you can only add that a to one of them.
And vector U times zero equals zero times vector U, not times, cross product, cross product, don't call this times, equals zero.
And then vector U cross product with itself, a vector cross product with itself equals zero also.
I just want to spend a quick video on the unit vectors.
So instead of writing an arrow, on that we write this little roof of a house called I roof.
There are other terms for it as well.
But in the three space cartesian coordinate system, that will be one zero zero zero one zero zero zero one.
Okay, so for one unit length down the x direction, nothing along the i and nothing along the z direction.
So it's only along the x direction. It's one one one.
Let's just take i times j.
So again, I'm going to write i roof, j roof, and k roof.
I'm going to remember my positive, negative, and positive.
I'm going to write one zero zero and zero one zero.
And as a matrix, let's just take the determinant of that.
Which is going to leave me with, for i roof, we're going to close this row and this column, zero and zero.
So I'm going to have nothing in the i roof direction.
Remember my negative for j roof.
Close there, close there, it's still zero minus zero.
So I'm going to have zero in the j roof direction, plus in the k roof direction.
I'm going to close that and that.
So I'm still just taking the determinant along the first row, remembering my matrix of cofactors.
So it's going to be one minus zero is one, one in the k roof direction.
So I'm left with k roof.
So i cross product j is going to give me k roof.
Similarly, you can do it yourself.
j cross product k is going to give me, well let's do that, let's do that.
So instead of again, I'm going to write i roof, j roof, k roof.
And now for j, we're going to write zero, one, zero.
And for k roof, for k roof, we're going to write zero, zero, one, zero, zero, one.
So let's do that.
So we're going to go left for i roof, close there, close there.
I'm going to have one, one minus zero, I'm going to have one.
I'm going to have one in the i roof.
I'm going to remember my negative for j roof.
Close there and there is a zero minus zero.
I have nothing in the j roof direction.
And surprise, surprise, I'm also going to have zero, I'm also going to have zero in the k roof direction.
So I'm left with, I'm left with i roof.
So i times j gives me k roof.
This is the circle.
j times k gives me i roof.
So little k times ib, do it yourself, you'll get j roof.
So if I have any combinations there of, remember in my properties of the cross product, what if I have, what if I have i times i for cross product, let me say times i cross product k would be negative k cross product i.
And k cross product i, I know is j, so that's going to equal negative j roof.
Okay, so quite easy these unit vectors.
