Now, let us start. I'm going to get to an equation for the area of a parallelogram.
Now, in two space, remember I showed you that if you had those two vectors and they then
form this parallelogram, I could take the determinant of these two vectors, writing
them in a two by two matrix, either as row or column vectors. And taking the determinant
was going to give me that. I'm going to expand on that as far as three spaces concerned.
In other words, I have these two, but they are not flat to the board. One is up and one
is in, so I'm talking about three-dimensional space. And you're going to see that still,
if these two are in three spaces and I take the determinant of these two vectors, and I
take the determinant of these two vectors, I am still going to get the area of a parallelogram.
even in three space. But we'll see a slightly different equation for that. And maybe not
spoil the fun. Let's start with the Lagrangian identity. We said that the norm of two vectors,
their dot product, squared equals the norm of each one individually squared, v squared, minus
the dot product of those two vectors themselves, squared. You might be asked to prove this. And the way to prove that is to write your i, negative j, k roof, three by three matrix, get an answer for, get an answer for this cross product, take the norm of it, and square that norm.
So you can have u1, v3, you can have a long left hand side, and then you do the same with this. Take the norm, square it, take the norm, square it, of the components, take the dot from it, square it, and if you simplify, you'll see that the left hand side equals the right hand side.
Okay. But let's do something else. Let's get to this equation for the area of a parallelogram in three space.
Let's keep this. Let's keep this. Let's keep this u norm of the vector squared, vector v's norm squared minus, but I know another equation for u dot v. Remember that was vector u's norm times vector v's norm times the cosine of that angle between them.
So let's say if that angle is between zero and the angle and pi, pi radius. So the angle is between zero and 180 degrees. So that would be the angle if the vectors were like this. It won't be this one. It would be this small. It's between zero and pi.
Inclusive. Okay, but this is squared. This is squared. So that squared is something multiplied by something and multiplied by something. So if I square them, it's just as well as each of them are squared.
Now, let's take out a common factor. Let's take out vector u's norm squared and vector v's norm squared. Then I'm left with one minus the cosine squared of an angle. One minus the cosine squared of an angle equals the sine squared of that angle.
And since that angle is always between that, it's always going to be positive. So if I take the square root of both sides, this is never going to be a negative value. Because I've chosen my angle to be between zero and pi, any angle between zero and pi is going to give me a positive sign.
So if I take the square root of that, I'm not taking the square root of a negative number. So if I just take the square root of both sides, it's u cross v, as far as its norm is concerned, equals norm of u, norm of vector v, times the sine of that small angle between them.
Okay. Okay. And in this lies the area of the parallelogram. In the next video, I'll show you where. But certainly this is our next equation that is of great importance to us.
Okay. So from the Lagrangian identity, Lagrange's identity, we get this equation. But now let's look, as promised, at this parallelogram formed by two vectors.
So there are my two vectors, u, vector u, and vector v. And I just continue with that, close it off as a parallelogram. Now, if I look at this as an angle, I've got to look at this as a length and this as a length.
But what is the area of a parallelogram? It's going to be the base. So in this instance, I took the norm times this perpendicular height of, so I've got to go from here to the base.
It's going to make an orthogonal angle there, perpendicular angle there, right angle there. But what is this? So the area of this parallelogram is going to be the norm of u times this d.
But what is d? Well, the sine of theta is going to equal this d, opposite divided by hypotenuse. And my hypotenuse, sorry, is the norm of vector v. In other words, d equals vector u.
Let's use norm times the sine of theta. So if I plug this in for d here, I plug in v. So that's the norm of vector v times the sine of the angle between them.
And look at this. And look at this. This is exactly this. So the area of a parallelogram is this. The area of the parallelogram equals the norm of the two vectors, their cross product.
There we go. That is nothing but that, which gives me the area of a parallelogram, is this. How do we get this? Remember, we're going to do the i-roof,
the negative j-roof, the k-roof. We're going to write u1, u2, u3. We're going to write v1, v2, v3. And what we did is we just did this as a matrix. We did this as a matrix.
And from that matrix. And from that matrix, we took the determinant along the first row. We took the determinant of the first row. And that gave us this cross product. And all we do now is take the norm.
Take the norm. Take the norm of that cross product. Take the norm of that cross product. And that gives us, that gives us the area of a parallelogram. So this is how we, we have this overlap.
This is why we are doing vectors and we are doing matrix equations. They have this connection between them, which is now becoming very clear.
To continue on this, so everything is clear. In two space, in two space, I could just write u1, u2, v1, v2. And I can take, so I write them as row vectors there, and my two, my two, these two vectors, and I just did the determinant of them.
And that gave me, and that gave me, and that gave me the area. Or, I could have just written the zero, zero there, and the i roof, j roof, k roof, and made this a minus, and of that whole thing take the determinant.
And that was going to then equal, that was still going to equal just taking the determinant of this because of those zeros.
So, here what we are saying, the cross product of two vectors, now in three space, will give me a third vector, which is perpendicular to those, and the magnitude of this new vector, the magnitude of this new vector, which is what this means, equals the area of a parallelogram formed, of a parallelogram formed by those two.
Okay, so you've got to take the length, you've got to take the length of the cross product of those two. So, if I only had two space, I could still take the cross product, but now with those x to z, I'll just have to take the norm of that, I'll just have to take the norm of that, in two space, I could have just written this of that, the determinant, but this determinant then equals the norm of the cross product, the magnitude of this new vector.
And this vector equals the area of that parallelogram, or half of this then will be the area of this triangle.
One more thing, I want to add as many things to this so that the understanding is crystal clear. When I had just the two space vectors, I just had to take the norm of the determinant of this. If I took the determinant of this, I could only have just one number.
It is already a scalar, already a magnitude. But if I did it in three space, remember, the cross product of two vectors gives me another vector, so I still have to convert that to some form of scalar, and that scalar is the magnitude.
So if I took the two space, two vectors, and I converted them to three space to do the cross product properly, I was going to get something, comma, something, comma, something. I would have to take the norm of all of those, but there will be lots of zeros in there, and I'm also only going to get something, there's going to be a zero for the x, a zero for the y, and there's only going to be a z.
Okay, so I need the magnitude of that. Okay, but if I just wrote it as such, without all of these, I haven't converted it to a three, just to determine that the determinant is already the length, that determines already the length, but in three space, I've got to get the magnitude, the length of that vector, hence me taking the norm of that.
I love it.
I love it.
