Now, we have the three points on a three-dimensional coordinate system, and we want to know those
three points in three space, what would be the area of a triangle formed by them. So
that it's not going to be a triangle that sits in flat space, it's a triangle that is
twisted in space. First of all, I've got three points that does not equal vectors,
I'm going to make vectors out of these. And if you do this problem, you'll know that you
can make any two vectors. You can make vector p1, p2, and vector p1, p3, which is what we'll
do, but you can do p1, p2, and p2, p3 as well. It doesn't matter which way you do it. All
you want is for, you want one common point. You do want one common point. So let's do
vector p1, vector p2. Let's do that. So it's going to be negative 1 minus 3, that's going
to be negative 3. We're going to have negative 2, and we're going to have 2, and we're going
to have 2. Let's just be funny about it. Let's make p2, p3. P2, p2, p3. So this p2 is going
to be our, this p2 is going to be, well let's do, let's do p1, p3, p3. I'll show you now,
let's use that. p1 to p3, so I'm going to have negative 2, I'm going to have 2, 3 minus,
we're going to have 3. Let's get the area of a triangle, the area of a triangle that's going
to be half times the norm of vector p1, p2, cross product vector p1, p3, p1, p3. Okay,
let's get the cross product, and I showed you how we're going to do it. We're going to have
iRoof, we'll put that negative, just to remind ourselves that we need a negative for the matrix
of cofactors in the first row, and we have negative 3, negative 3, negative 2 and 2, and
we have negative 2, we have 2 and we have 3, and we're going to take the determinant along
the first row of that, then we are going to just get half of some, a vector, let's just
get that vector, so for i we can close row 1, column 1, so it's minus 6, minus 4 is going
to be negative 10, in iRoof direction, my vector here, then I'm going to remember my negative
for the j, that row, that column, so I'm going to have negative 9, plus 4, it's going to be
a negative 5, in iRoof direction, and then for k, we're going to have negative 6, minus 4,
again that's negative 10, in iRoof direction, so that is my vector, and I need to take the
norm of that vector and multiply it by a half, so that's going to be a half times the square
root of 100, plus 25, plus 100, and the square root of all of that I think is 15, so the answer
is going to be 15 over 2. Let's just look at these points, if they were just in, let's just
throw away, let's just throw away, so let's make 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, and I need some
negatives as well, man, so let's just do some negatives as well, so it's going to be negative
1, negative 1, negative 1, negative 2, just a rough idea, so let's make p1, 2, 2, 2, so 2, 2 is going
to be there for p1, we're going to make negative 1 and 0, negative 1 and 0 there for p2, and let's
make 0 and 4, so 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, we have p3. So if we just did this in two space, this is the triangle
that we're going to have, obviously, so I haven't added this third dimension. So let's just look
at the two vectors that we made. We made vector p1, p2, we made vector p1, p2, and we made vector p1, p3,
vector p1, p3. Now, if you do the cross product of that, you're going to get this vector. If I did vector p2,
p3, p3, I was going to have this vector, and then p2, p3 means I was going to have this vector here.
So suddenly I was going to have the head of this one by the tail of the second one, and what we want
is for some common point to be there. So I could have done vector, I could have done p2, p1, and p2, p3, and p2, p3.
So what you want is for these first ones here to be the same. First ones to be the same, and you're always going to
subtract this one, then you're going to have this one, subtract that one. So here I was going to have
negative one and minus two, and I was going to have zero minus two. So always the second one minus the first point,
but you want these first points to coincide because you want those. But it's going to give you the correct
cross product. If you do it the other way around, though, if you did p1, p2, p2, p3, you were going to get a different
vector as far as the cross product was concerned. But, but, but, the norm, the norm was still going to be the same.
You would still have, you would still have gotten to the right answer as far as the area was concerned.
Now we're going to move on to something more exciting. It's called the scalar triple product. And if you have
three vectors there in three space, vector u dot product, the cross product between vectors v and w.
two. First of all, I want to write this three by three matrix. And you'll quickly see that those are each
vectors in three space. And here I have a three by three matrix. So I converted these row vectors, because if I wrote
vector u is going to equal u1, u2, u3, and I'm now writing it as a column, I'm writing this. If I had this, u2, u3,
if I had, that's a one, if I had that one by three matrix, I would call that a row vector. I would call that a row vector.
And this is where it comes from. And remember before, we just added them all into one three by three matrix.
Let's take the determinant of this matrix along the first row. So I'll just remember also my plus, minus, plus for my
matrix of curve factors. So I'm going to have u1 times the determinant. I'm going to take row one and column one away,
because u1 is there. So it's going to be left with v2, v3, w2, w3. So that was going to be, that would be, that would be,
my first one. Then I'm going to remember the negative u2. And if I take that row and that column away,
I'm left with v1, v3, and w1, w3. And I'm going to add to that, I'm going to add to that u3. And I'm going to have
v1, v2. And I'm going to have w1, w2. So that was going to be my determinant of that matrix. Let's do this first.
So let's get v cross product w. So remember, I was going to write i, I was going to remember my negative,
I was going to write that. I'm going to have v1, v2, v3. And I'm going to have w1, w2, w3. And I'm going to now
take the determinant of this to get this cross product, which is going to give me the following vector.
I'm going to have for i, I'm going to have this times this minus this times this. So in actual fact,
I am doing, I'm just taking the determinant, sorry, the determinant of what is left here, w2, w3 for i roof.
I'm going to remember the negative for j roof. So I'm going to be left with v1, v3, v1, v3, and w1, w3 for j roof.
For j roof and for k roof, I'm going to have v1, v2, w1, w2 for k roof. And that is going to be my vector.
Now, I'm going to do the dot product between this and that. And instead of me having written this out,
it's going to be v2, w3, minus v3, w2. I could have written it all out. But I'm just keeping it as a 2x2 matrix, as a determinant.
Because I take that one, take the row away, take the column away, and I get the determinant of what is left.
a minus, a times d minus b times c. So I'm still getting the determinant of that.
I'm still getting the determinant of that. Now I'm going to do the dot product with u in front of that.
So I was going to be left with u. I was going to be left with u. And then u1. And then v2, v3, w2, w3. Plus, well there's a minus.
I'm going to be u2, v1, v3, w1, w3. And plus u3. And I'm going to have a v1, a v2, w1, a w2. And look at that. Look at that.
It is exactly this triple product, scale-out triple product. The scale-out triple product is nothing but writing it as a 3x3 matrix in the order that we have there.
And we take the determinant along the first row. It's got a bit squashed. That is exactly what we have here.
And we'll see what geometric equivalent or what we can do with this in geometry.
