I want the scalar triple product of those three vectors and have the notation of these three vectors in i-roof, j-roof and k-roof direction.
So if I want the scalar triple product, I'm going to do u dot and then get another vector as the resultant of the cross product of those two vectors.
As the cross product of those two vectors.
What I want to show you is just this little triangle.
I'm going to do that u, v, and w.
So it's got nothing to do with a triangle that is formed or anything.
It's not two points, three points forming a triangle.
I'm just writing, I'm writing my dot there and my cross there.
So it's u dot v cross w.
But if I move those along, so now I'm going to put the dot there and the cross there.
So I'm going to have v, I'm going to have v dot product w cross product u.
Or if I move the dots and crosses on the dot there, now the cross moves there.
That is w dot u cross v.
I'm going to get exactly the same answer.
So remember this little, remember this little triangle.
Now let's get, we can do this first and then do that.
But we know if we want the scalar triple product, we can write them as a matrix.
Three, negative two, negative five.
We can do it one, four, negative four.
We can have a zero, a three, and a two.
And we're going to take the determinant.
Now we know if we have a three by three matrix like this, or a square matrix,
and we take the determinant, you need a square matrix to take the determinant.
You can do it along any row, or you can do it along any column.
Now why not choose the row or column that it's easier?
So three, one, zero, column one looks easier to me than zero, three, two, and the third row.
No, I've just got to remember to add my little plus, minus, plus for my matrix of my cofactors.
So I'm going to do a three times the determinant that is left if I take this row and this column away.
So I'm left with a four, negative four, a three, and a two.
I'm going to remember my negative one there.
If I take that row and that column away, I'm left with negative two, negative five.
And I'm left with, it's right, it's going to be three and a two.
So let's get the determinant there.
That's going to be three times eight plus 12 is 20, minus, here I have negative four minus negative 15, that's 11.
So I'm going to have 60 minus 11, that's 49.
Now let's just see these.
If I write V at the top, so that's U, that was my row vector for U.
And if I wrote this V, that was V, and then this is W, if I wrote that on top, it was not going to change anything.
It was not going to change anything.
As long as I stay in this order.
If I don't stay in this order as far as U, V, W was concerned, let's do that.
Let's change that order.
Let's make it U.
Let's make it V.
Let's see what happens.
Why don't you say, let's see where this goes.
We have V and then we have, instead of W, U, let's have UW.
Let's have U cross W.
So I don't have W cross U, U cross W.
Now we know if I have two vectors, A cross B, that it's going to be negative B cross A.
Let's see if that was right.
Am I remembering this?
Am I remembering my arithmetic correctly here?
Let's see.
So our answer was 49.
Let's have a look.
Let's do the determinant of that matrix.
So all I did was I did an elementary row operation in as much as I just swapped rows in my matrix.
So let's write V at the top.
So there's going to be 1, 4, negative 4.
Then I have U, which is 3, negative 2, negative 5.
Then I'm going to have W, which is 0, 3, and 2.
Let's get the determinant of this matrix.
Again, I'm going to choose column 1 because that looks easiest for me.
Plus, minus, plus, minus, plus, minus, plus.
Okay, so I'm going to have just the determinant of what is left of that row and that column removed.
So it's negative 2, negative 5, and 3, and 2.
I'm going to remember my negative 3.
I'm going to remember my negative 3, my negative there.
Okay, if I take this row and this column away, I'm left with 4, negative 4, 3, 2.
So here I'm left with negative 4 plus 15.
So that's 11 minus 3.
And guess what this is?
That's 20.
So I'm left with 11 minus 60.
And that indeed is negative 49.
So that was indeed correct.
Now, let's look at the geometric result of what we just saw.
And we hinted to this before.
Remember, remember when we had two vectors in two space.
So that was going to be U1 and U2 in component form,
and B was going to be B1 and B2 in component form.
And we showed that we can form a parallelogram with these two vectors.
Both of them have the origin, the tails have the origin.
We can form two vectors, and that will form a parallelogram for us.
And we showed that if we took the determinant of the two-by-two matrix that we form with these two,
U1, U2, B1, B2.
If we took the determinant of that, and we took the absolute value of that determinant.
Because remember, area cannot be negative, it's positive area.
If we took the absolute value of that determinant,
we got the area of the parallelogram formed by these two.
Now, watch this.
If I now add a third vector,
if I add a third vector,
oh, let's put it like this.
Now, I'm going to have this in three space.
V3 and W1, W2, and W3.
If I take the determinant of this,
or indeed the scalar article product,
I get the volume of a parallelepiped.
What is a parallelepiped?
Well, I've got three vectors going out.
And if you extend each of them,
close it off,
and use the third one as well,
and you connect all of them,
you're going to have that little old-fashioned housey
that we drew in school,
this sort of thing.
You connect all of them up.
But it all started off with three vectors.
One vector,
two vector,
three vectors.
And I form a parallelepiped.
Now, this is a cube,
but it can be a rectangular,
or it can be all skewed.
This one can be slightly skewed to start off with.
It'll be that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one,
that one.
Okay.
So it can be all skewed to parallelepiped.
This is still a bit of a skewed cube.
They can be a lot longer,
some more broader,
higher,
whatever.
But that's a parallelepiped,
and that is the volume of it
coming from the determinant
of a three-by-three matrix
formed from the row vectors
that I got from these.
And I take the absolute value of that,
just to make sure,
because look,
last time I had a 49,
and I laid a 49,
just to show that you need to take that
to get the positive value,
because you want volume.
Just to add an old concept,
so that we don't forget about that,
we said that this is in two-space,
but what if we had the two vectors?
We only have two vectors,
we can only form a parallelogram.
It's adding that third vector,
not the third dimension,
just adding that third vector
that gives us a parallelepiped.
Okay.
If I just have these two vectors,
if they're in two-space,
I can just do this determinant.
If they are in three-space,
it doesn't matter,
if I just have two vectors,
I still just have a parallelogram.
I have nothing more than that.
Remember,
and that is u cross v,
and I take the law of that.
So,
the magnitude of the resultant vector of,
the cross product of two vectors,
the magnitude of that resultant vector
equals the area of this parallelogram.
So,
don't get confused when three vectors
and three-space comes in.
Okay.
If I have three vectors,
if I have three vectors in three-space,
I take this determinant,
and the actual value of that,
I have the volume of a parallelepiped.
If I have two vectors in two-space,
it's simply just a determinant.
And here,
remember,
if it's two vectors,
even if it's in three-space,
as in here,
I can only get,
two vectors,
I can only get a parallelogram,
even in three-space.
And if there were just two,
remember,
we wrote i-roof,
minus j-roof,
and k-roof,
and we did u1,
u2,
u3,
and v1,
v2,
v3,
and we got the determinant of that
along the first row.
So,
don't get confused
between all these different techniques
and what they actually mean.
Thank you.
