Now that we've seen how to get the volume of a parallelepiped, there's another way that this scalar triple product, remember that was u dot v cross product w, or we just took the absolute value of the determinant of this vector, the determinant of this vector,
v1, v2, v3, w1, w2, w3, we took the determinant of that, we took the determinant of that, and the absolute value of that was going to give us the volume of a parallelepiped, or else it is the scalar triple product, it's the volume.
Now if you think about that, that is three vectors in three space, and we finish up the parallelegram and give it some volume, that's volume, so how can we have three vectors lying in the same place?
Well think about that, if we have two, forming your parallelegram, you have the third one together with that, which is going to give you volume, but if the third one was in the same plane, that means the volume is going to get less, less, less, less, boom, until the volume is zero.
So, if you have three vectors, and their scalar triple product equals zero, or the determinant, actually the value of the determinant of that three by three matrix making a row, making a three by three matrix out of the row vectors,
if that equals zero, that means your volume is zero, that means these three vectors lie in the same plane, in the same plane.
The last concept I just want to deal with here is, the cross product is co-ordinance system independent.
Right in the beginning when we started looking at vectors, vectors was just a line segment with an initial and a final spot, a tail and a head,
and it was just free in space. What it had was length, and it had a certain direction.
So, to simplify things, we took this vector, and we put it into a co-ordinate system, so that we can do some mathematical calculations on these vectors.
And we put, usually put, this tail, the initial point, at the zero comma zero point, zero comma zero comma zero point, if that was two or three space, co-ordinate system.
And these two vectors here, were exactly the same, inasmuch as they had the same magnitude, and they had the same direction.
So, they were seen as the same. So, here are my two vectors that I'm doing a cross product on, my resultant vector.
So, here, this is vector u, and this is vector v, from u to v, right hand rule, my resultant vector u cross v was going to point straight towards you.
But now, I switched the coordinate system, so instead of the 90 degree here, I switched it, it turned it 45 degrees there.
And that will give these new vectors, it will give them new coordinates.
But, fortunately, if I said you can think very easily why that is so, the cross product will still be the same.
It is coordinate system independent.
One thing though, remember, is both of these must be in the same coordinate system.
They can't have different coordinate systems, and then you get a cross product.
But if it is coordinate system independent, inasmuch as I can take that vector, choosing another coordinate system for these two vectors,
making them, giving them new components, and if I do the cross product with these new components, I will still get the exact same cross product.
Let's get some examples done. We want the area of the parallelogram formed by those two vectors, and then these two vectors.
Remember that the area of the parallelogram was going to be the norm of the cross product of these two vectors.
The norm of the cross product of those two vectors.
And remember how do we do the cross product?
It's vectors in three space. I'm going to have my i roof, my negative j roof.
I just put the negatives to remind myself of the matrix of curve vectors.
I have one, negative one, and two, and I have zero, three, one.
And I'm going to take the determinant, but now I am forced to do it along the first row.
This is not a scale-out triple product, so I'm not looking at the volume of a parallelepiped inasmuch as I only have two vectors.
So I've got to do this along, with this technique, I've got to do this along the first row.
So, u cross v, there for my first example, I'm going to have for that, I'm going to have close that row, that column, so I'm left with this two by two sub-matrix.
Negative one minus six is going to be negative seven along the i roof direction.
I remember my negative for j roof.
Close that row and that column which it is in.
I'm left with one times one is two.
One times one is one, minus zero is one for the j roof direction.
And then for the k roof direction, I'm going to have three minus zero, that equals three for k roof.
But now I need the norm of u cross v.
And that is going to equal the square root of 49 plus one plus nine, that equals the square root of 59.
Now look at the second one, I can immediately tell you that that's going to be zero.
How can I do that?
Well, look very carefully, you'll see that v equals twice vector u.
If I multiply vector u by two, two times three is six, two times negative one is negative two, two times four is eight.
In other words, I'm going to have a vector, and then I'm going to have another one on top of it, just twice as long.
And how can that form?
On top of each other, how can that form a parallelogram that cannot?
In other words, immediately see the area of that parallelogram is going to be absolutely zero.
Don't have to go through all of this to know that this will be zero.
