Let's see if we can solve these few problems. If we find, if we are given that the scalar triple product of u, vectors u, v, and w is 3, what would be the scalar triple product of u, w cross v, u dot w cross v.
We know that w cross v equals the negative of v cross w, so we'll just have a negative in front, so that will be a negative 3.
What that should be across? v cross w, so it's still the same as the dot product u.
Well, that's easy. Let's make v cross u, v cross w, let's make that equal to a new vector called vector a.
v. So what I'm saying, at least at the top there, I have u dot product a, and now I have a dot product u, and we know those two are equal to each other.
So this is exactly the same as that, so this is just going to be 3.
What is w dot product with the cross product of vectors u and v?
Now remember our triangle. Initially, we were given u, v, w, and we were given dot cross.
Now we're going to do the w cross u cross v, w dot u cross v.
So I'm just carrying on with that, so there's no difference there.
They all equal to each other. Now what about v dot u cross w, so that is v dot, so that is v dot, but then it's u cross w.
So that might as well then be v cross the negative w cross u, and we just saw, we see that we do that, it doesn't matter.
So that's still v dot, so that will be negative 3, because I just brought that out, I just brought this one out, and we're still carrying on in the same direction then.
And then w cross w is always 0. Oops, I already put that in. Anyway, this one equals 0.
Next question, if we have these, these three vectors, and we're told that the initial points go inside, we want to know, are they in the same plane?
And the only way that they'll be in the same plane, is if they form a parallelepiped, if the volume of that parallelepiped is 0.
What is the volume of a parallelepiped? Well, it's the scalar triple product.
The scalar triple product, so let's do that. First of all, let's just get to v.
v cross w, v cross w is going to be the determinant along row 1, row 1 of i, remember the negative j, k, and v cross w, so we'll have 3, 0, negative 2, we're going to have 5, negative 4, and 0.
So we're doing the determinant along the first row, so for that we're going to close off that, we're going to have 4, 0.
So there's 0, minus 8, so that's negative 8, in the i roof direction, negative for j, we're going to have 0, minus, minus 10, that's a positive 10, j roof, and for k roof we're going to have negative 12, negative 12, in the k roof.
So for a vector that's going to have negative 8, negative 10, negative 12, now I've got to get u cross that, so that'll be just multiplying each element by the other corresponding element and adding all of those, so that'll be 8.
So this is u dot, the full one, u dot, v cross product w, that is going to be negative 8, negative 8, that's 8, negative 2, negative 10, that's plus 20, 1, negative 12, negative 12, that does not equal 0, so those 3 vectors are not in the same place.
Now we are asked to simplify this expression, I have vector u plus vector v, and the cross product of vector u minus vector v, how can I simplify that?
You can just, first of all, think of, you know, bringing that out as positive plus negative v, that's not going to help you much.
I think what we can do here, I think what we can do here, is let's see this, let's make vector u minus vector v, let's give that a new name, let's call it vector w.
Let's just call that vector w, so what we have here is vector u plus vector v, cross product with vector w.
So that's what we have here, so that's what we have here, and we know how to do this, how to expand this, this is going to be vector u, cross product with vector w, plus vector v, cross w.
Let's expand those again, let's expand those again, that'll be vector u, cross product, what was w, that was vector u minus vector v, plus we have vector v, cross product with, again expand w, that's u minus v.
We can expand, we can expand these again, so that'll be vector u, cross product vector j, so let's put that there, minus we have vector u, cross product V, plus we have vector v, cross product vector u, and we have minus vector v, cross product vector v.
And these are going to simplify as much as that is zero, that is zero, and I can write
vector u cross vector v, I can write that as negative vector v cross vector u, and with
that multiplied by that negative, so that's just going to disappear, so I'm going to have
vector v cross vector u plus another v cross u, so that's going to be twice vector v cross
vector u. Nice simplification of that. Good, we want the area of the triangle formed by
these three vertices. In the first part, in the second part we want to know the height between
the vertex c and the line, or in the line ab. Now to use vector algebra, or linear equations
to do this, matrix equations to do this, we all remember that the area of a triangle is
going to be a half times the norm of a cross product of two vectors. So we're going to
make two of the sides into two vectors. Later on we're going to be asked to make c the vertex,
so let's have two vectors connecting with the initial points at vector c. In other words,
we're going to have vector c a, and we've got to have a vector c b. Let's do that. So for
vector c a, we're going to have one minus two is negative one, zero minus one is negative
two, we're going to have one, and one minus zero is one. And for this vector we're going
to have negative two, we're going to have one, and we're going to have three. So let's get
the cross product first of those two vectors c a and c b. And then it's going to be the determinant
along row one of i minus j k roof, and we have negative one, negative one, one. Then we have
negative two, one, and three. Let's get that. So the cross product of these are going to be
for i roof we're going to have a negative three minus one is negative four. In the i roof
direction, minus, we'll have a negative three minus negative two, so that's negative three plus
two, that's negative one in the j roof direction. And for k we're going to have negative one minus
two, that's negative three in the k roof direction. And if we get the norm of c a cross c b, it's going
to equal the square root of 16 plus one plus nine plus 25, that's the square root of 26. And
if we get half of that, we're going to have square root of 26 over two is going to be the area of
this triangle. Now we want, so say for instance that was c a and that was c b, so that was c,
that was a, that was b. So we want this perpendicular, and let's draw it in a better way. Well, probably
not. We have c a, we have c b, c a and c b, we want this, we want that height there. We want
that height from c to a b. Now there's two ways we can, we can do this. Remember that this is
going to be perpendicular. And we can change this into a, because we've got two points in it, so we can
change that into a, into a line. And we've got a point c, we want to know the distance from a point there. And we
certainly do know an equation for that. So you can use that method. Or we can just have a look at, we can have a look at
drawing this in a different way. Let's just draw this better. And I prepared a previous one. Let's make this
there. And how would I do it? Yeah, let's make this there. So c we want a b. And certainly so we want this
perpendicular distance there. We can get an angle there. Then this height will be, let's call it, that height h.
So we know that the sine of theta is going to equal opposite, divided by hypotenuse. So sorry for using h there. We
should use h for hypotenuse. But hypotenuse will then be the norm of ac. It will be the norm of ac. And
always this height that we are looking for between the vertex c and ab. I'll just carry on in the next video.
Before we were interrupted, we were just going to get this height on its own. So that's going to be the sine of theta times
the norm of ac. Now what is theta lies there. So that is the angle between two other
factors. We can make them ac and cb. Now if I take the norm of ac cross product ab. Remember that is going to be the
norm of ac. The norm of ac. The norm of ae times the angle, the sine of the angle between them. In other words,
sine of, sine of this angle equals, I can get this on its own so it will be this divided by this. But even if I make these two my vectors and this was my, my vertex with my two, I was still going to get the square root of 26 divided by two.
For the angle here. So for the triangle that would have been half of that. So it's just those two with each other. This will still be the square root of 26 now divided by ac and ab.
Okay, I think half of y should still be, even though I'm getting two new, even though I'm getting two new vectors, the area here is still going to be the same. So the cross product of those two vectors and the cross product of these two vectors should give you,
and the norm of them should give you exactly the same value. So that's going to stay the square root of 26. So I can plug this in there. So I get that my height is going to be the sine of theta which is square root of 26 times ac.
There's going to be an ac, there's going to be an ac and an ac. They're going to cancel out with each other. So I'm just going to let you live to the norm of ab.
The normal vector ab. Now we've got to get the vector ab. So the vector ab, that's going to equal negative one, two, two.
Okay, so I've got to get the norm of that vector, the norm of ab. It's going to be the square root of one plus four plus four, square root of nine, that is three.
So I'm going to get the square root of 26 divided by three. So you just have to be careful in this problem.
Number one, to realize that the norm, the norm of these two vectors and the norm of those two vectors are going to be exactly the same because they both describe the same triangle.
So that's going to be 26 and it's not half of it. I'm not talking about the triangle. So I've got to take the half away to get 26.
And remember when this angle between these is the angle between two new vectors, that will be vector ac and vector ab.
That's the sign that is this angle that we're talking about.
