Good, now we want to move on to this Taylor's theorem for our functions here.
So if we have this function f, and these are all the prerequisites.
First, n derivatives is continuous on the closed interval a to b.
f is differentiable on the open interval a to b.
And we have this point p, which is an element of the open interval a to b.
And for every x, which is an element of the open interval a to b, there exists a value c between x and p.
In other words, x comp and p, for which this holds.
But the original function equals this Taylor polynomial plus some error function.
That's all, you have to know all of these.
And you can't be caught out one day doing a real problem, and this doesn't hold, or one of these prerequisites don't hold.
And you try and do this, and you're going to get some bizarre answer, or untrue answer.
Okay, this is not important for now.
Let's concentrate on this.
Because we are, we have the original function, the Taylor polynomial, but I said it only approximate at that value close to x equals p.
And then, beyond that, the graphs actually go away from each other, and you get some error.
Now, this error is important to us.
This error.
And it's going to equal the f of, and it's going to be n plus 1.
n plus 1 at p.
We're going to have an x minus p, the power of n plus 1, and here we're going to have n plus 1.
Factorial.
n factorial.
Okay.
And this is called the Lagrange form of the error, by the way.
Lagrange.
Lagrange form of the error.
Now, we're never going to know what this value c is between x and p, but we can use it to get two bounds.
Oh, it's difficult to not, without us doing an example, it's difficult to understand what I'm trying to explain now.
We're going to get two bounds, or c actually has two bounds, x on the one side and p on the other side.
And we don't know exactly what x is, but we can use one value for c, and we can use the other value for c.
And if we plug c in there, if we plug c in there, we're going to get a lower value and an upper value.
So at least we know the error is going to be from there to there.
Note that this is just one extra step up from what we had originally with this Taylor polynomial.
So we just go one step up, so it's actually one closer fit, one closer fit, and we're just going to see, at a point c, you know, what are the upper and lower limits of our error.
As I say, it's very difficult to understand what is meant by this.
Important, there's got to be these prerequisites, otherwise you do this and there'll be some error.
If it's not continuous, if it's not differentiable, then you are going to land up somewhere you're going to be caught out.
So know that these have to exist before you start doing this problem.
And what we are saying is, there is a, especially going further away from our p-value, our Taylor polynomial does contain an error,
and we can get the upper and the lower bounds of that error by noting that there is this value c between x and p, between x and p,
and we can use those two bounds to, through the Lagrange form of this error, so this error equation, we can actually see what the upper and lower bounds is for how big our error is.
In the next video, we'll do an example, and hopefully things will be a little clearer.
Okay, let's see this in action.
I want to know, I want to approximate this, the natural log of 1.03.
Now, first of all, we're not dealing, we're not dealing with a complex function here,
we're not going to get the Taylor, the Taylor series for the natural log of 1.3 and estimate it.
I want, I want a value from this, not a Taylor polynomial, but I need to get the Taylor polynomial to get this.
Think about this, what I have here, in essence, is a function, f of x, and that equals the natural log of x.
And, we can have a nice graph of this, we can have a nice graph of this, remember, something like that,
and then specifically at 1.03, I can get a value, I can get a value.
And, that's exactly what I want.
I want the f of 1.03, the natural log of 0.13.
But, I can probably work, very close to 1.03, I can work with a value there, I can work with 1.
So, I can set a p equal to 1.
A p equal to 1.
So, my c is now going to be less than 1.03 and larger than 1.
So, that's where my c value is going to lie.
Just remember that.
I have chosen 1, so I might as well, in the exam, I've had a problem, get the third order Taylor polynomial of the f of x around the point p equals 1.
Why do I say third order?
Depending on your exam, you might be asked to fourth to fifth.
But, let's use third, so I chose 1 now, I chose 1 because it is closer to 0.3, and I physically chose third order.
But, you can, I suppose you can choose zero, or not zero, but it's an asymptote, you can choose two.
But, then your error is obviously going to be larger, and you can then choose the tenth order,
which will make, you know, your exam a bit problematic, because you're going to sit a long time with this problem.
So, you see what we mean.
If you just ask to approximate this value, choose something sensible.
I'm going to choose 1, and I'm going to choose a third order Taylor polynomial.
As I said, you might have been asked that directly.
Get the Taylor polynomial to third order of the natural log of x at a point p equals 1.
Because, in essence, that's what I've chosen.
So, let's remind ourselves of two things.
Let's get the Taylor polynomial.
Third order.
In x, that is going to be the sum from k equals 0 to 3 now, of the f, and we're going to have a small k there,
of our value p, and we're going to have x minus p to the power of k, all over k factorial.
And remember, the error, here, if we look at the Lagrange form of the error, so this was going to go to a 4.
That was going to be the f of 4, so that was going to be the f of 4, p, x minus p to the power of 4, that's going to be over 4 factorial.
That was going to be our error.
First of all, let's do this for a p equal to 1, for p equal to 1.
So, let's go.
So, our f of x, our f of x equals the natural log of x.
In other words, our f of 1 is going to be the natural log of 1, which is just 0.
f prime of x is going to be 1 over x, and the f prime of 1 equals 1 over 1, which is 1.
See, where there's a 1, there's an essence of that.
I could never do f prime of 0, because I'll be dividing by 0, if that wouldn't happen.
Okay, f prime prime of x, that is going to be minus 1 over x squared.
And if I look at the f prime prime of 1, that is going to equal a negative 1.
That is going to equal a negative 1.
And if I look at the f prime prime of x, that is going to be a 2 over x to the power of 3.
So, the f prime prime prime of 1, that was going to equal 2.
That was going to equal 2.
So, let's do this.
Let's say that the t3 of x is now going to equal our first is going to be 0.
So, our first value is 0, so that falls away.
The second one is just going to be to the power of 1, so that's going to be x minus 1.
x minus 1.
And we're going to seem to have a negative.
This is 2, so it's negative 1 over 2.
It's always going to be all over 2 because it's 2 factorial, and that's going to be x minus 2 to the power of 2.
And then lastly for, is that correct, minus 1, 2, yeah.
And then lastly, we're going to have this to the power of 3.
So, that is going to be a 2 for us there.
A 2 of 6 is a third.
So, we're going to have here plus a third.
x minus 2 plus 3 over 3.
So, that is our third order Taylor polynomial for a p equals 1.
For a p equals 1.
But now, we want an order Taylor polynomial of 1.03.
So, I can substitute 1.03 in there.
So, I'm going to have 0.03 minus 0.03 squared over 2 plus, well, it's all minus 1.
I don't know where I've suddenly got this 2.
All this 1.
0.03 to the power of 3 divided by, where will we, divided by 3.
So, this is going to be a natural log of 1.03 is going to be approximately, and you can do that with your calculator.
So, in the next video, I'll just get some space.
We're going to see what our estimated error is.
We're going to look at our error function in the grange form of this error to see this approximation of ours.
You know, what do, what are the upper nerve bounds of this, of the error that we're making in this approximation.
Good, we've cleared some space.
So, here's my Lagrange form of the error.
And now, we're going to look at this error, third order of 1.03 is the value.
So, if the fourth partial derivative at p minus x minus p4, remember, we've just added 1.
We went 1 higher from 3 to 4, and then 4 factorial.
Okay, so, in essence, we're going to have the fourth derivative at c, 1 minus, well, so that's going to be 0.03 to the power of 4 over 4 factorial, which is 24.
And remember that the third derivative of x was 2 of x cubed, so the fourth derivative is going to be negative 6 of x to the power of 4.
So, the fourth derivative, then, is c is going to be negative 6 over c to the power of 4.
But we know c, we said c was between 1 and 1.03.
So, I can plug in f4 of 1 there, and that's going to be a negative 6.
And I can plug in the fourth derivative of 1.03, 1.03, so I can put 1.03 in there, and I'm going to get some value, let's call that value s.
You need a calculator for that, 1.03 to the power of 4, negative 6 divided by that.
So, I know, now, r3 and 1.03 is going to be less than, that is going to be less than using this, with a 1.03 on this side, so this will be a s, 0.03 to the power of 4 divided by 24 on that side.
And on this side, I'm going to use this negative 6 there, this negative 6, 0.03 to the power of 4 divided by 24, divided by 24.
So, I can use a calculator, I can get this value, and I can get that value, so I know, I know, as I said before, I never know what c is, but I know that that approximation that I got using my Taylor polynomial for the natural log of 1.03, I know that the real value is going to lie between there and there based on what I have chosen, the error in my approximation, let me put it there,
the error in my approximation, the error in my approximation, is going to be between these two values, that is going to be the size of my error, and then remember from that, I can say that that is going to be equal tn, x plus r, and x.
So, I'm going to have some approximation for this value, and I'm going to have this kind of error, and the error is going to be between those two values.
