Good, let's take it slow and let's do an example.
We remind ourselves of the Taylor polynomial equation at the top there.
I hope it comes out and let's do this example properly.
We have the f of x equals the sine of x and at the point p equals pi over 4,
we ask to get the third order Taylor polynomial.
Third order Taylor polynomial.
Now let's see what we will require from that.
So let's see, we'll need f of x on this side and its derivatives.
We are going to need the f there of p.
We're certainly going to need the x minus p to the power of k and we're going to need k factorial.
So at, at, let's put that as k there.
At i equals 0, at i equals 0, what do we have?
We have the f of x, just the f of x.
So that is going to be the sine of x.
And if we put our value for p in there, that is going to be the sine of pi over 4.
And if we do that, we can remember our triangle, right triangle, if this is pi over 4, that's 1, 1, and by Pythagorean theorem, square root of 2.
So the sine of this angle is going to be 1 over square root of 2.
So there's 1 over square root of 2.
And we're going to have x minus pi over 4 to the power of 0, which is 1, and 0 factorial, which is just 1.
For i equals 1, for i equals 1, we're going to have f prime of x.
f prime of x, which is the cosine of x.
If I substitute that in there, the cosine of pi over 4, well, cosine is adjacent, divided by hypotenuse, so that's still going to be 1 over square root of 2.
And here we're going to have x minus pi, which is pi over 4, to the power of 1.
pi is now 1.
And here we're going to have 1 factorial, which is just 1.
Let's go to i equals 2.
The second derivative, so that was just the f of x, the first derivative, the second derivative, so the derivative of this is negative the sine of x.
It'll be negative the sine of pi over 4, which will be negative 1 over square root of 2.
This is going to be x minus pi over 4 squared, and 2 factorial, which is going to be 2.
Now for the third part of the summation, i is now going to...
Oh, I've been writing i on the side, and I wrote my summation here as k.
So all of these i's should actually be k's.
Sorry for that.
So for k equals 3 now, we have the next derivative of this, which will be negative the cosine of x.
It's negative the cosine of pi over 4, which is also negative 1 over square root of 2.
And we're going to have x minus pi over 4 cubed, and 3 factorial, lastly, is 6.
So now we can just use all of these answers and build them up.
This is an answer, this one and this one.
We have this one, and this one, and this one.
We have this one, this one, and this one, and we have, where are we, this one, this one, and that one.
Those are all the steps we need to go to a third order Taylor polynomial.
It's the summation in this order.
So it's this one times this one over that one.
So this times this over that is just going to equal, so the Taylor polynomial, third order, in x, is going to be 1 over square root of 2 plus, that's this one.
Next one is going to be this times this divided by that.
That is x minus pi over 4 all over square root of 2.
This one is going to have a negative in it, minus x minus pi over 4, this time squared, divided by 2 times that, 2 times square root of 2.
And then lastly, we'll have a negative again, minus x minus pi over 4, this time cubed, divided by 6 times the square root of 2.
So there is my third order Taylor polynomial expansion of this function around the point P equals pi over 4.
