Now, just as we had Taylor's theorem for single variable functions, we also have it for multivariable functions.
It is a bit more complex, though.
It is, I don't want to, I hesitate to use the word constraint, but you have to have these, keep these three factors into consideration.
You have to take them into consideration.
They've got to be true before we can really look at Taylor's theorem.
And it says that this function f must be a multivariable function defined on an open convex set.
C-O-N-V-E-X, a convex set.
What is a convex set?
Well, I can have a function of x, a function of x and y, a function of x, y, and z, multivariable function.
I can just ramp it up to as many as I like.
But if I take the whole domain of f, it's going to form some set, some set called a convex set.
Open, it's an open convex set, so it doesn't include the border.
But that's a two-dimensional set that you can think of, a three-dimensional set, four, five, six, seven, and a tenth-dimensional set.
Okay, what is not a convex set?
If I have this sort of scenario where I have my vector x there, my vector p there, there, and there, and they are connected as such,
where a part of that line segment that connects the two points fall outside of my set, then that is not a convex set.
It's not a convex set.
You can look carefully if the line segment between x and p is contained within this set, within the set which contains all vectors for which f is defined.
And f must also, and all its partial derivatives, up to an order of r plus one, must be continuous on the set.
And point p must be an element of the set, so p can also not lie outside.
Then, and only then, a point c, or a vector c, exists on the line segment between x and p, such that the following holds.
And that's Taylor's theorem.
So you've got to have all three of this.
And Taylor's theorem says that the f of some vector x is going to equal the Taylor's expansion, Taylor's polynomial, of that vector plus some error.
Plus some error.
And it's the same we had for single variable, except we didn't have to have all, we didn't really have to have all of these.
And we have to define the r of x, the Lagrange form of this error part, and that is going to equal, that is going to equal the following.
That is vector x minus vector p, dot product with the del operator, to the power r plus one of the f at this point c, divided by r plus one factorial.
Divided by r plus one factorial.
Where do errors creep in?
Well, one of these aren't true, you have to check for those.
It usually comes in where we put, by being used to doing this part at least, over and over again, and forgetting that that must be an r plus one, that that must be an r plus one, and that must be a c.
The other thing that you have to do is you've got to choose a point c.
You never know where it is.
It is on that line segment of the convex set, so it's got to be something like this.
On that line segment is a point or a vector c, and you have to choose it.
And we usually choose a comma b for two variable, or a two variable function f of x comma y.
And you still have to go through all of the steps.
Point p remains what point p is, so it's always going to be x minus p.
For instance, in the previous problem, it was 0 comma 1, so it's still going to be x minus 0 and y minus 1.
Still the dot product with the del operator, all to the power r.
Now we're going to have a Taylor's polynomial in order 2, so r equals 2, but this now will be raised to the power 3.
And there'll be a 6 in the denominator because it'll be 3 factorial, which is 6.
And you'll always have to carry that on the outside, and we'll have a look at that in the next problem,
and how to work into that, this point, a comma b.
Now let's do a problem.
We've already done, or at least part of the f, of that vector x equals e to the power of x natural over y,
and we saw that the second-order Taylor polynomial expansion of that would be, we did part of it,
but that would be the final answer, which is then approximately equal to f of x.
And we remind ourselves of this error component.
Now just make sure that you have it in your books.
I might have written it incorrectly in my previous one.
It's vector x minus vector p dot product, the del operator, all of that to the power r plus 1 of f at the vector p divided by r plus 1 factorial.
So what would that be for here?
So we are still going for r2.
We are still going for r2 at our point, at f of vector x.
Now this r equals 2, so here we're going to have 3.
So let's just rewrite that.
That is going to equal vector x minus vector p dot product, the del operator, to the power 3 of the f at vector p divided by 6.
So let's just do this part.
Now remember that's of c.
I keep on making a mistake with these.
I'm going to...
Ah, c.
At some point c.
Now vector c.
Now we've got to choose that vector c.
Now we're never going to know.
We know for the convex set it's going to be between x and p.
So we've got to choose something.
Okay, let's just choose it to be a comma b.
But somewhere on that line segment, we don't know where it is.
We can only use it to get an upper and a lower limit.
So let's call it that.
So what are we going to have for...
What are we going to have for x minus p?
We do remember here that p was vector p equals 0 comma 1.
So we're going to have...
Let's have x minus p vector x minus vector p first.
Remember that it's going to leave us with an x comma y minus 1.
And we've got to get that dot product to the del operator there.
And all of this is going to be to the power 3 of the f at c.
If at c...
We should remember all times 1 over 6.
So let's do this dot product first.
Let's do this dot product first.
So we're all still going to be left with a 6.
Always carry that over.
So that is going to be xd1 plus y minus 1d2.
That is going to be raised to the power 3 of the f at c.
So that is going to be a 6.
I think we're going to write this whole board.
And I might have to do another video just raising.
Okay.
Let's do that.
Let's do that longhand.
So let's keep that xd1 plus y minus 1d2
and multiply that by x squared d1 squared
plus 2 times x y minus 1d1d2
plus y minus 1 squared d2 squared.
All of that of the f at c.
So now we've got to just do this division.
Normal algebra.
That is going to leave us with a 6.
That is going to leave us x cubed d1 cubed.
Let's carry on.
Plus 2x squared.
y minus 1 of d1 squared of d2 plus we're going to have x y minus 1 squared d1 d2 squared.
So it's this component times x.
I've just multiplied this one, that one, and that one.
And now for this one, this one, and that one.
So that's going to be plus x squared y minus 1 d2 d1 squared
plus 2xy minus 1 squared d2 squared d1.
And lastly, we're going to have y minus 1 cubed d2 cubed
and all of that of the f of c.
Now there's some common ones here.
There's a 2x squared y minus 1.
2x, where would it be?
Where would it be?
There's x squared y minus 1.
There's a d1 squared and a d2 squared.
So certainly we can get those together.
So that's going to be d1 cubed plus there's 2x squared plus 1x squared.
That's going to be a 3x squared y minus 1 d1 squared d2.
We've looked at this where the partial derivatives are going to be equal to each other.
So we know d1 squared d2, d2 d1 squared.
That's going to be exactly the same.
And it looks like there's an x and there's an x.
y minus 1 squared d2 squared d2 squared d1 d1.
So those go together.
That one and that one.
That's 3x y minus 1 squared d1 d2 squared plus finally y minus 1 cubed d2 cubed.
All of that of the f at some point c.
Some vector c.
So let's do that.
Let's get d1 of the first partial derivative of the first partial derivative of the first partial derivative of this.
So it's always with respect to x, with respect to x, with respect to x.
So we're just going to be left with the same thing.
x cubed and we're going to be left with e to the power x.
And then for log of y.
And we're going to substitute a and b in there shortly.
Plus here we have 3x squared y minus 1.
So what is d2 of this?
It's going to be e to the power x.
e to the power x.
y to the power minus 1.
So I've taken d2.
Now 2 times first partial derivative.
y is a constant e to the power x.
First derivative of that is e to the power x.
Another first derivative of that is again e to the power x.
So this one is easy.
e to the power x of the y.
plus we have 3x y minus 1 squared.
So we need to get d1 of d2 of d2.
Okay, so what is d2 of this?
d2 of this is e to the power x.
y minus to the power minus 1.
I have to get d2 of that again.
So the negative 1 comes forward.
e to the power x.
y to the power negative 2.
And now I have got to get d1 of that.
which will remain exactly the same.
Because it's with respect to x.
First derivative of e to the power x is e to the power x.
So it looks like here we're going to get
negative e to the power x over y squared.
Plus lastly y minus 1.
I iterate this is not where the...
We're not taking the derivative with respect to this.
We're taking d2 of d2 of d2 of the f of c.
First I'm just doing it not for the f of c but for the f.
So let me just rewrite exactly what I'm doing there.
I'm getting the d2 of the d2 of the d2 of the f at point x.
So let's get the d2 of that.
The d2 of that is going to be e to the power x.
y to the power minus 1.
So we need to get the d2 of the d2 of that.
The d2 of that is going to be the d2 of
negative e to the power x.
y to the power negative 2.
And if I get the d2 of that
it's going to be positive e to the power x.
y to the power negative 3.
So that equals 2 e to the power x over y cubed.
So that's what I'm going to have left here.
I'm going to be left with the 2 e to the power x
over y to the power 3.
So now I can substitute for all my values x and y.
I can substitute this point c
because I actually need this of the f of c.
So let's do that.
And we must still multiply this 6 in.
So that's the 6th x to the power 3
e to the power a natural log of b.
The 6 times the third is a half.
So that's a half.
x squared y minus 1
e to the power a over b.
y equals b.
plus 3x y minus 1 squared.
This becomes a negative.
For that negative e to the power a over b squared.
And that is 2 times a 6.
That's a third again.
A third.
y minus 1 cubed.
e to the power a over b cubed.
So there is my equation for this error component.
of second order.
So.
we can now substitute in values here
for a and b at p.
and we can work out the upper and the lower bounds
basically for where the error is.
We're never going to know exactly where a and b is.
So we can only say it's between
between two certain values.
So let's have a look.
Did we do that problem here?
Did I do the problem?
Let's have a look.
Quick look.
Quick look.
Quick look.
Now.
Anyway.
So it's going to be
that the f of x equals
this function.
The second order Taylor polynomial
plus
the r of x
which is this.
And that will give us Taylor's theorem
reminding ourselves of the three components
that need to be present
before we can do
before we can use this.
Thank you.
So.
