In this section we want to calculate the equation of a plane. We know how to get the equation of a line.
If I have the equation of a line in 2D space, all I need is the slope of that line, the slope m, and I need a point on the line, point p.
If I have a point on the line x, y, and I have the slope, I can use y minus y1 equals m of x minus x1, and I can get point slope form.
But what if I have a three-dimensional plane? What's the equation of that?
Well, I can define two points in the plane. I have point p0 here, x0, y0, z0, and another point in the plane there, px, y, z, and I have a normal to the plane vector m with coordinates a, b, with components a, b, c.
So if that's normal to the plane, and if I make a vector out of this, these two vectors will be perpendicular to each other.
So if I get the dot product between the two, the Ukrainian inner product of those two, the dot product, they should equal zero.
So if I make a vector p0, that is going to be x minus x0, y minus y0, z minus z0, and my vector n equals a, b, and c.
So if I have vector n dot product vector p0, b, I must get zero.
So in other words, it's going to be a, x minus x0, plus b, y minus y0, plus c, z minus z0, equals zero.
And this is what we call the point normal form, the point normal form of the equation of a plane.
The point normal form of the equation of a plane, and this is point slope for a line in two space.
Here I have a plane in three space, the point normal form of the equation of a plane.
In the next video, we'll do an example to see if we can get this equation.
Okay, so it's still a plane in three-dimensional space.
I'm given a point, and I'm given a normal.
So for a line, I would have been given a slope and a point.
But here I've got a point, a point and a slope.
Here I've got a point and a normal.
Now, we'll get another point, another point in the slope, another point on the plane, and we'll call that x, y, and z.
There's another point in the slope.
Now, we can call the point that we were given point p0.
Let's call that point p0, and we are given a point x, y, and z.
We make another point, x, y, and z.
So again, if I get the vector p0, p, I'm going to get x minus 3, comma, y plus 1, because it's y minus negative 1, and z minus 7.
I still have my vector n there, so if I have vector n dot product vector p of p, p0, p, I'm going to have 4 times x minus 3, plus, I'm going to have 2 times y plus 1,
and I'm going to have minus 5, minus 5, z minus 7, equals 0, equals 0, because these two will be perpendicular to each other.
I'm choosing p, so that p and p0 lie in the plane.
I'm just taking an arbitrary point, p, x, y, 0, there.
So I'm left with 4x minus 12 plus 2y plus 2 minus 5z plus 35 equals 0.
And if I simplify, I'm going to get 4x plus 2y minus negative 5z, and then I'm going to get plus 25 equals 0.
And that is called the general, it's a linear equation in x, y, and z that is in the general form of the equation, of an equation of a plane.
Now in some books you might see, or some lecturers might do this, this equals 25, okay, and some will have the negative 25,
some will have the plus 25 on the left-hand side of the equal sign, so that you get ax equals by plus cz plus d equals 0.
To emphasize the fact that we are working with a point normal form, using a point and the normal.
Okay, one thing that will immediately jump out at you, look at the normal.
There's a 4, there's a 4, there's a 2, there's a 2, there's a negative 5, there's a negative 5.
So I can use that and immediately write part of this equation, part of this equation, 4.
4, the equation of a plane.
And what this negative 25 on this side does, or plus 25 on this side does, is the following.
If I had a coordinate system sitting here, if I had my coordinate system sitting there,
and I had a plane parallel to this one, going through, going through the origin there,
and that constant there is just going to move my plane parallel to that plane just up and down,
further away, below it or further above it.
But parallel to a plane going through, if that 25 wasn't there, it just equals 0.
That will be this exact same plane with the same inclination but going through the origin.
And that 25 just brings me further away, below or above, but parallel to that initial plane.
Okay, I have three points and they're all in a plane and I want the equation of that plane.
Now you might say, well, we've been given the norm, we were given three points,
and they're all in a plane, so nothing is perpendicular to that.
But we've got three points, and we saw with, for instance, by getting the angle,
the surface area of the triangle, I could make two vectors out of those,
as long as I have the same vertex.
And if I take a cross product of those two vectors, I'm going to get another vector,
which is perpendicular, and that perpendicular vector is a norm,
a normal to that plane, since both vectors are going to lie in the plane.
So let's make two vectors, P1 and P2, and then we're going to make P1, P3.
We looked at this before, we've just got to have the same vertex,
they've both got to stick out from the same point, from P1 to P2, and from P1 to P3.
So I can get the cross product of those two.
So let's look at what this vector is, P1, P2, so it's going to be 2 minus 1 is 1,
3 minus 2 is 1, 1 minus minus 1 is 2, and we're going to have 3 minus 1 is 2,
negative 1 minus 2 is negative 3, and 2 minus negative 1 is positive 3.
So I've got two vectors, and if I get the cross product of these two vectors,
let's get cross product vector P1, P2, cross product vector P1, P3.
So that is going to be the determinant along row 1 of I, negative J, P, roof, roof, roof.
Okay, so I'm going to have 1, 1, 2, and I'm going to have 2, negative 3, and 3.
Let's get the determinant there.
That is going to be 3 minus negative 6, that's going to be 9 for the I roof direction,
my negative for J roof.
I'm going to have 3 minus 4 is negative 1 for the J roof, and for K roof, I'm going to have
negative 3 minus 2, that's negative 5, in K roof direction.
In other words, this new vector of mine, cross product of those two vectors, is going to be
9, 1, negative 5.
So I already know, my equation is going to be 9x plus y minus 5z, I'm just looking for
that constant equals 0.
Now, this is the normal.
This is nothing other than the normal vector.
The normal vector.
Because this cross product is perpendicular to these two vectors.
Now, I just need to make a new vector with one point, any one of these points, plus another
point P, which is this x, y, and z.
Because I want an equation with x, y, and z.
I can't choose both of these.
These will just be solutions to the equation.
So I've got to get a new vector, and let's choose P1P.
Vector P1P.
So this P, x, y, and z also is a fourth point line in my plane.
Okay, a fourth point line in my plane.
So let's just choose P1P.
So that's going to leave me with x minus 1, comma, y minus 2.
And we're going to have x, y minus 2, and z plus 1.
Now, z plus 1, that is going to be that.
So all I need to do is the dot product between my normal vector and this vector.
So what do I get?
I'm going to get 9 times x minus 1 plus y minus 2 minus 5z plus 1.
And that's going to equal 0 because these two are perpendicular.
I've set it up so these two are perpendicular to each other.
So I'm going to get 9x minus 9 plus y minus 2 minus 5z minus 5 equals 0.
So I'm left with 9x as predicted, plus y as predicted, negative 5z as predicted.
Now I've got minus 9, minus 11, minus 16, minus 16 equals 0.
I'm not going to do it here, but set up.
You can set up any one of these.
Set up P2, set up P3, and you're going to end up with exactly this equation.
This equation, exactly that general form of the equation of a plane.
Okay, so before we looked at the point-normal form.
So I had a point and I had a normal, so point-normal form.
So that was, in effect, the general form of the equation of a plane.
Now I'm going to look at the vector form of the equation of a plane.
So imagine here I have my coordinate system, x, y, and z.
And this triangle here is just a plane, but it doesn't stop there.
It makes a whole plane.
So if it was there, there, and there towards you, there's this plane lying there.
Say it's 35 degrees, something there.
There's this plane lying there.
And I make two vectors, or first of all, I choose two points, point P and point P0, with
coordinates x, y, and z, and x0, y0, z0.
And I draw two vectors.
And the vectors are from the origin, the initial point of origin, and they terminate their final
points at P for vector R and at P0 for vector R0.
So now I just want to look at what would be the vector R minus R0.
So there will be R plus negative R0.
So there I have vector R, vector R, and then I add to that the negative, negative of vector
R0.
That leaves me this vector here.
In other words, this vector here is R minus R0.
Vector R minus vector R0.
And this is my normal, and that means the dot product between this normal vector and this
vector R minus R0 is going to equal zero.
And if I do that, I get the vector form of the equation of a plane.
Just to show you quickly what the vector form of an equation of a plane looks like, I will
have my normal, and I will have my vector P0P, and I'll write the dot product.
So I'll write A comma B comma C dot product this comma this comma that equals zero.
So if I had a point 3, 1, 1, and the x minus 3, y minus 1, z minus, I can't remember what
I just said, equals zero, and then I'll have 4, 5, negative 1, whatever there the normal
was.
So I just stop there.
I don't multiply it out to get the general form.
I leave it in this form, and this is called the vector form of an equation of a plane.
