In this section, we want to calculate the equation of a plane. We know how to get the equation of a line.
If I have the equation of a line in 2D space, all I need is the slope of that line, the slope m, and I need a point on the line, point p.
If I have a point on the line, x, y, and I have the slope, I can use y minus y1 equals m of x minus x1, and I can get point slope form.
But what if I have a three-dimensional plane? What's the equation of that?
Well, I can define two points in the plane. I have point p0 here, x0, y0, z0, and another point in the plane here, pxyz, and I have a normal to the plane vector m with coordinates a, b, with components a, b, c.
So if that's normal to the plane, and if I make a vector out of this, these two vectors will be perpendicular to each other.
So if I get the dot product between the two, the Ukrainian inner product of those two, the dot product, they should equal zero.
So if I make a vector pop, that is going to be x minus x0, y minus y0, z minus z0, and my vector m equals a, b, and c.
So if I have vector m dot product vector pop, I must get zero.
So in other words, it's going to be a, x minus x0, plus b, y minus y0, plus c, z minus z0, equals zero.
And this is what we call the point normal form, the point normal form of the equation of a plane.
The point normal form of the equation of a plane, and this is point slope for a line in two space.
Here I have a plane in three space, the point normal form of the equation of a plane.
In the next video, we'll do an example to see if we can get this equation.
Okay, so it's still a plane in three-dimensional space.
I'm given a point, and I'm given a normal.
So for a line, I would have been given a slope and a point.
But here I've got a point, a point and a slope.
Here I've got a point and a normal.
Now, we'll get another point, another point in the slope, another point on the plane, and we'll call it x, y, and z.
There's another point in the slope.
Now, we can call the point that we were given, point P0.
Let's call that point P0, and we are given a point x, y, and z.
So again, if I get the vector P0, I'm going to get x minus three, comma, y plus one, because it's y minus negative one, and z minus seven.
I still have my vector P0, I still have my vector N there, so if I have vector N dot product vector P of P, P0, P, I'm going to have four times x minus three, plus, I'm going to have two times y plus one, and I'm going to have minus five, minus five, z minus seven, equals zero.
Because these two will be perpendicular to each other, because these two will be perpendicular to each other.
So I'm choosing P, so that P and P0 lie in the plane, and I'm just taking an arbitrary point P, x, y, zero, there.
So I'm left with four, x minus twelve, plus two, y, plus two, minus five, z, plus thirty-five, equals zero.
And if I simplify, I'm going to get four, x, plus two, y, negative five, z, and then I'm going to get plus twenty-five, equals zero.
And that is called the general, it's a linear equation in x, y, and z, that is in the general form of the equation, of an equation of a plane.
Now in some books you might see, or some lecturers might do this, this equals twenty-five.
Okay, some will have the negative twenty-five, some will have the plus twenty-five on the left-hand side of the equal sign,
so that you get ax dot by plus cz plus d equals zero, to emphasize the fact that we are working with a point normal form,
using a point and the normal.
Okay, one thing that will immediately jump out at you, look at the normal.
There's a four, there's a four, there's a two, there's a two, there's a negative five, there's a negative five.
So I can use that and immediately write part of this equation, part of this equation, four, the equation of a plane.
And what this negative twenty-five on this side does, or plus twenty-five on this side does, is the following.
If I had a coordinate system sitting here, if I had my coordinate system sitting there,
and I had a plane parallel to this one, going through, going through the origin there,
and that constant there, is just going to move my plane parallel to that plane, just up and down,
further away, below it, or further above it.
But parallel to a plane going through, if that twenty-five, that twenty-five wasn't there,
which is just equal zero, that will be this exact same plane,
with the same inclination, but going through the origin.
And that twenty-five just brings me further, away, below, or above, but parallel to that initial plane.
Okay, I have three points, and they're all in a plane, and I want the equation of that plane.
Now you might say, well, we weren't given the norm, we were given three points,
and they're all in a plane, so nothing is perpendicular to that,
but we've got three points, and we saw, for instance, by getting the surface area of the triangle,
I could make two vectors out of those, as long as I have the same vertex.
And if I take a cross product of those two vectors, I'm going to get another vector,
which is perpendicular, and that perpendicular vector is a norm,
a normal to that plane, since both vectors are going to lie in the plane.
So let's make two vectors, P1, and P2, and then we're going to make P1, P3.
We looked at this before, and we've just got to have the same vertex,
they've both got to stick out from the same point, from P1 to P2, and from P1 to P3.
So I can get the cross product of those two.
So let's look at what this vector is, P1, P2, so it's going to be 2 minus 1 is 1,
3 minus 2 is 1, 1 minus minus 1 is 2, and we're going to have 3 minus 1 is 2,
negative 1 minus 2 is negative 3, and 2 minus negative 1 is positive 3.
So I've got two vectors, and if I get the cross product of these two vectors,
let's get cross product vector P1, P2, cross product vector P1, P3.
So that is going to be the determinant along row 1 of I, negative J, P, roof, roof, roof.
Okay, so I'm going to have 1, 1, 2, and I'm going to have 2, negative 3, and 3.
Let's get the determinant there.
That is going to be 3 minus negative 6, that's going to be 9 for the i roof direction,
my negative for J roof.
I'm going to have 3 minus 4 is negative 1 for the J roof, and for K roof, I'm going to have
negative 3 minus 2, that's negative 5, in K roof direction.
In other words, this new vector of mine, cross product of those two vectors, is going to be
9, 1, negative 5.
So I already know, my equation is going to be 9x plus y minus 5z, I'm just looking for
that constant equals 0.
Now, this is the normal.
This is nothing other than the normal vector.
The normal vector.
Because this cross product is perpendicular to these two vectors.
Now, I just need to make a new vector with one point, any one of these points, plus another
point P, which is this x, y, and z.
Because I want an equation with x, y, and z.
I can't choose both of these.
These will just be solutions to the equation.
So I've got to get a new vector, and let's choose P1P.
Vector P1P.
So this P, x, y, and z also is a fourth point line in my plane.
Okay, a fourth point line in my plane.
So let's just choose P1P.
So that's going to leave me with x minus 1, comma, y minus 2.
And we're going to have x, y minus 2, and z plus 1.
Z plus 1.
That is going to be that.
So all I need to do is the dot product between my normal vector and this vector.
So what can I get?
I'm going to get 9 times x minus 1 plus y minus 2 minus 5z plus 1.
And that's going to equal 0 because these two are perpendicular.
I've set it up so these two are perpendicular to each other.
So I'm going to get 9x minus 9 plus y minus 2 minus 5z minus 5 equals 0.
So I'm left with 9x as predicted, plus y as predicted, negative 5z as predicted.
negative 5z minus 9 minus 11 minus 16 minus 16 equals 0.
I'm not going to do it here, but set up.
You can set up any one of these.
Set up P, P2.
Set up P, P3.
And you're going to end up with exactly this equation.
This equation.
Exactly that general form of the equation of a plane.
Take it in.
Thank you.
Whatever I mean.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
Thank you.
Again, thank you.
인vote.
If you look at P3 aseta, you see...
but you will in tip per y Puerto and there are little dots sometimes.
But, if you look, it's not easy if you're going to do things this time.
If you look at this time and bite back it, get up for memory.
Take results of some of these.
Also, just say of anything.
Absolutely.
A forth startographic pressure pressure pressure pressure pressure pressure pressure
You're going to get the Check زicall.
If you look at the location of P4 as possible,
the 그렇죠 push.
You see, if you look at thengulo,
you have a little bit but you're going to do it here.
It's happening.
