Now, just as we had a vector form of an equation of a plane, we have the vector form of the equation of a line, a line in 3-space.
I don't know why I wrote through there.
And we're going to set up again our line L, put it out to that, we'll have a vector B, with components A, B, C.
And we'll note that once again, as before, if we have the two points P0P and we draw two vectors of R0 and R, we will note that this result of vector P0P equals R minus R0.
Do that, you'll see it for yourself.
And once again, we're going to have the vector POP, P0P, is going to equal some scalar times vector V.
Because they're parallel to each other, they're just going to have a different Z.
In other words, we're going to have the fact that vector R minus R0 is going to equal T times vector V, or vector R is going to equal R0 plus T vector V.
And that is the vector form of a line in 3-space, and it's parallel to some vector V.
So if this is our point, we're going to have the fact that R is going to equal our point, which is going to be negative 2, 0, 3, plus T times 4, negative 7, 1.
And we're going to have these values for, sorry, these values for, it's an infinity sign for T.
Now we want to know two geometric things with all the information that we have up from now.
And that is going to be the distance between two parallel planes, or if I just have a point, and that point can be in another parallel line.
So that will also be in the distance between two parallel planes, so I should say plane is not right.
If I have a point and a plane, and I want this distance, shortest distance between the point and the plane.
And that point P0 is x0, y0, z0, and in the plane I have a point Q, x, y, z, and I have a normal to my plane as normal vector N, in component form A, B, and C.
So you would agree that we are looking for something perpendicular, so it's going to be this perpendicular distance here.
It's going to be perpendicular to be the shortest distance between the point and plane.
And you'll also agree that this will fit in there exactly, so if we take a vector QP0, QP0,
we're looking for the orthogonal projection of vector QP0 along vector N.
And that will be this distance, which is the same as this distance, so I'm looking for, I'm looking for the,
that distance D being the norm, like this, that will be the norm of the orthogonal projection of vector QP0 along vector N.
The norm will be that. And we do know an equation for this, inasmuch as D, is then going to equal the absolute value of the dot product between QP0 and N,
divided by the norm of vector N. The norm of vector N.
One thing I do want to know, Q, lies in the plane, so it will, it will be a solution to the equation AX1 plus BY1 plus CZ1 plus D equals 0.
Because that is my general form of the equation of the plane, just with AX0, VX0, CZ0 plus D equals 0.
But because I have a point in the plane, X1, X1, Y1, Z1, it does, it does, there's a solution to my equation, so I can put X1, Y1, Z1 in there.
And if I do solve for D, and you'll see why I need to do that later on, it's going to be negative AX1 minus BY1 minus CZ1.
I'll remember that for D, I'll remember that for D, I'll just solve it for D.
Okay, let's get QP0, we need to get QP0, so that's going to be vector Q, P0 is going to equal X0 minus X1, and Y0 minus Y1, and Z0 minus Z1.
And I've got to do the dot product there, and get the absolute value of that dot product with vector N, so I'm going to get A, and then X0 minus X1, plus B, Y0 minus Y1, plus C, and I'm going to get Z0 minus Z1.
That's the absolute value of that, and the normal vector N is just going to be the square root of A squared plus B squared plus C squared.
So I'm still solving for this distance D here, I'm going to multiply out A with those two, B with those two, C with those two, but you'll notice that I'm going to get a negative AX1,
A negative AX1, I'm going to get a negative BY1, negative BY1, I'm going to get a negative CZ1, CZ1, and that's going to equal D.
So all I'm left with is the distance equals AX0 plus B, Y0 plus C, Z0 plus D, because that's my D there, absolute value of that divided by the square root of A squared, B squared, C squared.
And that is an equation for the distance between a point and a, let's get some examples on thereabouts, there is a point and an equation of a plane,
so I want the distance between a point and a plane, yeah, I have two planes, and I want to know the distance between them, so two planes are either going to be parallel,
and we can clearly see these are going to be, because this is just a multiple, one times two is two, two times two is four, negative two times two is negative four,
and that three remember being negative three and negative seven is our D values, how far away they are from, it's not three units away, it doesn't quite work like that,
but it will be away from the intersection of the X, Y, and Z planes, so you can clearly see those two are parallel, if they weren't parallel,
they're going to cross somewhere and we'll want the equation of a plane, if they are parallel like that, we want the distance between those parallel planes,
and just look at the normal of that first one, it's going to be one comma two comma negative two,
that's for equation of the first plane, equation of the second plane, that norm of the second plane is going to be two comma four comma negative two,
and you just see that twice normal Y equals normal, normal two, so those two are parallel to each other,
the norms are parallel, so the two planes are parallel, okay, but let's first of all, let's first of all get the distance between this point and this plane,
remembering that the equation for the distance is going to equal the norm of AX0 plus B, Y0 plus Z0 plus D,
divided by the square root of B squared, B squared, C squared, now we just need to know what is AX0, Y0, Z0, and D, and what is A, B, and C,
remember that this A, B, and C refer to the norm, and we can get the norm from two, three, and six, okay, so that is clearly going to be A, B, and C,
and I've got to bring that negative one over to the other side, because I need this in the general form, so plus one equals zero, that makes that my D,
and if that is so, this is the point I'm looking for, and this point we're going to make X0, Y0, and Z0,
because if we solve for D, we're going to get the norm of two times one is two plus, for B, B, B, B, B is negative three times negative four is positive twelve,
and then for C, C, and Z0, we're going to get a negative eighteen, and we're going to get for D plus one,
and that is going to be over the square root of A squared, B, C squared, C squared, so it's four, plus nine, plus thirty-six,
and, what was it, forty-nine, sorry, forty-nine, so if I solve this, it's going to be fourteen, fifteen,
regular three, actual value of three, square root of forty-nine is seven, so that distance between that point and that plane is three over seven,
let's get, let's get this, this is a bit, this is a bit more tricky if we want, if we want to do this,
certainly we could get the norm, we could get the norm of this second, the norm of the second one would be,
the second plane was going to be two comma four comma negative four,
okay, that was the norm of that, and remember, um, we'll, we'll, we'll have to see what is A, B, C, D, and what is,
uh, what is a point, now one of the two equations, we've got to make a point to solve this problem,
because we had a point and a plane, so one of them, forget this, one of them has got to be the plane,
let's make that a plane, now we need a point in that plane, now remember, a plane is going to go through the x-axis,
through the y-axis, and through the z-axis somewhere, so we might as well choose a point,
we might as well choose a point on that line that goes through the x-axis, meaning y equals zero and z equals zero,
that will leave me an x equals three, that will leave me a point on that plane, on that plane of three comma zero comma zero,
that would be a point where the plane passes through the x-axis, now I do have a point there,
and I have a plane there, now again, I need to just decide what is what, I need to change this into general form,
so that's going to be a negative seven equals zero, which will make this my a, my b, my c, my d,
and this is going to be my x-zero, y-zero, and z-zero, and again, I can just solve using this equation,
so that is going to be the absolute value of two times three is six, that'll be zero zero minus seven,
so that's going to be equal one, divided by the square root of four plus sixteen plus sixteen,
which is thirty-six, thirty-six, so I'm left with the distance between those two parallel planes is one over six,
one over six, okay, so we only learn one equation, and that is for the distance between a point and a plane,
so if I have two planes, I have to make, take a point in one of them, and the easiest way to do that is just to solve for,
well, you can solve for any x, y, or z, all we want is the fact that it crosses one of those axes, making the other two values zero.
