In this example, we want to find the parametric equation of the line containing a point P and parallel to a vector n.
So there's our point, and there is our vector.
First of all, we have to remember what this is all about.
So if I have a coordinate system, and I have a vector, and I have another line which is parallel to my vector.
On this line, I can construct another vector.
Now I was given point P0, for instance.
I was given that point.
I'll construct another point, x, y, and z.
I'll make this into a vector.
And because they're pointing in the same direction, one is just a scalar times the other.
So this point that I'm given, point P, always make that point P0, construct another point, x, y, and z.
So let me get your vector P0, P, and that is just going to be T times this vector.
The brush box will put a V there.
And this question asks for an n.
That will just be some scalar, and we use T.
Usually S and T we use for parametric equations, so that will be T.
P0, P, is going to be x minus 3, y plus 1, y minus negative 1, and z minus 2.
And that is going to equal T times, my vector is 2, 1, 3.
In other words, I'm going to have x minus 3 equals 2T.
I'm going to have y plus 1 equals, y plus 1 equals, that was just a 1, that's T.
And z minus 2 equals 3T, t times 3, 1 times T, 2 times T.
In other words, x equals 3 minus 2T, y equals negative 1 plus T, and we always put the T at the end.
And z is going to be 2 plus 3T.
And those are my parametric equations.
My parametric equations, see if I've got it right, 3 plus 3, was that n was 2.
Let me just see if I got something wrong, y minus 3 equals 2T, okay?
Let me just see if I got this right.
This must be a positive 2T now.
I brought the 3 across to the other side, positive 2T.
Okay, so that's parametric equation.
What about this one?
If I take my point P to be x, y, and z, and this is my point P0,
I'm going to have P0P being x, equally x minus x0, y minus y0, and z minus z0.
Then it's going to be that, and this is going to equal T times, T times vector n.
In other words, x minus x minus x0 is going to equal, this is my vector, so that's going to equal T.
Or let's just do this.
x0, y0, y0, z0, we do have, so that's x minus 0, y minus, so that I was a step behind myself, 0.
I was a step behind myself, so x minus 0 is going to equal 1T.
And then y minus 0 is going to equal negative 2T, and z minus 0, z minus 0 is going to equal 3T.
In other words, I'm going to have x equals T, y equals negative 2T, and z equals 3T.
It's going to be my parametric equation for that point parallel, containing a line, containing this point parallel to this vector.
And actually, just for completion sake, remember, you've got to put,
you've got to put your values, your possible values for T in there as well,
so that you can create a line from these parametric equations.
Now we're going to find the parametric equation of a line formed by the intersection of two planes.
And what are we asking ourselves?
Well, we've got to solve these two equations,
so that we have x, y, and z values that would satisfy both equations.
And the easiest way to do that is through linear algebra.
We can construct two matrices.
We just have to be slightly careful.
Let's construct this first one.
And what we're going to construct is, remember, the augmented matrix inasmuch as
we're going to put the right-hand side in as well.
So we're going to have 7, negative 2, 3.
And then we're going to have this negative 2.
We just have to be careful on this side, because we need that constant on the right-hand side.
So we're going to have negative 3.
We're going to have a 1.
We're going to have a 2.
And we're going to have a negative 5.
So we now have this augmented matrix.
And as I say, some people put those lines, a line, or dotted line, or whatever in there.
Now we have to get this to, through Gauss elimination,
we have to get this to row echelon form.
And I think I have shown before, I actually like to go one step further into reduced row echelon form,
or take the first step into reduced row echelon form.
But you'll see, because we only have two, because we only have two equations,
we are going to end up in reduced row echelon form anyway.
So we need a leading 1, first of all.
So we're going to divide that first line all out by 7,
which will leave us 1, a negative 2 over 7, a 3 over 7, and a negative 2 over 7.
I'm going to do things in one step.
So as much as I'll multiply this line up by 3,
because if I do that, and I add my result in the row to this row,
I'm going to get rid of the value underneath my leading 1 for the second row.
So if I multiply this out by 3, I'm going to be left with 3.
I'm going to be left with negative 6 over 7.
I'm going to be left with 9 over 7.
And I'm going to be left with negative 6 over 7.
So I've multiplied 3 out by this, by this row.
Now let's add this multiple of row 1 to row 2.
So I put dots underneath so that I don't mix up what I'm adding to each other.
Negative 3 plus positive 3 is 0, which is what I want.
1, which is 7 over 7.
Minus 6 over 7 leaves me 1 over 7.
2 over 7, which is 14 over 7.
14 and 9, that leaves me 23 over 7.
23 over 7.
So I did that one, I did those two, I did these two.
Let's look at them.
14.
14 plus 9 is 23, and that is 14 over 7.
That is negative 5, so that makes it times 7.
14 over 7 is negative 55 over 7, plus negative 6 over 7.
That leaves me 41 over 7.
41 over 7.
I've done those two as well.
Okay, I can multiply this row out by 7.
Let me just do that.
0 times 7 is 0.
This times 7 is 1.
This times 7 is 23.
This times 7 is 41.
41.
41.
Now we can stop there inasmuch as it's Gauss elimination.
I have leading ones.
I have nothing underneath the leading ones, so this is a row ishron 4.
Just to make life a little bit easier, I can now back substitute.
But I like to make life a little easier, and I'll do one more elementary row operation.
Let's try that out.
Let us get rid of, so for a reduced row ishron form, what we now need to do is to get rid
of the values above leading ones.
So to do this, I've got to multiply this by, this row 2 by 2 over 7.
Finds 2 over 7.
If I do that, if I do that, if I do that, remind myself that I'm working with the moment
of matrix, if I do this, 0 times 2 over 7 is 0.
1 times 2 over 7 is 2 over 7.
23 times 2 over 7, that gives me 46 over 7.
And 41 gives me 82 over 7.
Now I've got to add that to row 1.
1 plus 0, 1 plus 0 there is 1.
Negative 2 over 7.
And 2 over 7 leaves me with a 0, which is what I wanted.
Now, 3 plus 46 is 49, divided by 7.
7 times 7 is 49, so that leaves me with 7.
And 84, 82.
I just wanted to see that there is, I left my negative up there.
I thought there was something there.
It was negative 5, remember?
So that's negative 82, 7.
Apologies for that total mistake, which always happens with matrix equations.
So I have negative 2, negative 2 over 7.
That's negative 84 over 7, which is negative 12.
Which is negative 12.
That's 0, that's 1, that's 23, that's minus 41.
Now, I don't have a value for my z, because I don't have three unknowns, three equations.
I only have two equations and three unknowns.
So let's let z equals t.
That will leave me with 0x plus 1y plus 23z, but z is now t.
So plus 23t equals negative 41.
In other words, y equals negative 41 minus 23t.
And for x, we're going to have 1x and 0y is 7z's, but z is t.
So plus 7t equals negative 12.
So I'm going to have x equals negative 12 minus 7t.
And there are my three parametric equations that are solutions to these two equations.
That will form a line, and this is the parametric form of the intersection, of the line of intersection
between those two planes.
All that remains that I should put my values, possible values, for t.
Let's have a look at that two equations there.
I can construct a matrix, or rented matrix, 2, 3, negative 5, 0.
And I don't have a 0, a 1, a 0, and a 0.
And what I can do, though, quite easily, is I don't have to put this in any kind of echelon form.
I can just solve, because this makes it quite easy for me.
If I let z equals t, y equals 0.
And then for x, we're going to have a factor of 2x, y is 0, so that's plus 0, minus 5, and z equals t, equals 0.
In other words, 2x equals 5t, and x equals 5 over 2t.
With all that remains, there's my three parametric equations.
And all I have to remember is to add all my possible values for t.
I could have just done an elementary row operation by dividing this first line up by dividing it by 2,
or multiplying it up by a half, just to get a leading one.
Then I am in row echelon form, and I could have read off these equations as well.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
