In this problem we want to know if these two planes are parallel and we have them, equations of plane and vector form, so negative 1, 2, 4, dot product, this equals 0 and 2, negative 4, negative 8, dot product, that.
Remember what vector form is, it is going to be vector n, dot product, vector r minus r0 equals 0. That is going to be the vector form and if I just look at these two vectors, this vector n1 clearly is, if you look at it, negative 2 times vector n2.
Because negative 2 times that is 2, negative 2 times that is negative 4, negative 2 times that is negative 8, so the two vectors to which these planes are perpendicular, meaning their dot product equals 0, the dot product equals 0, so this comes from the two points in the plane, this comes from the vector parallel to that.
So if this vector is just a scalar value of the other one, then of course they do point in the same direction, they just are different lengths.
In other words, they are parallel to each other, meaning that these two don't have to mark, you don't have to do this dot product, you don't have to do anything, these two are indeed parallel to each other.
Now for this problem, which might seem difficult at first glance, we must find an equation of the plane through a point, perpendicular to a line, but we are given the line in polar coordinates.
And we need to find out what this plane is, so imagine just the following, imagine I have my plane there, I have my coordinate system here, and I have my line going there.
It's just an imagination, and these two here, and these two here have got to be perpendicular to each other, the net has to be perpendicular.
I know a point on the plane, let's call that point P0, I don't know where they intersect, and as much as I only have that form of the equation of the line,
I don't know the equation of the plane, impossible for me to find out where they might intersect.
What I can do with that, what I can do with that is that, I can, I can form two vectors.
I can form two vectors by getting, if I could get two points, if I could get two points, let's call them point L1 and L2,
on this, in other words, I can form a vector, I can also choose another random spot on this plane, call it P, and I can get another vector.
If I have these two vectors, and I multiply them, or I do the dot product, let me say multiply, and I do the dot product between them.
Now, I should have done this, perhaps in a slightly better way, in as much as, say for instance, I chose P there.
So P0, P, and L1, L2, if I get their dot product, that should equal zero, irrespective of where they are in space.
Let's have a look at that.
Let's get two points on that line.
Let's get point L1.
How can I do that?
Well, I can substitute any value into T, because remember T, it's any value from negative infinity to positive infinity.
Let's, if T equals zero, that is going to give me X equals four, Y equals negative two, and Z equals zero.
That leaves me with point L1 being four comma negative two comma zero.
Let's get another point here, and that's T equals one.
I'm just making it easy for myself.
If that's one, that means X equals six.
And if that equals one, one, that is three, and that leaves me Y equals one.
So I'm taking that two over to the other side, and that leaves me Z equals negative five.
And I'm going to have point L2 as six comma one comma negative five.
Six comma one comma negative five.
If I now get vector L1, L2, that's going to equal six minus four.
One minus negative two is three.
Negative five minus zero is negative five.
So I now have this vector.
What if I get vector P0P?
Well, I just have to get a point P as well, and I'll just make that X, Y, and Z.
It can be anything.
Still in that plane.
And if I get P0P, dot product, my P0P is going to equal X minus, I do have point P0, there's point P0, X plus two, Y minus one, and Z minus seven.
If I get the dot product between these two, I'm going to get two times X plus two plus three times Y minus one, minus five times Z minus seven.
And that's going to equal zero, since these two vectors are parallel, or I should say that one.
These two vectors are parallel to each other.
In other words, two X plus four plus three Y minus three minus five Z plus 35 equals zero.
So I'm going to be left with two X plus three Y minus five Z, and I have four minus three is one.
One plus 35 is plus 36 equals zero, and equation for my plane in standard form.
Now here are two very interesting questions.
The equation of the plane parallel to the X, Y plane, and the equation of the X, Y plane itself.
And you've got to draw this out in your mind, as even the previous problem, if you draw that out in your mind,
or you draw a little picture like this, it actually becomes quite clear.
So I have my X, Y, Z coordinate system.
The back plane is in the back plane here.
It's in the X, Y plane, and this one is a bit forward in the X, Y plane.
So let us take, that is the X, Y plane, parallel to the board, the Z coming out at you.
Now let's take two points in that parallel plane, the plane parallel to the X, Y plane.
I can take two points in it, and I can call it point P0, which is X0, Y0, and Z0.
I can take another point, X, Y0, and I can construct a vector, P0, whoo, that's rough, P0, P,
which is just going to be X minus X0, Y minus Y0, and Z minus Z0.
Now, there is a vector in this plane.
It can point anywhere in 360 degrees there.
Anyway.
Now, I need a vector parallel to that plane,
and that is where looking at this picture becomes quite clear.
And that vector parallel to this plane of mine has got to go along the Z axis.
Anything along the Z axis is parallel to the X, Y plane.
And I can just take the unit vector.
Why don't we just take the unit vector along that plane?
And that unit vector along Z is going to be 0, 0, 1.
It's not going to move along the X direction.
It's not going to move along the Y direction.
It's going to come straight at you, straight.
And that's Z1.
Now, if I do these, 0 times that, nothing left.
0 times that, nothing left.
So I'm left with Z minus Z0 equals 0,
inasmuch as the dot product between these two have got to be 0.
And there I have an equation for a plane parallel to the XY plane.
As simple as that.
As simple as that.
Now, what about an equation for...
What about an equation for...
The...
XY plane itself.
For the XY plane itself.
Now, for that to happen, I've got to choose my second point.
And my second point has got to be at Z equals 0.
So my second point here is not going to be X0, Y0, Z0.
But my point on that plane is going to be X0, Y0, 0.
Y0, because no matter where I'm on this plane, in the XY plane, I choose a point.
No matter where I choose that point, it is going to lie on Z equals 0.
Because I'm at the XY, I'm at the XY, I'm at the XY plane.
In other words, this becomes Z minus 0 here.
That becomes Z minus 0 here.
And now, if I multiply them out, I'm going to have 0 times that.
0 times that.
1 times that.
So 1 times Z minus 0 equals 0.
And that leaves me with Z equals 0 as an equation for the XY plane.
Unfortunately, the memory card is full, so I'll have to put these videos together.
So we know now that Z equals 0 for the XY plane.
That means that is for XY.
If I make XZ plane, that means Y equals 0.
And X is going to equal 0.
X is going to be 0 for the YZ plane.
Similarly, this is a plane parallel to the XY plane.
So Y minus Y0 equals 0 is going to be a plane parallel to the YZ plane.
Important then to note that the most important thing is for the plane, XY plane,
my point is going to be X0, Y0, anything.
X can be 3, Y can be 10, but Z is always going to be 0 on that plane.
So I choose a 0 there.
I choose the unit vector in the opposite direction, in the perpendicular direction.
So this XY plane is going to be along Z.
If I want it along the X, along the X, that is going to be 1, 0, 0.
And if I want the unit vector along the Y, that is going to be 0, 1, 0.
And I'll choose which one is perpendicular to my plane.
And for the other planes, this will become 0, or this will become 0.
On the planes, though, I can have, parallel planes, I can have any value.
Along this plane, Z0 is going to be some specific point.
But then I want it S, I leave it Z0, and I can multiply the L.
Or I can get the noteproduct of the unit vector parallel to that plane,
and outjumps my equation.
