This is a very important problem. I have a line L, I have a D, a parametric 4, x equals negative 1 plus 3t, y equals 5 plus 2t, z equals 2 minus t, t being anything from negative infinity to positive infinity, and it is contained in a plane that is perpendicular to another plane, 2x minus 4y plus 2z equals 9.
And I've already called it, I see my plane 1. Find the equation to the other plane, plane 2, containing that line. So what are we talking about? What are we talking about? It would seem as if I do have a plane. It seems as if I have a plane perpendicular to that.
I have another plane perpendicular to that. So these two planes indeed are perpendicular to each other. Let's call this our plane 1 that we have the equation for.
The other plane contains a line. The one that I'm looking for. Let's call that plane 2. I'm looking for. And they sit in this 3D coordinate system.
How will I solve this? How will I solve this? There are various ways to solve this, I suppose, but there is a base fundamental idea. Think about it. If I have a vector parallel to this line, it means it's parallel to this plane. It's not going to help me.
But the normal to this plane. But the normal to this plane, which I can easily get, is perpendicular to this plane. In other words, because this plane is perpendicular to that one, the normal to this one will be parallel to that one.
Because the normal is perpendicular to this one. So now I have two vectors. I can get two vectors which is parallel to this plane. And if I get the cross product between two vectors, that cross product will be perpendicular to them.
So I will now get a new vector which is perpendicular to this plane. So in other words, it's a normal to this plane. All I need is a point on the line, which is a point on the plane.
So I have a point and a normal vector. I can write the point normal form of that plane. So that is the basis of that.
Now how do we get the first vector that we need? This one that is parallel to this. There are various ways to go about it. One way to go about it is just to get two points on that line.
And I can make t equals zero. And then t equals one. I'll have two x, y, z values, two points. And I can get, just by subtracting the one lot of elements from the other, I have that.
Or I can just write this in vector notation, this line. Remember that's x, y, z. And that is going to equal negative one comma five comma two plus t three comma two comma negative one.
Three comma two comma negative one. Now remember, this is a point. In this form, this is the point. And this is a vector parallel to. Vector parallel to that line.
But do yourself a favor. Plug in t equals zero. Plug in t equals one. You have two points. Subtract one from the other to make a vector out of it. And you'll also get three, two, negative one.
You'll also get three, two, negative one. So that is my vector parallel. Let's call this vector, vector, doesn't matter what you call it. Let's just call it vector V.
You can call it vector V. You can call it whatever you want. Seeing that it's on the line L. Oh, let's call it vector L. It's a vector parallel to my line L.
Now this vector, normal vector to this plane, the normal vector to plane one, that's easy to get anyway. That's two comma negative four comma two.
So now I have two. So now I have two vectors. I have two vectors that are both parallel to this plane, this plane that I want. And if I get their cross product, the resultant vector, the cross product of two vectors is perpendicular to this plane and that would be a normal to that plane.
So let's get that plane. So let's get that cross product. So let's do N1 cross product vector L. So that's going to equal I the roof, negative J the roof, K the roof. Remember how to do this.
N is 2, negative 4, negative 4 and 2. And L we said is 3, 2, negative 1. 3, 2, negative 1. And if you do that, I get an answer of 0 comma 8 comma 16.
Just check on that. And let's call this vector N, which is now perpendicular to this plane that I want. All I need now is a point on that plane.
Well, I already have a point on the line and the line is contained within the plane. So that is going to be my point. I just need another point, P, which is x, y, z.
In other words, I can get vector POP, familiar territory. That is going to be x plus 1 and then y minus 5 and z minus 2.
And all I need to do now is the cross product of these vector N cross product vector POP and that's going to equal 0.
Now I can simplify this. I can make this 0, 1, 2. Or you can just multiply it out and then simplify. So that will be 0 times that. That's nothing. That will be 8.
8 times y minus 5. And it's going to be plus 16 times z minus 2. That equals 0. As I say, I can divide straight through by 8 now, which will leave me with a 1, which will leave me with a 2.
So I have y plus 2z. I'm going to have negative 5, negative 4 equals negative 9. Taking it over to the other side equals 9.
Beautiful problem. Remembering that the cross product between two vectors is a resultant vector which is perpendicular. All I needed was two vectors parallel to this plane that I want.
I could get one easily just from the line. The second one I could get as the normal to this other plane.
Because the normal is perpendicular to this plane. Because these two planes are perpendicular to each other.
That means the normal of this plane is parallel to that plane. I have two parallel vectors.
Its cross product will be perpendicular. Meaning it is a normal to that. A normal to that plane.
Quick, let's hit the scratch section. Home by a second problem in a similar vein. Find the equation to a plane through a point that is perpendicular or orthogonal to both of these planes.
4x minus 2y plus 2z equals negative 1. And 3x plus 3y negative 6z equals 5.
Once again, our plane is perpendicular to both of these. Their normals, which is perpendicular to them, will in other words be parallel to our plane that we want.
The cross product. The cross product of those two will be perpendicular to them. Meaning, that is perpendicular to our plane, which will become the normal to our plane.
If we have the normal to our plane, we have a point in our plane, we can write point normal 4. And it's easy as that.
So let's get the cross product. So let's get the cross product of the two normals of this.
So again, and that is going to be, let's just call that n, which is now going to be the normal to our plane.
And as much as it's going to be perpendicular to it. So that is going to equal i negative j and k.
And we're going to have 4 negative 2 and 2 as being the perpendicular or the normal to this plane.
And the normal to that plane is going to be 3, 3 negative 6.
So if I get the determinant of that along row 1, along row 1, I get an answer of, just do that, you'll get 6, 13 and 18.
And I can simplify that as 6 and as 1, 5, 3. So that is n, 1, 5 and 3. I just need a vector on this plane.
And I'm going to let that be point P0. I need another point x, y and z.
In other words, my vector P0P is going to equal x plus 2, y minus 1 and z minus 5.
Now I get the dot product of these two vectors and that should give me 0.
So I'm going to have an x plus 2 plus 5 times y minus 1 plus 3 times z minus 5.
That is going to equal 0 by the fact that the cross product between these two should be 0.
And that is going to give me an x plus 5, y plus 3, z.
Then I'm going to have 2 minus 5 minus 15 is minus 20 plus 2 is negative 18 equals 0.
That is going to be the equation of my plane.
I need a Breeze.
So make sure to make sure to make sure to pay for it if it is 0.
By already laying through the auto codeצimate, forget the command on the interventions edge.
I lord, you see it in yoga, you clear that it also shoots almost 51, 40, y plus 3 times been
here with the mark at the top which we do not have.
And you are going to replace anywhere with a 10 symbol?
I do not gotta do this сдел slack이라고 so with 2, 60, for example.
Jacka Kinga Kinga Kinga Ganga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga Kinga levels in言葉 tohe
