Here we have the same kind of problem as the first one we dealt with in this video.
We find an equation of a plane through these two points, negative 1, 2, 5 and 2, 1, 4,
perpendicular to this plane, 8x minus 2y plus 6z equals 1.
Once again, the normal to this plane is perpendicular to this plane.
This plane is perpendicular to the one we want, so it's normal, it's parallel.
So I have one vector parallel to this.
I can get another vector parallel to this plane by these two points.
We had that line, we wrote it in vector form,
but I also said you could get, just use two points on it by making t0 and t1.
So I can get a vector p1p2, p1p2.
That is just going to be 2 minus negative 1, that's 3.
1 minus 2 is negative 1.
4 minus 5 is negative 1.
I can get another vector, vector n, call it n1, which is perpendicular to this plane.
And if it's perpendicular to this plane, this plane is perpendicular to that plane.
It means the normal to that is parallel to our plane, and that is 8 and negative 2 comma 6.
If I get the cross product of these two, n1 cross product, p1p2,
I'm going to get a new vector which is perpendicular to this plane.
These two are parallel.
The cross product will be perpendicular.
These two lie in the plane of that plane, so this will be a normal, a normal to that plane.
So that means i negative jk.
And I get the determinant along the first, the determinant along the first,
along the first row.
So let's have 3, negative 1, negative 1, and I'm going to do 8, negative 2, and 6.
Let's get that.
This is going to be my new vector n, which is parallel to, which is perpendicular to that plane.
So I'm going to close in here.
I've got negative 6.
Minus 2 is negative 8.
Negative 8.
Now I must remember my negative.
If you're going to just write it in one step, do not forget the negative.
I forget that negative sometimes.
Don't forget that.
That row, that column sign gives 18.
Plus 8 is 26, but that makes it a negative 26.
Now this row, this column, so I have negative 6, plus 8 is 2.
Plus 8 is 2.
So I can simplify that.
I can simplify that.
Let's just take out a negative 2.
If I take out a negative 2, I have 4, I have 13, and I have negative 1.
All I need is now a vector containing x, y, and z.
In that side, I can get another point, p, x, y, z.
It doesn't help me to use those.
I need unknowns in there.
I need to write the equation of a plane in point normal form.
So my vector, p1p, is going to be x plus 1, y minus 2, z minus 5.
And I've got to do this n dot product, p, 0, p.
Because they are perpendicular to each other, their dot product will be,
their dot product has got to be 0.
In other words, I have 4 times x plus 1, plus 13 times y minus 2.
And I have minus z minus 5.
That is going to equal 0.
In other words, I'll have 4x plus 13y minus z.
And I'm going to have 4.
Minus 26 is negative 22.
Plus another 5 is negative 17 equals 0.
Another problem along the same theme,
just with a few twists in it and something to trick you.
Find equation for a plane with a point 1 negative 1, 2.
And the line x equals t, y equals t plus 1, z equals 2t plus 3.
So let's just think about it.
We have a plane, we have a plane, we have a plane, we have a line through it.
We know the equation of this line, we know some point in that plane.
What can we do?
Well, we know,
we know that we can get a parallel vector to this line.
So we're going to have one vector.
If I write this in a form, I can do that in two ways.
Either I can get two points on that line by making t equals 0 and then t equals 1 or whatever you want.
And I get that.
And once again, I have two parallel vectors.
I get the cross product, which means I'll get a perpendicular vector.
Both of those were in the plane, so I'll have a point on the plane and I'll have its normal, easy enough to do.
Or I can just write this in vector form.
But here's the trick.
See that these are not written properly.
And this must be y equals 1 plus t.
And this must be z equals 2t minus 3.
Yeah, it's negative 3 plus 2t.
Now I can write x, y, and z.
That is going to equal now 0, because that is 0.
That equals 0 plus t.
So that's going to be equal to 0.
That's going to be a 1.
That's going to be a negative 3 plus t times 1, 1, 2.
1, 1, 2.
So which one is my point?
Which one is my vector?
Remember that this is my point and this is my vector.
That vector is parallel to this line.
That point is on.
Okay, so already I have two points.
I have two points on that line.
As I said, you could have made two points anyway to get a vector, which would still have given you this vector.
You've got another vector with these two points.
It doesn't matter which way around you do it.
Let's use these two points.
Let's use these two points to make a vector.
Let's just call it vector, let's just call it vector p.
So I can have, for instance, 1 minus 0 is 1.
Minus 1, minus 1, minus 1 is negative 2.
2 minus negative 3 is 5.
I have my, I have my other vector also, which is that vector v, which is 1, 1, 2.
If I get their cross product, if I get their cross product, so let's get vector v, cross product vector p.
That's going to be i, negative j, k.
Vector v is 1, 1, 2.
I have 1, negative 2, and 5.
As I said, once again, be aware of that negative.
I'm going to get the determinant across the first row, so that is going to be 5, minus negative 2.
5 minus negative 2, that's 9.
So I'm going to make sure that I've got that correct.
Then remember my negative.
So I'm going to have 5 minus 2 is 3.
Then I'm going to have negative 2 minus 1 is negative 3 again.
I can take, I suppose, a 3 out.
Then I'm going to have 3, negative 1, negative 1, which is my new vector, vector n,
which is perpendicular to my plane.
I've got one point in my plane.
I need another point, p, x, y, and z.
So I'm going to have the fact that vector n, dot product, vector p, o, let's call that point, p, o,
vector p, o, p.
That is going to equal 3 times x minus 1.
Minus will be a y plus 1.
And again, minus z minus 2, which is going to equal 0.
That gives me a 3x.
I've done this so quickly.
Let's just make sure I'm right.
Minus y minus z.
Then I'm going to have negative 3, negative 4, plus 2.
That's negative 2 equals 0.
Various ways to get your points and your two vectors in that plane.
Cross product them.
And you'll get a normal, in other words, to this plane, you've got your two points.
So you've got that vector, dot product that vector, has got to equal 0.
Thank you.
So we're going to have pulls and you've got to pull them in the middle.
You've got them.
I feel like we've got to pull them off.
So you've got to bring them off.
And put them on the left, kind of coming if I don't want to go where they are.
Just those here.
Then there's
there.
