Here we have an absolute fantastic problem. Do these two lines intersect? And if so, where?
I have x minus 3 equals 4t, y minus 4 equals t, z minus 1 equals 0.
x plus, oh, I can't even see what I wrote there. It's x plus 1 equals 12t, y minus 7 equals 6t, and z minus 5 equals 3t.
Okay. First things first, let's describe these properly. Never have them, never, never help you to have them in this.
x equals 3 plus 4t, y equals 4 plus t, z equals, what will that be, 1 plus 0t, x equals negative 1 plus 12t.
Let me see if I did that right.
y equals 7 plus 6t, and z equals 5 plus 3t.
Okay, that's in a better format. Now think this out for yourself.
If they do intersect, they're going to intersect at a point p, namely x, y, and z.
Let's call that point p, a, b, and c.
We don't know what it is. We need to find it out. Let's call it point a, b, and c.
Now think about it.
That means these two have to be the same, these two have to be the same, these two have to be the same.
But I cannot say that 3 plus 4t equals negative 1 plus 12t.
Because I do that, I'm going to get a different t version for each.
And where does that get you? That gets you nowhere.
Where they intersect, they're not going to have the same t value.
This t value and this t value, it's not going to be the same when they intersect.
That you must clearly see and clearly understand is just logical.
So I must give this different values.
So let's call this t on this side.
Let's call that r, and we'll call this s.
So what are we going to have?
So if x equals a, I'm going to have a equal 3 plus 4r.
And that is going to equal negative 1 plus 12s.
B is going to equal 4 plus r equals 7 plus 6s.
And c is going to equal, c is going to equal, c is going to equal, 1 equals 5 plus, 5 plus 3s.
Now because I made this so simple for you, you don't, you don't have to do anything.
What you've got now is three equations in two unknowns.
You only need two equations in two unknowns, but they made it so easy for you by letting this equal, z equals 1.
In other words, I can very quickly solve for s.
In as much as 3s equals negative 4, s equals negative 4 over 3.
If I plug that in here, I'm going to have 3 plus 4r equals negative 1 plus 12 times negative 4 over 3.
That is going to give me 4r.
It's going to give me negative 4.
And that is going to give me minus, that will go into that 4 times.
That is going to give me 16.
That is going to give me, that is going to leave me, where does that leave me, divide everything by, well, 4r equals negative 20.
In other words, r is going to give me negative 5.
I've solved for r, then I've solved for s.
If I've solved for r, then I've solved for s.
I didn't even need to solve for that.
I just needed the s.
Because if I have s, I can put s in there.
So that's going to give me a equals negative 1 plus 12 times negative 4 over 3,
which gives me an a value of, that gives me an a value of, what was my,
I need to see where that is negative 17, that gives me a b value of negative 1,
and that gives me a c value of 1.
So this is indeed where they intersect.
Because they made it so easy for us, we could have just stopped there.
I can put s in there.
I can solve for a.
I can put s in there.
I can solve for b.
And I know c equals 1.
Just to let you know, just look at this.
If this wasn't so simple, I have r and s here.
I have two equations and three unknowns.
I could have made an augmented matrix.
I could have done a Gauss elimination to row echelon form,
or Gauss-Jordan elimination to reduce row echelon form.
I could have read off the values of r and s from there.
And by Gauss-Jordan elimination, I could have read it off directly.
With Gauss elimination, I would have had to back substitute the value for s.
If I wrote r as my first and s as my second.
And if I had those values for r or for s,
I could have just replaced it in there and also gotten a, b, and c.
As simple as that.
But because they made this so simple for us, there's no way.
What you have to see is, if they do intersect,
they're going to intersect at a point.
Call that point summing.
And just realize, the most important thing to realize about this
is that the t values are not,
I suppose you can set up something where they will be equal to each other.
But in the vast majority of cases,
there's going to be two lines in three space.
One running there, one running there.
There they connect.
But their t values is what makes them a line.
Okay, that's what makes them a line.
T can be anything.
T can be anything.
Okay, so they're not going to intersect over there
where the two t values are exactly the same.
You've got to give these different variables.
You've got to give them different variables for the two.
Okay, we've already done one of these problems.
So I'm not going to do a whole full one.
I'll just show you how easy it is when you do get it in this easy form.
We want the parametric equation for a line of intersection of two planes.
Remember, we can then write two augmented matrices
and we're going to do Gauss elimination.
Or as I like to do Gauss-Jordan elimination.
I'm going to let, because I will only have two equations and three unknowns,
I will let z equals t.
And then I will read off the values.
And for every z, I'll just replace that z with a t.
Here it's a lot simpler.
And as much as we're always going to start with z equals t,
y we already know equals 0.
So this is the matter of solving for x.
So we're going to have 5x, y is 0, so that's 0, plus 2,
t is, uh, z is this, t.
And that has got to equal 0 as well.
So 5x equals negative 2t.
In other words, x equals negative 2 over 5t.
So those are my three parametric equations.
1, 2, and 3.
As long as negative infinity is less than t is less than infinity.
So that's easy to solve.
If you were given two, uh, you know, two of this type,
not as easy as that.
You set up your augmented matrix.
You do Gauss-Jordan elimination on it.
You let z equals t, and then you just read off the answers, uh, for, uh, from the bottom up.
So that you have z, then you have y, and then you have x.
Now some of these distance problems.
The distance between a point and a plane.
There's my point, there's my plane.
Let's remind ourselves of what the equation is.
Remember that distance is going to be equal to the absolute value of ax is 0, plus b,
y is 0, plus c is z is 0, plus d, divided by the square root of a squared, plus b squared, plus c squared.
So we just need to figure out what is a, b, and c.
What is x is 0, y is 0, and z is 0.
And d.
So it's very easy to see that this is where, um, your a, b, c, and d is going to come in,
as much as there's your d.
But remember, we'll have to write, that's 1x, plus 2y, minus 2z.
I'm just writing it big like that so we can see, minus 4 equals 0.
That is going to be my d, that's my c, that's my b, that's my a.
That leaves this as my point, p0, x0, y0, z0.
So if we didn't quickly do that, we're going to get the absolute value of 3 plus 2 is 5,
5 plus 4 is 9, minus 4 is 5, which is the value of 5 is 5, divided by the square root of 1 plus 4 plus 4,
that's 9, squared root of 9 is 3, so the answer is 5 over 3.
So the important thing is just to know which is a, b, and c, which is x0, y0, z0.
I mean, it's easy enough to see there's 3 there, without remembering how we got to this equation.
And a, b, c, and d, you obviously need the plane, the constants of the plane to be a, b, c, and d.
And the last thing to remember is just to bring everything over to the left-hand side to equal 0,
so that you get the proper value, and the proper sign, at least, of the one last video here.
I need to show that this parametric equation of a line, x equals x0 plus at, y equals y0 plus bt,
z equals z0 plus ct, with t being anything from negative to positive to infinity,
I need to show this equality, x minus x0 over a equals y minus y0 over b,
and z minus z0 over c, and this is called the symmetric, symmetric equations of the line.
That's very easy to do.
Each of these I can just solve for t.
If I solve for t, here, t is going to equal x minus x0 over a.
And if I solve for t, here, I'm going to get y minus y0 over b,
and z minus z0 over c is t, and I'm just putting all these t's equal to each other,
t equals t equals t,
and I find this symmetric equations of the line.
So if I have this point, parallel to this vector,
let me write the symmetric equations of this line,
and remember here, I'm going to have x, y, z,
which is going to equal my point,
3 comma negative 1 comma 2,
plus t times 2 comma 1 comma 3.
So what am I going to have?
What am I going to have?
This is a long way of doing it.
So I'm going to have x equals 3,
x equals 3 plus 2t,
and I'm going to have y equals negative 1 plus t,
and I'm going to have z equals 2 plus 3t.
If I solve for t,
I'm going to get the fact that x minus 3 over 2
is going to equal y plus 1
is going to equal z minus 2 over 3.
That is the symmetric equations
of the line through this point
parallel to that vector.
Thank you.
