Now, does this connect matrices in our head with planes and lines?
Why did we look at matrix equations before?
Why did we look at the determinant before?
Why did we look at inverse matrices before?
Now, let's look at this. This is a linear set.
A set of linear equations.
4x plus 0y plus z equals 0.
2x plus y equals 5, and x plus y plus 2z equals 7.
And I could write a matrix of this.
I could write 4, 0, 1.
And I could write 2, 1, 0, and 1, 1, 2.
That could have been my matrix A.
My matrix x of unknowns could have been x, y, and z.
And my answer on this side matrix B was 10, 5, and 7.
And I said A times x equals B.
And if I could get the inverse of A,
so I multiplied this by A inverse and this by A inverse,
all on the left-hand side because, remember, A inverse B is not equal to B inverse A.
Okay?
So if I could get the inverse of A and I have B, I could get answers for this x.
I could do that.
Or I could write an augmented matrix.
My augmented matrix would have been 4, 0, 1, 10, and 2, 1, 0, 5, and 1, 1, 2, 7.
My augmented matrix, and I could do Gauss elimination or Gauss-Jordan elimination,
and I could have read those answers easily.
So there would be two ways to solve this.
But why do I get a solution in x, y, and z?
Why do I get a specific solution for each?
Well, look at that.
Each of those is an equation of a plane.
And if I have two planes, if I have one plane and I have another plane there,
they're going to intersect somewhere, and where they intersect there's a line.
And that's why we said if we have three unknowns and two equations,
we're going to get either no solution or infinitely many solutions.
Why do we get infinitely many solutions?
Because where these two planes interact, where they, there's a plane,
there's another plane, where they intersect makes a long line.
So y will have infinitely many solutions.
Why would I have no solutions?
Remember we said if one row was just a multiple of another row,
we would not get, we would not get a solution.
Why is that?
Because I would have had two planes parallel to each other.
They would have been parallel to each other.
Because remember, say for instance I had one plane which was 8x plus 2z,
2z equals 20.
That is exactly, that describes exactly the same plane.
Okay?
I just multiplied throughout by, and this was my normal vector.
This one, this one, this one.
My normal would have been, my normal would have been 4, 0, 4, 0, 1.
Or I could have multiplied this by 2, this by 2.
So those vectors were parallel to each other.
And if I have two vectors, and they are parallel to each other,
they are parallel to each other, that means, it's not well drawn,
but anyway they're parallel to each other, they're never going to touch.
In other words, there's either infinitely many solutions or no solutions whatsoever.
And the infinitely many is, if I just had, if I had three unknowns,
and only two equations, that's why I get infinitely many.
It could also be 0 in as much as if those two were parallel to each other.
So there's a clear connection between the linear algebra, the matrix equations that we've done,
and looking at planes and lines now.
Now I add a third.
I add now a third plane.
I add now a third plane, and they're all going to intersect.
I can't draw that properly.
Say, for instance, was line flat.
Now they are going to intersect at one single point,
and then one single point is the solution to my linear set.
Because each three of those was the equation of a plane.
So it all fits together very beautifully.
Good, let me try and explain this by slightly better drawing.
So I have two planes there.
So I have my two planes, and they actually intersect.
And there's their line of intersection down the middle of it.
Every point on that line is the solution.
So I have three unknowns, and I have two equations.
If I only had two equations, I could get either an infinite number of,
or, now imagine if I looked at these from the top,
and if I turn this one so that they're both lying parallel.
So if I look down upon them, imagine they were parallel,
then there's no line of intersection, and there's no solution.
So it's either infinitely many, or there are two.
If I have two equations and three unknowns.
But now I add a third one.
So at the moment, looking from the top, they look like this.
If I added a third one there, so I've got one that runs down here,
I will also not have any solutions.
So my possibility there would be also having no solutions,
because this plane will lie down here looking at the top.
It will be like that.
Apologies, the card was full and the recording stopped.
I was about to say, if I now have a third plane lying flat in here,
I would get my point of intersection at one point.
If it was like, nothing like this,
looking at from the top of the third one,
I would then see completely flat.
There's the one, there's the other one.
The third one I'll see is completely flat from the top.
Whether it be slightly angled, doesn't matter.
But it will meet at one point.
So I'll get a specific solution to my linear set.
Or looking from the top, it could do this.
I could have my two and it can lie also intersecting along that long line.
So I could also have, I could also have infinitely many solutions.
So I can have from no solutions to infinitely many solutions
in as much as it is only there.
So the only point I want to really hear is,
it's easy to see that if I only had two equations,
that I could have only two possibilities.
Either infinitely many solutions or no solutions whatsoever
in as much as they are parallel.
If I had three equations and three unknowns,
I can have either no solutions whatsoever,
infinitely many solutions.
Or if it just intersected there,
at one point I'd have a single,
I would have a single solution.
And if we think about once again,
why I could, if I only had the two,
two why, one reason why I would get either infinitely many,
but one reason why I would get none,
is that one was just a scalar multiple of the other
as far as my normals,
the normal vector coordinates here were concerned.
Okay, it also occurs to me that there's one last solution,
which we didn't discuss before.
And if I again had my three equations and three unknowns,
so that's three planes in three space,
if each of them, you know, had three unknowns,
is if I wrote all three out and had all three exactly the same.
So I'm going to have one plane on top of it,
exactly the same plane,
and the last one exactly the same plane.
So I could have a three by three matrix A,
and it describes not, no solutions,
or one solution, or infinitely many solutions,
but it could also explain a plane.
But that's not really interesting inasmuch
as I just duplicated all three equations.
I'd look exactly the same, exactly the same,
exactly the same equation.
So my third possibility, looking from the top,
then would just be that line,
and all three are exactly the same equation.
So that doesn't make a lot of mathematical sense,
in which you can't do much with it.
But if I had three equations in three unknowns,
I could have the possibility of no solution,
infinitely many solutions,
and there were two ways to get the infinitely many solutions,
and I told you that was,
I had two equations in three unknowns,
or I had them all intersect in the very same line.
So that would also be infinitely many solutions,
or it could also be a plane.
A single solution, then, if they all meet another point,
but it can also then be a plane if they were all three
exactly the same equations of that plane.
Okay, it occurs to me that there's one more solution
that we did not discuss.
One second, let's just use my first example.
That was a 4,
4x plus z equals 10,
and I had 2x plus y,
and that equals 5,
and I had x plus y plus 2z equals 7.
Okay, that was my three equations,
and in actual fact, you can do that.
You can do that,
or you can write the augmented matrix
and do Gauss-Jordan elimination on that
to reduce the row ishlan form,
or to row ishlan form
and back substitute,
and you'll get exactly one answer.
I think it's 2, 1, 2,
as far as x, y, z is concerned.
So we had our possibilities,
but there is a third one,
and that is whether all three of them are the same.
What if I had 4x,
4x plus z equals 10,
and I wrote 4x plus z equals 10,
and I wrote 4x plus z equals 10.
In terms of my three equations,
in three I know that all three be exactly the same plane,
lying on top of each other,
and my solution would be a plane.
That would be my solution,
the whole plane.
But that's not very interesting as much as what can I do with it.
But I could also multiply this line out by 2,
so I get 8,
and I get 2,
and I get 20,
or I can multiply it by 3,
so I'm going to get 12,
I'm going to get 3,
and I'm going to get 30.
Remember I said any plane has infinitely many equations to write.
Okay.
All I different now was the length of the norm.
The length of the norm just got longer and longer.
It was the size,
one size,
then I multiplied it twice,
and then I multiplied it three times.
It was three times as long as the first one.
But it was still the same vector as far as the direction is concerned.
So the plane that it described is still perpendicular,
was still perpendicular to that.
So all three of that is exactly the same plane.
And if I read the matrix,
each equation would just be a multiple of the other.
So we already said when two are parallel,
so how do they become parallel?
That is when these ones,
when two planes then fall on top of each other,
I'm not describing the same plane.
If I made this something different,
I made this four,
then these two are exactly the same plane.
That one would just be parallel to these two.
And then once again,
I would get no solution to my linear set.
