Okay, we've just seen how an equivalence relation divides our set into these partitions.
And these partitions we can also call these equivalence sets, or equivalence classes.
I just want to show you this notation that you might come across, that all these equivalent classes,
if we add all of them together, if we get the union, of course we get A,
and the intersection of any pair of them is going to be the empty set.
But you'll see these square brackets around it, and that just states that it contains,
so this subset, which is an equivalent set, contains all the elements Y such that Y is an element of the larger set A,
and we have this relation Y with a relation with A. So you're going to see that.
And you might be asked to prove a few things.
The first one that you might want, might have to prove that A, the element A is an element of this equivalence set,
or equivalence class A. Now that's trivial, because you just say by the definition,
A is all the elements Y such as Y is element A, and Y has this relation with A.
So A is inside of that. A is going to be one of the elements in this set.
So that's just by the definition. Much more difficult is going to be this proof.
That B, it's not really difficult, and that if B is an element of this set A,
this subset or equivalent set, then actually B equals A, or A equals B.
So remember this A is going to have all of these pairs, these relations, and A is going to be in there.
But I'm saying if B is an element in there, and I make this equivalence set with B in it,
then actually it is nothing new, it is actually just A.
So what are we going to use to prove that?
Remember we are dealing here with equivalence relations.
So let me just write that in green, because that is what we are going to pull out of our little box.
Equivalence relation.
Equivalence relation, remember they have this property that they are reflexive,
that they are symmetric, and that they are transitive.
So we are going to use at least these two properties, that is what we've decided what they are,
so we can use them when we do our proof.
So what were we given?
We are given that B is an element of A.
And that implies, you have to write that when you write out your proof,
that implies that we can write this relation B, R, A.
Okay?
That is a relation that exists.
Now let's take, let's take something like x, let x be an element of this set B.
If it is an element of that set, equivalent set B, then I can, that implies that I can write x, R, B.
And if I can do that, look at this.
I have at the, at the moment this relation, and I have the relation B, R, A.
But, this is an equivalence relation, we are told that it's equivalence relation.
So by the, by the transitive property, therefore, x, I can write x, R, A.
But remember, x was an element of B, so what does this imply?
Well, it implies at the moment that B is a subset of A.
That B is a subset of A.
So I've got this, so I've got to go the other way.
This time around, I've got to go the other way.
Again, I've got to write, given that B is an element of A, that implies that I write all of that,
B, so that I can write this relation.
But by the, the symmetric property that implies that A are B.
Now let's get a new element in A.
I'm going to say, let y be an element of A.
And what does that imply?
That implies that there is this relation, Y, R, A.
So I've got this relation, Y, R, A.
And I've got this relation, Y, R, A, but I've also got the relation, A, R, B.
So I've got this relation, Y, R, A, and I've got this relation, A, R, B.
And then by the transitive property, by the transitive property, that implies that we have Y, R, B.
But remember, Y was an element of A.
So I've just proven here now that this A is a subset of B.
And by that other little piece of knowledge that I can pull out of my box,
if B is a subset of A, then A is a subset of B.
Therefore, A equals B.
So we've just shown that if B is an element of this equivalent set,
then I have created nothing new.
I'm still set with this equivalent set B.
They are exactly the same thing.
There might be something else that you have to prove, which is quite a long proof,
which I'm not going to do here.
You might look at the proof in your book.
You might find it and you think, how on earth did someone come up with this?
It took a long time.
So for you just to do it in a snap is not that easy.
That if we have that this intersection of these two is not equal to the empty set,
if that is not equal to the empty set, then at least, let me just see this long proof here.
Then, well, let me just finish here.
Then at least A equals B.
And that's quite a long proof that you'll find in many textbooks.
I don't think it's fair to ask for that as a proof in the exam.
Have a look through that.
But you can think about the logic, of course, behind this.
Because remember, we said that if they have got to be the empty set to start off with,
if you take the intersection of any of the two partitions or equivalent sets inside of a larger set,
then the intersection should be empty.
Otherwise, it's not a partition.
So you can start thinking how to put all of this together.
But it's actually quite a long proof.
You can start thinking that when we can interact with you,
you can start thinking that from Europe.
What about the cost, of which you have to put in the store for space in
the backpack here, where it's shower mockery.
That's what we can do here.
All right, cool.
All right, cool.
We will see you in there.
