Now we want to look at velocity and acceleration in three-dimensional space. We want to do
that derivation for those two equations and the best way to do that though is to change
your intermediate frame to cylindrical coordinates. So let's have this. We have here our world
coordinate system. Our world coordinate system. So we're going to make this the k-hat direction.
This the i-hat direction which means somewhere in that direction there we'll have our j-hat.
So I'm swinging from i to j, k that's the world. Here's my point A which is here in my cylindrical
coordinate system. Let's view it something like this and any point there, any point there
and that's my point B. So I can express B as far as this A frame is concerned. So once
again I'm going to remind you of the fact that R of B with respect to O that's going to be
R of A in O plus R of B in A. That's what we're going to have. That was the normal thing. The
only thing we're going to change now we're going to express this vector AB in cylindrical coordinates.
And how would we do that? Now remember cylindrical coordinates. I'm going to have this R of B in A.
I'm just going to write it down for you. We'll run that. That's going to be some R in R-hat plus we're
going to have a Z in the k-hat direction and we're going to have some angle theta. Now that's a bit
special there. Now just remind yourself of polar coordinates. Let's just do that. Let's just or not
polar coordinates cylindrical coordinates. Let's just have the cylindrical coordinates. Remember
with cylindrical coordinates. If I have this in my vector there. Remember this is going to be
whatever direction this is going to be that is my R-hat direction. So it's just going to have this
length in that direction. Now so it's going to have some height in this k-hat direction in this k-hat
direction. And if I look at it from the top if I look at it from the top it's going to be at some
angle there. But remember an angle does not fulfill just a static angle does not fulfill the criteria
for a vector. Because remember they don't commute. Remember first year physics you learned if you first
turn something in this direction and then this would end up being different from doing it this
and then this direction. You end up with two different things. It's like putting on your
underpants in your pants. Whatever you put on first it's going to make a difference. So this is not part
although to express the vector completely we've got to have this R and k-hat and whatever angle it's
standing at. So it's going to have this direction. It's going to have a certain height and it's going
to point somewhere. If I look from the middle from somewhere there. But where it points there is not
of concern. That is not a vector. So this is what we end up with. So the first thing that we want
really we want R dot of B in the O and that is going to be R dot. Nothing has changed. R A in O.
I can just express it as such because this A is in the world frame. So if I take its first derivative
I can just take the first derivative. But now I have to take the first derivative of these two. Most
definitely R-hat changes. R-hat changes because it goes with the vector. If this point B is moving
this point B is moving in three-dimensional space. So in the I-hat direction and the J-hat direction
and in the K-hat direction. So this is not constant. K-hat definitely is constant because K-hat here
small K-hat equals uppercase. Uppercase and lower K-hat they point in the same direction
both unit vectors. So that doesn't change. So this doesn't change as we change as the position
of B changes in the world frame. So I'm only going to take the product rule of these two.
I can do the product rule of these two but the DDT of K-hat obviously is just going to
be zero. Let me write it out. So what are we going to be left with here? Plus we're going
to have R dot R-hat plus R and then the DDT of R-hat plus I'm going to have Z dot K-hat and
as I say plus let's just put it there Z ddt of K-hat. But K-hat's a constant and the first
derivative of a constant is zero so actually zero times Z nothing gets left there. Now as
with always we've got to remember what these are. You have to have them in your head. Remember
we showed this many times before that the DDT of this vector R-hat this tangent vector is
this going to be is this going to have this theta dot in the theta hat direction and DDT of
theta, oops, oops, theta hat. Remember that's going to be negative omega dot in the R-hat direction.
Because if you view it from the top remember there's some angular velocity in that direction.
Remember that we're going to have that is if that's the R-direction you have some angular
velocity theta dot theta dot or omega so it's going to be in that direction and if you take
that derivative it's going to be in the negative R-direction again. We've done those quite a few
times. So we're going to have that R dot B with respect to O it's going to be R dot A with respect
to O plus we're going to have R dot R-hat plus remember for that we're going to have this so
we're going to have R theta dot theta hat plus Z dot K-hat. And that for three-dimensional space expressing
these in cylindrical coordinates will be our equation for velocity and same is going to happen for acceleration.
This is in the O-frame so we can just take the derivative easily enough of that but now we've got to do the
product rule there and the product rule there. This is certainly not there because once again K-hat is going to
it's not going to make a difference for us. So what are we going to have here? R double dot R-hat
plus R dot again with this theta dot theta hat and now we've got to do this one. I'll just carry on down here.
So we're going to take the derivative of this plus those two, those two plus the derivative of that and
those two plus the derivative of that. So let's do that. So we're going to have plus R dot theta dot theta hat
plus R theta double dot theta hat minus, now we're going to have this minus R, there's a theta dot and another theta dot
that's theta dot that's theta dot squared in the R-hat direction for that and then here we're just going to have
plus Z double dot K-hat for that. Now we can just group the terms and we'll have acceleration of point B
in the O-world frame is going to be the acceleration of A in the O-frame plus we can put all these R-hats together.
There's an R-hat and there's an R-hat which is going to be R double dot minus R theta dot squared R-hat.
And then for the theta hats, for the theta hats here we're going to have plus, now there's one and there's one
they're exactly the same, two R dot theta dot for those two and our other one here is plus R theta double dot.
It's all in the theta hat direction plus Z double dot K-hat. I hope you can see in the corner there.
So here's our equation for velocity, for velocity in three-dimensional space using cylindrical coordinates
and for acceleration. Acceleration in three-dimensional space. Quite easy derivatives. Derivations.
Derivations.
High G
