Good. In this video we want to discuss and start discussing optimization.
And what optimization refers to is nothing other than in our old first year calculus
where we have a function f of x. It has a graph and on that graph we will find local extrema.
That will be a local maximum and then a local minimum. And if our domain was such that on the x-axis
we were going from there to there, obviously here would be a local, a global maximum.
Here would be a global minimum and these would be a local maximum, local minimum.
And we identified these points as critical points by looking at the f prime of x, the first derivative
and setting that equal to zero because the slope at these would be zero.
Obviously the slope there and there is not zero but because we've included it in some domain
these points would be, if I for instance had just some x squared value, that would then be a global minimum
irrespective of how I would choose my domain to be, or indeed if it was from negative infinity to infinity
this local minimum would also be a global minimum. The only reason why these are such is that
if we look at a graph it's very easy to see this is the lowest point that we're ever going to get.
That's the maximum point we're ever going to get. Now if we move up to higher dimensional functions,
multivariable functions, things get a little more awkward but we're still going to use the concept of the slope.
Here though we're not going to use the slope but we're going to use the gradient, as simple as that.
And we're going to set the gradient of a function in a multivariable function equal to zero.
We're going to set that equal to zero. So let's look at a function, let's use for instance that the f of x, y
that's our vector x, y equals x squared minus y squared. x squared minus y squared. Let's get the gradient of that.
The gradient of f. That vector is going to be 2x, minus 2y. We know how to do the gradient.
And we've got to set that equal to zero. But remember that's not zero, that is the zero vector.
That is the zero vector. So we have to put the zero there. If this is a x, y,
if x equals x, y, that is going to equal 0, 0, a vector. So let's do that.
Oh, this is going to equal 0, 0. In other words, 2x equals 0 and minus 2y equals 0.
That's only going to happen when x equals 0 and at y equals 0.
So at the point 0, 0, the gradient would be 0.
So this point 0, 0 is a local extremum, local extremum or critical point, just as it was for the single variable function.
Now we just need to know if in a certain domain, whether that will be a local, a global then, or a continued local extremum,
or whether it would be a maximum or a minimum. Now if we talk about a two-dimensional function, in other words, z equals,
there's a three-dimensional, we might not only get either it being a maximum or minimum, then there's a third option.
And that third option is called a saddle point. And the saddle point is just the same as in single variable calculus,
where for instance, we had a function that had this inflection point. It had an inflection point that would have been some form of local extremum,
but in leading into that point and leading out of that point, we have a different positive negative values of the second derivative,
we remember to do those. So that was an inflection point, here we do get it, and it's called a saddle point,
if we're talking about three dimensions, a saddle point. So what we might have then there, and it's beautifully drawn in some textbooks,
because I can't really draw it, is that you're going to get, you're going to get this sort of thing.
That depending on, it looks like the saddle that you would put on a horse. So from, if the horse's head is there, the tail is there,
and this way, in this direction, the saddle is like a parabola. But on this side to this side, as I sit down,
it obviously goes down. So at that center point, depending on what direction you go, it might be a maximum,
or it might be, in this direction, it's going to be a minimum, and in this direction, it's going to be a maximum,
and that's a saddle point. So how do we determine, how do we determine what a point is?
It's easy for us to get this point, we get the gradient, and we set the gradient equal to the zero vector,
and we get a vector, and we can get a point. And there's an equation, this is we use the second derivatives,
we are now going to use the higher order partial derivatives. We're going to use the higher order partial derivatives
to decide what it is. And for that, we're going to use this term delta. And delta equals the square of the first partial derivative
of our function, of our function, times the square of the second derivative of our function,
minus the first derivative of the second derivative of our function, squared. I hope that comes out in the corner there, squared.
So delta equals the first derivative squared of the function, times the second derivative squared,
second partial derivative squared of our function, minus the first partial derivative of the second partial derivative
of the function, squared. And that's going to give you delta. And depending on what delta is,
if delta is positive, we know it's a local extremum. If delta is negative, less than zero, it is a saddle point.
Unfortunately, delta equals zero is inconclusive, and we need to figure out it in some other way.
We need to look at directional derivatives in various directions to see.
Furthermore, if it is positive, so that there's a local extremum, we need to decide whether it's a minimum or a maximum.
And we do that by just looking at the sign of this first squared partial derivative of the f of x.
If that is positive, at our point, it's a local minimum. If it's negative, it's a local maximum.
And we can certainly look at an example how to do this. Be aware though, this in many instances, for instance,
if that would be cubed, we're going to get more than one, we're going to get more than one critical point,
more than one local extremum. Or we're going to get more than one critical point, let's call it that.
And one of them might be a saddle point, and the other one might be a local extremum.
So, and we might even get an inconclusive. So here we might get more than one point, and each one individually
has to be looked at as to where it fits in here. Let's in the next video do an example.
As promised, let's try this example. We have this two variable function, the f of x and y,
shown here as x the vector x. x cubed plus y squared minus 6xy plus 6x minus 3y plus 1.
I'll try and stick to my color convention. The problem's in blue, solutions in orange.
So, first of all, we said we need the gradient of f of x and y.
And that is going to equal a vector. The gradient is a vector.
So the first partial derivative, that means with respect to x, is going to be 3x squared minus 6y plus 6,
comma, now this function with a partial derivative with respect to y, is going to be 2y minus 6x minus 3.
We know how to do this now. Here we see y as a constant. Here we see x as a constant.
And we need to set this equal to the zero vector. In other words, 0 comma 0.
In other words, we're going to have 3x squared minus 6y plus 6 equals 0.
And we also have to have this function, 2y minus 6x minus 3 equals 0.
We've got two functions and two unknowns. And that should be quite easy for us to solve.
Let's solve this one first. So we're going to have 2y equals 6x plus 3.
y is going to equal 3x plus 1 and a half. We can substitute that in there.
So we're going to be left with 3x squared minus 6. And instead of y, we're going to have 3x plus 3 over 2.
Plus 3 over 2 plus 6 and then equals 0. In other words, we're going to have 3x squared minus 18x.
And 6 times 3 is 18. 18 divided by 2 is 9. Let's see. That is negative 9 plus 6 equals 0.
And let's see. Did I make an arithmetical error some way? Let's carry on.
So that is 3x squared minus 18x minus 3 equals 0. I must have made some, I must have made one some way.
Let's have a look. 3x squared minus 6y plus 6. And on this side we have 2y minus 6x minus 3.
Let's see if that is what the problem was. Plus 6x plus 3y. Plus 6x plus 3y.
I had done this problem before and I thought there was a problem. That should be a plus there.
It should be a plus there. Which makes this one a plus. Which makes this one a plus.
Which makes this one a negative. And this one a negative. And this one a negative. And this one a negative.
And this one a positive. Which leaves us with 15. Apologies for that.
Now let's solve this. We can divide 3 out by 3. We're going to be left with x squared minus 6x plus 5 equals 0.
And that leaves us simple negative 5 and negative 1. In other words x equals 5 or x equals 1.
In this instance when it's 5 we can substitute that back in there. In other words y equals 15 minus 3 over 2.
Or y equals 3 minus 3 over 2. That leaves us with 27 over 2. If I'm correct. And that leaves us with 3 over 2.
In other words we're left with 2 points. That is going to be 0.5 comma 27 over 2. And 0.1 comma 3 over 2.
That's the 2 points we're left with. And we need to check each of them individually to see what they are.
They are both critical points. They are both critical points. Let's try and have a look.
Let us now move on to decide. To decide indeed what they are. So let's get this value for delta.
First of all let's get the d1 of the d1 of the d1 of the function f of x. And that x is a vector.
That leaves us with the d1 of. Let's get that 3x minus 6y plus 6. So now I've taken the first partial derivative with respect to x.
Now I've got to take it again. And that just leaves me with 3. Is it correct? 3x squared. Sorry. Apologies. 3x squared minus 6y plus 6.
Now I need to get the partial derivative of that with respect to x again. That is going to leave me with a 6x.
That's going to leave me with a 6x. Let's get the second partial derivative of the second partial derivative of the f of x.
x being a vector. That leaves us with the second partial derivative of 2y. 2y minus 6x plus 3.
And if I take the second derivative of that with respect to y. The second partial derivative of that. That just leaves us with a 2.
So if we're looking at d1 squared plus d2 squared. That's going to be 6x plus the 6x times the 2. So that's going to leave us with a 12x.
f of x. Let's just get the d1 of the d2. Let's just get the d1 of the d2 of the f of x. That leaves us with a d1 of getting the d2 of that.
Same again. It's going to be 2y minus 6x plus 3. Getting d1 of that. Getting d1 of that leaves us with a negative 6. Is that correct?
Let's see. 2y, 2y, 2y minus 6x plus 3. I'm getting that with respect to x which leaves me with a negative 6. And that has got to be squared which leaves me with a 36.
So if I do this, it's going to be 12x. So delta is going to equal 12x minus 36. Minus 36. Check if that is correct.
Now we've got to do both points. Let's do the first point. Let's call this vector a and let's call this vector b. Not to be confused with a and b. That would be a comma b. There's vector a and vector b.
So let's get delta for vector a. For vector a. That is going to be 12 times. What is x? It's 5. Minus 36. That leaves us with 60 minus 36. 24. That is greater than 0.
So this point. So this point. This represented here as a vector. 5.27 over 2. Is a local extremum. So let's already say that this is a local extremum. A local extremum. This critical point is a local extremum.
extremum. If we just look at D1 squared. If we just look at D1 squared. If we just look at D1 squared. Which is 6x. Evaluated at that point. 5. 6 times 5 is 30. That's also greater than 0. So it turns out that this point is a local minimum. Local minimum. Did you see what I did there? Minimum. See what I did there? So I'm only looking at this part. I'm only looking at this part for this specific point.
The D1 squared. The D1 squared of the f of x. Was equal to 6x. I substitute my point in there. It's only the x I'm interested in. Which is a 5. 6 times 5 is 30. Which is positive. Larger than 0. So that is a local minimum.
1. Let's look at the other point. 1. Let's look at the delta of B. That is going to equal. 12 times 1 is 12. Minus 36. That equals negative 24.
And that is certainly less than 0. Which is there. So that is a subtle point. So this is a subtle point.
1. Okay. Now if you could graph all of this.
You certainly I think see that these are not global extremum. So it's not a global minimum.
And a subtle point is a subtle point.
1. It might be depending on what our exact domain is here. It might be on the periphery.
2. What I mean by that is exactly what we had.
2. Exactly what we had with this function.
3. That was a local maximum. That was a local minimum.
3. But if this was my.
3. The end of my domain.
3. This point is higher.
4. Than this point.
4. In other words that was going to be the global maximum.
5. Although it's not a critical point.
5. It is a critical point actually.
5. But certainly the slope there at that point is not 0.
5. And the same is going to happen here.
5. That in a 3 dimensional space.
6. In a 3 dimensional space.
6. We have this 3 dimensional curve.
7. You're going to have a point.
7. You're going to have a point somewhere.
7. Which is somehow going to be.
7. If you can imagine that it flips in.
7. This is this wavy curve that flips in.
8. There's going to be a local minimum.
8. But it might be that in a certain radius around this.
9. I have this ball.
8. Three dimensional balls.
9. So I'm looking in that direction.
9. Or certainly.
9. That might then not be the.
10. The global minimum.
10. It might be at the periphery of my domain itself.
10. Which might then have the true global.
11. Minimum or global maximum.
11. Just as we had.
11. Analoges exactly to what we had here.
11. So important to remember.
It's not that one is positive.
11. One is negative.
11. It's just each individual point.
11. This has to be done to each individual point.
11. First of all to see where we are there.
12. If the delta is larger than zero.
12. As it was here.
12. You have to do this sub.
13. Examination to see whether it is a local minimum.
13. Or a local maximum.
14.
14.
15.
15.
15.
15.
16.
16.
17.
16.
16.
17.
16.
17.
17.
17.
20.
23.
17.
20.
20.
20.
20.
21.
20.
22.
22.
21.
22.
21.
22.
24.
220.
22.
22.
22.
22.
21.
21.
22.
22.
