Now that we know a bit more about optimization, we've got to look at the concept of constrained
optimization.
It really makes life very easy if you have to work with real life problems solving solutions
where you might have to minimize or maximize a certain situation as in utilizing the minimum
amount of money to produce the maximum amount of product.
Before we get there though, let's look at constraint optimization.
If we would just consider single variable calculus and we had some equation, so for instance the
f of x equals x squared and we had a line through here say for instance at y equals 2.
We would have a local maximum of our function f of x equals x squared right here.
We could also have one for instance right there and we could read off what that x value was.
This was simple to do because we might only have looked at, say for instance this was y
equals 2.
We only needed to look at where these two curves intersected, where these two lines intersected.
It gets a bit more difficult in a multivariable calculus as much as we don't have a curve but
we begin to have a three-dimensional surface and we might want to constrain it somehow by
another equation.
Let's call the first equation the f of x and that is vector x and the second one the g of
x and that would also be a vector.
For example the f of x comma y and the g of x comma y.
Now imagine as you would some three-dimensional surface and I'm going to constrain that surface
somehow by another function and say for instance this is this sort of function somewhere we're
going to have somewhere we're going to have some I can't draw that but somewhere we're
going to have some intersection between these two.
And in this area of intersection now we can have a minimum and a maximum.
Some critical value, some critical point which might be local or global minimum or global maximum
or indeed a saddle point.
So we are constraining the domain just to this area of intersection of these two.
Now I don't really want to call it intersection.
it is really that the domain of g that the domain of g is included in this domain of f is included
in this so it's not a less than sign it is a curved u there so it's included in this domain
of f. Most textbooks will make it very difficult to understand exactly what's going on here and
you might have realized that from trying to draw this it can be quite complex but fortunately
for us there is the method of Lagrange. The method of Lagrange which makes it very simple for us.
And it indeed has two equations, two equations that you need to solve and that will get you this
critical point, critical points in this domain of f of x constrained by the g of x.
And it states the following. It states the following. The gradient of f at vector x equals some constant
we will call it lambda times the gradient of the g of x. Furthermore that the g of x equals some constant c.
Now let's take it from the bottom up. We've seen this before. And that is for instance where we just have
where we just have this function at a certain point c. And for instance that means if we have a three dimensional coordinate system
with a f of x and y it just means we're going to if we have say for instance we have this three dimensional curve in this plane
and we took some value z equals two, z equals two. So there will be two up on the z. And we drew a plane in that
it intersected with our curve at a certain value. But that was the plane that was just moved up.
Moved up or down. But that certainly is what we're dealing with here. It will become a bit clearer as we do an example of two.
This is certainly the important part. And this is called the Lagrange multiplier. That the gradient of f of vector x equals some
Lagrange multiplier of the gradient of g of x. In the next video we'll certainly bring these two together in an example that will make
these very bad sketches of mine become a lot clearer. Now without putting some practical value to these, let's have these two equations.
The f of x and y equals x squared y and the g of x and y being 100x plus 40y. Now these x and y's are the same for these two functions.
So now in the same coordinate system. Now subject to the constraint of g of x of y equaling 75,000. Remember that was the same as saying
it was that part. The g of x equals some constant c. Equals some constant c. We need to maxify the maximum value. In other words a local extremum, a local
maximum of f. Of f. Now let's remember that was the one equation we had. We should have drawn that in v. But the other one was
certainly that the gradient of the f of vector x equals the Lagrange multiplier times the g of this vector x. So let's do that. Let's get the gradient of f.
x and y. That is going to be 2xy, x squared. Let's get the gradient of the g of x. And that is going to equal, there we have
100, 40. 100, 40. 100, 40. But we said that this equals some constant multiple of that. Some constant multiple of that. Let's
fix this side. Let's fix this side. That should be lambda. That should be lambda times the gradient of the g of x. That looks good.
In other words, this equals lambda times that. 2x and y equals lambda times 100. 100 lambda. And we also have that x squared equals lambda times 40.
Now we only have these two equations and we need to solve them. Well, I think we can easily get rid of lambda by just dividing both sides of the equation by each other. So I'll have the 2xy and I'll divide that by x squared, meaning I'll have to have the lambda and the 100 divided by the lambda and 40.
So those will cancel. So those will cancel. And I have 80xy equals 100x squared. Equals 100x squared.
Let's have a look. Is that true? No, certainly. We can get rid of this x and one of those x's. So we'll have 80y equals 100x. Or the fact that y equals 100 over 80 or 5 over 4x.
Now we have this constraint. Now we have this constraint. We have this constraint which says that 100x plus 40y equals 75,000. The g of x of y. The g of x of y equals some constant.
We can now substitute. We can now substitute. We can now substitute this value for y. 100x plus 40 times 5 over 4x equals 75,000. In other words, 100x plus 50x equals 75,000.
Or 150x equals 75,000. And that leaves us with an x value of 500. Which makes y equal to 625. So at this point, vector p, 500, 625.
This function will have a maximum. Now there's no easy way of using this Lagrange method to know whether it's a minimum or a maximum. So indeed you'll just have to fit some other values in there to see if you, with this constraint, that you do, if you do get, if you do get higher or lower values.
Well obviously not with that constraint. And other values. And other values here. So if you take these two functions and you plug them on your computer on a, on a drafting tool that can do three dimensions, you'll notice that these two drafts intersect.
And it's actually at this point of maximum intersection, a local maximum, of these two that you will find exactly this value.
So play around a bit with a drafting tool that can do three dimensions on your computer and see how these two interact with each other.
And then realizing how this would constrain that and how you would get to a local maximum.
So as soon as you plot in, if you, if you, if you, uh, uh, place 50625 in there, that is going to be the maximum value that f, remember that's going to be z equals, can reach, given this
given this g of x constraint at a value of g of xy equals 75,000.
Now let's do this problem. Find the maximum value of x squared plus xy plus y squared plus yz plus z squared.
On the sphere, x squared plus y squared equals 1. Let's remind ourselves, we're going to have the g of this vector equals some constant.
And the gradient of f, x equals the Lagrange multiplier of the gradient of g of the vector x.
So which is which? I think it's easy enough here to see that this is going to be our f of x.
So our f of x versus vector x is going to be x squared plus xy plus y squared plus yz plus z squared.
And we're going to have our g of x. Our g of x equals some constant and the constant was put for us there.
In other words, our g of vector x is going to equal x squared plus y squared plus z squared.
And that has got to equal 1.
Now this will accompany your graphing calculator because we're talking four dimensions here.
But let's do it. Let's get the gradient of the f of vector x.
And that is going to equal, first with respect to x, that's 2x plus y. That's it.
Then we're going to have with respect to y, we're going to have x plus 2y plus z.
Then with respect to z, we're going to have y plus 2z.
And if we look at the Lagrange, if we look at the gradient of the g of vector x,
we're going to have that as 2x comma 2y comma 2z.
In other words, we're going to have these functions.
2x plus y is going to equal 2 times lambda times x.
We're going to have x plus 2y plus z equaling 2 times lambda times y.
So being that lambda, I'm just multiplying as a constant, multiplied by a vector.
So it gets multiplied by each.
And I'm going to have y plus 2x and y plus 2z.
Should that be? Let's see.
Where are we? So it's y plus 2z.
y plus 2z equals 2 lambda z.
Now we've got to solve these.
So what shall we do? Let's divide this one into that one.
So that's 2x plus y.
Left hand side, I'm dividing into this left hand side.
y plus 2z equals, that's 2 lambda x and 2 lambda z.
That will go, that will go, that will go, that will go.
So it's going to be 4x plus 2y.
Oop, I can't do that.
That's a z, not a 2. That's a z.
Apologies for that.
So that is 2xz plus yz equals xy.
So those two, multiplied by these two, plus 2xz.
We'll see that those two xz's can go, the y can go, the y can go.
In other words, x equals z.
So we have that.
And on the other hand, we're going to have, let's divide,
let's divide the second one in there.
So we're going to have 2x plus y divided by x plus 2y plus z.
And that's going to equal 2 lambda x divided by 2 lambda y.
Those will go.
I'm going to multiply out that.
That's 2xy plus y squared equals x squared plus 2xy plus xz.
So 2xy and 2xy will go.
And I have the fact that y squared equals x squared plus x.
But z equals x.
So that's another x squared.
So that equals 2x squared.
2x squared.
So I know that x equals z.
And I know that y equals 2x squared.
Or for that matter, 2z squared.
2z squared.
So I know that.
Let me just move up.
I hope we can get everything in.
Now I have that.
Let's see if I can now use my constraint to get to values of x, y and z.
So certainly from this, I have that x squared plus what is y squared?
Well y is 2x squared.
Y squared equals 2x squared.
And z squared will be another x squared.
Because x equals z.
That's going to equal 1.
In other words, 1, 2, 3, 4.
So 4x squared equals 1.
In other words, x squared equals a quarter.
In other words, x equals the square root of that which is plus or minus a half.
That means z has also got to equal plus or minus a half.
And that leaves us with y.
y equals 2 times x squared.
And we already now said that x squared is a quarter.
So 2 times, where are we, where are we?
So 2 times x squared is a quarter.
So that's going to be y equals, where are we now?
y is going to equal the square root of 2x squared.
And x squared is a quarter, times a quarter.
So that is going to be a half, the square root of a half.
So there's 1 over square root of 2, which can also be a plus or minus.
Now, you can just substitute all these values in there.
You'll see there's a squared.
That one times that one, that's a squared.
That one times that one, that's a squared.
So it's easy to see that they've all got to be either the negative values
or all the positive values.
So let's move up a bit.
So the values that we are going to get is positive a half, comma, 1 over square root of 2, comma, a half.
Or negative a half, negative 1 over square root of 2.
So that'll be the negative square root of 2.
I should probably put the negative out there and make that positive.
And negative a half.
So if you plug those negatives, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative, negative in there,
you're going to get a maximum value for your function f of the vector x there.
Alright, so just go through the steps quickly.
We're going to get the gradient of both.
We're going to multiply this Lagrange multiplier into,
so the lambda is going to be there because of the lambda into each,
which will give us the 2 lambda x, 2 lambda y and 2 lambda z.
On the other hand, because remember, if I say that this is a vector and that's a vector,
if two vectors are equal to each other, they're components.
X component, X component, Y component, Y component, Z component, Z component
is going to be equal to each other.
Now I've just got to get rid of some of my unknowns here.
And the easiest way to do that is just to divide one of them into the other.
So it's left-hand side becomes numerator, left-hand side denominator,
which means right-hand side numerator, right-hand side denominator.
And if I do this twice, I can usually figure out how x, y and z,
how x, y and z are related to each other, how they're related to each other.
I can then back-substitute it into my constraint here because I am constrained there.
I am constrained there.
For me to get...
Can you see up there?
I am constrained by this one.
I'm constrained there.
In other words, I can now substitute these, these, and this back in there to get the 2.
And I just have to look at, as I said, the Lagrange method does not immediately tell you what's going on.
You have to look at your equation and see which value, specifically if you get...
If you get square roots, it's the positive or the negative.
But you'll see if you enter both of these, that is going to give you the maximum value
that you could possibly have given this spherical constraint.
Now we get into the exciting world of...
Well, at least part of mathematical modeling.
You need to manufacture this closed cylindrical tank.
And it must have a volume of a thousand cubic meters.
It's got to be made of two types of metal.
The top and bottom parts of them is made of metal that cost $2 per square meter.
And the size $2.50 per square meter.
Per square meter calculate the minimum cost.
And then how much material or what the cost of these materials is going to be.
How can you minimize the cost to still get to this?
A real world problem.
A bit simplistic.
But nonetheless, it's a beautiful illustration of how constrained optimization can be used.
And it's basically two multidimensional shapes intersecting.
Right.
So let's just do a few things.
If we express the volume in terms of radius and height.
So the volume of a cylinder is going to be pi r squared times the height.
Pi r squared times the height.
Let's look at the cost C.
If we express that in terms of radius and height.
Let's just do that.
Let's just first of all start with the top and bottom.
So let's start with the top.
The area of the top, what is that going to be?
The area of the top is going to equal, well, pi r squared.
And if we do the bottom, that is also.
Ooh, let me move down.
You couldn't even see that.
That's better.
So we're manufacturing a closed cylindrical tank with a volume of a thousand cubic meters.
Top and bottom made of metal, two dollars per square meter.
And the sides, two dollars fifty per square meter.
Calculate this minimum cost to get to this tank.
So we said we have an equation for volume expressed as a function of r and h, radius and height.
So this is a multivariable equation.
And the cost, we're busy working that out.
The top area will be pi r squared and the bottom area will also be pi r squared.
So in total we're looking at two pi r squared.
Two pi r squared.
Now look at this.
There's something to wipe this.
So this is two pi r squared meters.
Meters.
Now this, that's the cost of one.
And it is costing, the top and the bottom, two dollars, two dollars per square meter.
Per square meter.
So those are going to go, so the cost here is going to be four pi r squared dollars.
So that's for the top and bottom.
That's for the top and bottom.
So four pi r squared.
So top plus bottom equals four pi r squared dollars.
And if we look at the sides, the sides is going to be pi r squared.
Pi r squared, what is the sides?
The sides is going to be width times height.
Now, of a rectangle.
The side is a rectangle even though it's a cylinder.
The circumference is going to be the width.
If you just take a cylinder and, if you just take a cylinder and you would unfold it.
It becomes a rectangle.
It becomes a rectangle.
Where this was the circumference.
And the circumference is two pi r and the height is still h.
So that's two pi r square meter.
And I'm multiplying this by two dollars fifty per square meter.
Those two cancel.
So my cost here is going to be five pi r h dollars.
So my total cost, my total cost expressed in terms of radius and height is going to be
total cost four pi r squared plus five pi r times height.
That's my total cost.
Now my volume is constrained to one thousand cubic meters.
One thousand cubic meters.
So what are we looking at here?
We're looking at the gradient of c of r and h is going to equal the Lagrange multiplier
of the gradient of the volume of r and h.
As simple as that.
So what is the gradient of c of r and h?
Well, there is c.
We have c.
Let's first do it with r.
So that's eight pi r plus five pi h, comma,
and then with respect to just h is going to be five pi r.
So it's beautiful.
You don't have to have x and y's obviously.
Let's get the gradient lambda times the gradient of the g,
which in our instance is now the v of r and h.
And then that is going to equal first with respect to r.
So that's two pi r h.
And with respect to h is just going to be pi r squared.
So we're going to have that eight pi radius plus five pi height
is going to equal two lambda pi r h.
And we're going to have second component with second component,
five pi radius equals lambda pi r squared.
Okay.
Let's divide these eight.
Let's move up.
Eight pi r plus five pi h divided by this side.
I'm going to divide there five pi r.
And that is going to equal two lambda pi r h divided by this lambda pi r squared.
And so we are left with I think these pi's will go.
So I'm left with eight r plus five h divided by five r is going to equal
that will go, that will go, that will go, that will go, that will go, that will go.
So I'm left with two h divided by I've just got a simple r at the bottom.
So I've got eight r squared plus five r h is going to equal five r.
That will be ten.
So that is going to be ten r h.
We can get rid of that r and that r and that r.
In other words, we're going to have eight r plus five h equals ten h or eight r equals five h or r equals five over eight times the height.
And that is in essence what we are looking for because I can now substitute this into my constraint.
In other words, pi.
Now r is five over eight, five over eight h.
And I've got to square this h equals one thousand.
In other words, I'm going to have pi and twenty-five over sixty-four h cubed.
It's got to equal one thousand.
It's got to equal one thousand.
Now you can carry on and do that which means you can solve for h and then you can solve for r.
And that will give you an answer, a beautiful answer to this manufacturing problem that we had up here.
If you had to build it to a thousand cubic meters and these were your costs, how can you minimize the costs to still get two?
It will give you r, it will give you h.
You can actually then use your equation for costs to see what the total cost was going to be.
But certainly this value for r and h is still going to give you, by this volume, still going to give you a thousand.
And it works out beautifully.
