In this section we're going to start talking about vectors in in space.
First of all we have to just get some definitions clear so that when we do carry on with the discussions that we all understand what's going on.
So let's take a number n, this variable n, and it is a positive integer.
So it can only be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Okay, then an ordered n-tuple, an ordered n-tuple, that is a sequence of n real numbers.
Now remember I said it has to be a positive integer.
So say for instance it's 2, that means it is a sequence of 2 real numbers.
So any real number will do 1 and 7,420.1.
That is a 2-tuple.
And by 2 and 3 we usually talk about an ordered pair and an ordered triple and then it will be an ordered n-4-tuple.
And we all know what this is.
It comes from you pair and then triple but then quadruple means 4.
So whatever this number n is, that is your number of values, number of elements in your audits, in your set.
And then we have another definition, n-space, that n-space is the set of all ordered n-tuples.
Now let's make it easy.
Let's just start with 1.
Okay, now as I said here we've denoted rn.
So let's just start with 1.
We usually don't write the 1 there, we just write r.
In other words, n equals 1.
So I can just have 1 element.
Let's make that element 4 and a half.
Whatever.
I can just have 1.
Okay, but I can have another set of 9 and that set is the number 1 or that set is the number 4,000 or whatever.
And if I take all of these, each one of those is now a 1-tuple.
Each one of these.
Now if I put all of them together, I call it a set of all the intervals.
And if I have it as 1, that means I'm talking about the real line.
All the values on the real line, from negative infinity to positive infinity, will fit in this r1 space.
But it's just on that line.
Just on that line.
So n-space is the set of all ordered intervals.
Now let's go to two-dimensional space.
Now I don't really have the line, but I also can go up and down in life.
I live in two-dimensional space.
Now this is called two-space.
Because I can now have 4,3.
1, negative 2.
4000, 1 times 10 to the power of 14.
I now have two values.
I have two elements in my set.
So now I'm describing two-space.
In other words, two-dimensional space.
And this now, if I then take this whole board, and I go up to infinity, down to infinity, left to infinity, right to infinity, much larger than this board.
So r2, if I take all the possibilities, all the combinations that there is, all possible combinations.
Then I describe a point, every single point, in this massive two-dimensional space.
Now I add a third one.
Now I have a third one.
Now once again, this is called an ordered pair.
An ordered pair.
Now I'm going to have an ordered triple.
Let's have a 4, and a 0, and a negative 1.
Now here I have three examples of a description of n-space.
And if I take all possible ordered triples, I write 3, and I take all possible ones, I am describing all the points in possible three-dimensional space.
Okay.
So this is an ordered pair.
That's an ordered triple.
And if I take now a set of all the ordered triples, I'm going to describe three-space.
I'm going to describe three-space.
Okay.
So we've grown from a line.
Now we've gone up to three-dimensional space.
But we needn't stop there.
We needn't stop there.
I think by about 18th century, people started, mathematicians, started realizing, well, you can just carry on.
And it's very difficult in your mind because we don't live in a four-dimensional world or five-dimensional world.
So for you to geometrically try and understand what's going on in your mind is nearly impossible.
But if we just do it this way, if we just do it this way, we can do all sorts of equations on this.
And it's easy enough for us to get to an answer.
Now you might have noticed before, so we would write 0.4, 2, 1.
And we would write vector V equals 4, 2, 1.
And we did certain things to differentiate those two.
In a textbook, they will be printed in bold on the board here.
I put a little arrow on it that it's a vector.
And I put an equal sign.
Where's the point?
I have no equal sign.
I have nothing apart from the point.
It's not printed in bold.
Okay.
One, it would be a point in three-space.
There's a point in three-space.
The other one will describe a vector towards that point.
But it needn't have its initial point there.
It can have its initial point anyway.
These will all describe the same vectors.
What you have to understand is those two are equivalent.
It makes no difference which way you look at it.
You can still do mathematical operations in the same operations
and take these two as being absolutely equal.
So a point R and a vector R in whatever space is exactly the same thing.
You can treat it as exactly the same thing.
Just to show you that although we've added some new names, new terms,
we haven't described anything new.
All of this stuff is known to us because you get the standard operations on Rn.
And those are addition and multiplication by a scalar.
So vector U plus vector V, that's addition.
And K times vector U, that's multiplication by a scalar.
Just a new term.
Those are the two standard operations.
Then just to define the zero vector in Rn,
that means I have zero, first one, second one, zero, three, up to zero n.
So if that was five, I'd have one, two, three, four, five ns.
If that was one, I'd just have one zero.
That is the zero vector in Rn.
And then, again, nothing new.
Negative of a vector is also now called the additive inverse.
In other words, the additive inverse of U is negative vector U.
So vector U minus vector V equals vector U plus the negative of vector V.
Nothing new.
Let's carry on with our vectors in space.
And I just want to give some examples.
Certainly in many textbooks there are examples.
Let's just look at these four.
I do an experiment.
Now, in medicine, we have, for instance, what we call a prospective review.
And there's one form of research.
So I will have a form.
And basically, it turns out to be an Excel spreadsheet.
So I'll have patient number, the sex, the age, date of admission, time of admission, where in his body the stab wound was, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And then I'll have, and I'll then have these entities.
Each and every patient will then have all those values.
I can write all those values as a vector.
And depending on how many variables I have down there, that will be, I can write those as a vector.
So that will be hospital number, comma, sex, comma, what have you.
Okay.
Now, what we usually describe in here, we're dealing with mathematics.
So string, text, text strings is not really what we're looking at.
So a better example would be, I can then denote the blood volume loss, the volume of resuscitative crystalloids, the volume of resuscitative colloids, the number of units of packed red blood cells, the number of units of fresh frozen plasma.
Those will all be numbers that I can put down there and make vectors in our end space, depending on how many variables I have.
So that's experimental data for you.
A computer screen, that can be each little pixel in a computer screen in a high-definition display.
We have 1920 by 1080 pixels, and I can give them each an XY coordinate system, so I can have X, Y.
But then I can also, for each of that pixel, have a new saturation and a brightness value.
New saturation and brightness value.
And that can describe any one of these, almost 2 million, if you multiply those out by 2 million pixels, can have a vector like that, which at least these three change in time all the time.
I suppose I can also put a time variable there.
The state of a particle system, I have a linear movement of particles, and I can have them each in a different position, X1, X2, X3, X4, and then each of them will have a velocity.
But that will now be element number 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, velocity 1, velocity 2, velocity 3, velocity 4, and at any time t.
So that's a 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 9 tuple, describing my four particles at any time t, their position, and their velocity.
Okay, and we know from Heisenberg's uncertainty principles, I think that's impossible.
I cannot know position in momentum to arbitrarily accuracy at one time if I, the delta X, delta P, and the X direction has got to be larger than H bar.
Okay, if you don't know, if you don't know, if you don't know, not in physics, don't let that bother you at all.
I'm just writing all of this, I'm writing all of this as, as a vector.
And what about M-theory?
Some books might still call it string theory, sorry.
String theory, there are different types of string theories.
Okay, try to combine them all, make this as, M for membrane, or matter, or whatever you want to call it, M-theory.
Okay, and that is in our 11, that is in 11, there's 11 spacetime.
In other words, we have 10 spatial dimensions, so not only X, Y, and Z, but 7 other spatial dimensions.
And we have the one, still the one single time dimension, which gives us 11 dimensions.
And we can do mathematical operations, if we treat this as an 11-duple,
and we can do equations as far as M-theory is concerned.
Let's look at our properties, our vectors in R-n space.
Again, absolutely nothing new on this board.
If I have vectors u, v, and w, the vectors in R-n space, and I have two scalars, k and n,
then u plus v equals v plus u, u plus v plus w, associative rule, it equals u plus v, and then plus w,
u plus 0 equals 0 plus u, and that is this u, vector u.
u, what have I done, then, minus u, that equals u plus the additive inverse of u, that is 0.
If I have a scalar times a vector, I can multiply those two scalars first, and then multiply it with a vector.
And yeah, I have distributive laws here, k times u, k times v, then I have k times u plus m times u,
and just 1 times u equals just u, nothing new.
