Okay, let's do a matrix equation for the dot product.
So we're going to do the dot product, and we've now just recently seen another form of writing it,
but now I'm going to do a matrix equation for that.
As long as both of them are in space, so if it's in two space or three space, both vectors have to be.
So I'm going to take vector u dot product vector v, and I'm going to get a new way of writing it,
and I'm going to use the matrix equation to write that in the inner product.
Now remember, if I have a vector u, and let me just have it in two spaces to save some time, u1 and u2.
Remember that I could also write it in column and in a row matrix form.
So I had u1 and u2.
I could also write it as a column vector.
In other words, I had u1 and I had u2.
Equals that, equals that.
So I could write it like that.
So what if I had a matrix u, that's my matrix u, and I wrote them both, both of these, I wrote as column vectors.
Let's do that.
So that's going to be u1 and u2.
And I have vector v, and I'm writing it also as a column vector.
d1 and d2.
Now let me take the transpose of vector v, this new column matrix of mine, that is just going to become v1, v2.
So all the elements in the column become the elements in the row and vice versa.
Now what if I take my transpose of column vector v, and I multiply it by column vector u.
So I'm going to have v1, v2, and I'm going to have u1, u2.
So this is a 1 by 2 matrix, and this is a 2 by 1 matrix.
So what are we going to be left with?
A 1 by 1 matrix.
And let's do that.
What is that going to be?
It was going to be v1 times u1.
v1, v1, u1, plus the first row, we're doing the first row by the first column.
So it's v1 plus u1 plus v2 times u2, v2, u2.
And if I just read like that, and I don't write my brackets, that is going to equal u1, v1, plus u2, v2.
And that is nothing other than the dot product between vector u and vector v.
So I can write the vector u dot vector v equals the transpose of the common vector v times the common vector u.
That is a matrix equation for the dot product of two vectors.
