Let's do some exercises with the Euclidean in space.
Show that the norm of 1 over the norm of vector B times vector B, D equals 1.
Let's just do it for, for instance, for 3 space, but it will work for 2, 3, for any space.
Let's say that V equals V1, V2, V3.
If we get the norm of vector B, or indeed 1 over the norm of vector B,
which is going to be 1 over the square root of V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
And now we have to multiply that out by vector V itself.
So we need to get this.
We're going to multiply this by each of those.
We're going to multiply this scalar now by each of those.
So it's going to be V1 over the square root of V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
We're going to have V2 over the square root of V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
And we're going to have the 3 over the square root of V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
Now we have to get the norm of this.
In other words, it's going to be this squared plus that squared plus that squared,
and the square root of all of that,
which is going to be plus V1 squared over V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
I'm getting rid of the square root because I'm squaring that.
That'll be plus V2 squared over that plus V3 squared over the same thing.
I have the same common denominator here.
If I get all of that as a common denominator,
V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared,
and that will then be V1 squared plus V2 squared plus V3 squared.
Those two are exactly the same,
so I'm dealing with the square root of 1,
which is just 1,
which is indeed what we wanted.
Here we have a simple problem.
We have to calculate all the values of the scalar K.
If we have the vector V equals negative 2, 3, 0, 6,
and the norm of scalar K times vector V equals 5.
Now that's easy because we know how to rewrite that
in as much as we have absolute value of K times the norm of V.
Vector V equals 5,
so the absolute value of K times the square root of 4 plus 9 plus 36 is 49.
That's going to be equal to 5,
so the absolute value of K is going to equal that 7.
That's 5 over 7.
That makes K equal to plus minus 5 over 7.
That means we will keep it Señor and true.
So we can have the terms of assumptions,
because we are
