In the second video I want to look at fluids at rest and what we're going to do is just to
eventually get to equations that can give us the pressure at a certain depth or indeed pressure up
in the air. What we have here is a container with a fluid and in that fluid we've taken an imaginary
cylinder and the cylinder will have a surface area at the top and a surface area at the bottom and it
will have a certain volume. We'll also take basically take for granted that the density is uniform in this
fluid. Now if we have this imaginary block of fluid three forces will be acting upon it. First of all
there will be a normal force of gravity from the center of mass. From the top surface the water or
the fluid pressure I should say pushes down on the top of our surface area of our cylinder there
and from the bottom there's a slightly higher pressure as we go down in the fluid and that
will push upwards. This imaginary cylinder of ours is in static equilibrium so the forces the sum of
the forces in the wide direction have got to be zero and if we look at that that means F2 which is
positive add to that negative F1 and negative mg has got to be zero or if we just rewrite that with
force 2 on its own so force 2 will be force 1 plus mg. From pressure equals force divided by area
it's a simple algebra we know that force will be pressure times area and if we substitute that into
our equation here we're going to get that the pressure 2 which is this level here at Y2 where F2 acts
times the area is going to be pressure 1 times the area plus mg. Now we want to do something with
that mass we know that density equals volume that means mass equals density times volume. We also know
that volume for this imaginary cylinder of ours would be the area times the height and the height is going
to be the difference between Y1 and Y2. So if we substitute this density times volume for that mass and for volume we
substitute this part we're going to get this equation. The pressure at let's say level 2 times the area is
going to be equal to pressure at level 1 times the area plus the density of our fluid times the free
fall gravitational acceleration times the area times 1 minus Y2. We see we can take out a common factor
that will be A so we are left with the pressure at any level 2 will be equal to the pressure at any level 1
times the density times free fall acceleration times H which is the difference in height between our two layers.
We can also do this for any pressure up in the air where any point up above the Earth's surface is going to have a
pressure of P0 which is the pressure at ground level minus the density of air and we're taking that the density is
to be uniform times G times D and D in this instance is the difference between where the two pressures were taken.
So from ground level, ground level pressure there, till the pressure that we are taking.
So these last two equations are the ones that you should memorize.
So rest- Hawaii then you should do some heat primer.
All right.
That's pretty quick.
Now get a quick loose.
Hopefully go ahead and climb closer to the air and then get a sculptures center.
So we have to go ahead and hop on.
We can go ahead and forward and repeat it.
Okay,ize how you do it.
So because huh?
You can go ahead and push up the pressurebow bottom yet.
So you can stop the pressure is perfect.
I can push it right because you can leave as pain is perfect.
Nothing.
