In this section I want to look at Bernoulli's equation.
Now Bernoulli's equation is quite difficult and the concepts behind it is quite difficult.
I will end off this video though with a few tips that if you remember those you should be able to solve any problems
once you plug in the values that you are given into this equation.
First of all this equation is about kinetic energy density.
As we had with a volume flow rate we had cubic meters per second
and with a mass flow rate which we had kilograms per second
in the previous video here we have kinetic energy flow rate.
Now first of all we know that work equals a change in kinetic energy.
And furthermore from other chapters regarding kinetic energy
we know that that would then be half times mass times the velocity squared
that's the final velocity squared minus half times mass minus the initial velocity squared.
And we can just take two common factors out the half times mass.
So we have this equation.
We know that mass equals density times volume.
So if we rewrite that we'll have the density volume in our equation.
Now work done.
We're talking about work equals change in kinetic energy.
The work done comes from two sources.
The first is negative work done by the force of gravity.
And if I highlight all of these it's negative.
So that's mass times pre-fall acceleration times d which is now the fall in height
or the rise in height and that will be y2 minus y1.
And we know that mass is density times volume.
So we're going to end up with this equation.
Now the second source of forces doing work on the system.
It's a force pushing a certain mass of fluid forward.
And we know, let me highlight all of this.
We'll get to it step by step.
We know that work equals force times distance.
And from pressure equaling force divided by area.
We know that force equals pressure times area.
So if I just substitute the force value there.
That will be pressure times area times delta x.
We also know that area times delta x is volume from the previous video.
So if we substitute these back.
We'll see that work equals pressure times volume.
Now this must be seen in two parts.
Firstly work is done on the system.
That is this work in.
As a certain mass of fluid is pushed forward.
And then there's work done by the system.
And that's on the output end.
We'll get to that graphic later.
And that's on the output end.
So that will be negative.
So those are difficult concepts.
Look at them and accept them as is.
So if we add those two work equations.
We'll get that work equals negative.
The pressure at value two times our volume.
Plus pressure one times our volume.
And we can take the common denominator.
Our volume out there.
And we are left with this equation.
Now remember we were looking at work equals a change in kinetic energy.
So if we take our work there.
And we add that work.
That has got to equal our work on this side.
And there is Bernoulli's equation.
I won't derive it for you.
But you can simplify this into this form.
Which is the one that you should absolutely memorize.
There is no getting away from memorizing this equation to solve some of the problems.
As I promised initially.
Let's look at the graphic up here.
And if you remember these four facts.
It will be quite easy for you to solve problems.
Once you've memorized this equation.
Again we are dealing with an ideal fluid.
So no turbulent flow.
No rotational flow.
Etc.
We have four sections here.
Section two being wider than section one.
But they are on the same level.
Section three being wider than both of them.
And lower.
Section three and four being at the same level.
But four being wider still.
If fluid flows from the input side here.
To the output side there.
Remember the following.
Volume flow rate is constant.
So if you ask to rank these areas.
Into which area.
One, two, three or four.
Will have the highest volume flow rate.
They are all tied.
Remember that is a constant.
RV is a constant.
Secondly.
Wider means slower speed.
So as we go from one to two.
It's wider there.
Which means the velocity.
The speed there.
Will be less than there.
It is wider still there.
And wider still there.
So at least as far as width is concerned.
Our area there.
Speed will be slower.
Wider means higher pressure.
That should be higher pressure.
So the pressure here.
Is going to be a lot more than there.
Because the flow.
The speed there.
We said is higher than there.
So the wider this is.
The wider the area.
The higher the pressure.
The higher the pressure.
And lastly.
Lower.
That means the height.
Those two are at the same height.
These two at the same height.
But three and four.
Are lower than one and two.
Lower means higher pressure.
So together with this equation.
Bernoulli's equation.
Together with these four facts.
Remember.
Volume flow rate stays the same.
So A1V1 will be the same for all four.
Wider means slower speed.
We have a big hose pipe.
And the same volume flow rate goes through it.
It'll just be slower than in a thin little hose pipe.
The water will absolutely run through there.
Wider also means higher pressure.
If it's narrower.
The fluid flows through faster.
That'll be lower pressure.
So wider means higher pressure.
You can remember.
If you think back.
If some of you have seen it.
Try to remember those lines.
That curve over the wing of an airplane.
You've seen those drawings.
When those lines come closer to each other.
That is lower pressure.
At the bottom of the wing.
Below the wing actually.
Those lines are further apart.
And that is actually higher pressure.
So wider means higher pressure.
And lastly lower.
The level.
That's just the level from there.
Dropping down to there.
If this would be piping.
That is set somewhere in a house or building.
Lower means higher pressure.
And that's obviously.
And that's obviously so.
