In this third video, I'm going to look at Pascal's Principle.
If you just remember the graphic that I've drawn here, you'll remember everything about Pascal's Principle.
It just states that the pressure caused by a force of an area of an uncompressible fluid, as we have a liquid here,
is transmitted throughout every part of that fluid.
And we're just taking for granted that the density in this fluid is the same everywhere.
So on this right-hand side, and this is basically a hydraulic system or hydraulic lift for engineers,
so on the right-hand side, we're going to apply a force over a certain area.
Now that force is going to be transmitted throughout this fluid, and it's going to cause an output on the other side.
Now, if we just look, we remembered that pressure equals force divided by area.
So if we take the force that we apply at the input, and we divide it by that area onto which that force is applied,
that has got to be equal to the force that is given out, divided by the area out.
So if you just think of algebra in your head, if you have a very large surface area right-hand side here,
proportionately, the force output has got to be so much greater.
So applying a small force, for instance, a small weight, so many newtons on this side,
you're going to get out on the other side a lot more newtons, so you could lift up a much heavier object.
There's a second consequence of this, in that the volume, if you press in on this side,
a certain volume of fluid is going to be displaced.
And that has got to equal the volume on the other side.
And remember, a volume for this fluid that we are going to compress in on this side
will be area times the diameter, area times the distance that it is put in, that it is pressed in.
And that would be volume on this side, and that has got to be area out times distance out on the other side.
Now, again, proportionately, this is a multiplication on both sides,
so if the area is a lot larger, the distance is going to be, the distance out is going to be a lot smaller.
So you'll have to push in a lot further on this side to get a small lift on the right-hand side.
And the last consequence of this is that the work that you put in on the one side
has got to equal the work that you put out on the other side.
And again, that's going to help you in problems where you have to calculate what distance the output side is going to be lifted, for instance.
So the force in times the distance in is going to be the force out times the distance out.
Again, it's multiplication on both sides, so the force out is proportionately a lot bigger than the distance out.
The amount that this platform on the right-hand side is going to lift is going to be so much smaller.
