In this next video, I'll talk about Archimedes' Principle.
And it states that when a body is fully or partially submerged in a fluid,
so it just sits there, quite still in the fluid, nothing is touching it,
then it is in static equilibrium, with a buoyant force equal to,
but in opposite direction to, the weight of the object.
So, once again, try and remember this graphic.
So, this lighter green colour at the bottom is my scale,
there is an object on the scale.
This object will have a weight, which is this force of gravity pulling down on it
through the centre of mass, which is mg.
And that, because there is static equilibrium, has to equal the normal force
from the scale pushing back up, and it is that normal force
that we are going to read as the weight on the scale.
If we now submerge this into a fluid, we are going to read the apparent weight of this object,
because it is now going to be less.
Let's have a look.
So, let's just get our eraser there.
There we go.
So, the sum of forces in the y direction has got to be zero, because it is static equilibrium.
And that's why the normal force on the left hand side is going to be the weight
that we are going to read from the scale.
On the right hand side, also, we have the sum of forces in the y direction has got to be zero,
the static equilibrium.
But now, this buoyant force is going to subtract from the weight mg, the force of gravity,
to give us a new normal force or a new weight called the apparent weight.
Now, in problems dealing with the people of Archimedes,
you are usually going to be asked how far an object submerges into some fluid.
So, for what height will it submerge?
Now, just think about it.
The area of your object and the area that it touches in the fluid,
those areas are going to be the same.
So, the difference you are going to have, because the object and your fluid is going to have different densities,
is that there is going to be a difference in volume.
Let's look at these equations here.
It might not come out so well on your screen.
What I would suggest is either just listen carefully or do watch it on YouTube in high definition
so that you can see these little subscripts.
I will make them larger in future.
So, when you do get problems pertaining to what height is this object submerged in a fluid,
remember one thing, that the mass of the object has got to equal the mass of the displaced fluid.
And that is the principle of Archimedes.
Now, we will remember that mass equals density times volume.
So, on the left hand side we are going to have the density of the object times the volume of the object,
and that has got to equal the density of the fluid times the volume of the fluid.
Now, volume is going to be area times height.
So, on the left hand side of the object itself, the mass of the object is eventually going to be
the density of the object times the area times the height of the object itself,
so how high this object is.
And on the right hand side, this has got to equal the mass of the displaced fluid.
Now, if this is not, the object is not fully submerged,
obviously its height is not going to be the same as the height with which it is submerged.
It is going to, some part of it is going to stick out.
But this has got to equal the density of the fluid times the area again.
And remember I said the areas that touch are equal.
So, we don't have to worry about the area of the object and the area of the fluid.
They are exactly the same.
Times this now, lower case h, which is the submerged height.
So, we have the area on both sides, which we can just subtract.
So, if you are asked in the problem, to what height is it submerged,
you are going to just get on the right hand side here, the h submerged on its own.
And that will then equal the density of the object times the height of the object itself,
the full height of the whole object, then divided by the density of the fluid.
And that is going to give you h submerged.
