In this video we're going to look at the triple integral.
It's a simple extension really of the double integral and we'll use an example here
of what is analogous to a type 1 region in the double integral.
In this instance we simply have a surface in 3-space that becomes our area, our volume actually, d.
And here's our equation. We have the triple integral over this volume d of a function in 3 variables
that is over some differential volume.
And look at the end. It is dz, dy, dx.
Where z is expressed, first of all, the inner integral of our iterated integral
is between an equation in h of x and y, h1 and h2.
Then we move to dy which will be between a function g of x, g1 of x to g2 of x.
And then right on the outside with respect to x we take an integral between two constants.
So let's look at this example. Calculate the integral of the f of x, y, z equals x over the tetrahedron d
formed by the intersections here of the x, y plane, the x, z plane and the y, z plane
and the plane z equals 2 minus x minus y.
And we have a beautiful illustration here of this.
Our red area really is this plane lying in z equals 2 minus x minus y.
And if you think about it, if we said z equals 0, so we are just going to look at this bottom y, z plane.
If z equals 0, then we have x plus y equals 2.
And really y equals 2 minus x.
If we just solve for y.
And if we let both z and y equal 0, then we are just left with x equals 2.
So that sets our volume d in x, y and z of the x going from 0 to 2.
Well, let's start right at the end.
Really the z is going to go from 0 till 2 minus x minus y.
Now our next function, which will be g1 and g2, think about it if z equals 0,
we just have this line lying right at the bottom between the x and the y axis, actually that whole plane.
And y is going to go from 0 till this line, end of the line in the xy plane, which is 2 minus x.
And then x will just simply go from the y, z plane where x equals 0 at the back to the front where x equals 2.
So we've set up our triple integral there.
First of all, we're going to do the inner integral.
That is with respect to z, which simply will bring z into our x.
And that goes from 0 to 2 minus x minus y.
We see the solution there once we plug in those values.
We have our middle integral, if I can call it that now, with respect to y.
Still we have the dx left.
And that's easy to do, you see it there.
And when we replace the values going from 0 to 2 minus x,
for every y that we have in this 2xy minus x squared y minus half xy squared,
we are left with 2x minus 2x squared plus half x cubed.
Single integral now going from 0 to 2 with respect to x.
Quite simple to do.
And you'll also end up or should end up with an answer of 2 over 3.
Now that's another way.
We're going to do the next one.
We're going to do that.
Finally we're going to as Well Highway 4.
Third of all, we're going to be using final voltaism for 4 geen geolonde mixture bearing for 5 pm.
We're going to be fair enough so that we're loading up and cub we want them just move on for this島 initially.
Again, this contains some good things.
And you must not know but you want to do it again.
We're going to be 24 meters that soon as well.
After cleaning down as well.
There's all over 1 over 30 feet on Christmas in two miles.
Going up the decimal cargo fishing finishes for 8 troreluminı servicio committee
