In this video, we'll start to develop the concept of the double integral.
Now, the single integral was an area under a curve, so it's a two-dimensional from a single variable function.
So we have the f of x, single independent variable, and we have our curve between two values on the x-axis.
We will look at the two-dimensional area under this curve.
Now, for a double integral, you can extend that.
You can well imagine what we're going to get to, the volume under a surface.
So we're looking at a three-dimensional volume, three-dimensional volume from a two-variable equation, from a two-variable equation.
So before we write that, let's have a look.
Imagine this is our three-dimensional surface.
Here on the x-y-axis, I've plotted a nice square, and I'm going to divide that up into tiny little squares.
Tiny little squares.
That square will have an area, and up from there, it will meet my surface somewhere, and this will form a volume.
And just as we had Riemann sums of all these tiny little rectangles in their area, we're going to have the tiny little volumes there.
And then if we have that over this whole area, where x goes from a to b, and y goes from c to d, we're going to have an area there.
Small little area with its height, which will give us a volume, the volume of this little square, this little square unit here will, if we add all of them, we'll get the volume under this curve.
Now, first thing to notice is it's nice and neat, our boundary is nice and neat, straight lines, but it need not be that.
Any of these sides can be a curve on this x-y plane in itself, and so we needn't have this square box going up.
It can be any surface.
And you can imagine where we'll go from here, from a double integral.
First of all, we can remember that we can keep y constant, and if we keep y constant, and we have this yz plane, it will intersect, it will intersect our surface here in a nice two-dimensional line.
The same if we had a yz plane, by keeping x at some constant value going up, it will also be an intersection.
And all we're going to do is we need to integrate both separately.
So we're going to have, if this now is our area t, our area t equals this x going from a to b and y going from c to d,
we're going to have the double integral, the integral of the integral over the area t, over my whole area t, of the f of x, y, dx, dy, dx.
There's actually proof that if this is continuous, nice, integratable, it doesn't matter which way around you're going to do it.
So what this is saying in essence, we're going to go, say for instance, x is on the outside, x is going from a to b, of the integral going from c to d, of the f of x, I'll make it vector x, which means x of y.
So the c and d is going to go dy, and then we're going to go to dx.
And what we're going to do when we do this first bit, let me do this, when we do this first bit, with respect to y, we're going to keep x as a constant,
solve for this definite integral, which will now only have an x in it, which we will then solve this definite integral with respect to x.
Next video, we'll do an example.
Good for example 1, we have this area of x and y such that x goes from negative 1 to 2 and y goes from negative 1 to 3 of this multivariable or two-variable function f of the vector x,
which is expressed in terms of x and y, of x, y squared.
So let's go, we're going to have the double integral, two variables, over the surface of the f of x.
And I think the guy's name was Fubini, who showed that it doesn't matter if it is a surface, if it is integratable, doesn't matter which one you put first.
So first, let's put dy, dx.
So that's what we're going to do.
So first we're going to do dy and then dx.
So dx on the outside goes from negative 1 to 2 and y goes from negative 1 to 3 of x, y squared, dy, dx.
So this is the part, this is the part that we're going to do first and we're going to treat x as a constant.
So if x is a constant, remember x we can bring outside of an integral.
Sine, so it's going to be negative 1 to 2.
The x is going to be brought out as the definite integral of y squared dy going from negative 1 to 3.
So that is going to be a third, y to the power 3, going from negative 1 to 3, dx.
Now that is really a constant, we can really bring that out.
So that's going to be a third, a definite integral going from negative 1 to 2 of x.
And then that's what's happening to this y.
It's going from negative 1 to 3, so that's going to be 3 to the power 3, minus negative 1 to the power 3, dx.
And that is what's going to happen.
We're going to get rid of all y's so that in the end we're just integrating with respect to x.
So that is a third, definite integral from negative 1 to 2.
3 to the power 3 is 27, minus negative 1, that's 28.
I can certainly bring that to 28 outside as well.
And x dx, that will be 28 over 3.
See if I was correct.
Let's not make an arithmetical mistake.
So that's 28 over 3.
And multiplied by a half x squared, going from negative 1 to 2.
That is going to be 28 over 6.
28 over 6.
And this x squared is going to be 4 minus 1, which is just 3.
So that's going to be 28 over 6 times 3, which goes into there, goes into that twice.
24 divided by 2 is 14.
Now let's just see if Fabrini was indeed correct as far as this was concerned.
Let's do the integral the other way around.
So we're going to have negative 1 to 3, and then we're going to have negative 1 to 2 of x, y squared.
This time we're going to do dx first, and then dy on the outside.
So y here, we're going to treat y as a constant, so we can bring that y squared out.
So it's only the definite integral going from negative 2 to 2 of x dx, which means that will be a half x squared.
And going from negative 1 to 2 of dy, but half is definitely a constant.
We can bring that out, y squared, and now we're going to have x squared going from negative 2 to 1.
So that's going to be 4, again, 4 minus 1, which is 3 dy.
That can be brought out as 3 over 2.
Definite integral from negative 1 to 3 of y squared dy.
That's 3 over 2, and that's going to be a third y to the power of 3, going from negative 1 to 3.
That is going to be a half, and that is certainly going to be 27 minus negative 1, which is 28.
28 divided by 2 is 14.
So it doesn't matter which way around we did.
But what we do have to understand is first we, which, if we did this first, first we kept x as a constant.
x was kept as a constant somewhere.
If this is the x-axis pointing towards you, the y-axis net, and the z-axis up, first we kept y as some constant.
If we kept y as a constant, we were going to form this plane, which was going to intersect with our surface.
So we were going to have a nice curve, which we integrated, and then we're going to keep x as a constant.
Now we're going to keep, well, first of all we kept x as a constant, now we're going to keep y as a constant.
So we're going to have this plane, this plane intersecting nicely.
So the first one we were going to keep x constant here.
So it was going to intersect nicely, and we were just going to integrate over the y-axis.
So it doesn't matter which way around you go, as long as you understand, first we're going to do the inside integral,
and then we're going to do the solving it completely, the definite integral, and then solving the outside integral.
