Now I alluded to in the previous video that the surface on the XY plane need not be a perfect square or rectangle. It might actually be, have some curves.
Now there are ways to classify the area on the XY plane that will form the basis of this shape that we want the volume of.
First of all, we're going to look at what we call a type 1 region. In a type 1 region, let's turn on this side, in a type 1 region, the X values are straight lines.
And then the Y values can be any curve, can be any curve. So this is going to be the X axis and that is going to be the Y axis.
So the Y can be a curve and the other side of the Y, but the two Xs are going to be straight lines.
What you must always do is draw parallel lines to your two straight lines. Just draw parallel lines.
If they are in this region, if they are, if they move up and down, this is a type 1 region.
So in essence what we are saying is that X is going to go from A to B.
And Y is going to go from some function of X to some other function that might be dependent on X.
So there is the G1 of X and the G2 of X and there is A and there is B.
Y equals A and Y equals B.
So here we have an example, the double integral, which is on top of region G of X plus 2Y.
And then we usually write DA there because they don't want to give you a clue as to which one you have to do first,
DY or DX.
And they say that this G is the area in the circle X squared plus Y squared equals 2 between the Y axis and the line X equals 1.
We know that the Y axis is in the X equals 0.
So we know we are going to go from X equals 0 to X equals, that will be X equals 1.
So we are going to go from 0 to 1.
But the Y axis is different.
But once again, it's going to be between these two lines, Y equals, X equals 0, X equals 1.
So I can draw these parallel and they are going to go from curve to curve.
These lines are going to go from curve to curve.
So I know if these lines are parallel to these X equals constant lines, we know it's a type 1 region.
And what we are going to do there is always, always, from A to B and then the integral from G1 of X to G2 of X of our function F of X,
first with respect to Y and then with respect to X.
So if it's a type 1 region, which we know it is because the X values are constant, the two Y values are functions of X.
One of them might be a constant, one of them might be a function of X.
We know it is because we draw parallel lines, always parallel to the constant lines and then they intersect with two curves.
We just have to figure out what the two curves are going to be in this instance, Y1 and Y2.
So we are going to get Y2 equals Y, Y is going to equal the square root, let's make it Y2 at the top,
the square root of 2 minus X squared and Y1 is going to be negative the square root of 2 minus X squared.
So that will certainly be the top quarter of the circle there and the bottom quarter of the circle there as far as those two is concerned.
So let's do that. We are going to do the integral and going from 0 to 1 of the integral of minus 2 minus X squared
until the square root of 2 minus X squared of our function was X plus 2Y.
And we always said type 1, we are going to do DY first and then DX.
So what we have here, we are going to do this inside first.
We are going to treat X as a constant but we have a plus sign there so in essence we can break that up into 2.
All of this with respect to X, we can break this up into two integrals.
So we are going to have the integral and going from negative square root of 2 minus X squared to the square root of 2 minus X squared.
Now X is a constant so it can be brought out just DY plus 2 is a constant of the definite integral from minus 2 minus X squared to the square root of 2 minus X squared,
negative and negative and positive of Y DY and all of that with X.
So this is going to equal the definite integral going from 0 to 1 and this is going to be an X.
There is going to be a Y going from negative 2 minus X squared, square root of 2 minus X squared plus 2.
That will be a half. That will be Y squared going from negative 2 minus X squared.
I am going fast here. Everyone should know how to do first a calculus.
All of that will be dX. All of that will be dX and it is still going to be the integral from 0 to 1.
Now if we have that minus negative that, that is going to leave us with 2 times that.
So we are going to have 2X, we are going to have 2X, 2 minus X squared.
So this is going to be 1, so it is going to be Y squared, so it is that squared minus that squared,
which actually leaves us with 0 because it is going to be 2 minus X squared minus 2 minus X squared.
There is nothing left. It is just a 0, so dX.
We can bring the 2 out and from 0 to 1 of X and then 2 minus X squared to the power of half dx.
Do that for yourself. You will see that nothing is left behind.
And we will remember how to do these from first a calculus.
We will certainly remember how to do these from first a calculus.
We can just do a substitution. Let's make our substitution U equals 2 minus X squared.
In other words, let's change this integration, the U of 1.
That is going to be 2 minus 1 is 1 and the U of 0.
If I plug 0 in there, that leaves me with 2.
I can integrate DU with respect to X. That is going to leave me with a minus 2X.
So it looks like x dx is going to be equal negative 1 half DU.
So I know all my substitutions that I can make.
So this is going to equal 2.
For X dx, it is going to be negative 1 half DU.
I can bring that negative 1 half out. It is a constant with DU at the end.
I am going to have an integral now going from 2 to 1.
U.
And 2 minus X squared is U, so it's U to the power half.
So I've done all my substitutions. I'll be left with a negative 1 in here.
But I know from my rules from first year, if this is negative, I can make it positive as long as I then change the limits of this integral around.
U to the power half DU.
That is going to be 2 over 3.
U to the power 3 over 2 going from 1 to 2.
That equals 2 over 3.
And we're going to have 2 to the power 3 over 2 minus 1.
That equals 2 over 3.
I hope we can still see here at the bottom.
Maybe not.
Let's go on here.
That equals 2 over 3.
What was it?
U to the power 3 over 2 going from 2 to 1.
And let's put it there.
That's going to equal 2 over 3.
That's going to be 2 to the power 3 over 2 minus 1.
And that equals 2 over 3.
That is 2 square root of 2 minus 1.
And there's our answer.
So this is a type 1 region.
A type 1 region in as much as it is the y-axis that varies between two functions of x.
In this instance, as I say, one might be a constant.
The other one, the function of x.
As long as they're not both constants.
And that says that we have to do that integral first with respect to y with a constant always on the outside.
In a type 1 region, you draw lines parallel to the two x equals constant lines.
And it intersects two curves.
So one curve up or down.
That is a type 1 region.
To meet where.
Twenty- Vlad.
two regions in the region.
Together then to market here.
In that regard, one of the figure rules is six Erin Jewelry.
There's a type with respect here that's massive and common sense of this one that's going to be linked up in the abdomen.
