Now I want to move on to a type 2 region, type 2 region, so we're going to do this problem and we'll introduce the concept of this type 2 region and what it refers to. You can well imagine though, knowing now what a type 1 region is, what's going to happen to type 2.
So we want to evaluate this double integral, in other words we want the volume. This is our surface, 4x minus y, on top of this surface H, represented by this area. H is an area in the xy plane, inside the circle x squared plus y squared equals 2, above the x-axis and below a line y equals 2.
Now I want to introduce a graphic here, I'll bring it into the system and you can clearly see what a type 2 is. We can see the area marked off by this area H in our xy plane and we draw horizontal lines, that is type 2, that is type 2.
Let me just introduce the second graphic here and you see if I did a type 1 region, I would have had to do 2 regions, a region 1 and a region 2 marked in yellow and marked in blue.
Because certainly, 2 different graphs are met at the top. 2 different ones, the y equals x and on the other side, the part of the circle y equals the square root of 4 minus x squared.
So you would have had to do this in two parts. But if you do, if we go back to graph 1, if you do it horizontally, on the one side, the horizontal lines meet y equals x and on the other side, they only meet y equals the square root of 4 minus x squared.
So this is a type 2 region. So this is a type 2 region. We just have to think about what happens on the x to the x values. Certainly on the smaller side, the lesser bound will be x equals y and on the upper bound, it will be x equals the square root of 4 minus y squared.
And then y will be from a constant to a constant to a constant. And that makes it the outside of our double integral. You can clearly see it's going to go from y equals 0 parallel at the bottom and parallel at the top is going to be where the two lines meet.
The line x equals y equals y equals x and y equals the square root of 4 minus x squared or the other way around. So that is going to be, if you do that, to solve for one of the variables and you'll get the square root of 2.
So it will go from 0, y equals 0 to y equals the square root of 2. And then the x is going to be between two functions, variables of x.
So here we are back. We see that x is between y on the lower bound, on the lower bound, and on the upper bound, it's the square root of 4 minus x squared, and y goes from 0 to the square root of 2.
So let's do that. So let's do that. We're probably going to have to do this video in part. So I'll have to clean the board because it's quite a long problem.
But at least now making this a type 2 region, I don't have to do two separate regions, two separate double integrals.
So it's going to be the integral, and going from 0 to the square root of 2, and the integral going from y to the square root of 4 minus y squared.
Now, I'll have to break this up into 2. Remember, this is going to be our inner integral, and that's why it's called an iterator.
I'm going to do two iterations of this. First the inner integral, and then the outer integral.
Okay, so that's going to be 4x, 4x. Now, for type 2 region, we're going to do the fact that dA is going to equal dx dy, whereas for type 1 region, it was dy dx.
So this will be with respect to x minus the integral 4 minus y squared of y dx, and that is our inner integral, also called the inner integral, and all of that dy.
So I've just broken this into two parts, as we did in the first-year calculus.
So, that will still be on my outside, the definite integral going from 0 to the square root of 2.
Now, this is a simple integral to do. The 4 is a constant, which can be brought out.
And then x will become a half x squared, so I'm left with 2x squared going from y till 4 minus y squared.
And here y is a constant, because I'm doing an integral with respect to x.
So the y would have come outside, and then I would just be left with an x there, going from y till the square root of 4 minus y squared.
And that is still my inner integral, all of this with respect to y.
So let's carry on, so let's carry on, it's going to be 0 until the square root of 2, so this is going to be 2.
So it's this squared minus that squared, so it's 4 minus y squared minus y squared would be here, minus y.
And here we're going to have the square root of 4 minus y squared, minus y, and all of this with respect to y.
All of this still with respect to y.
So this is easy.
I'm going to have the integral going from 0 to the square root of 2, of 8, minus 4y squared, minus y squared, of 4 minus y squared, plus a y squared there, dy.
dy.
I can simplify this as the definite integral.
I'm going from 0 to the square root of 2, you're going to have 8, minus, it looks like, 4 plus 1 is negative 3, y squared, minus y squared, root of 4 minus y squared, all with respect to y.
I'm just going to stop the video, and just to make sure, because I think the battery is going, we'll be back shortly.
Okay, with a fresh battery, now we can break this up into 3 different integrals.
So this first one will leave me with an 8, with an 8y, going from 0 to the square root of 2.
Then I'm going to be left with 3 over 3y cubed, going from 0 to the square root of 2.
I'm not going to go through how that is done.
This one is a bit more interesting though, let's do that.
I think we can do some substitution here.
Let's let u equals 4 minus y squared, minus y squared.
In other words, what's going to happen, the u of, we are going from 0 to the square root of 2,
so the u of square root of 2, that is going to be 4 minus 2, that is 2.
And the u of 0 is going to equal 4.
If I take du dy, it is going to leave me with 2 minus y squared.
In other words, not y squared, just y, minus 2y, that.
So in other words, that leaves me with y dy equals negative 1 half du.
So I can do all my substitutions here, I'll still have a negative.
Now I'm going from 4 to 2, from 4 to 2.
And y dy, so this y dy, I can have another negative, so that will become a positive half du.
And this inside will be 4 minus y squared will be u, so that's u to the power half.
U to the power half.
That will become plus half, and that will become 2 over 3, u to the power 3 over 2, all the way from 4 into 2.
Let's just do these a bit.
So that is going to be 8 times the square root of 2.
This is going to be minus 2 square root of 2.
2 square root of 2.
And this will be, let's see, the 2's will go, so that's positive a third.
And we're going to have 2 to the power 3 over 2, or minus.
2 to the power 2, to the power 3 over 2.
So this is going to leave us with a, let's just see, was that correct?
I hope so, 6 square root of 2, 6 square root of 2, plus, this is going to leave us with a third.
That is going to leave us worth 2 square root of 2.
Oop, shouldn't have done that.
2 square root of 2, those two, those two cancel out.
So it's 2 to the power 3, is that correct?
2 to the power 3, which makes it minus 8, minus 8, minus 8.
So we're left with 6 square root of 2, plus, 2 square root of 2 over 3.
And, somewhere I think there is a little mistake.
Let's carry on, let's carry on, it might be correct.
Minus 8 over 3, minus, minus, yeah, 8 over 3.
So let's put all of that over a common denominator, 3.
So that's going to be 18 square root of 2, plus, yes, our 2 square root of 2, minus 8.
And that leaves us with, I think that is correct, 20 square root of 2, minus 8, all over 3.
All over 3.
So these just become very long exercises in first-year calculus.
Easy to make a little mistake, which I thought I did, but it looks okay to me.
And the main thing to realize, though, that we turned this from two type 1 regions into one type 1 region.
And you must, where the parallel lines are drawn, it must go from one single variable function
to another single variable function, or from a constant to a one variable function on the other side.
The lines cannot go as we had, the lines cannot do this.
That was our function, that was our function, something like this.
The lines can't meet at the bottom, they're still meeting y equals 0,
but at the top, they would meet two different functions.
So that means you would have had to split this into two regions,
a region R1 and a region R2, and you would have had to do this problem
over, certainly over two of these two regions, H1 and H2.
