I hope this video is not as dark as the previous one. Lighting in this office is poor.
So let's play around a bit with the double integral.
What is the volume of a cylinder? How can we do the volume of a cylinder?
Well, we can construct the base and we can construct the height.
And the height is very easy in three dimensions if you think about it.
We can let the f of x and y, we can have the f of x and y just equal a flat plane in a three-dimensional surface.
A flat plane in a three-dimensional surface.
So if we have our three-dimensional surface, we can just construct a simple plane.
And it's going to be at some height h.
And that'll just be the flat top of our cylinder and the flat bottom.
Now if we have a look at this graphic, we can very easily make the base which is circular.
We can have the base have a radius of a.
So x squared plus y squared equals r squared where the r, the radius equals a.
In other words, from that we can construct a region.
And what if we construct a type 1 region?
In other words, our lines are going to be horizontal.
So y is going to go from y equals 0 to y equals the square root of a squared minus x squared.
And the x-axis is going to go, which is going to be the outer part of our iterated integral, is going to go from 0 to a.
So, let's have a look.
Let's clean some up and let's see.
So, we're going to construct our region h as x squared plus y squared equals a squared where a equals our radius.
In other words, we're going to have y equals the square root of a squared minus x squared.
So, we know for our region, at least what's going to happen, y is going to be less than that.
h squared minus x squared.
And on the other side from y equals 0.
So, that's where the lines touch at the bottom and touch at the top.
x is going to be much easier on the outside.
That is just going to go this radius from 0 to a.
d.
So, we know that this is going to go onto the outside, these constants.
And this is going to go from a squared minus x squared.
f of x and h equals this h, which is a constant.
And then, remember we said we're going to have dy and then dx on the outside because it's a type 1 region.
So, let's do this iterated double integral.
First, we're going to do the inner bit.
That's very easy.
Inasmuch as we're still going to have the definite integral going from 0 to a of the d of x,
but on the inside, h is a constant, which can just be brought out.
And then, we'll have y going from 0 until the square root of a squared minus x squared.
And then, on the outside, d of x.
That's the definite integral from 0 to a with respect to x of h.
And this is just going to be a squared minus x squared dx.
Now, obviously, here we'll have to make use of trig substitution, wouldn't we?
So, let us make x equals a times the sine of theta.
Let's try that.
Now, I used a here, but let's not get confused with the a that is our radius here.
Let's not confuse those.
But just let's say that theta is then equal to the arc, the arc sine of x over a.
Of x over a.
So, remember though that x goes from 0 to a.
So, if for theta a, we're going to have the arc sine of a over a, which is 1.
And the angle that gives us that is pi over 2.
Pi over 2.
And theta for a, if we make a 0, it's going to be the arc sine of 0.
And that equals this 0.
Now, we've got to integrate this with respect to theta.
And that gives us a times the cosine of theta.
In other words, d of x equals a times the cosine of theta d theta.
And when we're nearly there, we need an x squared.
So, x squared is going to equal a squared, cosine squared of theta.
So, we've got enough stuff to do our substitution.
So, now it's going to be the definite integral now going from 0 to 2 pi.
Pi over 2, half pi.
The h we can actually bring outside because it is a constant.
A constant h.
Now, for dx, dx, dx, we have a cosine of theta d theta.
And for a squared minus x squared is now a squared minus that.
So, that is going to be the square root.
We can take a squared out as a common factor.
So, that's going to be 1 minus cosine squared of theta.
Right there, d theta.
We can certainly clean this up a bit.
The different integral going from 0 to pi over 2 times that h.
So, 1 minus cosine squared of theta.
You've got to know it's sine squared of theta.
So, the square root of a squared sine squared of theta is just a sine of theta.
A sine of theta.
Let's just see if I made a mistake somewhere.
Surely, surely, surely.
Cosine of theta, cosine of theta.
Cosine of theta we have there.
Cosine of theta we have there.
But, x squared was not.
I hope you caught that.
It was 1 minus sine squared of theta.
Sine squared of theta.
Cos x equals a sine theta.
So, x squared is a sine squared of theta.
I'm going to make these mistakes so that you are forced to go back and have a look at that.
So, that's all that's going to be left there.
And then, 1 minus the sine squared of theta is the cosine squared of theta.
So, a squared of theta, cosine squared of theta, square root of that is going to be a cosine of theta.
But, we already have an a cosine of theta.
So, those are both squared d theta.
Now, I can bring my a squared up because remember it is a constant.
That is our radius times the definite integral of 0 to pi over 2 of cosine squared of theta d theta.
Now, that is a square there which is an even number.
So, we had better use our trigonometric identities to do that.
First year calculus, a squared going from 0 to pi over 2 of our half angle formula.
So, that's a half plus cosine of 2 theta divided by 2 of this d theta which just becomes doing this twice.
That is going to be h a squared.
So, let's see what we have.
We're going to have a half theta going from 0 to pi over 2 plus we're going to bring a half out.
And, the integral of cosine of 2 theta is another half sine of 2 theta also going from 0 to pi over 2.
I don't want to spend too much time on this.
This is first year calculus that you have to review.
So, if certainly if I just had a half sine 2 theta and I integrated that with respect to theta,
differentiate that with respect to theta, it's going to be a half times cosine of 2 theta.
The inside still has to be integrated, differentiated.
That's 2.
2 times half is 1 and I'm left with a cosine of 2 theta.
So, certainly that is correct.
So, here I'm going to be left with h a squared, a half times, I have to do this part.
So, that is going to be a half times theta over 2 minus 0.
Plus, here I'm going to have a quarter of the sine of 2 times that as pi minus the sine of 0.
Now, that's quite easy to do in as much as the sine of pi is 0.
The sine of 0 is 0.
So, that's going to be 0.
So, I'm left with this.
Equals h a squared and now I'm going to have pi over 4.
Now, think about back to our graphic.
What we actually have now is only a quarter of the volume.
We only look at that base of hours.
This base of hours, we only looked at one quarter.
So, the volume of a cylinder.
I'm still going to multiply this by 4.
Which leaves me with h a squared pi.
But remember a is our radius.
So, if we just rewrite this, it's going to be pi r squared times the height.
Which is indeed, very nicely, the equation for the volume of a cylinder.
So, quite a bit of fun and you can construct all sorts of shapes like spheres, etc.
And you can calculate, you can certainly use calculus, double integral to calculate the volume of those shapes.
Very nice.
Very nice.
