There's another way that we can use to look at the volume of a cylinder.
First of all, we are using double integrals and we're just using the xy-coordinate Cartesian
coordinate system.
We can convert that though to a polar grid.
If we do the conversion to the polar grid, it might be easier for us to do this.
Remember we were still using the fact that z equals the f of some vector function of x
and y equals some constant h.
So we have the cylinder going up to a flat plane and we want to denote, we want to get
to an equation for this volume using just double integrals.
Now instead of using then the fact that we have a type 1 region going from this y equals
zero up until this y equals the square root of a squared minus x squared where we have
the fact that this outer cylinder, the outer wall of the cylinder is x squared plus y squared
equals some radius called a squared.
So this whole radius here would be till a.
Now the same as we did with normal, let's do it this way.
Remember we are doing our double integral over some region at the bottom, let's call it region
r.
Our function is just a constant over some area.
And because of a type 1 region we call dA equals dy dx.
That is how we made these infinitesimally small little blocks and we sum over all of them,
that is an integral.
But now we are going to construct a different tiny little rectangle block and here I have
to note that we have scaled it up in as much as we have this tiny little angle d theta.
And this tiny little angle d theta can denote if it is very small it approximates the width
of this little rectangle of ours and if we look on this going from zero till the radius going
from zero till a, we have a here.
If we take just an infinitesimally small part of that and we call that dr, if we call that
dr that will be the height of our little rectangle.
Now we just need the width of our rectangle and what is the equation for arc length?
Remember arc length equals just the radius times the little angle that you, the angle
that you are making theta 2 minus theta 1 equals delta theta.
That is certainly what we are going for.
So that is arc length and if it becomes infinitesimally small this approximates a straight line so we
still have height times width. So what would be this area, the area now of this tiny little block
becomes height times width. That is r d theta not delta theta for the difference between the two
if it becomes infinitesimally small. Remember it's d theta, it's dr so it's r dr d theta.
So r d theta those two and dr the length and the width of that little rectangle.
So now we have over some region of this constant function of ours r dr d theta, you can also
do d theta dr, it doesn't matter. Now we just have to look at the bounds of these two, of this new grid of ours.
So the first thing to convert to a new grid is to start with the basics. Integration is forming
infinitesimally little small line segments or or or little rectangles then. Let's call it little
rectangles. That's what we did with the Riemann sums when we started learning about integration. We're
still constructing these tiny little areas. It has a width, it has a height. If we multiply those two by
each other which is the equation for a rectangle height times width, width times length whichever
way you look at it. And just to remember that this is r times d theta and this is dr. Multiply
them and you get area. So for a Cartesian coordinate system it was just x times y dy dx.
So now we have r dr d theta. So let's just work out what the bounds are going to be. We'll take,
conventionally we'll put the r in the middle because it usually is a constant. Now what happens to the
radius? It goes from a radius of zero to the radius of a. So that becomes easy. The inner integral here,
the inner integral becomes very easy in as much as as far as h. There's a r dr. The dr becomes
and from zero till a. And on the outside we just have to think what happens to this angle theta.
Well we're going from theta equals zero all the way around to two pi. That's what's happening. We're
sweeping this tiny little blocks all the way around and all the way from the center out. And if we add
then all these uncountable little rectangles we are integrating. So that goes from zero to two pi.
And that is going to be the volume of this cylinder of ours between this plane at the bottom and a y
axis which we haven't drawn here equaling z equals h or the f of x and y equals h. And there we have it
with a d theta. So this is going to equal zero to two pi. We can take the h out. Going from zero to a
of r dr and then the outside function d theta. You know we've got this terrible noise here. Going from
zero to two pi of h. What is this? It's going to be a half r squared going from zero to a d theta.
We can certainly bring this h out now also. We can bring the half out as well. And we're going
this is going to be a squared minus zero squared. Now the a is also a constant so that can also come
out and all we're left with is the zero to two pi d theta. That's all we have left. That's going to be
an h over two. That is going to be an a squared. And that's going to be a theta going from zero to two pi.
In other words an h over two and a squared and a two pi. Eventually what are we left with?
We are left with pi a squared to h. And remember this a represented the radius. That is pi r squared h.
And that is the equation of the volume of a cylinder changing from a Cartesian coordinate system to a polar
coordinate system. Just remembering the only difference we did is to calculated the area of
tiny little infinitesimally little tiny little rectangles in a different way.
left with pi a y.
