So in this video, let's look at the f of this vector x, f of xy equals 3xy, and we need to determine or calculate the volume above this region in the xy-plane, the intersection between y equals x and y equals half x squared.
Now let's have a look at this graphic. Clearly you can see on the left-hand side type 1, you'll notice the lines go vertically and then type 2 on the right-hand side and they go horizontally.
Now certainly we can do this type of problem in both ways. So we can have our differential area be dy, dx in region 1, or we can have a dx, dy in region 2.
So, back to the book. So if we have a type 1 region, a type 1 region, our dA, our differential area, is going to be dy, dx.
So dx is on the outside, so x better be from a constant to a constant if we want a number as an answer.
In other words, if we look at y, and if we look at the bottom, where those vertical lines touched at the bottom, that was certainly going to be on this side.
The smaller side was going to be a half x squared, and if you think about back at the graphic, certainly at the top was going to be the line y equals x.
And we need to see where those two intersect, if we're going to do the x. Certainly this is going to intersect at 0, 0, so x will be 0 at the bottom.
But let's just do that quickly. We're going to have x equal to a half x squared, to a half x squared, and we immediately see that's going to happen by x equals 0 and x equals 2.
You can solve that, you can solve that, you'll see. So certainly the other value at the top is going to be at a 0.2.
So if I set up my double integral now, on the outside is going to be my x value, so the definite integral, and going from 0 to 2,
over the definite integral going from a half x squared, to x of the 3xy dy dx.
But now let's look at the type 2 region. The type 2 region. So certainly here, we're going to have dA equaling dX dy.
In other words, things look a little different. This time my y is going to be on the outside, and my x is going to be on the inside.
So I'm going to look at this x first, and since those were horizontal lines, I need to switch these around.
I had y equals x, which is now going to become x equals y, and that was on my lower bound.
That was on my lower bound.
And I certainly have y equals the half x squared, which means x equals the square root of 2y.
And that was lying on the right hand, with the upper bound.
So that is going to be the square root of 2y.
And then again, at y, on the outside, it's going to again go from 0, where they meet at the one side,
and the value 2 on the upper side, again where that intersection was.
So this is going to be the integral, again from 0 to 2, to the integral of going from y to square root of 2y of 3xy dx dy.
So let's see if those two, if Fubini was correct.
Certainly you can swap them around, but you just have to look at the fact that you now, in this type 2,
you have to express x being the dependent variable, y being the independent variable,
where here, on this side, x was the independent variable, and y was the dependent variable.
So you have to look very carefully at which way you are expressing your functions in type 1 and type 2.
So, let's hope we didn't make a mistake anyway.
Let's hope we didn't make a mistake anyway.
So that's going to be from 0 to 2.
Now with respect to y, 3x is a constant.
And so it's y dy, which is going to be a half y squared,
and going from a half x squared to x at dx.
And suddenly we can bring the 3 over 2 out.
As a constant, 3 over 2, integral going from 0 to 2 of what we have left.
The x was the constant, so that stays the same.
x, and here we're going to have x squared,
minus a half times a half is a quarter,
x to the power of 4 dx.
x to the power of 4 dx, that equals 3 over 2,
a different angle from 0 to 2 of x to the power of 3,
minus a quarter x to the power of 5 dx.
That becomes 3 over 2,
and that is going to become 1 over 4,
x to the power of 4,
minus, that looks like 1 over 24,
x to the power of 6,
all going from 0 to 2.
That is going to be 3 over 2.
And let's see.
If we put 2 in there,
2 times 2 is 4,
times 2 is 8,
times 2 is 16,
16 divided by 4 is 4,
minus 16 to the power of 16 times 2 is 32,
times it is 64.
64 over 24 is 8 over 3,
minus, it will be 0,
that will be 0 there.
So I'm going to get 3 over 2,
let's do it on this side,
3 over 2,
my common denominator is going to be a 3,
so that's going to be a 12 minus 8,
which is 4 over 3,
times 4 over 3,
the 3s can cancel,
4 over 2 is 2.
4 over 2 is 2,
let's see if we get 2 on this side.
So we're differentiating with respect to x,
so certainly 0 and 2,
the 3y were constants,
so I'm just left with x,
so that is going to be a half x squared
going from y to square root of 2y dy,
certainly the 3 over 2 can come out again,
different integral going from 0 to 2,
and so the y is still left,
so if I plug that in there,
that is going to be 2y minus,
that will be a y squared,
dy,
that equals 3 over 2,
0 to 2,
of 2y squared,
minus y to the power 3,
dy.
that is going to be 3 over 2,
and that is going to be 2 over 3,
y to the power 3,
minus 1 over 4,
y to the power 4,
all going from 0 to 2,
it seems,
0 to 2.
Uh-huh, let's have a look.
that equals 3 over 2,
that is going to be 2 over 3,
times,
now 2 to the power 2,
so that is times 8,
times 8,
minus 2 to the power 4,
16,
16 divided by 4 is 4,
minus,
if I plug 0 in there,
there will be nothing left of that,
so that's going to be 3 over 2,
times 16 over 3,
minus 12 over 3,
which is 4,
that's 4 over 3,
that's 3 over 2,
multiplied by 4 over 3,
and indeed,
that leaves us with a 2.
So, indeed,
they are both the same,
so it doesn't matter which way around,
around the depth,
that's for Binney's rule,
but I can't just swap it around,
and say,
divide the x,
and do nothing about,
the upper and lower bounds,
certainly the upper and lower bounds,
are going to be different,
between a type 1,
and a type 2 region,
with type 2,
remember,
these are going,
horizontally,
so I'm going from an x value,
to another x value,
so I better express,
my two functions,
my two polynomials,
in terms of y,
x equals a function of y,
and x equals a function of y,
so I had to change that around.
