In this video I want to look a bit more closely and formally to the transformation of axes.
Now we've already done so in as much as we've taken a Cartesian coordinate system and we've converted it into a polar grid.
And we took the double integral then according to that.
But let's look at that more formally.
I don't necessarily have to go to the polar grid. I can go and develop any kind of a grid that might help me.
So here's a double integral.
We're going from the different integral going from 1 to 2 of the different integral and going from 0 to 2 of our function xy over this type 1 region dy dx.
And this region is defined as x being between 1 and 2 and y between 0 and 2.
In other words it's just a rectangle.
But I want to convert to a new type of grid.
And my conversion is such x equals 2u and y equals u plus v.
So I'm creating this new grid pattern in two axes called u and v.
And look at the first thing we've done.
We've turned these two equations in x and y both being equations of u and v into a vector.
The vector t in u and v which will then be the vector of two components x comma y.
So that will leave us with 2u and the second component u plus v.
Now before we go anywhere, let's just get the Jacobian matrix of our new vector.
So that will leave us with 2 0 and 1 1 in our matrix.
And if we get the determinant of our Jacobian matrix of our vector t, we see that that leaves us with a 2.
And I just want you to remember that 2 for a short while.
Let's go to this graph on the left hand side.
You can clearly see my type 1 region, the markings in vertical and pink there.
And you can see the bounds set up by these four lines which were the four equations.
x equals 1, x equals 2 and then y equals 0 and y equals 2.
4 straight lines and the region is defined where they intersect.
And we can actually work out those points of intersection.
At the left bottom would be 1 comma 0 and the right bottom 2 comma 0.
Left top 1 comma 2, right top 2 comma 2.
And we clearly see here that we do have an area.
This is 2 times 1 which will be 2.
So in our definite integral where our dA, our differential area was dy dx.
We can see at the bottom here our delta A, our whole area will then be delta y delta x.
And that's 2 times 1, that's equal to 2.
But let's convert this.
Let's convert this by the equations we have for x and y to our new grid.
On the right hand side, you can see things are now, the area is now turned into a parallelogram.
Anywhere where you have a rectangular area and you have linear equations for your transformation,
you are going to end up basically with a parallelogram.
So if x equals 2u and y equals u plus v and we take our four corners in x and y,
let's take the bottom left one being 0 and 1 and we convert that to u and v coordinates.
So we plug 1 and 0 into our equations.
x equals 2u and y equals u plus v.
We get a half comma negative a half.
And if we plug the bottom right 2 comma 0 in we get 1 comma negative 1.
And so we go for 1 comma 2 and 2 comma 2.
And we plot those.
Now let's look at those vertical, the vertical lines of these four corners that we've plotted
on our new grid pattern in the two axes u and v.
The lines for u now become u equals a half and u equals 1.
And the two red lines, y equals 0 and y equals 2,
becomes this v equals negative u and v equals 2 minus u.
If you just connect up the four corners that we drew from this conversion from x and y to u and v
and you connect those, you can clearly see what happens to those lines.
So in our new coordinate system, we're going to have our u value going from a half to 1
and our v going from negative u to 2 minus u.
And because we want the constants on the outside, you see we're clearly going to still have this type 1 region
where we have this vertical line.
Now look at the bottom of these two graphs.
Where our differential area on the xy coordinate system was dy dx,
it's now going to become 2dv du.
Remember in the polar coordinates it became r dr d theta.
And look on the right hand side.
The whole area, delta a equals delta v times delta u.
That's 2 times a half which is 1.
Now look what happened.
We had an area for 2 on the xy system
and we get an area of 1 in the uv system.
Clearly, the xy system is twice the size of the uv area.
And that's where that determinant comes in.
I said, remember that determinant?
And that's what happens.
The determinant was 2.
In other words, dA equals dy dx
which equals 2 times dv du
because 1 has to be multiplied by 2 to get to 2 on the other side, dy dx.
So the conversion rate between this area for dy dx,
that very same area is now half the size.
So you have to multiply by 2 to keep the area the same size.
And that's how we convert.
So here's your equation.
Any double integral over some area r
of some function above some area dA
would be in dy dx equal to the f
but not of the f of x and y.
Now the f of that vector t
we constructed in u and v
times the determinant of the Jacobian of the vector t
times dv du.
So, you know, you could also do it the other way around,
dU dV.
So you just have to watch out exactly how you are converting.
So let's look at our example.
The f of x and y was x and y.
If we now plug in our values for the vectors,
so the f of the vector t in u and v.
So for x I'm supplanting 2u
and for y u plus v.
So I'm left with 2u squared plus 2uv.
That will be my new function f.
And remember, it was still a type 1 region.
Well, I suppose we still have to call it a type 1.
It's not what it's about though.
It is about the fact that we want our constants
on the outside of our iterated integral.
So that'll be the different integral going from a half to 1,
which was our blue lines of the different integral
going from negative u to 2 minus u.
Those were our red lines of 2u squared plus 2uv times twice dv du.
Now this can be done in various ways.
We can bring the two out as a constant.
We can multiply it through.
Here are the steps that you can look at
and follow them along.
Try and do them yourself.
Now this becomes a normal integral.
Nothing different from the normal double integral
that we've done before in x and y,
y and x.
And you'll get to an answer of 3.
As an exercise,
do it as the original integral
in the area that's defined by y and x
and you'll see you'll get 3 exactly as well.
I can't believe it's a trauma-done.
lift your eyes as a ground 타 M países
and use both inner,
witness that's the understanding of the outline
that nail na saha l Mattos
the whole body of the core.
Look at the document running And so that through
the document running And so that in Vision
your web page down thatuct makes it a sense,
a part for the improving balance,
and you have aзя,
holaCK's focus,
so that we move onto one part of the,''
You
