Now I would like to revisit this problem where we had the equation for the volume of a cylinder.
So once again we're going to have the f of x, our z, some flat level, and we're going to get the volume over this area of ours, x squared plus y squared equals r squared.
We did it before and we knew we were going to end up with the same integral but r dr d theta if you look at video number 5 in this series.
Now that we know how to do translation of x's though, let's translate the xy axis now to axis of r and theta and see if we get to the same answer.
We now know that we have to get the f of this vector t times the determinant of the Jacobian, Jacobian, whichever way you want to pronounce it, times dr d theta.
Now again we're going to do just a quarter of a circle and in the end we're going to multiply it by 4.
For the translation of axes, in this instance we know that x equals r times the cosine of theta and y equals the r sine of theta.
That is our conversion between the two axes.
That is the conversion between the axes.
We know this because if we do have, if we do have the circle, any point on the circle there, down there, down there, if this angle is theta,
this is going to be x, this is going to be y, and we know now that the sine, the cosine, for instance, of theta, cosine of theta is,
and if this is the radius, it's going to be x divided by r, in other words, x equals r cosine theta.
The same goes for y.
So first we have to construct this vector mouse t in r and theta, which is going to equal the values for x comma y.
In other words, we're going to have, let's get a board eraser and just make some space for ourselves here.
So that indeed is going to be r times the cosine of theta comma r is sine of theta.
Let's get the Jacobian, Jacobian matrix of this.
So we're going to take, this is our f1, this is our f2, we're going to take d1 and d2 of f1.
So this with respect to, first derivative with respect to r, partial derivative with respect to r,
this is going to leave us cosine of theta.
This with respect to theta is going to leave us with a negative r of sine of theta.
Now function number two, with respect to r, is going to just leave us with a sine of theta.
And with respect to theta, it's going to leave us with r cosine of theta.
So there's our matrix, and if we get the determinant of this matrix,
the determinant of the Jacobian of t, I should say t in r and theta,
that is going to equal cosine times r cosine, that's r cosine squared minus negative r sine squared of theta.
So that becomes positive.
I can take out r as a common factor.
So I'm left with r cosine squared of theta plus sine squared of theta,
which equals just r.
In other words, this determinant just becomes r, and I'm left with r dr d theta,
which is exactly what we had when we explained it by the small sizes of those rectangles.
Now I just have to convert this into the f of the t of r and theta,
but fortunately for us, this is just a constant, so this is also going to be h.
So, and again, we are going to go, we're going to have r dr d theta.
So for d theta, we're going to go from zero to pi over two.
In the previous video, this translation of axes, where we went from this rectangle to this parallelogram.
We don't have to do this in this instant, fortunately, in our minds.
It's very easy to do, to convert from a Cartesian coordinate system to a polar grid.
We don't have to plot certain points and see what it is at.
Fortunately, we can do these in our minds.
This goes from zero to r, and we're just left with f.
f can come out.
Remember, this is now going to be a quarter of the volume still.
So, fh, h is just a constant, and it will always be a constant, no matter what the r d theta is.
So we're going to be left with going from zero to pi over two of r d r d theta.
So that will be a half r squared going from zero to r d theta.
And the half could come out, so that's going to be h over two.
r squared going from that to that is just going to be, it's just going to leave us with an r squared.
And that r squared is constant as far as theta is concerned, so I can bring that r squared out as well.
So I'm just going to be left with zero to pi over two d theta.
And if I bring that out, it'll just be a theta going from zero to pi over two, which just leaves me with a pi over two.
So that is going to be an h, an r squared, a pi over two.
But there's already a two there, so that becomes four.
And if I multiply this by four to get the full volume, I'm left with pi r squared times the height, exactly what we had before.
