In this video I want to look at a sample problem where we have two separate values.
One above and one below the xy plane.
So we are asked to calculate the volume of the shape above the function
f of x and y is x squared plus y squared minus 2
and below the function f of x and y equals the square root of x squared plus y squared minus 2.
With x squared plus y squared equals 2 as a common base region.
When we look at this figure we'll notice that the function in f with the square root is obviously above the xy plane
and the x squared plus y squared minus 2 is below.
And we'll have to work out two separate volumes.
With the xy plane cutting this shape in 2.
Obviously the function that is below the xy plane will have a negative volume
and we'll have to take the absolute value of that volume and then add it to the top volume.
And I mean top where z is positive.
We also note that it would be easier for us to convert or translate our axes
because we are dealing with a circle.
So first of all the circle for our base, our region that forms the base of both of these shapes.
So we'll construct a vector t and r and theta.
We know that x equals r cosine of theta and y equals to r sine of theta.
And then for our top function then, f1, we'll call it f1 and x and y, which is the square root of 4 minus x squared minus y squared.
I'll replace x with r cosine of theta, y with r sine of theta.
And I'm thus left with this f1 of our vector in r and theta being 4 minus r squared to the power half.
Now look at setting up our first volume.
Be a double integral in r d r d theta.
We've looked at that before.
If we move one step further, you'll note that in this instance we used u substitution.
And I'll show you on the right hand side how that substitution was done.
And that leaves us with a volume 1 of 2 pi times minus 2 times the square root of 2 over 3 plus 8 over 3.
Now let's look at the negative volume below the xy plane.
Again, I'm going to convert or I'm going to translate my axes.
I'm going to replace x and y with again r cosine theta and r sine of theta.
But the volume 2 would be the absolute value of this double integral.
Follow the double integral.
No need for any kind of substitution.
And you'll note that we get to an answer of 2 pi.
I now simply add volume 1 and volume 2.
Volume 2, as I said, was the absolute value.
It was negative 2 pi without the absolute values.
And if we add them you should get 2 pi over 3 times 11 minus 2 square root of 2.
on the perceived value, if we add them, it has an moment where you can get all these 6 paintings.
We have a 3ème graph.
If I put the house on your right hand side, which of the competing Podcast is nothing else plus I'm worth to use now.
Follow the battery charge to this side.
Check out the battery charge to this side on the phone.
