In this section we're going to start discussing the complex numbers
and specifically how it pertains or how it can be used as vectors
in linear algebra. First we have to define
the imaginary
number i. Let's start with
the imaginary number
and number i.
The problem that was dealt with here
in the 18th century is the fact that x squared
was always larger than or equal to 0.
We could solve that for x.
x could be 0, x could be 1, x could be negative
20,000. It doesn't matter what real number
we use for x, we'll always get an answer
or greater than 0 would be equal to 0, of course, when x equals 0.
But what about this problem?
How do we solve that problem?
There simply is no real solution
to that problem.
So in the 18th century, the imaginary number i was, shall we say, invented
and i equals the square root of negative 1 with a property that i squared equals negative 1.
So certainly we now have a solution to this problem.
And if we use an imaginary number, the imaginary number i, we can create all sorts of complex numbers.
Complex numbers. Complex numbers.
And we denote there's different ways in which we can write a complex number.
And it's usually written as a plus bi.
So a is a real number and b is a real number and then i is our imaginary number with a property that i squared equals negative 1.
By the beginning of the 19th century, it was noted that you can also use complex numbers or denote complex numbers as an ordered pair.
An ordered pair. And it was noted then as a comma b.
If we use what we call the imaginary plane.
And the imaginary plane, in two axes, this is the real axis.
The x axis is the real axis and the y axis is the imaginary axis.
Imaginary axis.
So if I have a point a comma b, it refers to a comma bi because this is my imaginary axis.
So if I have a point there and I have a point there.
There's a, there's b, this is my point a comma b.
But we can also note it as a vector.
Not only as a point but also as a vector.
This vector a plus bi.
So this plane of this x and y axis, the real axis and the imaginary axis as we call it now.
This is the imaginary plane.
The imaginary plane.
And this whole diagram, if we draw a diagram like this to denote our imaginary vector or point there.
It's called an argand, a-r-g-a-n-d diagram.
An argand diagram.
Okay.
Last thing for this video is we can also denote, so there are different ways, our first way,
we can also denote it as a single, as a single number or letter then in our instance.
Let's call it z.
And z equals a plus bi.
And if we write it like this, we say that a, which is a real number, real number, real number,
is the real part of z or the real part of a plus bi.
And then v equals the imaginary part of z or the imaginary part of a plus bi.
Okay, so we talk about the real part and the imaginary part when we denote this complex number as a single letter
until there was a single number z.
We'll carry on with some more properties of our complex numbers in the next video.
Let's carry on.
And let's see where two complex numbers are equal to each other.
So if we have two complex numbers, a plus bi, and we say that equals c plus di.
So just as any vector in two space, we can also say that these two complex numbers are equal if these real imaginary parts are equal.
So those are equal if and only if a equals c and b equals d.
And b equals d.
So that's the next part.
Two complex numbers being equal to each other.
The next thing we want to look at is just the real numbers.
So those are all the numbers on the x-axis.
In other words, b equals zero.
So I can write all numbers as a plus zero i.
All real numbers.
All the dots, all the little points that make up the real axis,
or the old x-axis on our argon twin diagram.
And then we also get pure, we get pure imaginary numbers, pure imaginary numbers.
And now we have a equals zero.
So that's all the numbers on the imaginary axis.
So we're going to have zero plus bi.
We're going to have zero plus bi.
Now, the last thing is just some simple arithmetic.
Some simple arithmetic.
So, if I have a plus bi, and I add to that c plus di,
I'm going to have a plus c plus b plus di.
So I've just taken i out there as a common vector.
So what am I saying here?
I'm actually saying is, we can again treat that as two vectors.
So that's my vector a plus bi.
That's my vector c plus di.
So all I'm doing here is I'm just adding the components.
I'm just adding the components along the real axis,
and along the imaginary axis.
And if you just did that one, add it to that one,
our resulting vector is going to be that.
Which is going to be a plus c, and then b plus di.
Not only can I do addition, but I can also do subtraction.
So that becomes a minus, the negative is there,
and the minus sign, sorry, the minus sign is there.
I can also multiply a real scalar.
Now, a plus bi.
That is going to be ka plus kbi for k.
k equals a real number.
k has got to be a real number there.
That's simple arithmetic.
We'll carry on with some more examples in the next video.
Now, let's do some very simple problems.
I have two complex numbers, z1 and z2, or z1 and z2.
4 minus 5i, minus 1 plus 6i.
And I just want to remember z1 plus z2, z1 plus z2.
Remember, with this negative sign out here,
all we are saying is 4 plus negative 5i.
And here we're saying, obviously, it's negative 1 plus 6i.
So let's do that.
All we're going to do is just to add the components.
So we're going to add 4, and we're going to add to that negative 1.
That leaves us the 3.
We're going to add negative 5 and 6.
That leaves us plus 1.
So that's 3 plus i.
Let's subtract the components.
So we're going to have 4 minus negative 1,
which is 4 plus 1, which is 5.
We're going to have negative 5 minus positive 6.
That's negative 11i.
We're multiplying out the scalar.
Scalar times that first complex number.
So that is going to give me a 12.
3 times 4 is 12.
3 times negative 15.
So we can put a positive there.
But 3 times negative 5 is negative 15i.
So that leaves us with 12 minus 15i.
And the last one, I'm multiplying.
Negative 1 through z2.
So that is going to leave me with a 1 minus 6i.
So all in all, really simple.
I'm inj 1983.
I willичего from the 크uję naipa,
To me it 509.
So you can put this intozuf...
To start with my keyboard and me.
So that's even worth noting.
Yeah.
человек, your and your trained teacher today,
Every class, at least you might beginning to me
to answer details as to figure out how you use the skills
to the chamber for the other.
You got to worry.
You got to worry.
You get to worry.
I'll see you.
I'll learn to worry.
