Now, as promised, we've got two matrices and they contain complex numbers. I want to add them. I want to multiply the scalar, which in this case is a complex number i, with one of the matrices and I just want to multiply the two matrices.
I can't multiply them because they're both two by two matrices. My result of the matrix will also be two by two. So nothing has changed from what we've learned about matrices before. Let's add, we just add these components to each other. So that's going to be a one plus i. So that's one plus i.
We're going to have a negative i plus this. So it's one minus two i. One minus two i. And the only problem that we deal with here is just to remember that we're not multiplying here, we're just adding. So it's negative i plus one negative i.
So we're going to have one plus i and two minus three i. Remember, those can be seen as ordered pairs or as vectors. And I can just add and subtract the, in this case, add the components. So one plus two is three.
And I have a positive i. And I have a positive i and a negative three i. So that's negative two i. And I have four minus i plus another four. So four plus four is eight. That is eight minus i.
So certainly, certainly that. Let's just check that I'm correct. I'm going to have one plus i. One minus two i. Three minus two and eight minus i. I just want to check that I'm indeed correct.
So let's multiply i by that. So that's going to give us i times one is i. We have i times negative i. That is going to be negative i squared.
I have i times i times one plus i. And I have i times four minus i. Okay, let's do that. That's going to be an i. Now i squared is negative one. Negative one times negative one is just one.
Positive one. And I'm going to have negative one. And I'm going to have negative i squared, which is just a positive i. Negative i squared. Negative times negative one is one. Positive one.
Negative one. And I'm going to have negative one. And I'm going to have plus four i for that. Okay, now perhaps for the more difficult one, I'm just going to multiply these two.
So in essence, nothing other than we've had before. So it's row one and column one. So there's one times i is just the i plus negative i times two minus three i.
That would be my first. Now row one, column two will be here. So I'm going to have a negative i times one minus i. Added to that, I'm going to have a negative i times four times four.
Now we're going to go to row two, column one. So it's this one times this one plus this one times this one. So I'm going to have i times one plus i.
And I'm going to have a negative i. And I'm going to have a negative i. And then lastly, row two, column two. So I'm going to have one plus i and one minus i. Added to that, I'm going to have a four times four minus i.
So there's my matrix there. So there's my matrix there. Once again, the trick to this is not to get confused between when you're adding and when you're subtracting.
So this is going to have a negative i. So this is going to have a negative two i. Negative two i. And the negative times a positive, negative is a positive three i squared.
Here we're going to have a negative four i squared. Here we're going to have a negative four i. Okay, here we're going to have an i plus an i squared.
And here we're going to have positive eight minus 12 i minus two i and plus three i squared. So quite a long one there. And then we're going to have one times one is one.
I'm going to have negative and positive and then negative i squared. And I'm going to have added to that is 16 minus four i.
Okay, we can simplify further. This is going to be a negative three. One. Yeah, that's going to be a negative three. So negative three.
I have positive one minus one. That leaves me with negative i there. Yeah, we have negative one. Negative one is going to give me...
Ah, sorry. That is i squared, which is negative one, minus one. And I have minus five i. See how easy it is to get confused. So make your dot scary so you can see which are ones and which are i's.
And now we're going to have an i. Negative fourteen. So that's going to leave me with a negative thirteen i. And I'm going to have negative one. Negative one. I can't see clearly what I've written here.
Okay. Um, four times two. Let me just see what I've done. One plus one. And four times two is eight. Four times two is eight. So I'm going to have, I'm going to have one, negative one plus eight, that's seven. Minus another three is going to be four. That's correct.
And lastly, I'm going to have, um, and let's again see where I placed, uh, where I placed, uh, so this negative i squared, which makes it negative, uh, negative minus one. So that's plus one. One plus one is two. Plus sixteen is eighteen. Eighteen minus four i.
Okay. Okay. So I did it quick and rough. Just make sure as I said, don't get computed between when you're adding and when you're multiplying. And simplify. Check this on. So I'm quite sure. I'm quite sure that it's correct. So nothing different from what we did with multiplication before. By matrix multiplication, just to remember that i squared equals a negative one.
