Now I just quickly need, before we do a few examples, this is the properties, the properties of the conjugate, the conjugate of the complex number z.
First of all, if I have the conjugate of z1 plus z2, that is going to equal the conjugate of z1 plus the conjugate of z2, and I can do the same for negatives.
I can also do the same for multiplication, so if I have z1, z2, the complex conjugate of that would be the complex conjugate of z1 times the complex conjugate of z2.
I can also do it for division.
If I have this scenario, that is going to equal the complex conjugate of z1 divided by the complex conjugate of z2.
If the complex conjugate of z2 does not equal zero, and z2 itself, z2 itself also not being zero.
So both z2 and this complex conjugate of 10, then the simpletion of p0 counter by zero.
And then the last one is, what is the complex conjugate of the complex conjugate of z twice the, well, that is the z.
Easy to see, easy to see z, if z equals a plus bi, then z bar, or z, the conjugate of z is going to be a minus bi, and then the conjugate of that,
if I call this now, if I call this y, for instance, so that is going to be the complex conjugate of y,
which is a plus bi, which is a plus bi, so I'm just back to where I start.
Easy enough.
Example time, let's do these three.
We are asked to calculate 1 over z.
z to the power of negative 1.
How do we do that?
Well, we are doing division by complex numbers here.
And we know division by a complex number, division by a complex number, is if we have z1, divided by, let's do it here, where can we do it?
Let's do it there.
z equals z1 divided by z2.
We're going to multiply it by z2's conjugate, divided by z2's conjugate.
That is going to leave me z1, multiplied by z2's conjugate, divided by a squared plus b squared, of, remember, of, which one is it now?
a squared over b squared, that is of z2.
Remember here, I'm looking at z2, of z2, of z2, of z2, in other words, of the denominator,
of the denominator, of the denominator.
So what do we have here?
In the numerator, we just have 1.
In the numerator, we just have 1.
So 1 over z, or z equals i, we're going to have,
we're going to have 1, multiplied by the denominator's conjugate, the denominator's conjugate.
is conjugate.
The denominator z equals i, its conjugate is negative i, times negative i, divided by a squared plus b squared of the denominator.
The denominator is just z, and its a is 0, its b is positive 1, so that is just 1.
So we're left here with, 1 over z equals negative i, negative i.
So 1 over z, of z equals i, is negative i.
Let's move on to this one.
So we have 1 over 1 minus 5i.
And what are we going to do?
1 over z, so 1 over z equals, 1, we're going to multiply both sides by the conjugate of the denominator.
So upstairs, we're going to have 1 times the conjugate of the denominator, which is 1 plus 5i.
And in the denominator, we're going to have a squared plus b squared.
The real part squared plus the imaginary part squared of the denominator, which is this.
So we're going to have 1 squared plus negative 5 squared.
That leaves me with 1 plus 5i, divided by 1 plus 25 is 26, which is 1 over 26, plus 5 over 26i.
We want to write it in the standard form like that.
Okay, last one.
Okay, last one.
1 over z.
So I'm going to have, I'm going to have, I'm going to rewrite this as negative 1 over 7i.
So it's 0 minus 1 over 7i.
Let's rewrite that.
z equals 0 minus 1 over 7i.
So what will, what will the complex conjugate be of that?
That would be 0 plus 1 over 7i.
So 1 over z is going to leave me with a 1 times the complex conjugate of the denominator, which is this.
0 plus 1 over 7i.
0 plus 1 over 7i.
0 plus 1 over 7i, divided by a squared and b squared of the original denominator, which for us is z, which is z, which is z.
So that's 0 squared plus negative 1 over 7 squared.
So that leaves us with 1 times 0 is 0, plus 1 over 7i, divided by 1 over 7 squared, which equals i over 7 times 7 squared over 1.
That one will go, that one will go, and we are left with 7i, 7i.
So don't get confused with doing these.
Now let's do these two.
Let's divide i by 1 plus i.
So that is going to be i times the complex conjugate of the denominator, which is 1 minus i.
Divided by b squared and b squared of the denominator.
So 1 squared plus 1 squared is 2.
So that is going to be i minus i squared, which is positive 1, divided by 2.
So that's going to be 1 half plus 1 half i.
1 half plus 1 half i.
This one, now it looks slightly more complicated, but all we really have to do is just do this square.
So that's 1 over 3 times 3 is 9, plus 3 times 4 is 12.
2 half plus 2 is 24i, plus 16i squared, which becomes negative 16.
Okay, and if I simplify that, I'm going to get 1 over, I'm going to get negative 7 plus 24i.
So if I do that multiplication, it's the numerator times the complex conjugate of the denominator.
So that's going to be negative 7 minus 24i, divided by a squared plus b squared.
So that's 49 plus 24 squared.
Have I done the right thing now?
It's negative in the numerator, yes, plus 24 squared.
And we can quickly do that.
24 times 24 is 16.
That's 9, 0, that's 8, and that's 4.
So that's 6, 7, 5.
And I add to that another 49, which is going to give me a 5, 7, 8, 2, 6, 25.
So this is going to be negative 7 over 6, 25, minus 24 over 6, 25i.
All be done without the use of a calculator, which in most courses you wouldn't be allowed to use in the exams.
In the exams, anyway.
So, let's do this problem.
Again, we can see that you'll probably have to multiply out that denominator, which will just give us a simple division.
I would advise against that, though, because things can get very, or fairly complex.
There's another way that we can write this, which can make life a lot easier for us.
What if we rewrite this as 1 over 1 minus i.
That is my one side, and my other side is square root of 3 plus i divided by square root of 3 minus i.
Now, I haven't changed anything, and I can get the two divisions here separately.
And I chose to put this one here purely because they look the same.
It's just the sine of the difference.
Let's do that.
Let's do that rather than multiplying out this bottom, which will become rather complex,
because we're going to have, if we don't use a calculator,
if we use a calculator, we're going to have decimal points.
If not, we're going to have 1 minus square root of 3 as our real power, which becomes clumsy to work with.
So what is this going to be?
So that's going to equal my first part.
It's going to be 1 plus i, because we're just dealing with the complex conjugate of the denominator,
divided by 1 squared plus negative 1 squared is 2.
So this is going to be easier on this side.
On this side, we're going to have square root of 3 plus i.
And we're going to multiply that by square root of 3 plus i.
It's a complex conjugate of that.
So I'm squaring that, divided by 3 plus 1.
Why 3 plus 1?
Square root of 3 squared is my i squared.
My b is negative 1 plus negative 1 squared is plus 1.
Okay, let's simplify.
If I simplify, that's 1 plus i divided by 2.
Let's do this.
Square root of 3 times square root of 3 is 3.
I'm going to have 2 times this square root of 3 i's.
And I'm going to have plus i squared, which is a negative 1, divided by 4.
That leaves me as a 1 plus i divided by 2.
We're going to have 3 minus 1 is 2.
So I'm going to have 2 plus 2 squared root of 3 i.
And I can divide all of that by this 4, which will leave me 1 plus square root of 3 i over 2.
I'm going to have to simplify.
I'm going to have 3 minus 1 is 2.
So that's 2 over 4, which is a half.
And 2 over 4, which becomes another half negative.
So now I can multiply these two with each other.
1 times 1 is 1.
1 plus square root of 3 i squared becomes minus that over 4.
That leaves me with 1.
Let's see, let's see if I have one too many i's here, what does that look like?
i plus i.
Somewhere it seems to me I have too many i's in there.
So 1 times 1, 1 times that is plus 3 i, plus i, let me just see, 1 plus 4, 1 plus i, 1 plus 4, 1 plus i, square root of 3.
Okay, there's my, it's so easy, let's just say, i times square root of 3 i, that's square root of 3 i squared, which is negative square root of 3.
Not that i there, apologies for that, minus square root of 3, plus i can have 1 plus square root of 3 i, all divided by 4, and I can make that 1 minus square root of 3, divided by 4, plus 1 plus square root of 3, divided by 4 i.
There we go.
So that's actually much simpler than multiplying, try that with multiplying these up first.
So you'll see it becomes very, it becomes very complex, it becomes very complex, but rewriting it like this actually makes my division of complex numbers a bit easier, and then I just have to multiply out.
And all I've done here is I've just grouped these terms, there's my real term, there's my real part, my imaginary part, so I've just grouped them together.
