Good, let's continue with our problems here.
We might need to prove that the complex conjugate of the complex number z squared equals the conjugate itself squared.
Let's just start off by stating what z would be.
Let's say let this complex number be a plus pi.
Now let's do these two separately.
Let's just get z squared first.
z squared, so that's going to be a plus pi squared, which is going to be a squared.
That's going to be 2abi, and that's going to be plus b squared i squared, and i squared is negative 1, so that's going to be negative b squared.
This leaves us with our real part, a squared plus b squared, and we're going to have a minus b squared, and we're going to have positive.
We're going to have a positive 2ab, that is our imaginary part i.
Now let us get the complex conjugate of this answer, so we take z squared and we get this complex conjugate, which is just going to make this a negative.
So we have a squared minus b squared, and we have negative 2ab i.
Now let's do the other side.
Let's just get the complex conjugate first, so this is our complex number.
Our complex conjugate is going to be a minus bi.
Now let's get the squared of this complex conjugate, so it's going to be a minus bi times a minus bi, which still leaves us with a squared.
We're going to have a negative 2ab i, and we're going to have negative b times negative b is positive b squared.
i times ii squared, so that makes it negative b squared, and lo and behold, we are left with an a squared minus b squared, and we have minus 2ab i, which is exactly what we have here.
In other words, we've proven that those two are indeed equal.
Good, let's use Kramer's rule to solve the following linear set, a set of linear equations.
First of all, we need to set up or remind ourselves that using linear algebra, we're looking at ax equals b.
And to use Kramer's rule, first of all, we need to define these matrices.
So let's define matrix A, that is the matrix of coefficients, which for us is going to be 1 by 1.
1, 1, negative 1, and 1, negative 1, 1.
Okay, x is going to be our column vector here, which is x1, x2, x3, and our column vector b is going to be 3, 2 plus 2i, and a negative 1.
Now, to see if we can do, if we can indeed use Kramer's rule, we need to first find out whether this determinant of the matrix of coefficients is not 0.
So let's get the determinant of a, the determinant of a, let's use it along row number 1.
And remember that we have positive, negative, so we're going to have 1 times, that's 1, minus 1 is 0.
Then we have to have a negative 1 times, close that row, close this column, so it's 1, 1 minus a negative 1, so that's 2.
And we're going to have a plus 1, and we're going to have a plus 1, and we're going to have minus 1, minus 1 is minus 2.
So we have negative 2, negative 2, that's negative 4, so indeed we can use, we can use Kramer's rule.
Let's just do this now, let's just get the 1, we're going to replace column 1 by those elements of column vector b.
So we can do it instead of 1, 1, 1, we're going to have 3, we're going to have 2 plus 2i, and we're going to have a negative 1,
we'll have 1, 1, 1, and we'll have 1 in negative 1, 1.
Let's just do the determinant of this, the determinant of matrix A1, this is our new matrix A1, let's just do that along row 1 again,
remembering that this will be positive, minus positive, so we're going to have 3 times,
we're going to have 1, minus 1, minus negative 1, is 2, then we're going to have a negative there,
okay, we've got to have a negative there, um, did I do this right, let me see that I wrote everything correct?
I hope you caught that, that's 1, 1, negative 1, there should have been a negative 1 there.
1, 1, negative 1, 1, negative 1.
Okay, so let's do that again, so 3, so that's 1, minus 1, that's a 0.
Then we're going to have a negative from that, negative 1, close that to the same column,
so we're going to have 2 plus 2i, 2 plus 2i, 2 plus 2i, minus 1, minus 1, and then we're going to have a positive,
we're going to have a positive there, and now we're going to have minus 2, minus, minus 2, minus 2i,
minus negative 1, which is a positive 1, so that's a 0.
2 minus 1 is 1, so that's negative 1, negative 2i,
and that is minus 2 plus 1 is negative 1, minus 2i,
which leaves us with negative 2, negative 4i,
and to get x1, to get x1, x1 is going to be the determinant of a1,
divided by the determinant of a,
which is going to leave us with negative 2, negative 4i,
divided by negative 4, that is a half plus i,
for x1, half plus.
And you can do the same, let's do one more,
it's a bit laborious after a while,
but let's try and make, not to make a mistake in the rewrite,
so column 8 stays 1, 1, 1,
column 2 is now going to become 3,
2 plus 2i, and negative 1,
and that is 1, and negative 1, 1.
Let's get the determinant of a2,
let's do the longer one as well,
remember there's positive, negative, positive,
so this is going to be 2 plus 2i,
going to stand in your way here,
2 plus 2i, we have a positive 1 there,
2 plus 2i, minus 1,
then we're going to have a negative 3,
negative 3,
let's do this just to keep them,
to keep them proper,
negative 3, we're going to have 1,
minus negative 1 is 2,
then we're going to have a positive 1,
plus 1,
then we're going to have minus 1,
minus 1, minus 2, minus 2i,
and there is 2 minus 1 is 1,
so that's 1 plus 2i,
minus 6,
and we're going to have minus 1,
minus 2 is minus 3,
minus 2i it seems,
so 1,
2, and 2 go there,
so 1 minus 6 is minus 5,
that's minus 8, negative 8,
so x2,
x2 which is the determinant of a2,
divided by the determinant of a,
which is going to be,
where are we,
negative 8 divided by negative 4,
that equals 2,
that equals 2,
I'm not going to do a3 as well,
but obviously I'm just going to replace this column,
with the elements of that column vector,
and for that I got an answer of a half minus i,
a half minus i.
Now for something a bit more involved,
we need now not to use Kremersoul,
but we need to solve this by Gauss-Jordan elimination,
so the first thing we have to set up,
this is our a, x, and b,
but we need to set up an augmented matrix,
let's do that,
so for our augmented matrix,
augmented matrix,
we have 2,
negative 1,
minus i,
and we're going to have a 0,
we're going to have negative 1 plus i,
a 1 and a 0,
and then some books will put those,
those dotted lines,
this is an augmented matrix,
we've put in the right hand side,
now that's in a modular system,
so it will always have the trivial solution,
if i, x1 equals 0,
x2 equals 0,
but that's not the point of the exercise here,
let's try and use Gauss-Jordan elimination,
now first of all we need a leading 1,
now I might do some examples,
which clearly shows it's not always the best thing to,
immediately turn this into a 1,
but it's going to be very difficult to turn this into,
and to turn this into a 0,
because below the leading 1's we need 0's,
so let's multiply the first row up by a half,
so we're going to be left with 1,
we're going to be left with negative 1 half,
minus 1 half i,
0 minus 2 remains 0,
and what I now want to do,
is I want to multiply this first row by that,
because then I can subtract,
so never do all,
never do steps,
try not to do two steps in one,
when you do solve this,
because you need to use a row,
that does not exist anymore,
but here clearly,
this row does now exist,
I want to multiply it by,
negative 1 plus i,
if I do this to this row,
I'm going to be left with,
negative 1 plus i,
now I'm going to,
let's do this,
I have negative 1 half,
minus 1 half,
i,
and I'm multiplying that by,
negative 1,
plus i,
let's do that,
minus minus,
that will be a positive 1 half,
we're going to have,
minus 1 half i,
minus minus,
we're going to have,
positive 1 half i,
minus minus,
so we're going to have,
minus 1 half i squared,
which makes it,
positive 1 half,
positive 1 half,
those two go,
half plus 1 half,
equals 1,
so then we have 1,
and this time 0,
remains 0,
now let's subtract,
this multiple of row 1,
from row 2,
so this,
minus this,
is 0,
1 minus 1,
is 0,
oh,
0 minus 0,
is 0,
so now we have,
a row of all 0's,
now we have,
a row of all 0's,
what can we do,
well,
we can always let,
x2 now be,
t,
let x2,
equals t,
and,
I think what you will see,
it's easier,
if we make this,
equal to 2t,
you'll see y now,
this makes x1,
because there's a 1 there,
1 times x1,
this times x2,
but x2 is now t,
so that is going to be,
negative 1 half,
minus 1 half i,
t,
equals 0,
that means x1,
equals,
minus,
a half,
minus a half i,
t,
t,
and that equals,
a half,
distribute the negative,
in plus a half,
plus a half i,
t,
but if I let,
x2 equals 2t,
make,
x2 equals 2t,
that means,
I have to distribute,
another 2 in there,
which means,
I'm going to have,
I'm going to have,
1 plus i,
t,
so there's my answer,
for x1,
and my answer,
for x2.
