Okay, we need to use the theorem that states that if A equals that 2 by 2 matrix, then A inverse is 1 over the determinant minus rearranging our matrix by swapping A and B and multiplying B and C by negative 1.
To show that A inverse equals I equals A inverse A. So let us get our matrix A first of all. Our matrix A was going to be I negative 2 and we're going to have 1 and I.
So let's get this part first of all. 1 over AD minus BC. So this is going to be 1 over I times I is I squared which is negative 1 minus negative 2 which makes it negative 1 minus negative 2 which is positive 2.
That's 1 over 1 and it is 1. So our A inverse is just going to equal. So this is a 1 that we're going to distribute in there and we can just change those around.
I and I, that remains the same. And that becomes a 2 and a negative 1. So that is A inverse.
Now let's do the first part. A inverse. A times A inverse. So A is I, negative 2 and 1 and I. And one way to do these multiplications, let's write A inverse here.
So here it's I, 2, negative 1 and I. So we're going to do row 1, column 1 for the first position, row 1, column 2 for the second, column 2, row 1 there.
Then we're going to do row 2, column 1 for this entry, row 2, column 2 for the last entry.
So I times I is I squared, which is a negative 1. So Z1 times Z1 plus Z1 times Z1. That means it's a plus 2.
And we can already see that's 1. So we're well on our way to showing that it is the identity matrix.
Now row 1 times column 2 for this position, down there, down there, across there, so we can immediately see.
So that's going to be 2I plus negative 2I, which is 0. So once again, it works for us.
Now for this position, it's that row and that column.
1 times I is I plus negative I, that's 0.
And for this, it's that row and that column comes together there, which is 2 times 1 is 2.
So that will be 2 plus I squared, which is negative 1.
So 2 minus 1 is 1.
And we have the identity matrix, 2 by 2 identity matrix.
And what you can do is swap these two around and you'll certainly quickly see that A1,
A inverse times A is also going to be that identity matrix.
Now the same as the problem before, we're going to use the theorem that states that if A equals A, B, C, D,
then A inverse is going to equal 1 over A, D minus B, C.
And we're going to swap A and D, so that becomes D, that becomes A.
We're going to multiply B and C by negative 1, so that's negative D, D, D, C.
And we need to show that A inverse equals A inverse A equals the identity matrix I.
So first of all, let us get 1 over the determinant.
The determinant is going to be, so A inverse is going to equal 1 over 2 times 0 is 0 minus I.
1 over minus I.
Oh, that's starting to look very interesting.
We're going to swap those, so that becomes 2 and it becomes 0, 0 and 2.
And we're going to have a negative I and we're going to have a negative 1.
So each individual element has got to be multiplied by this.
So A inverse is going to equal, I'm not dividing this into there, it's this times that.
It's a scalar times all the elements in the matrix.
So this times 0 is just a 0.
This times that is going to be negative I.
Negative I over negative I.
Now that's already, that already looks quite interesting.
Yeah, I'm going to get negative 1 over, negative 1 over negative I.
That's interesting as well.
And lastly, I'm going to have 2 over, 2 over, 2 over negative I.
Now we need to be circumspect.
How do we do these divisions?
Remember, it's easy to think that this is just 1, which by the way it is.
That you can cancel that.
Let's just show that that is correct.
Remember here we have 0 minus 1I divided by 0 minus 1I.
So how do we do?
We're going to multiply it by the complex conjugate of the denominator over itself.
So that is going to be 0 plus I divided by 0 plus I.
So let's do the top one.
That is going to be 0 times 0 is 0.
0 times that is 0.
0 times that is 0.
And we're going to have positive times a positive is a negative.
negative 1I squared, which is another negative 1, which is indeed just 1.
And we're going to divide that by A squared plus B squared.
So 0 squared plus negative 1 squared, which is 1.
And indeed that is just 1.
So that is 1.
So A inverse is going to be 0 or 1.
0, 1.
And what are we going to have here?
We're still going to have negative 1 over negative I.
And we're going to have 2 over negative I.
So let's do A times A inverse.
A, A inverse.
So A was going to be 2 and I and 1 and 0.
And we're going to write this up here, which was 0 and 1.
We're going to have negative 1 over negative I.
And we're going to have 2 over negative I.
2 over negative I.
There.
Let's do these multiplications.
So for this position, the row 1, column 1, we're taking row 1, column 1.
2 times 0 is 0.
So here, again, we're going to have I times that.
So that's going to leave me with 0 plus negative I over negative I.
And we've already shown that that equals 1.
So we're looking as if we are going towards identity.
Now, for this row 1, column 2, it's a row 1, column 2 crosses there.
So it's 2 times 1 is 2.
Plus, we're going to have plus 2I divided by negative I.
2I divided by negative I.
Now, that is 2 minus 2.
And inasmuch as, again, here, I can bring this up, so I have a negative 2 there.
And again, I have I divided by I.
Here we had negative I divided by negative I.
But the same is going to happen if these are positives.
You are, again, going to just get a 1.
So it's 2 minus 2, which is 0.
Now, for this position, it's this row and this column 0 plus 0 is 0.
So that looks good.
And now this row and this column, 1 times 1 is 1.
0 times that is plus 0.
That's a 1.
So I'm left with the identity matrix.
And indeed, if you swap those around, if it's like inverse A,
you swap these two around, you're going to get exactly the same.
Just be aware, though, because this is easy just to have I over I.
I over I.
That is just 1.
But as a matter of working these things out and reminding yourself
how to do division of complex numbers,
is this is the proper way to do this.
Do it the proper way.
Do it the proper way until you become comfortable to know.
Because this is easy.
This is an easy fraction.
This is an easy fraction.
It's not always going to be that easy.
And you might just make a mistake.
In as much as if we had 1 plus I and we want to divide it by I.
That is not simply going to be, you know,
that's not simply going to be, well, I can cross those out
and it'll just be a plus one way.
Do it properly until you've done enough of these to go
that you don't make a stupid mistake when it comes to division of complex numbers.
Do it done for you.
That's very simple.
That's probably what we are doing.
That's exactly what we are doing.
Do it with
You
