Now finally let's get to an example. An example always makes things clearer. We have our equation for the nth root of a complex number.
And what we have to put on the n here, I don't think I mentioned it in the previous video, we go from k equals 0,
that means we're just dealing with theta over n. And we go, we're going to keep on going until we get to n minus 1.
So if we want the cube, cube is 3, the 3th roots of negative 8, we're going to go k equals 0, 1 and 2. 3 minus 1 and 2.
We're only going to go there because we want 3 roots. And if we start at k equals 1, we already have one root, our second root, our third root.
Okay, so we're only going to rotate our vector 3 times. Now we want all the cube roots of negative 8.
Now on a complex coordinate plane, there's a vector in that 2 space of negative 8, which means it is negative 8 plus 0i.
That is the complex number negative 8. So it lies, what is its modulus?
So the modulus, if we let this equal z, equals negative 8. So the modulus of z is going to be the square root of negative 8 squared.
That's 64 plus 0, and that equals positive 8. So the modulus of negative 8 is 8. And what is its principal argument?
The argument here of z, well that is pi radians. It is pi radians.
Okay, so that is what you have to do beforehand. And let's have a quick look. So let's find. Omega is going to be, now we want cube, so n equals 3.
And r equals, we've just seen, r equals 8. And 8 is nothing but 2 to the power 3. So I can write this as 2 to the power 3 to the power a third.
Okay? Now I'm going to have the first sign of, now my pi was, my theta was pi. So I'm going to have pi over 3.
And I'm going to have plus 2k, but my first one is going to be k equals 0.
k equals 0, so that is 0, so it's just left, I'm going to have plus i times the sign of pi over 3.
Exactly the same name. So what am I left with? Those cancel out, so I'm just left with 2.
What is the cosine of pi over 3? We've got to remember our triangles. That's pi over 3.
That's 1, 2, square root of 3. So the cosine of pi over 3 is 1 over 2. That's a half.
So that's a half. Plus i times, what is the sign of pi over 3? That's square root of 3 over 2.
So I'm left with 2 times a half is 1. Plus, those two cancel out, plus square root of 3i.
That's my first root, and k equals 0. Now let's rotate. k equals 1.
So what have I got here? The first root, if I write this as an ordered pair.
So I'm going to go 1 across, and I'm going to go square root of 3 up.
So that's 1, so the square root of 3, or that's 2 already. So it's a bit too small. It's going to be somewhere there.
Okay, all I'm doing now is, if that is my ordered pair of my first complex number root, I am dividing up by 3.
So I'm going to take a full rotation. Geometrically, this is what's going to happen.
I'm going to take a full rotation, and I'm going to divide it up into 3 parts.
So I'm going to have about 1 about there somewhere, and 1 about there somewhere.
So I will have 3 equal bits in that 2 pi, the full revolution.
That's all I'm doing. I'm rotating my vector by 2 pi over 3.
So if I could draw this out nicely on graph paper, I wouldn't have to do all of this.
All I would have to do is take my vector, and its length is going to be 1 squared.
The square root of 1 squared plus square root of 3 squared.
Okay, which is 1 plus this 4, square root of 4 is 2, so its length is going to be 2.
And its magnitude is going to be 2, and this is where I place it, at 1 and square root of 3.
Okay, and then if I just rotate that same length, and I rotate that by 2 pi over 3 radians,
and wherever it stops, its going to stop at negative 2, I think thereabouts.
Wherever it stops, that is going to be, I can read off the graph there, my next, my next, um, root.
And if I rotate again by another 2 pi over 3, I'm going to get my final root.
That's all I'm doing, but it's because it's 3, I'm dividing this by 3.
If I ask for the fourth root, I would have had a 4 here, so I'm going to rotate anytime by pi over 2,
or 90 degrees I'm going to rotate, and I can read off of that geometrically my answer.
But let's do it with some arithmetic here. This is basic algebra with trigonometry.
So my second one is going to equal still 2 times the power of 3 to the power of 3, which is still just going to be 2.
Now I'm going to have cosine of, I'm going to have pi over 3, plus, that's 1 now, plus 2 pi over 3,
and that just leaves me 3 pi over 3, which is just pi, plus pi times the sine of pi.
That's correct, so I'm going to have 2 times what is the cosine of pi.
Cosine of pi is a negative 1. That's going to be a negative 1.
The sine of pi is 0, so 0 times i is 0, so I'm left with a negative 2.
And if I had divided this up into 3, you see that would be straight on this negative real axis, negative 2.
And then when k equals 2, see that's why we go only to n minus 1.
So our third root is going to be 2 times the cosine of r.
Now I'm going to have pi over 3 plus 4 pi over 3, this means 5 pi over 3, plus i times the sine of 5 pi over 3.
And you've got to know this, the cosine of 5 pi over 3 is just a half.
And then the sine of 5 pi over 3 is negative, so plus i times the negative square root of 3 over 2.
And that leaves me with 1 minus square root of 3 i.
So I'm going to have 1 across, negative square root of 3 down, and then there's my ordered pair there.
And those are my 3 roots, cube roots of negative 8.
So you can do it analytically, you can just do it mathematically, or then through geometry you could also, you can also very simply do it by just rotating by 2 pi over how many roots you were asked.
You were asked 3 of the roots.
Okay, so you just put a 3 there, and you have your first one.
You are given your first, you can get your first one just by k equals 0.
And then you can just rotate and do it geometrically, or you can work it out with simple algebra as we did with trig functions very simply.
In this example we need to find all the fourth roots of 1.
And this is an example where you'll clearly see the geometric rotation helping you out.
First of all, let's just write this.
That is going to be the nth root of the modulus there of 1 into member z.
If we write 1 as a complex number, that's going to be 1 plus 0 i.
So if we had to draw that, if we had to draw that on the complex coordinate system,
it is just going to lie there with a r equals the modulus of z equals 1.
Square root of 1 squared plus 0 squared is 1.
And our principal argument is going to be 0.
Our principal argument is going to be 0.
The angle between 1, the vector 1 and 2 space, and the positive x axis is 0.
So we're going to then have the cosine of, we want theta over 4 plus 2k theta over 4 plus i times the sine of theta over 4 plus 2k pi over 4.
So let's just get it for k equals 1.
You can see what it is, you don't even have to do k equals 0.
You can see what it's going to be, but let's just do k equals 0.
Okay, so omega, our first root is going to be 1 to the power a quarter, which is just 1 times the cosine of 0.
And then this is also 0, so the cosine of 0 plus i times the sine of 0.
What is that?
Cosine of 0 equals 1.
The sine of 0 is 0.
0 times pi is just 0.
So that's just 1.
So 1, 0 is also going to be, 1, 0 if we write that as an ordered pair, because remember this is also what we're writing.
That's our first ordered pair, 1, 0.
But I'm going to rotate by, remember, we're going to say pi, 2 pi over, we're going to rotate 4 times, 4.
And that equals pi over 2.
So I'm just going to rotate by 90 degrees.
So let's rotate and my length stays the same.
If I rotate by 90 degrees, what do I get?
This is i, 0 plus i, 0 on the x axis, i on the 1 times i on the y axis.
If I rotate 90 degrees again, what am I going to get?
Well, I'm going to get negative 1, 0, negative 1.
And if I rotate again, what am I going to get?
Negative i.
Negative i.
So the four roots are going to be 1, i, negative 1, negative i.
They are my four roots of.
And I could have done that.
You could put k equals 1, k equals 2, k equals 3.
This time we're going to go to k equals 3 because we want 1, 2, 3, 4.
We want four roots.
And that's a very, very simple concept that we are dealing with.
Really nothing, nothing difficult.
