Lastly, before we do some exercises, there is one more notation to write. Now we've seen x plus i and y, or a plus bi, we've seen the polar form, and there's one more form, that's r, e, which is Euler's number, i times stator.
That's another way of writing it. So let's have z equals 1 plus square root of 3i. Let's write that in polar form. First of all, we need the modulus. Remember r equals the modulus of z, and that's going to equal the square root of 1 squared plus the square root of 3 squared, that is the square root of 4, which is 2.
It's a positive number. It's always going to be a positive number. And how do we get the angle? Well, we remember that the cosine of theta equals x divided by r, and x here for us is 1, so 1 over 2.
So theta is going to be the arc cosine, or the inverse cosine of a half, and that is pi over 3. Pi over 3. So we're going to have z equals r was 2,
times the cosine of pi over 3, plus i times the sine of pi over 3. So that's in polar form, and then in our new notation there, we're going to have 2 times e to the power i pi over 3.
That is going to be our new notation. That is going to be our new notation. Now what about the complex conjugate of z?
The complex conjugate of z. Well, if I had this, the complex conjugate of z is going to be r times, all we're going to do is multiply this imaginary part by negative 1.
So that is going to be cosine of theta minus i times the sine of theta.
Now there's some trigonometry that we have to remember, and remember that the cosine of negative an angle equals the cosine of that angle,
and the sine of negative an angle equals negative the sine of that angle. Remember those. If we put that in our equation there,
so the cosine of theta equals the cosine of negative theta. Negative the sine of theta equals positive the sine of negative theta.
Positive the sine of negative theta. Okay, nothing has changed. In other words, I can now use this.
This, my z, complex conjugate is still going to be r, e to the power i times my angle is now negative theta. My angle is now, both of them are the same, negative theta, negative theta.
I still have a positive there. So it's in this form, exactly that form. I just have negative theta and negative theta, so I can write it. So I can basically write it like that.
There's a special form, special case if we have r equals one, I think that's what I wanted to show as well, which means z is going to be this e to the power i theta, which is going to make the complex conjugate.
So it's going to be e to the power i with a negative theta. With a negative theta there. Okay.
Now as promised, let's do some examples. Let's write these complex numbers in polar form. In polar form. Now, this one is easy. And as much as remember, this is 0 plus 2i.
So what is r going to be? So what is r going to be? It's 0 squared plus 2 squared. So 0 plus 4. And the square root of 4 is 2. So my modulus is 2.
What is my angle going to be? Just think about it. This is my complex plane. 2i is going to be straight up. That's 1i. That's 2i. That's going to be straight up.
So this angle is 90 degree pi over 2. So pi over 2 plus i times the sine of pi over 2. I did not have to work this out. I can think in my mind, where's that line? I can work. I can find, I can figure out the angle.
If I didn't, if I couldn't do this in my mind that the cosine of theta equals x divided by r. And x here is 0 plus 2i. So that's 0 over 2. And where is the cosine? Where is the cosine 0?
Well, it's at 90 degrees. So I can solve that. But please, please remember both sine of theta. Sine of theta is going to be 2 over r, which is 2 over 2, which is 1. So they both have to be satisfied.
Let me just satisfy the first one. I'll get to some way that might be a problem. Negative 4. Remember, negative 4 is going to lie straight in this direction. It is going to have a modulus of 4. And as much as I'm going to have 0, 4, negative 4 squared is 16 plus 0i plus 0, square root of 16 plus 4. So it's always going to have 4. And if you think if it lies in this direction to minus 4, of course its length is going to be 4.
What is the angle going to be? Pi radians. So that's the cosine of pi plus i times the sine of pi. Let's just do this one. If we think about it, if we go 5 across and 5 up, so it's going to have this length.
By the Pythagorean theorem, the length is going to be the square root of 25 plus 25 is 50. And 50 is 5 times 5 times 2, so that's 5 squared by 2.
This is going to be its length. It's modulus. And what angle are we dealing with? Well, we're going 5 across 5 up, so this is going to be exactly 45 degrees.
Or the cosine of pi over 4 plus i times the sine of pi over 4. Okay, so those are three easy examples.
Now we're going to throw some negatives in there and in there, and things are going to be a bit more difficult.
Okay, as promised, negative 6 plus 6 squared root 3. So it's not too difficult because we don't have a negative 3. Just to think of this complex coordinates, I'm going to go negative 6 in this direction and then I'm going to go up 6 times the square root of 3 somewhere up there.
So certainly it's going to be that. I'm going to be in the second quadrant. And can we remember cosine and sine and cosine is positive there. What is positive there?
Well, it's only sine is positive here. Nothing is positive there. And only cosine is positive in the fourth quadrant.
So we're looking at something where the sine is going to be positive and the cosine is going to be negative. First of all, what is the modulus? Well, that's going to be negative 6 times negative 6 is 36 plus we're going to have 36 times 3.
36 times 3. 6 times 3 is 18. 3 times 39 equals 10 plus 36. And that's going to be 144. So that's the square root of 144. So that's 12. So z is going to equal the modulus as 12.
And the cosine of what angle are we dealing with here? What angle are we dealing with here? Well, it looks to me as if this is going to be a pi over 6 and a pi over 3.
So that's what we're thinking about. But let's do that. We'll say that the cosine of theta is going to be x, which is negative 6 over r, which is 12. So that's going to be negative 1 over 2.
So indeed, where is cosine is negative? Cosine is negative here and here. But in our minds, we already know we're dealing with the second one. So we are going to deal with something there.
Okay. The sine of theta equals, what is that? 6 square root of 3 divided by 12. That is square root of 3 over 2. Square root of 3 over 2.
Okay. So I've got to satisfy both equations for this theta. Now, as I say, you can clearly see the only place where cosine is negative and the sine is positive is in the second quadrant.
So we are going to be looking for an angle there. And how can we do that? Well, just think to yourself.
If I have this triangle pi over 3, pi over 6 and 90 degrees, so that's 60 degrees and 30 degrees, it's 1, 2 square root of 3.
So just think about the cosine of this positive over half would have been this pi over 3.
This pi over 3. And the sine of pi over 3 would be square root of 3 over 2, square root of 3 over 2.
So certainly our answer is going to have something to do with this.
But because it's because it's because it's in the second quadrant, we're going to take pi minus this pi over 3.
Minus this pi over 3.
Okay.
That leaves us with, so what the angle that we are looking for, the angle that we are looking for is this angle.
Sorry about that.
It's that angle.
So that is going to be pi minus this easy setup.
The setup is always going to be in the first quadrant.
So look at what would have been if both were positive.
Okay.
It would have been this pi over 3.
Okay.
So we were actually looking in reverse at this being pi over 3.
So we've got to take 180 degrees minus this pi over 3 to give us this.
So if I can put a common denominator there, that is going to be 2 pi over 3.
So 2 thirds pi is going to be in that direction.
Sine is going to be positive.
Cosine is going to be negative, so I've got the correct angle.
That's 2 pi over 3 plus i times the sine of 2 pi over 3.
Okay.
We'll do some more just to get comfortable with, because it's quite difficult if you don't
do a lot of these to decide what angle you must get to satisfy both of your equations.
We'll do some more.
We'll certainly do some more examples.
We'll do some more examples.
We'll do some more examples.
We'll do some more examples.
