Okay, we're going to have minus 3, minus 3i.
First of all, in your mind, draw the complex.
We're going to go negative 3 this way.
We're going to go negative 3i down.
So we can already see that it's going to bisect this.
I can already tell you now, the angle is going to be, we want this full.
So that again, that's going to be pi minus this little bit here.
Minus that little bit there, which is going to be pi over 4.
You see why that is pi over 4, because I've gone negative 3 left and negative 3 down.
That means it's 3 squared and 3 squared.
And because of that, it's going to completely bisect this 90 degree angle here.
Because that's of equal length.
And that's of equal length.
So, of course, this is going to bisect.
And anything that will bisect 90 degrees is 45 degrees or pi over 4.
But what I want is always, remember we define this negative pi and theta.
This is how we define polar coordinates.
We want the angle between negative pi and pi.
Okay, we don't want 4 pi or something that's larger, say something that's larger than that or smaller than that.
So I don't want 1.5 pi, for instance.
I don't want this angle, I don't want this angle.
I want this angle.
And as soon as I go clockwise, it's going to become a negative.
So this is going to be 180 degrees or pi minus this little bit gives me this angle that I'm looking for.
Okay, so if I put a 4 and a 4 there, it's certainly going to be 3 pi over 4, 3 pi over 4, this angle.
But I'm not going with this counterclockwise.
Because I'm going clockwise, so this must be a negative.
This must be a negative.
Okay, so this was our intuition from just drawing very simply this.
Let's see if we are correct.
First of all, we need the modulus.
The modulus is going to be the square root of negative 3 times negative 3 is 9, plus negative 3 times negative 3 is 9.
That's the square root of 18.
18 can be written as 6 times 3.
6 can be written as 2 times 3 times 3.
In other words, that's going to be 2 times 3 squared.
And if I put a 2 times 3 squared in there, I can bring the 3 out, so it's going to be 3 squared 2.
That's going to equal 3 squared root of 2 times the cosine of...
Now let's just see if we work with it.
Remember we said yes, sine and cosine is positive.
Sine and cosine is positive.
Above the line, sine is positive.
To that side of the line, cosine is positive.
Here, sine and cosine are both negative.
So what is the cosine of theta?
Well, cosine of theta, sorry, that's x over r.
What is x here for us?
It's negative 3.
R we said is 3 squared root 2.
So I'm looking for minus 1 over the square root of 2.
And indeed, where is cosine negative?
Cosine is negative there and there.
So these are only the positives that I write here.
So, okay, that's correct.
I'm dealing with either quadrant 2 or quadrant 3.
And what is the sine of theta?
Sine of theta equals negative 3 again.
Remember, it's y over r.
r is 3 squared root of 2.
And once again, that's going to be negative 1 over square root of 2.
Negative 1 over square root of 2.
And negative is, so it was either these two or now it's these two.
The only combination is this one.
So my intuition, or my drawing, my head was correct.
We are dealing with this.
But what is the angle going to be now?
Remember, we want this.
It's paramount.
In other words, I can't have this angle.
I will have to do a negative.
So it's going to have to be a negative.
So in your mind, just change this into a positive.
Imagine it was 1 over square root of 2.
And the only thing that would be 1 over square root of 2 is pi over 4.
That's pi over 4 there as well.
And it's 1, 1 square root of 2.
The sine of this angle is 1 over square root of 2.
So it would have been pi over 4.
Now here, I've just drawn it on his head.
Okay.
So this is going to be pi over 4.
So again, I want the full pi minus the pi over 4.
Leaves me this 3 quarter pi.
But I'm going in this direction.
So it's going to be negative.
Negative 3 pi over 4.
Plus i times the sine of negative 3 pi over 4.
We'll do another example.
We'll do another example.
Okay, let's do this example.
2 times the square root of 3 minus 2i.
Okay.
So I'm going to go 2 times the square root of 3 across.
And down, we're going to go negative 2.
So we're dealing with something that is going to be around about there.
And you're always probably going to get easy ones.
It's not bisecting.
It's not going to be pi over 4.
So I can tell you now that's going to be pi over 6.
And because we're going in this direction, it's going to be negative.
After a while, you start realizing it's going to be a negative pi over 6.
But let's have a look at it first of all.
Let me just answer the door and then we'll continue.
Okay, apologies for the interruption there.
First of all, we need the modulus.
So that's going to be the square root of 2 times 2 is 4.
4 times 3 is 12.
Plus another 4.
That's 16.
And the square root of 16 is 4.
So my modulus is going to be 4 times the cosine of...
Let's have a quick look.
So the cosine of theta equals...
The cosine of theta equals x, which is 2 square root of 3.
2 square root of 3 divided by 4.
That will mean the square root of 3 divided by 2.
Square root of 3 divided by 2.
Is that the one I think I did before?
Yeah, square root of 3 divided by 2.
So where is cosine positive?
To the right of the line.
So we're either going to be in that quadrant or this quadrant.
Let's look at the sine of theta.
Sine of theta is going to equal negative 2.
Y over r.
Negative 2 over 4.
That is negative 1 half.
Negative 1 half.
And where is sine negative?
So cosine is going to be negative.
Cosine is positive, so we're there and there.
Sine is negative there and there.
So indeed, we are dealing with that fourth quadrant.
Now, if we just look at that, let us draw...
That's pi over 3, pi over 6, so 60 degrees, 30 degrees, right angle, that's 1, 2, square root of 3.
So, we now already know we've got to be in the fourth quadrant.
If in the fourth quadrant, we're going to have a negative angle.
So, what would be, if I just made this a positive, what angle would give me a half opposite over hypotenuse?
That's pi over 6.
That is going to be pi over 6 would have given me a half.
And the cosine of that is square root of 3 over 2.
Square root of 3 over 2.
So, indeed, it's going to be a pi over 6.
But because I'm coming from this side, because I'm coming from this side, it's negative pi over 6.
Of negative pi over 6 plus i times the sine of negative pi over 6.
That's negative pi over 6.
Simple.
As simple as that.
The most important thing about this is draw this on the side.
So, you can immediately get an idea of what the angle is you're going to be dealing with.
It's either going to be 3 quarters pi or pi over 6 or pi over 3 or pi over 4.
It's obviously going to be one of those.
And just try and draw it to scale.
If you did this to scale, 2 times the square root of 3 is going to be a bit further out.
And this negative 2 here, so the angle is going to be there.
So, what I drew there is exactly that.
It's exactly that.
But because we know we're going to come from this side, it's going to be negative pi over 6.
If you just do it to scale, it's immediately apparent what you are going to be dealing with.
We're going to pick up another side.
We're going to stop hunting.
We're going to do it to scale, and we're looking to get a couple of great ideas.
And I'm Opti over 6 markets.
We're looking to keep in the way we're going to go.
We're looking to deal with 12切 woes.
If you're liking this time, we're going to stick to it, we're looking to deal with this message.
And I will be 진행 with whilst we're going to see if we're going to die after the lightning will berop zeros.
And I will number 2 times theところ we're going to bring down our espíritu in this side.
But as soon as soon as long as we're going to end our head, we're going to flip the面.
The idea of the forgiveness of ourReporter Putanp sozusagen is going to put this aside.
So, you're going to get off a bit faster.
