Now let's do this problem. We're asked to get all these three-th roots of negative 27.
And first of all, always in mathematics, just try to think of things before you just run away.
What is one of the answers? I mean, you can just, before you knew about complex numbers,
you knew that negative 3 would be one of them.
Because negative 3 times negative 3 is 9, 9 times negative 3 is negative 27.
So certainly negative 3 is going to be one of your answers.
Okay, so on the complex coordinate plane, one of your answers was going to be a negative 3.
And you've got to go 2 pi, you're going to rotate 2 thirds of pi, 2 thirds of 180 degrees.
What is 2 thirds of 180 degrees? That's 120 degrees.
So you've got to rotate 120 degrees, that's 90 plus another 30.
So there'll be the second one.
And you've got to rotate another, you've got to rotate another 120 degrees,
which is going to, which is going to take you up there.
Sorry if my drawing is not so accurate, but those aren't going to be your 3.
I mean, it's so, so simple to see.
But let's do, let's do one.
When k equals 0, you're not going to get to this negative 3 one.
You're going to get to one of the others, but let's do that.
So first of all, we need to express, or we need to tell ourselves, what are we writing here?
We're saying that z equals negative 27 plus 0i.
We're telling ourselves that the modulus of z is going to be the square root of negative 27 squared plus 0 squared.
So it's negative 27 squared, which is going to give us just 27.
That is 3 to the power 3.
That's easy enough.
And now we need the angle.
Think to yourself again, we're talking about negative 27.
It's all the way up here.
What is this angle, the positive x-axis?
It is pi radians, pi radians.
I don't even have to, I don't even have to figure this out.
Theta equals pi radians.
So if I use my equation, let's just remind ourselves again of the equation.
z to the power 1 over n equals the n root of our modulus times the cosine of theta divided by n plus 2k pi over n
and we've got to remind ourselves k is an element of dimensional numbers such that 0 is less or equal to k is less or equal to n minus 1.
So we've got 0, 1, 2, 3, until n equals less, k equals 1 less than n.
In other words, the other thing we were telling ourselves here is that n equals 3.
Don't forget to do this.
Don't forget the step.
Work out a formula for yourself.
That's why I'm trying to use formula when it's like saying an equation.
So we're going to write this first, we're going to write n first, and I'm going to write my values for k, which will then be 0, 1, and 2 according to our definition here.
Okay, so we're going to have, for k equals 0, we're going to have that z to the power 1 third, or negative 27 to the power 1 third, is going to equal the third root,
so that's 3 to the power 3 to the power 1 third, which is just 3, so I'm just putting 3 there and 3 there, 3 to the power 3 there, sorry, because it's 27,
times the cosine of, cosine of, now our pi, our angle is pi, so that's pi over 2, pi over 3 I should say,
plus I times the sine of pi over 3, that is going to equal 3 times, what is the cosine of pi over 3, that's a half,
plus what is the sine of pi over 3, that's the square root of 3 over 2, so that's going to equal 3 over 2 plus,
what do we have, 3 square root of 3 over 2, 3 square root of 3 over 2 pi, okay, that's going to be one of our roots,
and clearly, clearly that is this one up here, because that's positive and that's positive, so this goes up here,
now that means, we can, okay, let's just do k equals 1, k equals 1 is just going to be, k equals 1 is just going to be,
I'm now rotating by, 2 times 1, that should not be a 2, that should be an n, so 2 times 1 is 2,
so I'm going to rotate by 2 pi over 3, I'm going to rotate by 120 degrees, so it's going to be this magnitude 3 here,
let's just check that out, so again, I'm going to have, z to the power 3 to the power 3, that's just going to be 3,
and I'm going to have the cosine of pi over 3 plus 2 pi over 3, that's 3 pi over 3, which is just pi, okay, let's just have a look at that,
so that's pi over 2, pi over 3 plus, I'm going to have 2 times 1, so that's 2 pi over 3,
that gives me 3 pi over 3, which is just pi, plus I times the sine of pi, and that's going to equal,
what is the cosine of pi, well, that's negative 1, so that's 3 times negative 1 plus, what's the sine of pi,
that's 0, so plus 0i, that just leaves me with negative 3, so that's going to be my negative 3,
let's do the ordered pairs here, so if this one is, 3 over 2 comma, 3 square root of 3 over 2,
then what's this one going to be, well, I'm just going down, this is negative 3 over 2,
and that one is 3 square root of 3 over 2, but in the negative i direction, negative i,
and there's my third root, that one is, this negative 3 comma 0, and there are my three roots,
easy to see that this is 60 degrees, and that is 60 degrees to make up the 120,
so I'm just reflecting over this real axis, and if I do that, all I'm doing is making this a negative,
sorry, that's still a positive, that's still a positive, still in a positive direction,
good, let's do this example, we need to get the fourth roots of negative 8 plus 8 square root of 3i,
now first of all, we're going to follow our recipe, or our formula, and once again,
that's why I don't like to call, what textbooks would call formula, I would call equations,
this is the formula that we follow, first of all, we write z, negative 8 plus 8 square root of 3i,
we need the modulus of z, that is going to be the square root of minus 8 square root of 8 square,
square root of 3, square root of 3 square, that gives us, you can work that out,
64 plus 64 times 3, that's 256, 256, that is 16, which we can write as 2 to the power of 4,
so that's our modulus r, we also need theta, and theta is going to equal two things, remember,
it's going to be the arc cosine of x over r, it's negative 8 over 16, that's negative 1 half,
that's going to be something, and it's going to be the arc sine of y over r,
that is 8 square root of 3 over 16, that's square root of 3 over 2,
now we can do this in two ways, where's cosine negative, well cosine is going to be negative,
and quadrants 2 and 3, arc sine is positive in 1 and 2, so we are dealing with 2,
or, we can just quickly think in our minds, we're going to go negative 8,
this, and negative 8 times 1.7, so quite a bit further up, so we're going to be about there,
very clearly, that's going to be pi over 6, that's going to be pi over 3,
but we need it all the way from there, so it's going to be pi over 2, this 90 degrees,
plus that another pi over 6, and that gives us pi over 6, plus pi over 2,
we make that a 6, we make that a 3, that's 4 pi over 6, that is 2 thirds pi, 2 thirds pi,
and that will be a solution to both of these, what is our n value, n is 4,
that means k is going to equal 0 and 1 and 2 and 3, that's all we need,
this is our formula for cooking, for baking this cake, this is our recipe for baking this root's cake.
Okay, let's let k equal 0, let's get the first one, we're going to be left with z to the power 4,
the first one is going to be, remember, we need the fourth power of 2 to the power 4,
that's just 2, that's just 2, so if we draw our vectors, the length we have there,
the magnitude of the length. Okay, now, now, now, now, we need the cosine of,
we need pi divided by, theta divided by 2, so this divided by 2,
or multiplied by a half, so those are going to go, so it's pi over, it's pi over 3.
Let's just see, let's just see, which one did I do first on my board,
divided by, it's not divided by 2, I just thought, something went wrong there in my head,
okay, n equals 4, let's just remind ourselves,
z to the power 1 over n equals the nth positive root of r times the cosine,
remember, that is pi divided by n plus 2k, pi over n, etc., etc., etc.,
plus i sine, that angle, okay, so, it is pi divided by 4, so it's times a quarter,
so that will go, and it's 2 there, 3 times 2 is 6, that's pi over 6,
so simple to make these little errors, because the first few you'll do will always be
square root, n equals 2 root, and then, you know, you just want to divide by 2 every time,
but this is n equals 4, you've written it there, look at what you've written, n equals 4.
Okay, plus i sine pi over 6, okay, that's easy enough, that's 2 times 1 is the cosine of that,
that's a half, that's going to be a half, plus, what is the sine of pi over 6,
oh, is that cosine, what's the cosine of pi over 6, it's not a half, is it?
No, no, no, no, okay, remember our triangle, that's pi over 6, that's then 1, 2, square root of 3,
so the cosine of that is square root of 3 over 2, plus i times, what is the sine of pi over 6,
that's a half, so that leaves us with, square root of 3, plus i, now, if your lecturer wants you to do them all,
k equals 1, k equals 2, k equals 3, equal k equals 3, n minus 1, do all of them, write all of them out,
but the easier way of doing it, obviously, it says, let's have our coordinate system,
our complex coordinate system, and let's make our two space vectors out of these complex numbers,
in other words, we're going to use, we're going to use, we are going to use, audit pairs,
so square root of 3 is 1.7, so I'm going to go about 1.7, that's 1, that's 2,
so I'm going to go about 1.7, and I'm going to go 1 up, 1 up, so it's there, so that is going to be my first vector.
So, you can see why the length of that would be 2, because it is the square root of 3 squared,
which is 3, plus another one is 4, square root of 4 is 2.
Okay, so this is my ordered pair here, if I draw that as a vector, which is square root of 3, comma, 1.
Now, I am rotating by how much? Well, that's a 4, that's 2 pi divided, that's a full rotation,
I'm doing 4 of those, in other words, pi over 2, I'm doing 90 degrees.
Do the first one much easier, 90 plus 90 is 180, so I'm just going to go 180 this way.
180 this way. What is happening, what happens to my ordered pair?
Well, I'm going across square root of 3, and I'm going across negative square root of 3.
Negative square root of 3, and I'm going 1 up, so I'm going negative 1 down.
Okay, those were the easy ones. The more difficult ones are now,
how long did I draw these? I drew them about 22.
Now I need to go 90 degrees up from there.
I need to do this one,
and I need to do this one.
So, they are not so easy to do.
They are not so easy to do.
This has got to be 90 degrees.
But what happens here, I went across square root of 3.
Now I'm going up square root of 3, and I'm only going there, minus 1.
That's negative 1 comma square root of 3.
So, look what happened.
These two swap around when I do this 90 degree.
Do a few of these so that you can become comfortable with it.
Okay, and then this one across makes it very easy again.
Instead of going negative 1 in this direction,
I'm going to go positive 1, and I'm going to go down negative square root of 3.
So, the same that we did with these, we just swapped signs.
Same is going to happen here with the swapping signs.
Okay, but it's this 90 degree that's a bit more difficult.
You went across 1.7.
Okay, now that means if you rotate 90 degrees,
that means you're going to go up square root of 3.
And you went up 1.
So, you're going to go this way, negative 1.
So, just become comfortable with what you do with these.
As I said, there's one way of doing it.
So, now I do have as written as all the pairs.
Okay, all the roots of the fourth roots of this complex number,
negative 8 plus 8 square root of 3i.
And you can do all of them longhand.
Or you can realize all you're doing is dividing a full rotation by 4.
So, now I've done 1, 2, 3, 4 rotations to get to one full revolution.
And it becomes a lot easier to read off the four roots of this complex number.
Thank you.
Thank you.
