Most courses, as I say, you probably won't be allowed to use the calculator, then you might be asked to this sort of problem and so get the roots there, so it's the square root of 1 plus i, and you're told to express it in your roots in polar 4.
When it says that, it means you don't have to work out the cosine and sine values. Let's follow our formula, though. We're going to write z equals 1 plus i, and to get the modulus of z, that's going to be the square root of 2.
The square root of 2, so if you remember that z to the power 1 over n equals the nth root of r, so in our instance here, we're going to have the square root of, we're going to have the, so r for us is the square root of 2, is the square root of 2.
So we're going to have 2 to the power 1⁄2 in there, that is going to be 2 to the power 1⁄4, 2 to the power 1⁄4 for us, so we might as well write it there, that the square root then of the square root of 2 equals 2 to the power 4, and that equals the 4th root of 2.
We could also write it like that. Okay, we certainly need theta, we need theta twice, remember, so that's going to be the arc cosine of x, which is 1, so it's 1 over square root of 2, and we need the arc sine of y, which is also 1 over then the square root of 2.
That's very easy. We're going across 1, we're going up 1, it's 45 degree angle, it's pi over 4, pi over 4, and pi over 4, n equals 2, and so k is going to equal 0 and 1, 0 and 1.
So let's do those, let's start with k equals 0, that means z to the power 1⁄2, our first one is going to be the 4th root of 2, times the cosine of our first angle, and then it's, remember, theta divided by 2, so that's pi over 8.
It's another little spot where one makes, this is probably where you make most errors, but you're going to forget what you're dividing by letters.
Theta divided by n, this divided by 2, okay, plus i times sine of pi over 8, and then you go, you won't know offhand, most people won't know offhand what the cosine of an 8th pi is,
but the question will then say, we want to, the roots expressed in polar 4, boom, it's there, you're done.
Okay, now, also very easy for you, for us to reflect this, if we could just draw it, but let's do this one, so then z to the power 1⁄2, it's our second of our n equals 2 roots,
again, it's going to be 4th root of 2, n cosine, now, how much do we have to add?
Well, there's only 2, so what are you adding? You're rotating through 180 degrees, or remember it said 2k, 2k pi, 2k pi divided by n,
2 times k is now 1, that's 2, times pi divided by n, n in our instance here is, I should write the n there, is 2, so that's this pi,
we are just rotating by pi, so 1⁸ pi plus 1 pi is 9 pi over 8, and you certainly, very few people will notice from the top of their head how much that is,
you can work it out, the sine of 9 pi over 8, but the question said, we want the roots in polar 4, there you go, it's all done.
Now, let's do these problems, find the real and imaginary parts of z, if z equals 3e to the power 3 times e to the power i pi,
now remember, we can write any complex number as r e to the power i theta,
so in our instance, here, z equals, now remember also, in polar form, which is the second form we learned,
it's r times the cosine of theta plus i times the sine of theta.
Okay, so we get r, our r value is 3, the cosine of theta is there, for analysis, that's pi plus i times the sine of pi.
Now, that equals 3 times, what is the cosine of pi, that is a negative 1, that is a negative 1, plus i times,
what is the sine of that, that is a 0, so we're going to be left with a negative 3,
in other words, the real part of z equals a negative 3, and the imaginary part of z equals a 0,
negative 3 and 0.
I was trying to see on my board if I did this problem, I didn't think so.
I didn't think so.
Anyway, let's do this much more interesting problem.
We have z, conjugate, the complex conjugate of z, and that equals negative 3, e to the power negative 2 pi i.
Okay, now, what did we do to get the complex conjugate?
We just multiplied i by negative 1.
So, z is just going to be very simple, that negative 3 is going to stay, e to the power 2 pi i.
Or, I just multiplied i by negative 1.
Okay, this does not change.
So, z is still going to be the negative 3 times the cosine of 2 pi,
plus i times the sine of 2 pi.
Now, what is this negative 3?
What is the cosine of 180 degrees?
Remember, it's 1, 0, negative 1, 0, 1.
So, that's just a 1.
What is the sine?
That is just a 0.
That is just a 0.
So, plus i times 0 again.
So, we're going to have negative 3.
Negative 3 is going to be just our answer.
In other words, here we're going to have the real part of z is going to equal also negative 3.
And the imaginary part of z is also going to equal 0.
Okay, so all you do, do not change anything up front.
It's only i that gets multiplied by a negative 1.
So, the negative 2 pi i becomes 2 pi i.
That's all you change.
Alright.
So, when you're playing in the game, it's going to be a negative 2 pi
or whatever 1987.
So, I'll take it
