So we continue our discussion on this ordering of sets and I've got a question for you in a statement.
So the first question is, when does a relation partially order a set and then total ordering is not included?
It's when the following holds, when the following holds, that R is reflexive, that relation is reflexive.
Reflexive.
Spelling seems to be a problem today.
So R is reflexive when R is anti-symmetric.
Anti-symmetric.
That's a new one.
What does that anti-symmetric mean?
Well, if we have a sub 1 and its relation 2 and we have 2 and 1, that can occur if and only if a 1 equals a 2.
So there's this constraint on this symmetric property.
So only when these two are equal do we actually have that.
And if they are equal, obviously, we set with a reflexive property and then the relation must also be transitive.
Transitive.
Spelling really a problem today.
Anyway, long night.
So it must have these properties for that to partially order a set and then, of course, total ordering is not included.
Because look at the statement.
If a is a partially ordered set with respect to some relation, then every subset of a is at least partially ordered with respect to that same relation.
So remember we had the set and the set was 1, 2, 3, 4, and 12.
And our relation was, is divides.
So it divides.
And we could write out, and there's a nice way to do this, 1, 2, 4, 12.
And that 3 and 3 to 12, that we do have that partial ordering.
Because let me take one subset, a sub 1.
And if a sub 1 is 1 to 3, well, what do I have?
I have 1, 1 divides 2.
And 1 divides, sorry for the noise, 1 divides 3 there.
2 certainly does not divide 3.
So we have partial ordering here.
Remember we have a first element.
We don't have a last element.
The first element is unique.
We have a minimal, which is 1.
And we have two maximals, which are 2 and 3.
But I can have the subset.
Let's make the subset a 2.
And that subset might be 1, 2, and 4.
And certainly I have 1, 2, and 4.
1 divides itself, 1 divides 2, 1 divides 4, 2 divides 4, and 2, and 4 divides 4.
In other words, this will be, that will be totally ordered versus this partial ordering.
So that's why I say at least partial ordered.
And any of the subsets that you can take there are the same relation.
If the original one is partially ordered, all its subset will be at least partially ordered.
