In this section we're going to start looking at the line integral.
And our first topic is going to be line integral in the plane with respect to arc length.
What do we mean by that? Let's look at this graphic on screen.
First of all we have a function z equals the f of x and y, so that forms this three-dimensional shape in three-space.
But if you look down at the x-y plane you'll note a curve denoted there by c.
So c is some function that contains x and y values that might be explicitly expressed f of x equals some function y.
Or you might parameterize it and we'll certainly have a look at that.
But if we draw a line up from that curve, and that curve falls in the domain of our original function f upstairs, z equals the f of x and y,
it will intersect our three-dimensional shape somewhere in space.
And we can get the area specifically then from that shape down to the curve.
And how do we do that?
Well, as we normally do, as we did in first-year calculus, we need to base that on the Riemann sums.
So we need to have this small little part of our curve c, and its length will be delta s,
and obviously its height will be the f of our curve c, because it's where this curve,
if you would lift it up, the way it would intersect our three-dimensional shape.
So the area of that thin little yellow shade there will be delta area there,
that small little area will be f of our curve times delta s, that's height times length,
length of the curve, height of the curve.
And if we add all of those together, that will be the sum of that product.
And if we make that delta s infinitesimally small, we'll get to the integral,
because it will then be the sum of this function ds.
So we can actually, in our last line there, replace our sum function there with an integral sign.
So let's have a look at how we do this.
Well, first of all, the curve will usually be a function in the form f of x, y equals the f of x.
And we can parametrize it in some other variable, t,
or we can just have it explicitly as a function of x, as in f and x.
So we'll have x and y, here we can parametrize them, make x a function of t,
and y make y a function of t, or if it was stated as such, we can keep it as x on the f of x.
Then from previous chapters, we'll know how, if we see this as a vector,
if we see this as a vector, r and t, we know how to get the length of a small piece of that,
and that is ds, and if we take the derivative of that,
that will obviously be the square root of dx squared and dt squared,
and we can get ds on its own.
So for us now to get this curve of the f of our vector s, ds,
we are going to have the f of the r of t times the square root of dt,
and that will give us this a.
