Let's do one more example. I have my f of x and y equals 2xy, my curve, and the xy plane is 5 cosine of t, 5 sine of t, so it's already been parametrized, and t has this domain from 0 to pi over 4.
So, I can do various things. Let's just remind ourselves the fact that ds equals the norm, if I make this equal to the vector r and t, is the norm of r prime of t, dt.
And my f of this vector r and t is going to be 2 times x is 5 cosine of t, and y is 5 times the sine of t, and that equals 2 times 5 squared cosine of t sine of t.
So, my integral over this curve, my line integral, over this curve of the f of x ds becomes the integral, they're going from 0 to pi over 4, of this f of r of t, so that's 2 times 5 squared times the cosine of t sine of t, and dt, sine of t, dt.
Now, it's not just dt, I now have to get this, and the norm. How shall we do that? That's simple. So, what is r prime going to be?
Let's have a bit, let's make this r prime, and that is going to equal, that is going to equal minus 5 times the sine of t, and 5 times the cosine of t.
And what would be the norm of that vector? Well, it's that squared plus that squared. So, it's going to be 5 squared sine of t plus 5 squared cosine of t, and the square root of that.
So, where would that leave us? So, that's going to equal the square root of, 5 squared is 25, so I can bring it 25 out.
I'll be left with sine squared of t plus cosine squared of t, which is equal 1, so that is going to equal 5.
So, we'll have another 5 here, dt. Okay, so all I had to plug in was this. So, I know what the r of t is, I had to get its prime, and then I had to get its norm.
So, it looks to me as if we're going to have 2 times 5 to the power of 3, which we can bring out.
The definite integral, I'm going to 0 to pi over 4 of the cosine of t, sine of t dt.
How can we solve that? That's very simple. We can do it the long way around to write ourselves our first-year calculus.
We can, for instance, set the u equals the sine of t.
That'll make the u of pi over 4 equal to the sine of pi over 4, which is 1 over the square root of 2.
1 over the square root of 2.
And the u of 0, the u of 0, is going to be sine of 0, which is 0.
And du, dt, is going to equal cosine of t.
In other words, the cosine of t dt equals du.
So, I've got everything I need to replace.
I'm stopping with it to 2, 5 to the power of 3.
The definite integral now going from 0 to 1 over the square root of 2.
And sine of t equals u.
And cosine of t dt equals du.
And that's a simple enough integral.
That's a simple enough integral to solve.
