Now that we've looked at the line integral with respect to art length,
for number two, let's look at the line integral in the plane with respect to coordinate variables.
So where before we had some curve and we did the integral with respect to ds,
that would be summing up small lengths of that curve,
we now only look at the change in the x direction and the change in the y direction.
We will still have a function which we can parametrize and we can call it vector t,
which is going to be sum x of t and sum y of t.
There we go.
And if we should get the first derivative of this,
we're going to just land up with x prime of t and y prime of t.
In other words, if we just took dx dt,
that is going to be equal to the x prime of t
and dy dt is going to equal y prime of t.
As simple as that.
So we can just get the differentials, dx is going to be x prime of t dt
and dy, let's bring the dt to the other side, equals y prime of t dt.
And that's all we're going to do.
For the f of x and y,
we're going to have or what we're going to have here
is some initial t and some final t depending on what we start off
and what we finish, t1 and t2 there.
We're going to have the f again of the r vector out of t.
And then for dx, we're going to have x prime of t dt
and for this, we're going to have from, say, time 0 to time 1
if we want to call it that,
of again the f of this vector out
and for dy, we're going to have y prime of t dt.
So what you'll immediately notice is where with ds,
remember ds is equal to the square root of dx dt squared
plus dy dt squared dt.
Where we had this, this was positive.
We always looked at just a small piece of that
and it didn't matter which direction we were going here.
We only have x prime of t dt, y prime of t dt.
So if we were to look at a curve,
say for instance, we looked at this curve over there.
So let's make this equal to 3,
we make this equal to 2,
we make this equal to 0,
we make this equal to 1.
Now if we moved in that direction,
from t0 to t1,
obviously our slope was going to be positive.
If this was t0 and this was t1
and we moved in the negative direction,
our slope was going to be negative.
So that would have been a negative
versus going in this direction.
So for coordinate variables,
we're just going to look at each one individually.
It depends greatly in what direction we move,
whether we're going to get positive or negative,
what direction of our curve we are moving in.
