Let's have a look at this problem where we need to evaluate the line integral where this
curve is given by this parametric equation. Now let's remind ourselves of what we need
to do. We actually just have three different line integrals to do and they each only with
respect to a certain direction. So the equation that we have to remember is that a line integral
over some curve of a function, the function of a certain vector in a specific direction
it's called that dx i so that'll be dy, dx dy and dz will be this definite integral and going
from we'll parametrize this function some initial to some final value of this parameter of the
f of will make a vector of this new parameter times xi prime of t so that will be y prime
of t z prime of t dt. So always we'll mark these as green because it is a definition of function
that we have to remember and this certainly is what we have to do as far as this is concerned.
Now the t has already been given for us it will go from 0 to 2 pi that's easy. We need
to construct this vector and in actual fact we don't because we do have it right there.
this is vector r of t as given to us right here. So what we do need to do let's call this one f sub 1,
f sub 2 and f sub 3 or we can just call it f, g and h, it doesn't matter. Let's call it f sub 1. So f sub 1 of x, y and z. Remember that's a vector x. In component form it will be x, y, z and that first x has nothing to do with that x.
So I'm just using the vector notation instead of writing out components f of x, y and z. And this sub 1 has nothing to do with partial derivatives, I'm just trying to get the name of three functions.
So that's y f sub 2 of x, y and z equals x. And f sub 3 of x, y and z equals z. So let's get f sub 1 of our vector r and t. So that's just going to be y. So that's x, that's y and that's z. So that's just 2 times the sine of t.
f sub 2 of this vector r and t. F sub 2 of this vector r and t. This is going to be 2 cosine of t. And f sub 3 of this vector r and t is going to equal z and z equals t.
Now we need x prime of t. Now we need x prime of t, y prime of t and z prime of t. So let's just get those as well.
So we have that the x of t equals 2 times the cosine of t, y of t equals 2 times the sine of t and z of t equals t. So x prime of t is going to equal, well that's negative 2 times the sine of t.
y prime of t is going to equal 2 times the sine of t, y prime of t is going to equal 2 times the cosine of t and z prime of t is going to equal 1, is going to equal 1.
So it looks like we have everything we need for these three. So it's going to be the definite integral and going from 0 to 2 pi of f sub 1 of this vector r of t.
So that's, we can bring the 2 out. Well let's keep it there. 2 times the sine of t times x prime of t, x prime of t is 2 cosine t, x prime of t is negative 2 sine of t, dt on the end, plus the definite integral going from 0 to 2 pi of.
Now we'll need this function, 2 times y prime of t times y prime of t, which is there, which is also 2 cosine of t dt, plus the definite integral going from 0 to 2 pi of t, z prime is this 1, so that's dt, that will be quite easy.
quite easy. We can bring this negative 4, we can bring this negative 4 out, 0 to 2 pi of sine squared of t dt, and this will have to remember from first year calculus, plus we can bring that 4 out as well, 0 to 2 pi of the cosine squared of t dt, plus this one we can just do, that will be half t squared and going from 0 to 2 pi.
So this will be minus 4, so this will be minus 4, and remember these are even, so we'll have to use the half angle formulas here, half angle trigonometric identities I should say, which will be a half minus a half cosine 2t dt, plus 4 0 to 2 pi of a half, plus a half cosine of 2t dt, plus this is going to be a half times
times 4 pi squared. Now, you can see what is going to happen here, in as much as, both, these two are exactly the same, so that they'll be a half t and a half t times minus 4 times positive 4, so those two certainly are going to go.
And if we integrate cosine, it's going to become a sine value, and if we took sine then from 0 to 2 pi, the sine of 2 times 2 pi, that's the sine of 4 pi is 0, so this term is going to be a 0, and this term is also going to be a 0, so these two combined are going to be 0, and our answer is going to be 2 pi squared, but let's take it step by step.
But if you look carefully here, you'll really see this whole two parts are going to cancel out and return 0, but let's do that properly, so there'll be a minus 4, here we'll have a half t minus a half times, now what's the antiderivative of cosine 2t?
Well, that's another half, and the sine of 2t, so because if, let's integrate this, the half, the negative of a half is the negative of a half, this will be a half times cosine of 2t, times the derivative of 2t, which is 2, 2 times a half is 1, so I'm just left with cosine 2t, so that's certainly correct.
And this has got to go from 0 to 2 pi, plus 4, again I'm going to be left with a half, plus another half, another half, sine of 2t.
And that has also got to go from 0 to 2 pi, and that has also got to go from 0 to 2 pi, and this is just going to be 2 pi squared.
Now, as I say, what's going to happen here, is we'll have negative 4 times that, so that'll be negative 2t, and going from 0 to 2 pi, and all of this is going to go away, because it's negative of a quarter times the sine of,
there'll be 4 pi, which is 0, which is 0, which is also 0, so that goes away, here we're going to have plus 2t, going from 0 to 2 pi, so that negative 2, that positive 2, this is just going to cancel out,
plus 2 pi squared, so we're just left with an answer of 2 pi squared.
