So we have this line integral. Line integral of this vector field F. Vector F dot dr, but that's certainly not a normal. R, that's vector r. How do we use that?
So this denotes work of a variable force field that the force has on a particle. So we're summing up all those force times distances.
Well, let's look at F. We can write F in component form, and that will be di F di X, di F di Y, which is just a gradient of this function F of X and Y.
So we had some potential function, we took the gradient of that, we get a new vector in this component form. That's how we got to this vector field.
So we can rewrite this as M, and that will be a function in X and Y, comma N, a function of X and Y.
So I've just rewritten this partial derivative and this partial derivative as M and N.
How can I rewrite the vector D vector r? Well, I can also do that in component form. That will be di X di Y, di X di Y in component form.
So if I looked at this integral, so if I looked at this integral now, it will be the line integral of M, comma N, M, comma N dot product with a D X, di Y, with D X, di Y.
Well, what did I do? Let's write that out. That's still, that's now the line integral of MdX plus MdY.
Now, before we had the function, we took the line integral of some function F dx.
How did we do that? Well, we, we parametrized the function.
We parametrized that function and we got the F of the R of T.
So we can do exactly the same here.
We can do exactly the same here by getting the M of the R of T, this parametrized function.
That will give us a value for X and a value, a function of X and a function of Y.
And if we took the derivatives of that, that will just be X prime of T dt.
So, D X would be that and D Y would be Y prime of T dt.
Exactly what we, what we did before.
So, instead of D X, we're going to have X prime of T dt and plus N of R of T Y prime of T dt.
Nothing different, nothing different than we had before.
Now, I can certainly rewrite this back into component form and as far as, as a dot product is concerned.
So, I'm going to have the M of the R, vector R of T, comma N of R of T, the vector, dot product with, dot product with, well, I've got this X prime of T dt and Y prime of T dt.
Y prime of T dt, now I can certainly take out this dt outside and what we, what can we do with this?
What is this?
Well, this is just another way to write the F of the R, vector R of T.
So, that's one side and what is this?
Well, this is the R prime of T prime, so that dot product there and I just multiply that by this scalar actually dt.
So, if I multiplied, if I took dt out, so it becomes a scalar times those two components in a vector.
But, X prime of T, comma Y prime of T is this component form of, well, vector R prime of T.
And so, that would equal the line integral F dot dr, those two.
So, this is the equation that we should know and that expresses this line integral of a vector field over some curve, those two being vectors, that being a dot product,
is this line integral of F of some parametrized vector, parametrizing dot product with that vector R of T, its first derivative dt.
