So good, let's try and solve this problem. We have our vector field f in x, y, and z
as being y, z, x. So that's a 3 and a 3 function. So over this curve already parametrized for
us x, y, z equals t, t squared, t cubed, t being an element going from 0 to 1. In other
words, I can rewrite this. It's already parametrized that it's going to be t, t squared, t cubed,
t being an element going from 0 to 1. Let's remind ourselves of where we're trying to
go. It's a line integral of f dot dr. That is going to be that line integral of the f
of r t, that vector r dot r prime of t dot product there, dt. That is where we're trying to, that's
what we're trying to achieve, what we have to remember. So let's get the f of the r of
t. What would that be? The f of this vector r of t. Well, y, y is just t squared, comma,
x. And what is x? x is just t. So that's simple enough to do because there's my value for x, y,
and z. But my function, my vector function is y, z, and x. That will be my m, n, and I suppose
here's 3. So m, n, and p, or m, n, and o, or whatever you want to make. Now we already
know what the r of t is. What would be the r prime of t, this first derivative of this
vector t? Well, that's simply going to be 1, 2t, 3t squared, t still being a limit of
being a limit of 0, 1. So I've just individually taken the first derivative of each. So, it
is going to equal this line integral, different integral going from 0 to 1, of the f of vector
r of t, which is t squared, t cubed, comma, t dot product with, there's the dot product with
the r prime of t, that's 1, 2t, 3t squared, dt. That is going to equal the line, a definite
integral from 0 to 1, of t squared plus 2t to the power of 4 plus, remember this is component
times, component times component, plus component times component, plus component times component,
that looks like t3, all of this dt. That's a simple enough to do, that's going to be a third, t to the power of 3, plus 2 over 5, t to the power of 5, plus a quarter, is that correct?
Is that correct? It's a c, 3, that would have to be a 3 there, didn't it? Yeah, that is, yeah, 3 over, 3 over 4, let's make that into 3 over 4, t to the power of 4, all going from 0 to 1, that is going to equal a third, plus 2 over 5, plus 3 over 4, minus 0, 0, 0, that will be 6t, that will be,
20, plus, that will be 24, plus 45, that looks like, 89 over 60. So all, just remembering, trying to memorize this definitive equation here.
