So let's look at this problem, the curve C, a curve in 3 space with parametric equation
xyz equals tt squared t, t going from 0 to the range there to infinity.
Calculate the work done by the force field given as a vector function here,
xy, y, negative yz.
Now obviously this particle is not going to move all the way until infinity,
that is going to set up an improper integral and it's going to be divergent if we did that.
It just moves from a 0.000 to a 0.111.
So just simply making this line segment parametrized is that we are going to,
well we can just very quickly set that up as a vector function.
In other words in x, y, and z where we are going to start at a point 0, 0, 0 plus t times 1, 1, 1, and we have t going from 0 to 1 on that range.
How can I say that?
Well I could have just set up that minus that which will equal that.
And we have the fact that x equals t, y equals t, and z equals t.
They're all equal to t.
And if each of them just moves from 0 to 1, that means t is also going to move from 0 to 1.
So we've already solved for that and that is the answer that we're going to get.
What is the equation that we are going for?
What is, what, that we have to remember?
Some line integral of f dot dr, both of them vectors, equals that line integral over some curve of the f of, not of x, but of r of t, this parametrized part, dot product with that vector's first derivative in t dt.
So, if we just looked at this, in other words, can you see that would be x, that would be y, and that would be the z component of our vector x.
And here is the new values for, well here are the values for x, y, and t, but just on this little line segment, just on this line segment of ours, is what we're going to get.
So, on our line segment, r of t equals, we can say r of t equals x, y, and z, that is just going to equal t, t, t, and t going from 0 to 1, going from 0 to 1.
So, the r prime of t, in other words, is going to be 1, 1, 1, and the f of the r of t, well, simply put, x equals x, y, x, y, so that's going to be a t squared, a y is just going to be a t, and lastly, we're going to have a negative t squared.
Okay. So, what are we left with? It's the integral going from 0 to 1 of t squared, comma, t, comma, negative t squared, dot product of 1, comma, 1, comma, 1 dt.
So, just component times component, so these t squared will cancel out, so we're going to just be left with 0 to 1 of t dt, that is going to equal a half t squared, going from 0 to 1, which just equals a half.
