So here's a very easy problem to calculate. The work done by the force field. There's the force field in x and y is x squared and xy of an object that moves once around the circle x squared plus y squared equals one in an anti-clockwise direction.
What is it trying to tell us? Well, the starting position and the end position is exactly at the same spot. In other words, what we're going to have here is zero. The line integral is going to be zero. No work is going to be done because the change in position is zero. So force times distance, then no distance was moved because the start and end is at the same spot.
If we had to set that up, though, how would we do it? How would we prove this? Well, we should make use here of polar coordinates and we can set up the fact that x equals r times the cosine of theta and y equals r times the sine of theta.
So if we look at x squared plus y squared equals one, we're going to have the fact we're going to have r squared cosine squared of theta plus r squared sine squared of theta equals one.
We can bring the r squared out. Cosine squared plus sine squared of theta. That's equal to one. So r squared equals one. So r equals one.
In other words, x equals cosine of theta. And y equals the sine of theta. So our new vector here is just going to equal cosine of theta comma sine of theta.
That's all we're going to have. And if we take the first derivative of that, we're going to have negative the sine of theta comma the cosine of theta.
And what happens to theta? Well, we shouldn't put this in t because we're really working with theta. That's the one important bit.
We just had to solve for r so that we can get r in then. That was easy to do because our radius was just the square root of one, which is one.
That's r of theta. r of theta is that. That's the r prime of theta. And what happens to theta?
Well, theta goes from 0 to 2 pi. It's a full circle. It's a full circle. What are we trying to achieve?
F dot d r and f and r are vectors. That is going to be the f of the r prime of, in this instance, it's theta times r prime of theta d theta.
We're just setting it up with theta instead of t. So what would be the f of r of, so remember there, that's not, it's just the r of theta.
The r of theta. Well, there's fx squared is going to be cosine squared of theta comma x times y, x times y.
Well, that's going to be sine of theta cosine of theta. And we have our prime there. So we're going to have the definite integral going from 0 to 2 pi of, well, it's just the dot product between this two components and those two components.
So we're going to have a negative sine of theta cosine squared of theta plus, we're going to have a sine theta cosine squared of theta d theta.
And look, and lo and behold, those two are the same. They just cancel out. So we're looking at 0 to 2 pi of 0 d theta. And that just equals 0.
Exactly what we predicted it to be in as much as the starting position is the same. The change in displacement is 0, irrespective of this long path that we took.
So the work done by this force field on this particle moving anti-clockwise and that from same start to end position, one revolution would be 0.
