Let's have a look at this problem. We want to evaluate this line integral f.dr with f and r
vectors where f is this vector x squared plus y squared comma 2xy and we have c as the path
along the parabola y equals x squared from this point 0.0 to 1.1. Let's remind ourselves of how
to do a line integral. That is going to be the line integral of our vector f but now not
in x and y but in vector r of t dot product with the first derivative of this vector r
in t dt. So first of all let's get the r of t vector r in t. How would we do that? Well
we have our path here from y equals y. Let's write it here y equals x squared and we're
going between those two points. Let's parametrize this. It's always the easiest so we can say
x equals t and what happens to x? Well x goes from 0 to 1. That means x is an element of
going from 0 to 1. That means if x equals t that means t must also be on this same range.
And that lets y, that leaves us y equals t squared. In other words this vector r can be written
as t comma t squared. Semicolon t is an element of the set containing this range going from
0 to 1 inclusive. Now with that we have vector r. Let's get vector r prime of t. Still a vector.
Now that's quite easy to do. We just take the first derivative of each of the components
of our vector. Which will mean that it is a 1 comma 2t. Remember t is still on this same
range. Lastly all we need is vector f in vector r of t. So we have x squared that will be t squared.
Plus y squared that will be t to the power 4 comma 2 times x times y. So 2t to the power
3. So setting up our line integral in t. t going from 0 to 1. So it's the definite integral.
And now we just need the dot product of these two. Of this vector and this vector. Because
where is my usual green highlighter. Remember this is what we are trying to achieve. So
the dot product of f of this vector r of t. Vector f. And r prime of t are being a vector.
So it's t squared plus t to the power 4 times 1. Well that's this t squared plus t to the
power 4. Add it to that. It's a dot product. 2t cubed times 2t. That's 4t to the power 4.
All of that dt. We can simplify this certainly. That is the definite integral of t squared plus
5 times t to the power 4 dt. Straightforward integral to do. That is going to be a third. t to the power 3 plus t to the power 5. All of that from 0 to 1. That will equal a third plus 1.
minus 0 minus 0 minus 0 minus 0. And that leaves us with 4 over 3. Which represents the work done by this vector field. For instance on a particle going from the point 0.0 to the point 1 comma 1 along a curve.
y equals x squared. There is certainly, I suppose, there would be other ways of doing this.
And then we will have a vector of t squared plus 1 minus 0 minus 0. And that leaves us with 4 over 3. Which represents the work done by this vector field. For instance on a particle going from the point 0.0 to the point 1 comma 1 along a curve y equals x squared.
And this is certainly, I suppose, there would be other ways of doing this. If this is indeed a conservative vector field, it would mean we only have to consider the initial point and the final point.
We needn't bother the path that this particle travels to work out the work done on this supposed particle going on that curve. But this is the safe way to do it.
We're just parametrizing the curve and using this equation that we should know to be f dot dr with f and r being vectors.
The next problem, find the value of this integral. Now look very carefully. It's not two separate integrals. It's not the integral of this with respect to x and then the integral of that. It's the integral of this whole thing.
And it's certainly not something that we're familiar with because it's not the way that we do most integrals. There will be two separate ones. But this is the line integral of this vector field but all combined.
Now over each of the following paths marked with a c from 0.0 to 1.1. And this is the path from these two points. Y equals x, y equals x squared and x equals y squared.
So certainly all three of those will pass through those two points. You can substitute these values in there. They all fit.
And what we will get to is the conservative nature of a vector field. And if it is so, it doesn't matter what path it takes between the two points, the work done will always be the same.
And I say work done because we're just dealing with a line integral in a vector field.
Now let's have a look at one way of tackling this. What we're still trying to aim for is the fact that a line integral of the dot product between these two vectors equals the integral of this vector but in a parametrized form dot d.
So let's do that properly. The dr becomes r prime of t and this r being a vector dt. So that's still what we aim for. Now can we change this into this form? Certainly. Let's use y equals x as the path.
So I can parameterize this. I can say x equals t. Now if we look carefully, x goes from 0 to 1. If they're both the same, that means t must also be on this range from 0 to 1.
And if x equals t then y equals t and I have set up a new vector r in t being t comma t semi-colon t an element of this range 0 to 1.
Now let's get the r prime of t. Now let's get the r prime of t being a vector that is going to equal 1 comma 1. 1 comma 1 still on this same range.
And if I have x equals t, what will dx dt be? dx dt will just be 1. So dx equals dt and dy equals dt as well.
Now let's have a look at this x squared plus y squared. Let's call that f sub 1. It doesn't mean partial derivative. I'm just giving it a name. In x and y, remember I am a bit lazy so I just write it as a vector. That's how I usually write it.
But anyway, that's x squared plus y squared. So what kind of vector is this? Well, we only have on this side, we certainly don't have two components. We only have one component.
It's not comma something else. Okay, so what would this be? If 1 be, f is still being a vector. What would it be in terms of this vector?
Well, that is just going to be t squared plus t squared plus t squared. That's 2t squared. And what is f2 going to be? Let's make this. So this was for us our vector f1. This is our vector f2.
It's 2xy. It's 2xy. So that in r of t is going to equal 2 times t times t. That's 2t squared as well. 2t squared as well.
Now let's just rewrite this initial vector. Where will that lead us? Well, it will say the line integral going along this curve of x squared plus y squared
that now becomes 2t squared. That now becomes 2t squared. And what is dx? Well, there's dx. This is dt. This is dt plus...
No, it's not what it says. As I said, I'm so used to this. It's not what it says. Plus 2xy. That's another 2t squared. And what is dy? Well, dy is also dt.
Now I can simplify this. 2t squared dt plus 2t squared dt. Well, that's just the line integral of 4t squared dt. And as far as the curve is concerned, we go from 0 to 1.
So this is from 0 to 1. Which will leave us with 4 over 3. T to the power of 3 and going from 0 to 1. That is just 4 over 3. 4 over 3. I hope you can see there.
Now let's do this. Is it going to make a difference if we go along a different path? So if my curve this time, let's have curve C2 here. Let's have x equals t as well.
And that means... Because x goes from 0 to 1. Sorry. That means t goes from 0 to 1. I'm still going from 0... x equals 0 to x equals 1. But this means y equals t squared.
Y equals t squared. In other words, r of t equals t comma t squared. T being an element going from 0 to 1.
And if I just take the first derivative of this vector r. And if I just take the first derivative of this vector r in t, I'm going to land up with 1 comma 2t.
Still t in element going from 0 to 1.
Now though, what is... Let's just do it here. What is dx dt?
Let's just leave this dx equals dt. I bring the dt on this side. dx dt equals 1. And I bring the dt over to the other side.
But here we have dy equals 2t dt.
I brought the dt on this side. It's dy dt equals 2t. So dy equals 2t dt.
Now, what about if vector f sub 1... Let's write that in terms of the vector r in t.
Well, that was x squared plus y squared. So that's going to be t squared plus t to the power of 4.
Because x is t and y is t squared.
And f sub 2, our vector in vector r of t.
Well, that was 2xy. So that's going to be 2 times t times t squared. That's t cubed.
So if I have to rewrite all of this now, with the information that I have,
that is going to be the integral.
Definite integral going from 0 to 1.
x squared plus y squared now leaves me with
t squared plus t to the power of 4.
dx. There's dx.
dx becomes dt.
Plus...
Now, 2xy.
2xy becomes 2t to the power of 3.
And dy becomes...
2t dt.
Simplify.
I'm taking dt out as a common factor there.
And I'm left with t squared plus t to the power of 4
plus 4t to the power of 4.
That equals the integral there going from 0 to 1 of t squared
plus 5t to the power of 4 dt.
And this we can do.
That is just going to equal a third of t to the power of 3
plus t to the power of 5.
All of that going from 0 to 1.
That is going to be equal to a third plus 1.
And that is also 4 over 3.
That is also 4 over 3.
And indeed, I'm not going to do this last one.
Even if you do it this way around,
you're going to note that
in going from 0.0 to 1.1,
you are also going to get a value of 4 over 3.
So it's path independent.
We would say this is path independent.
The work done is going to be the same
going from the same initial point
to the same final point
irrespective of the actual path taken
if this is indeed a conservative vector field.
But I think we'll say more about that a bit later.
Thank you.
Thank you.
