In this section I just want to quickly introduce this new symbol. It's called a line integral
over a closed path. In other words, the beginning and end point has got to be the same. Now
in essence what we are doing is we are just saying the reverse or implying the reverse
of what the previous video implied. And what we are saying is a continuous vector field
f is path independent if and only if on a closed curve f dot dr equals zero. So you didn't
know that there was some potential function f and we'll have a look at that here. You didn't
know there was a potential function but you did the line integral and the end point and
the starting point were the same and you got an answer of zero that implies that this was
a conservative vector field. In other words, this vector field is path independent. So
it just says in reverse what we had and this symbol just means it's a closed path that we
are traveling on. And that is for every piecewise smooth, so again integratable everywhere, closed
directed curve c in the domain of f. You've got to remember that. Just a quick reminder
and how do we know if there is a potential function. In other words, if this is a conservative vector
field that is path independent, well we can take the curl of f and if that's a zero, that
also implies a path independence. So all of these things are all built around the same sort
of concept. Now, remember this conservative vector field also means it's just a gradient
of some function, multivariable function equals, if you take the gradient of that, you are going
to build a path independent conservative vector field because the curl of this f will be zero.
You can also check the determinant of the Jacobean matrix of f if that is zero because that's
certainly how we get the curl of f. Last reminder, the domain of the vector field f must be simply
connected. So no holes or no sections that are not included that this path has to travel through
that is not simply connected. So all these little things that you have to remember for all of these
things. Now, it's easy to remember just to memorize them, but if you're dealing with real problems
in multivariable calculus, you have to make sure that all these little things are true before you just
use everything you've learned in multivariable calculus to solve problems.
