So let's try this problem where you need to evaluate this surface integral.
We know it's a surface because there's this surface, differential surface there, and it's a double integral over a surface.
Of this four-dimensional multivariable function with respect to S,
and then this S is a part of the cone, Z equals the square root of X squared plus Y squared,
and Z is between 1 and 2.
Z is between 1 and 2.
So we notice, first of all, here we were given this in the form G of X and Y.
G of X and Y, so we know we're going to use the fact that DS equals the square root of,
well, di Z di X squared plus di Z di Y squared plus 1.
Where's my ruler?
That is what we're going to use with respect to A.
So da, we know we're going to use that part.
So let's quickly get this.
What would be di Z di X?
Well, that is the partial derivative of this with respect to X,
and if you do it, you'll note that it is, if you've done this a million times,
you know that that is X over X squared plus Y squared to the power half, or the square root of that.
We know that, and we will also note that di Z di Y is going to be the exact same,
but the numerator will be a Y.
Okay, so if we had to get all of that squared, so that was going to be X squared over X squared plus Y squared
plus Y squared over X squared plus Y squared plus 1.
Common denominator for these two, that'll leave in the numerator X squared plus Y squared.
So it's exactly the same, it'll cancel out, so that'll be 1, 1 plus 1 is 2.
In other words, d S equals the square root of 2 dA.
We won't waste time on that, you can do it on the side, you'll note that that is the case.
Now the F of X, Y, and Z equals this X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared to the power half,
but what I need, I need the F of X, Y, and G of X and Y.
That's what I need, so that would be X squared plus Y squared plus what is Z squared?
Well, there's Z, if I square that, there's another X squared plus Y squared.
And that leaves me, it's to the power half, that leaves me with the square root of 2 times the square root of X squared plus Y squared.
So I've just taken 2 out as a, the 2X squared, 2Y plus 2Y squared, I've taken 2 out as a common defector and I've brought it outside.
So what am I left with?
So I'm left now with the double, double integral over some region R or some area A, it doesn't matter which one you write,
most, I think most textbooks will write a region R of, well, it'll be square root of 2 times square root of X squared plus Y squared.
And instead of DS, we have another square root of 2 DA, that gives me, I can bring those two out,
that'll be 2 times the double integral over some area of X squared plus Y squared to the power half DA.
Good, now I just need to figure out what DA is, well, that is a two-dimensional area, so it'll be with respect to X and with respect to Y.
But if I look, I'm dealing with a cone that stands up and it's cut into two, between two planes, Z equals 1 and Z equals 2.
So I think if I convert this to polar coordinates, I might be a bit luckier.
Now I'm terrible at drawing, but let's give it a go.
So what I have in essence, let's make that, let's make that, oh, I'm so terrible at drawing, I have to think about this.
Let's make that there and there.
So I've got this cone, Z equals, Z equals X squared plus Y squared.
So I basically have this cone sitting there and now it's, it's cut through there.
It is cut through Z equals 2 and through Z equals 1.
And if this is a, indeed, a three-dimensional coordinate system, in other words, that's X, that's Y and that's Z,
it is going to reflect down here to this level where it's cut there.
So I'm going to have this sort of thing and then this one will be down here somewhere.
This one will be down here somewhere, so that will give us this effect.
Okay.
So I'm going to have these two circles here and this would be the radius, remember, in polar coordinates this would be the radius.
So the radius for this circle would just be 1 and the radius for this circle would be 2.
Just based on the fact that if, if I have the square root of X squared plus Y squared equals Z and I let Z equals 1
and I get these coordinates, we'll note that, that this has a radius of 1 and that is a radius of 2.
We can also use the transformation equation.
So I was, the cosine of, X equals R times the cosine of theta and Y equals R times the sine of theta.
I can solve for R and we know theta just goes all the way around.
So what we're going to have in essence here that our area A or our region R, R doesn't matter,
equals this R and theta such that the radius goes from 1 to 2.
So 1 is less than R and it's less than 2 and 0 is less than theta is less than 2 pi.
So that's what we're going to have.
So we're going to have 2 times, so theta goes from 0 to 2 pi.
We have R going from 1 to 2.
Now we have to convert this into polar coordinates again using the fact that X equals R times the cosine of theta
and Y equals R times the sine of theta.
And if I have that squared, that'll leave me an R squared that I can take out as a common factor,
but it's 2 power half, so I'm just left with R and cosine squared and sine squared of theta.
That's just 1, so I'm just left with R.
But I remember that DA equals R dr d theta.
And I already have one R there, so that'll be R squared dr d theta.
We've done so many of these.
You can look back at the previous videos how to do this.
I'm just using these.
I've substituted it in there.
I've taken R squared out, so I'm left with cosine squared plus sine squared.
Of the same angle by trigonometric identities, that just equals 1.
So I've got R squared to the power half, which is this R, and DA, and DA equals that.
So I have to substitute those in there.
And I remember that from my transformation of axes.
So that's why I'm left with, and that's a rather simple,
and remember this 2 I just got from these 2 squared root of 2 times square root of 2 is 2,
and I bought that as a constant coefficient outside of the double integral.
So I'm left with twice from 0 to 2 pi, and that'll be a third.
So I'll bring that 3 out.
R to the power of 3 going from 0 to 2 d theta.
That's 2 over 3, and going from 0 to 2 pi.
And so that'll leave me with an 8, so I can bring that 8 out as well.
8 out as well, and d theta.
And if I didn't make a mistake anywhere, I sincerely hope not.
I can't remember.
I did it somewhere before.
Somewhere in a loose piece of paper, it doesn't matter.
Hopefully I didn't do anything wrong.
So that'll leave me 16 over 3, and times still this.
That'll just be 2 pi.
So that's 32 over 3, and I think I might have...
Let me have a look at my piece of paper here just to make 100% sure.
Let's have a look.
Where did I do it?
Where did I do it?
Surface.
Where did I do my surface integrals?
Remember, this was from 1 to 2.
That's where my mistake was.
This goes from 1 to 2.
So that was going to be 8.
Where's my eraser?
So this was not from 0 to 2.
It's 1 to...
So it's 2.
That should be a 1 there.
So we're left with 8 minus 1, which is a 7.
That leaves us with a 14.
14, and that equals 28 over 3 pi.
That looks a lot better.
28 over 3 pi.
