So then let's just finish this little section of we've got these two examples and we're just looking at the two at least two types of binary operations and one is commutative, commutative and we've looked at that so certainly that's not commutative because of that.
So let's look at this. It is commutative. We've already seen if we swap these first and second elements around of these ordered pairs that we do get to the same. Now just have a quick look at this. Just note something for later on.
We note that there's no repetition of my elements if I go down any of the rows and any of the columns and if I go down my main diagonal here and if I look across from that B and B I get C and C, D, I get the let me just see the E's and the E's and I get A and A and I get the B's and I get the C there.
So there's certainly symmetric. So there's certainly something about this table as we've written out. So that is the commutative type of binary operation and then of course we get associative, associative type of binary, of binary operations.
Now let's have a look. Let's have a look at this one. So I'm going to have A and B, C and I'm going to have A and B and then C.
So what is this going to be? Well I'm just giving it the first element of any of that. So it's going to be A and B and that is going to equal A and if I do this, well that is going to be A to C and that is A and they are exactly equal.
So definitely this would be associative. Is this one associative? Is this one associative? So let's do A and B as well with C and let's do A with B and C.
So A and B, if I go to A and B that's B, so that is B with C and if I go with B with C I get D and if I go B with C, B with C that's D, so that's A and D and if I go A to D I also get D.
So definitely have a look at that. Let this binary operation on the set is associative just as this is. This one is commutative, that one is not commutative.
And now you can just play around with the normals. You can look at what is addition, what is the, let's say, what is the positive rational numbers under addition, under the operation of addition.
Just look at these, see if you can figure out whether it commutes and whether it is associative.
