So it remains for us to have a look at how we calculate in this perpendicular vector,
this vector perpendicular to our surface, any point of our surface.
And it's a very nice, it's a key, if you can use this word in mathematics,
it's a cute way of doing it, and if you sit and think about it for a while,
you should be able to come up with it yourself.
So we have this surface Z equals the G of X and Y,
and X and Y is in the XY plane.
It's a region in this XY plane.
Now we're going to construct another equation which is one dimension up,
and we've done this before actually, so we call it capital G now of XY and Z,
and we let that equal Z minus the G of X and Y,
and we now let X, Y, and Z be elements of a three-dimensional shape.
A shape, which makes it quite cool because if we take the contour of this capital function,
capital G, at zero of G, that just equals Z.
Because if we let this equal zero, we back to Z, and we take this to the other side,
we back to Z equals the G of X and Y.
So we've constructed this new vector, and we constructed this new function in four-dimensional space,
and we let this original function just be its contour in three-dimensional space.
Okay, because we're taking the contour at zero.
So that's a very nice way of thinking about this.
And the reason why we do this, because we remember if we take the gradient of this,
it is perpendicular, which becomes a vector.
It's the del operator there, nabla, which gives us this, which makes us into a vector.
And that vector is now perpendicular to the contour at zero, which is just that originally.
So we're going to have this new vector that is perpendicular everywhere to our original surface in three-space.
So we'll pause the video and just contemplate this for a while and think what a fantastic way of doing the problem this is.
And now we just need to change this vector into a unit vector.
And how do you change it into a unit vector?
Well, you just divide each component of it, because that's going to be a vector with three components.
You just divide it by the norm of that vector.
You just divide it by the norm of that vector, in other words, the length of that vector,
and that will give you the unit vector in that specific direction,
which will be perpendicular to our original three-dimensional surface area in three-dimensional space.
Very good.
