So let's do this problem, our first three-dimensional flux problem.
So we have this vector in x, y, and z, and that equals 0, z, z, and we have our surface.
So that would be a velocity vector in force space.
We have our surface through which this vector moves.
At each point, the fluid moves in x, y, and z, such that z equals 6 minus 3x minus 2y,
and x is larger than 0, y and z likewise.
So if we could just construct what is going on here, that's our y-axis, our x-axis, and our z-axis,
and this plane is a bit slanted coming forward, and there's the points of intersection as I've indicated in there.
Also note if we let z equal 0 in this whole situation, we'll end up with this line in the x-y plane,
and you'll remember why that is important, because we have to set up the upper and lower values for our double integral.
Let's just remind ourselves of what we're trying to get to here.
Let's remember a few things.
We're doing the double integral over some surface of a vector, dot product with a non-perpendicular normal vector, ds.
And we can remember here we were given z as a function of x and y.
In other words, we'll remember from surface integrals, this is going to be di z di x squared plus di z di y squared plus 1.
Where is my ruler?
So all of that, dA.
That's what we'll remember.
Let's first, where is all my stuff today?
It's all over.
I'm just looking for, yeah, let's remember, let's put it in green.
That's the ones we're going for.
One more thing, we'll remember that we have to construct, or what is n, we'll remember that it's just the gradient of this new function in x, y, and z,
divided by the norm of the gradient of g in x, y, and z.
So that's the last one we have to, or second last one we have to remember.
Maybe we should just remember what this capital G is for.
So this is the whole recipe for this g of x, y, and z.
This function, and that is, it's going to be z minus the g of x and y in this instance.
And where is the g of x and y?
Well, there's the g and x and y.
6 minus 3x minus 2y.
So that is going to equal z minus 6 plus 3x plus 2y.
That is certainly it.
Let's take its, let's get its gradient.
The gradient of g and x, y, and z.
Well, that is going to be 3, comma, so that's with respect to, this whole function with respect to x is 3.
With respect to y it's going to be a 2.
And with respect to z it's going to be 1.
So that's our vector there.
So if we want n, yeah, can you still see there, n is now going to be 3, comma, 2, comma, 1 divided by the norm of that,
which would be the square root of 3 squared plus 2 squared plus 1 squared, that gives us 14.
So, beautiful, there we have n.
So now let's just get f dot n, f dot this normal vector n.
So, f was 0, comma, z, comma, z, and the dot product with our gradient, which was 3, comma, 2, comma, 1 divided by the square root of 14.
Divided by the square root of 14.
So, 0 times 3 is 0, z is 2z plus a z, so that is going to equal 3z over square root of 14, or 3 over square root of 14, z.
So that's f dot n.
Let's remind ourselves quickly what ds is going to be.
ds is going to be the square root of, now, let's just remember what z was.
z was equal to 6 minus 3x minus 2y.
So, the square root of the square root of di z, di z, di x, which is just a negative 3, negative 3, negative 3 is 9, plus 2, that will be 4, plus the extra 1.
So, again, that's square root of 14 dA.
So, ds equals square root of 14 dA.
So, here we are looking at the surface integral.
And we are certainly now looking at the surface integral over some region R or some region A of 3 over square root of 14z times square root of 14 dA.
And those two would cancel, so I'm looking at 3 times the double integral over some surface of z dA.
Now, what is z?
Just remember that is z.
That is z.
And what is dA?
Now, back at this, we have to construct this as a double integral.
I don't think we will convert this to any kind of other coordinate system, like a polar coordinate system.
I think we can just look at it as far as dy dx is concerned.
So, if we let z equal 0, once again, we'll note that this will be our integral for y.
And then, that means x goes from 0 to 2.
So, we're going to be left to 3 times the integral and going from 0 to 2 over the integral of going from 0.
Remember, so there's the y axis.
So, y goes from 0.
It's like a type 1 region from 0 up to that equation there.
So, that would be negative 3 over 2x plus 3 of z.
z is just 6 minus 3x minus 2y dy dx.
Simple integral.
Let's do it quickly.
3 going from 0 to 2.
This, with respect to y, is going to leave me a 6y minus 3xy minus y squared.
All of that, which goes from 0 to negative 3 over 2x plus 3 dx.
Oh, this is a long one.
Shall we do it?
3, 0 to 2.
So, that's going to be 6 times negative 3 over 2x plus 3 minus 3x times negative 3 over 2x plus 3 minus all of that squared.
That'll be a 9 over 4x squared.
So, we'll have a negative 3 over 2 times a 3 times a 2.
6 is 18.
18 is negative 9 minus 9x plus 9.
It looks like, hopefully I didn't make a mistake there, dx.
But it was 3 times 0 to 2.
So, it's negative 18 over 2.
So, which means it's negative 9x plus 18 plus 3 times 3 is 9.
So, it's 9 over 2x squared.
That'll leave us with minus 9x.
And minus 9 over 4x squared plus 9x minus 9.
All with respect to x.
Oh, I hope there's not a small algebraic error there.
3 going from 0 to 2.
Let's see.
Let's see.
Negative 9, positive 9, and negative 9.
That's negative 9x.
18 minus 9 is positive 9.
And I have 9 over 2x squared minus 9 over 4x squared.
That just leaves me 9 over 4x squared dx.
That equals 3.
And that'll leave me, is that a negative 9?
I'm just not sure about this negative 9x.
18 over 2.
That is certainly a negative.
Negative times positive negative 9x.
Okay, so that'll be negative 9 over 2x squared plus 9x minus 9 over 12x cubed.
And going from 0 to 2.
That equals 3 times.
Well, I've got to plug this in there, which gives me a 4.
4, that's 2.
That's negative 18.
9 times 2 is positive 18.
And it's 8.
So it's negative 9 times 8 divided by 12.
Those two cancel.
That goes...
What can we do?
We can...
Just make sure that we still have this 3.
Are we carrying a 3?
Indeed, we are carrying a 3 in the front.
Which means 3 goes into that 4 times.
That's 72 divided by 4.
72 divided by 4 is 18.
I think before I did get to the answer 18.
I hope it's this time not through some mistake.
I don't think there's a mistake.
...
Certainly 18 times 4 is 72...
Thank you.
