Now that we know what Green's theorem is, let's tackle this problem.
We need to evaluate this line integral over this closed curve where this vector f in x
and y equals 2x times e to the power of y and 2x squared e to the power of y on c which
is this closed curve and which is two sections which is this section here let's do that y
equals x squared minus 2 and y equals x.
Now first of all if this was a conservative vector field then we know that this would
equal 0.
Let's see though if it is a conservative vector field and we know we can do the curl of f and
we know that the curl of f is just going to be n sub x minus m sub y and this is m and
this is n.
Let's have a look and see what this is.
So this partial derivative with respect to x so y is a constant so that will just be 4x
e to the power of y minus what will this be?
Well that's just 2x e to the power of y and that leaves us with 2x e to the power of y
and that's not 0.
In other words this is not a conservative vector field and that's where Green's theorem comes
in.
So we do have this closed path, this closed curve but this vector field is not conservative.
In other words this closed path is not going to give us 0 and that's an ideal circumstance
for us to try and do Green's theorem.
So what we are going to say here is the following.
That this is now going to equal this double integral over this area R over this area R of this which
is now 2x e to the power of y dA and we've taken, we've done a line integral and we've made it
into a normal double integral.
Now all that remains is for us to look at this and what we can do is let's use a type 1 region.
We remember this from double integrals.
So what our region is going to be, let's put it down here, our region is going to be all x and y
such that well first of all as far as y is concerned it's x squared minus 2 then y is less than x and
that means we just have to get these bounds and it's easy we're just going to set these two for
the intersection get them together and you'll note that's minus 1 and 2. If we solve for the fact that
x squared minus 2 equals x that means x squared minus x minus 2 equals 0 or x minus 2 and x plus 1
equals 0. That was just to get those two coordinates. So that's simple to do. That's simple enough to do.
So we're left here with a negative 1 to 2 and a x squared minus 2 to x of 2x e to the power y
dy dx. A type 1 region for our double integral. Now it might look easy but it's actually quite a long
quite a long problem. Let's try and tackle it because it's good exercise for us to do double
integrals again. I can certainly bring that 2 out as a constant coefficient negative 1 to 2
and this x e to the power y with respect to y so x is a constant just leaves me with
x e to the power y going from a lower limit x squared minus 2 lower to our upper dx. That equals 2 with this
definite integral still there x and that's e to the power x minus e to the power x squared minus 2 dx.
x. That leaves us I hope you can still see here that leaves us with 2 times the definite integral of
x e to the power x minus x times well that will be e to the power x squared and an e to the power negative 2
x dx dx. So it's one way of writing it. Now we're going to end up with many many brackets here in as
much as this equals 2 definite integral. Now let's what shall we do? Let's put curly braces here because
this is going to be negative 1 to 2 of x e to the power x minus we can do another integral because this
is all this is all with respect to x so I'm just breaking them up in two parts. This is a constant
coefficient which I can bring outside which is a 1 over e squared 1 over e squared and that is going to be
x e to the power x squared dx and we can close maybe I shouldn't do the curly braces.
Okay with the curly braces right at the end that's also then dx so I've made it into I've made it into
two parts. Now this one's the more difficult one because here we'll have to use integration by parts
so I'm still left to the two on the outside and I'll have to do let's do integration by parts here
quickly. We'll let u equals the x and v prime will equal the e to the power x. I want to do that because
if I take u prime that's going to simplify my equation that means v equals e to the power x
in other words still with a 2 and here we're going to have uv that's x e to the power x going from
negative 1 to 2 minus the integral negative 1 to 2 of
u prime v so that's uv minus the integral of u prime v that's e to the power x dx that's certainly
a lot easier it's still the 2 on the outside and here we still have negative 1 over e squared now
this one we can just do let's just coordinate these off this we can just do by u substitution we'll
let u equals x squared in other words the u of 2 equals 4 and the u of 1 equals 1 and du equals 2x dx
that was a rude uh telephonic interruption we were here that leaves us with x dx equaling a half du so
we can make all these substitutions so now we're going to go from one to four uh x dx becomes a half
which is a constant coefficient so i bring that at du and that leaves me with an e to the power x squared
is u all of this would be still have to be multiplied by 2 so that equals 2
this is i've got to do 2 e to the power 2 minus negative 1 times e to the power negative 1
minus this is going to be e to the power x going from negative 1 to 2
and this is minus 1 over 2 e squared e to the power u going from 1 to 4
we're slowly getting there that's going to be 2 that is 2 e squared plus 1 over e
minus this is going to be e squared minus e to the power negative 1
1 and this is going to be 1 over 2 e squared it's going to be e to the power 4 minus e to the power 1
and all of that is still times 2 that equals 2 times that's 2 e squared plus 1 over e
minus e squared plus 1 over e and that is going to be minus looks like e squared over 2
2 that's an e squared over 2 and this is a this looks like it's going to be e to the power 1 that is
1 over 2 e 1 over 2 e let's hope let's hope i didn't make a a little mistake somewhere let's see
so if i multiply the 2 in there or let's let's simplify a little bit so 2 e squared minus that e
squared and it's just going to leave me with an e squared it's going to leave me with a 2 over e
those two and this is still minus a half e squared and this is minus 1 over 2 e
if i now multiply by 2 i'm going to get 2 e squared plus 4 over e and that'll be minus e squared and
that'll be minus 1 over e that leaves me with a 2 e squared minus e squared that leaves me with an e squared
plus um that negative times that negative must be a positive which has caught my uh caught my eye there
so he said that must be a positive that must be a positive so 4 over e plus 1 over e that's 5 over e
okay so quick and dirty i don't think there's a mistake in there now to do unfortunately it turned
out to be a long problem but we took a non-conservative vector field we showed there was non-conservative
by checking that the curl was not equal to 0 and there are different ways to do this curl that would
be one way n sub x minus m sub y and we did this closed a closed uh line graph and we turned that by
green serum we used green serum and we substitute that with this remember we said that this would
then equal the double integral over some region r of n sub x minus m sub y d a d a and if i remember
where i put my green marker we can highlight that because that is what we were dealing with we were
dealing with with green's theorem
