Now let's delve into this problem. We have to evaluate this line integral, and that is not how we are used to it being written, but we have x minus y dx plus xy dy, and we have to evaluate it over this curve which is consistent of the vertices of this triangle.
So we have 0,0 down here, we have 1,3 up there, and we have 1,0 down here. That will leave this equation as of this line, that would equal x equals 1. This would be y equals 0, and this would be y equals 3x.
And what we clearly have here is a piecewise smooth curve, and as much as we can call it c1, c2, and c3, and we have to go anti-clockwise, anti-clockwise.
So what shall we do? Let's go in, let's start there and go in this direction, this direction, that direction. So let's make this curve 1, curve 2, and curve 3.
Now, we did line integral, we can do this as a line integral, and you can use Green's theorem. When we did a line integral, remember first of all we did it with respect to arc length, then with respect to directional coordinates, and then in a vector field.
So if we just think back at directional variables were concerned, I have to say directional variables were concerned, remember we had a function in f and x and y, we constructed a vector in x and t and y and t, so we could rewrite this as the f of the r of t,
and then we had the f of the r of t, and then we had the f of the r of t, for instance, x prime of t dt, or y prime of t dt. That's how we did the directional line integrals.
I write that there, because we just have to refer back to it if we do this as a line integral. So let's do this as a line integral. Let's start with c1.
So if we just start with c1, so it goes from there to there, let's have x equal to t. Clearly x goes from 1 to 0. We're not used to writing it like that. In other words, t is also going from 1 to 0 in that direction.
Or we could have said negative the c1 and that would have been the other way around. If x equals t, that means y equals the 3 of t.
And clearly dx will just be dt. dx dt will equal 1. Bring dt over to the other side. And the differential dy would be 3 dt.
So let's rewrite this for curve 1 and see where we get with this. So we're going to have this integral and going from 1 to 0.
t goes from 1 to 0 and as much as x goes from 1 to 0. So x minus y is going to be a negative 2t, t minus 3t. dx is going to be dt.
Now we don't build this. This x prime of t that's there is built into this because this function is not written as f of x and y. It's written in these two parts as if it's m, n of some vector field.
So don't make that mistake. This x prime of t is already in there. Let me show you. x times y is now going to be 3t squared. And dy is just 3 times dt. So that y prime of t is already built into that dt.
Okay. So that will be the definite integral. I'm going from 1 to 0. I can take dt out as a common factor. So I'm going to have 9t squared minus 2t dt.
That leaves me with 903. That's 3t to the power 3t squared. I'm going from 1 to 0. So that will be 0. If I put a 1 in there, that's going to be 3.
minus there. Of 3 minus 1. That's going to equal a negative 2. Just to see if that's correct. That's 0 minus this, which would be 3 minus 1, which is 2.
So that equals a negative 2. Sorry about that. So this first part is going to be a negative 2. Let's do c2. Let's do c2. So c2 goes from there to there.
Okay. And it starts with an equation y equals 0. So if y equals 0, let's just let x equal, x is then going to go from 0 to 1.
That is 0 to 1. Let's let x equal t. In other words, t goes from 0 to 1. I'm going to have the fact that dx equals dt and dy is going to equal 0 dt.
It's a constant. It's a constant. It's a constant. It's a constant. It is 0. It's a constant. It is 0. So if we rewrite, this is going to go from 0 to 1 of x minus y.
So that's t minus 0, which is this t. dx equals dt plus xy is just going to be 0. And dy is 0 dt.
So we're just left with a half. So we're just left with a half. A half t squared and going from 0 to 1. And that just equals a half.
So now we've had negative 2 and we've had a half. Let's see what happens with c3.
Now c3 goes from there to there. So let us say that x equals t. We know that x...
Oh, let's not do that. That's not going to work.
Let's say that x is just equal to 1. x is equal to 1. And y goes from 0 to 3. 0 to 3. Let's say y equals t.
That means t is an element of going from 0 to 3. We're going to have the fact that dx equals 0 dt.
dx is going to equal 0 dt because x is just a constant. And dy dt, dy is just going to equal dt.
t is just 1. So we're going to have the integral of going from 0 to 3 of what is x minus y.
that's 1 minus t. 1 minus t. And what is dx? That's a 0 dt. So that term is going to disappear.
x times y is this t. And dy is this dt. So we're going to have this 0 to 3. 0 to 3 of t dt.
That's half t squared. Going from 0 to 3. That's going to be a half times 3 squared, I should say.
And that's 9 over 2. So what do we have? We had a negative 2. Then we had a positive a half.
And then we had a positive 9 over 2. That equals 5 minus 2. And that equals 3.
So our answer for this line integral. I hope you could see where... No, you couldn't.
Where I was writing it? So I just had this negative a 2 there.
Plus a half. Plus 9 over 2. And that lets me with 3.
Let's try and do this though as a... As a... As using Green's theorem.
So Green's theorem is going to state that we're going to have this integral.
But what we would have to do... Let's just remember that this is now m equals x minus y.
And n equals x, y. So those are our two components of this vector field in x and y.
Which is going to equal x minus y and x, y.
Now we need the curl of f.
Other way to write that is this nx minus m, y.
Or that would have been just the gradient there cross product with f.
So I get the determinant of that 2 by 2 matrix.
Which is di n, di x minus di m, di y.
And that is going to equal...
So if I take this with respect to x, I'm going to get y.
Minus if I take this with respect to y.
That's a negative 1. That equals y plus 1.
So I can write my line integral now.
As a double integral over some region of my curl of f.
Which is y plus 1 dA.
Now this region, it has an area that refers to the same thing.
Let's turn this double integral into a type 1 region.
So we're going to go from, as far as the y is concerned, our region then, in x and y.
Such that, so y is going to go from 0 to this 3x.
And x is just going to lie between 0 and 1.
So this is a simple double integral then, in going from 0 to 1, in going from 0 to 3x.
Of y plus 1, in dy dx.
So just using green serum there to state that this equals the line integral.
That we had written in this form.
So that is going to be the integral, in going from 0 to 1, in going from 0 to 1.
Of, with respect to, that's going to be a half y squared plus y, going from 0 to 3x.
dx, that's going to leave us with, going from 0 to 1, that's going to be a half.
This is 9x squared.
So for that, plus 3x.
And putting in 0 says it's going to be 0 dx.
That is the integral going from 0 to 1.
Of 9 over 2x squared plus 3x dx.
And if I did this, that's going to be 9 over, that's going to be a 3.
A 2, that's going to be a third x to the power 3 plus 3 over 2x squared.
And going from 0 to 1.
That will cancel.
So that will just be 3 over 2x cubed.
Plus 3 over 2x squared.
And going from 0 to 1, which will just leave me with 3 over 2 plus 3 over 2.
That's 6 over 2.
And that equals 3.
Which is exactly equal to 3.
Which is exactly equal to 3.
