So now that we've seen what Stokes' theorem is all about, let's do a problem.
So we have this line integral over a closed curve of ydx minus 5xdy plus 3dz.
So we can see that it's in 3-space, so we can't use Green's theorem.
In the plane we'll have to use Green's theorem in 3-space, otherwise known as Stokes' theorem.
We see it's a closed-directed anti-clockwise curve as shown.
So it goes anti-clockwise, so it will go in this direction.
And if I curl my fingers along it, it's pointing in this direction, which will be as far as the z-axis is concerned.
Although it's this direction, it would be up.
So n would be, that would give us the direction of n, which would be positive.
Now there's a few things to do here.
First of all, we have to get f.
This is a long problem, I probably will have to break the recording in 2, but I'll put it back together again in editing.
So we have to get f as far as x, y, and z is concerned in the form of m, n, p.
Fortunately, it was written like this, so I know that that would be y, negative 5x, comma 3.
I think that's the way the problem was stated.
Let's see, y minus 5x and 3 indeed.
So if I had to get the curl of f, where's my ruler, if I had to get the curl of f, one way to do it would be to get the determinant of this 3 by 3 matrix, which is i.
I remind myself of that negative, and di, di, x, di, di, y, and di, di, z, and then y, negative 5x and 3.
The determinant of this 3 by 3 matrix, how did we do that?
Remember, first of all for i, we close the ith row and the ith column, and we get this determinant of the resulting 2 by 2 matrix.
So it's that 1 times that 1 minus that 1 times that 1, so it's di, di, di, di, y of 3, which is this 0.
That's this 0 minus di, di, di, z of negative 5x, that's also 0.
That's in the i-roof direction.
Then a minus, so I close that row and that column.
So it's di, di, x of 3, that's 0.
Minus di, di, z of y, that's also 0.
And that's what we expect from getting the curl.
It will always then be in the k direction.
Well, for this at least.
And then di, di, x of negative 5x, that's negative 5 minus di, di, y, 1, that's negative 1.
That's in the k-roof direction.
So I'm left with this curl, which is 0, 0, negative 6.
That is the curl of f.
Now what we need is we need, so we've got the curl.
Just remind ourselves.
So we're looking for, we're looking for the curl, the surface integral of the curl of f dot product within,
the normal vector, f, of that normal vector with respect to the surface, surface integral.
So now we know what the curl of f is, but certainly we need this n.
So for that we need, we need z equals the g of x and y.
As we've shown, we can do it in x equals the g of y and z, whatever.
But how do we, how do we do that if we were just given these three lines?
Well, there's, I suppose there's various ways to do it.
Let's review one from linear algebra.
That's always, that's always fun to do.
Let's choose a point P.
And we choose that point as x, y, and z.
And we choose this point P1.
And this point P1 equals 2, 0, 0.
That's 2.
Let's just choose another two points.
Let's choose point P2 being this one, which is 0, 3, 0.
And point P3, and we'll call that 0, 0, 6.
So let's get vector P, let's get vector P1P.
Vector P1P, so that is just going to be x minus 2, x minus 2, comma, y, comma, z.
So I'm just subtracting those two points.
This point P is in the plane, anywhere in this plane formed by these three lines.
So I've just chosen a point, and I'm taking one vector from that point, wherever it is, to that point.
And let's get this vector P2P3.
Completely different vector.
And so that would be 0, comma, negative 3, comma, 6.
So there's my vector.
I do know, well, let's get another vector as far as including this point P.
So let's get vector P1P2.
P1P2.
Okay, let's just get that.
We'll keep that one.
It's best to construct a vector that's somehow connected to the point you've just gotten.
So P1P2, so it's P1P2, that is going to be 0 minus 2, that's negative 2, comma, 3, comma, was that 0, yeah, comma, 0.
So now these two vectors, one points in that direction, and the other one points in that direction.
If I do the cross product, the resulting vector will always be 90 degrees, as we've shown there in the K, 90 degrees in the, or perpendicular, I should say, orthogonal to those two vectors.
If you do a cross product between any two vectors, those two vectors form a plane, and the resultant vector would be orthogonal or perpendicular to that.
So I need to get the cross product of those two.
So to do that, again, I'm going to get the determinant.
So what I'm doing is P1P cross product P1P2.
Those vectors there.
I'm getting that cross product.
So the determinant of I hat, negative J hat, K hat, and then I have the two vectors.
X minus 2, Y and Z, and negative 2, 3 and 0, and I'm going to get this determinant.
So what would that be?
Well, we're going to, for I, we're going to close I's row and column.
So I've got 0 minus, 0 minus 3Z.
So it's negative 3Z in the I hat direction.
I remember to put my negative.
So that's 0 minus negative 2, that's positive 2Z in the J roof direction.
And I close those two.
So that'll be 3X minus 6.
3X minus 6 plus 2Y.
2Y in the K roof direction.
So that vector is going to equal vector negative 3Z comma negative 2Z comma 3X minus 6 plus 2Y.
That is that vector.
Now I have this vector, which is perpendicular, orthogonal to this plane.
And I have this other vector, which is a vector not involving this point.
There it goes.
And if I do the dot product, remember, of two vectors that are, this one is in the plane,
and I know this one is orthogonal to that, so they are 90 degrees apart from each other.
And if I do the dot product between those two vectors, the answer should be 0.
So let's do that.
Let's do, you see there, let's do vector 0 comma negative 3 comma 6 dot product with this vector,
negative 3Z comma negative 2Z comma 3X minus 6 plus 2Y, and that has got to equal 0.
So I have 0 minus 6Z plus, let's say, let's see, there's 18X minus 36 plus 12Y equals 0.
I can divide everything by 6, I'm left with negative Z plus 3X minus 6 plus 2Y equals 0,
and Z equals, indeed, negative 3 times negative 2Z, that must be a positive 6Z,
so positive Z, so Z equals 6 minus 3X minus 2Y.
So I've just used my knowledge of linear algebra to get that equation of that plane.
But I have to construct the G of G of X, Y, and Z, and that is going to be Z minus the G of X and Y,
and this is the G of X and Y.
So that's going to be negative 6, positive 3X, positive 2Y.
I have to get the gradient of G in X, Y, and Z,
so that is going to equal, with that with respect to X, that is going to be 3,
with respect to Y is 2, and with respect to Z equals 1,
and for N, that will be 3 comma 2 comma 1 divided by the norm of that,
and the norm of that would just be square root of 9 plus 4 plus 1, that's 14.
And there we have N.
So we have the curl of F.
We have the curl of F.
Where did we do it?
Let's just write it here.
The curl of F, that was 0 comma 0 comma negative 6.
Now I have to get the dot product of those two.
So I have to get the curl of F dot product with N.
So that would be 0 times that would be 0, 0 times that would be 0,
so that's going to be 0 plus 0 plus negative 6 times that,
so it's minus 6 over the square root of 14.
Over the square root of 14.
Good.
So, yep, correct, negative 6.
So we have this equals negative 6 over the square root of 14.
So what we're left with is this surface integral of negative 6 over the square root of 16 dS.
Now remember what dS is.
dS now has to be brought down, of the surface brought down into the area that is the XY plane.
Into the area which is the XY plane.
So I have my function Z there.
So I just have to get di, di, di, X squared of this, which would be negative 3.
That's 9 plus negative 2 squared.
That's 4 plus di Z, di Z is 1.
1 squared is 1 dA.
So that works out negative 14 as well.
So I'm left with the area integral now.
Just of a region in the plane of negative 6 over the square root of 14 times square root of 14 dA.
Now think about it.
All I have now is this plane here.
And if this is X and that's Y, I can make this into a type 1 region.
And I can clearly see here this is going to equal, as far as Y is concerned, we go from Y equals 0.
Remember that's the Y axis, that's the X axis now.
So we go from Y equals 0 on this side to Y equals, so Y equals 0 at the bottom of this line.
And at the top we're going to have that is equal to, is it negative 3 over 2X plus 3.
So my region R, all those two cancel, so it's just negative 6.
But my region R is going to be such that, and X and Y, such that we're going to go from 0 to negative 3 over 2X squared plus 3.
And then X is going to go from 0, X is just going to go from 0 to 2.
So it's in the XY plane, a proper two-dimensional type 1 region.
So 0 and 1 on that side.
And it's simple just to get the equation of this line.
The slope is just going to be the change in Y over the change in X, which is 3, and negative 3 and 2, or 3 and negative 2.
Good.
So, there we are.
So, this is just going to be from 0 to 2, and 0 to negative 3 over 2X squared plus 3, dy dx.
That is going to be negative 6, and going from 0 to 2, and that will just be a single Y.
And I'm just going to replace this, so it will be negative 3 over 2X squared plus 3, all of that dx.
And that will be a negative 6.
So, this is going to be negative 3 over 2, 1 over 3, X cubed plus 3X.
And that goes from 0 to 1, that is going to be negative 6.
Those cancel out, that is negative 1 half.
So, it's negative 1 half times 1 plus 3.
And, um, plus 3, let's just see, I think, um, that's got to be, let's just see, uh, X squared and, uh, negative 3 over 2X.
What am I doing?
Something looked horribly wrong.
So, that line, this is X, not X squared, the way this X came from, this square came from, so that's this X.
And, if I bring that forward, that is going to make this a 4, so it's negative 3 over 4X squared.
And, uh, negative 3 over 4, negative 3 over 4, that becomes X squared plus 3X, X squared plus 3X, and going from 0 to 1.
Apologies for that.
So, if I bring that in, if I bring 0 to, oh, this is horrible.
I should really redo this, actually, that's 0 to 2, 0 to 2.
So, 2 times 4, so that's going to be a negative 3, and that is going to be a positive 6.
So, that's, uh, 3, and negative 6 times 3 is negative 18.
Oh!
At least, I hope the majority of you are awake, and you would have noticed all the nonsense that went on here.
So, we've just gone from a surface integral, uh, and we remember how to do a surface integral to doing this problem.
And, if you just don't rush it, like I've done here, and made these silly mistakes, it's easy to get to the answer of negative 18.
So, do you know, what you have done here?
