And finally, let's look at this problem. Calculate the output flux of an electric field with, I think, electric field with, that should just be the vector field F, through a smooth surface S, given by, this is our vector field of the electric field, X cubed, Y cubed, Z cubed, and our surface, fully enclosing our three-dimensional spaces, X squared plus Y squared plus Z squared equals 1,
which is just this sphere with a radius of 1. You have to recognize this as a sphere of radius 1. We remind ourselves that this surface integral of F dot this normal vector, dS, equals the surface integral over this three-dimensional region of the divergence of F with respect to this volume V.
Again, let us discuss the theorem that we're going to make use because all the criteria are there for us to allow us to use this.
First, let's get the divergence of the vector field. That is going to be the del-operated dot product with F. In other words, di-di-X, di-di-Y, and di-di-Z, so the three partial derivatives.
Dot product with x cubed, y cubed, and z cubed. That leaves us with 3x squared plus 3y squared plus 3z squared. And this will now be dV. Now, it's a sphere in three-dimensional space. The easiest thing to do would be to convert this to spherical coordinates.
Think of the sphere, though. Row is going to be very easy because going from the origin to anywhere on the surface will go from 0 to 1. So, row is going to be very easy. We don't even have to think about it. No matter where we are going from the origin, if the origin is right at the center of our sphere going from 0 in any direction, the length is just going to be up to 1.
Think of phi. That's also going to be very easy because if you cut this sphere down the middle from the top, the positive z-axis falling all the way to the negative z-axis, that's just going to be pi radians.
So, it's going to go from 0 all the way down to pi. And as with theta, with theta, it's going to go all the way around the sphere. So, that's from 0 to 2pi. So, that was very easy.
All we have to do is to remind ourselves of the translation equations. So, x is going to be rho, sine of phi, cosine of theta, y equals rho. So, this is this funny P, remember.
Sine of phi, sine of phi, sine of phi, sine of theta, and z equals the rho times the cosine of phi. So, this divergence of f, I just now have to write in the coordinates rho, phi, and theta.
I have to write it as such. And I can bring out the 3 as a common factor. It's x squared plus y squared plus z squared. So, that's going to be rho squared, sine squared, phi, cosine squared, theta, plus rho squared, sine squared, phi, sine squared, theta, plus rho squared, cosine squared, phi.
That is going to equal 3. I can take rho squared, sine squared, sine squared, phi, out of these two first ones as a common, and I'm left with cosine squared of theta plus sine squared of theta, which is just 1, plus a squared there, cosine squared of phi.
And now I can take out rho squared. There's a common factor for these two. That leaves me sine squared of phi plus cosine squared of phi, which by trigonometric identity is also 1. So, this is what I'm left with.
I just have to remember now that dv equals rho squared, sine squared, sine of phi, d rho, d phi, d theta. So, I still have to multiply those two. I still have to multiply those two. So, I'm going to get rho to the power 4.
So, if I rewrite this, I can bring out the 3 as a constant coefficient. So, that's going to go from 0 to 2 pi.
You can see there's 0 to 2 pi, from 0 to pi, and from 0 to 1 of, I have to still multiply this by that. So, that's rho to the power 4, d rho, d phi, d theta.
That's going to equal 3 times 0 to 2 pi of 0 to pi of a fifth. I can bring that 5 out. Rho to the power 5, going from 0 to 1, d phi, d theta.
So, that's going to equal 3 times 0 to 2, d theta. So, that's going to equal 3 over 5, going from 0 to 2, pi, and then going from 0 to pi, d phi, d theta.
Did I leave out my, I left out something, didn't I? Hope you caught that. I left out that sine of phi there as well.
So there has to be a sine of phi and a sine of phi there. Apologies for that. So
that is just the sine of phi left there d phi d theta. So this was the
conversion. I plugged that in that left me with 3 rho squared but I still had to
multiply by rho squared sine theta d rho d theta d phi d theta. Rho squared sine of phi. So that
leaves me with rho 3 rho to the power of 4 sine of phi. So it's just that sine of the 3 I brought
out as a constant coefficient. So I'm left with rho cubed sine phi but it's with respect to rho the
first integral. So sine of phi is a constant. I just keep the constant. Okay. So that's where
we left. So it's 3 over 5 going from 0 to 2 pi. Sine of phi d phi. The integral or the
antiderivative of that would be negative cosine of phi going from 0 to pi d theta because it's
negative the cosine of the first derivative of negative the cosine of phi would be sine of
phi. So here in doing this will be the cosine of phi minus the cosine of 0. That's negative 1
minus 1. That's negative 2 which I can bring out the negative 2. It's a constant coefficient.
Negative 2 times negative 3. That's 6 over 5 going from 0 to 2 pi just of d theta now.
So that leaves me 6 over 5 theta going from 0 to 2 pi which is this now 12 pi over 5.
So that wasn't too difficult to do. It was a good example in as much as we had to remember
how to convert to spherical coordinates which you would do either that or cylindrical coordinates
in 3d. Remember the polar coordinates we did for 2d space and spherical would work well here because
our surface is a sphere with a radius of 1. So we had to remember our translation and we had to
remember that dv would be rho squared sine of phi d rho d phi d theta. And we have to notice the fact that
because we have the smooth surface totally enclosing a three-dimensional region and we have this vector
field across that surface that we could use Gauss's theorem.
