Let's do an example problem. It didn't print out so well, but evaluate the surface integral.
So that will be a double integral over some surface of the dot product with a vector field and a normal vector to this surface with respect to that surface.
Where our vector field across the surface would be the f of x, y, and z.
And if you can't see properly, that's x, y, y squared, z, z cubed.
Where d is the surface, whereby x is between 0 and 1, y is between 0 and 1, and z is between 0 and 1.
And that's just simply this cube.
And it might be easier.
First of all, we notice that it is an enclosed space, an enclosed region.
And the surface is piecewise smooth, and it completely encloses this region d.
So we have a surface s enclosing a region d in 3 space.
And we have a vector field defined everywhere across this surface.
So if we could just do normals everywhere, the problem is we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 surfaces here, and we'd have to do the surface integral across each of those surfaces.
It would obviously be a lot easier if we can make use of Gauss's theorem, which we can, because it is an enclosed space and a surface that is piecewise smooth.
And what we are going to do is, the surface integral of ours of f dot n ds, we're just going to say that that is equal to a triple integral over that region of the divergence of vector f with respect to this volume.
So we just have to set up this volume.
Where is my green?
There we go.
This is what we are trying to remember.
That's what, that, that's Gauss's theory.
So it's just relating the surface integral to a triple integral over this volume enclosed by the surface.
And first of all, so let's get the divergence of f.
f, remember that is nothing other than the del operator, cross product with f, and this del operator has three components because we're dealing in three space here.
That's di, di x, di, di y, and di, di z.
So it's partial derivative with respect to x, y, and z dot product with, well, we have x, y, y squared z, z cubed.
First component times first component plus those, plus those.
So that would be with, this first one with respect to x, so y is just a constant, that'll leave me with y plus, this one with respect to y, well, this is going to be two y z.
And this last one with respect to z, and this last one with respect to z would be three z squared.
So that's the divergence.
Now we just have to look at this volume, this dv.
And volume in this case is going to be x times y times z.
And any kind, any small little cubee in here is also going to be that.
And the triple integral, the upper and lower values of these definite integrals, is just 0 to 1, 0 to 1, 0 to 1, as has been given here in our region D.
Of then y plus 2y z plus 3z squared, let's make it dz, dy, dx.
And as much as the integral x, z goes from 0 to 1, y goes from 0 to 1, and x goes from 0 to 1.
So that's easy enough to see, and now we just have to do this long triple integral, 0 to 1, with respect to z, that's going to leave us with a y z plus, that is going to leave us with a y z squared, and that's going to leave us with a z cubed, going from 0 to 1 with respect to y, then with respect to x.
Then 0 to 1, and 0 to 1, and 0 to 1, if I just plug in the z's there, and then the 1, and then the 0 for the z's, I'm left with y, it looks like y plus y plus 1, that's 2y plus 1, dy dx.
That will be this integral going from, now it's with respect to y, so this will be y squared plus y, going from 0 to 1, dx, that will just be 1 plus 1 is 2, I can bring the 2 out as a constant, dx, that will be 2x going from 0 to 1, that is just 2.
So the flux across this whole surface is, instead of doing 6 separate surfaces, I'm using Gauss' theorem, and that simply gets me an answer of 2.
