In this video we will discuss the immunological blood transfusion reactions.
We'll have a brief introduction, we'll talk about the classification of these reactions,
and we'll briefly discuss each type.
It'll stretch over more than one video, so let's get started.
Transfusion reactions, the immunological type, is a whole spectrum of reactions, from benign to quite lethal.
The problem is that the initial symptoms are often very similar between the benign and the lethal side,
and it's difficult to identify when active management is really important.
We can categorize the hazards of blood product transfusion into immunological,
infectious, chemical, and physical, and each of these can present very acutely or quite delayed.
Let's look at the classification system.
These are all the types of transfusion reactions that we are going to discuss.
First of all, they are the febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reactions,
then the acute hemolytic transfusion reactions,
delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions,
anaphylactic transfusion reactions,
the uticarial transfusion reactions, post-transfusion purpura,
and then I think in the next video we'll get to transfusion related acute lung injury,
and graft versus host disease.
Now let's start off with the febrile non-hemolytic reactions.
This is the most common reaction, presents with fever,
usually with some chills as well, and mild dyspnea.
We'll see in the red there, same type of symptoms that we are going to see with acute hemolytic transfusion reactions,
which are a much more dangerous type.
Okay, as far as the febrile non-hemolytic reactions are concerned,
usually starts about one to six hours after packed red blood cells or platelets,
can also happen with a platelet transfusion.
It is benign with no lasting consequence.
And 40% will experience another reaction should they have another blood transfusion.
It is caused by cytokines, interleukin 1, 6, 8, tumor necrosis factor alpha.
And what happens there, you can clearly see there's an accumulation of these cytokines as blood gets,
as the storage process carries on.
So the longer the blood or platelets are stored, the more these cytokines accumulate.
The pathophysiology, there's an interaction between the donor leukocytes and the recipient antibody.
So the leukocytes in the donor, packed red blood cells in the platelets.
Okay, interleukin 1 from the donor leukocytes or recipient monocytes react,
and that gives you prostaglandin 2 production in the hypothalamus.
There are some alternative hypotheses, as you can see here, some expression of CD154,
and some would also suggest allergic agonist C5A type.
Okay, so the various hypotheses.
The management thereof, first of all, as with all of these, stop the transfusion,
and determine that an acute hemolytic reaction is absent.
And we'll get to those and how you test for that.
And then you can administer an antipyretic.
Can we prevent these?
Well, you'll see with all these hemolytic type reactions, or transfusion type reactions,
that giving leukoreduced blood, in other words, washed blood products,
will lessen the effect of all of these reactions.
There is, though, for febrile non-hemolytic reaction, very little level 1 evidence.
And even some of the retrospective reviews are conflicting.
But I think most authors will still suggest this leukoreduced blood in the case of febrile non-hemolytic reactions.
We have looked at premedication with paracetamol and antihistamines.
They are randomized controlled trials, but they do not actually show any difference.
Let's move on to the acute hemolytic reactions.
These are medical emergencies.
Why do they happen?
There's some clinical or procedural error.
There's a rapid destruction of donor red blood cells by preformed recipient antibodies.
So naturally occurring immunoglobulin M, anti-A and anti-B in O type patient fixes complement.
And then there's rapid intravascular hemolysis.
So it's usually in the ABO incompatibility group.
Also acquired LO antibodies such as anti-RH and anti-JKA.
Okay, so remember type O patients are universal donors, but they are not universal recipients.
So they will get blood of type A, type B, type AB.
They have naturally occurring immunoglobulin M to these antigens,
because they don't express these antigens in their own blood, seeing that they group O.
Okay, that reaction of antibody and antigen fixes complement, and that gives you the rapid intravascular hemolysis.
You can also really see it in transfusion in patients of group A, B, AB patients,
receiving donor plasma with a high type of ABO-LO antibodies.
Clinical presentation.
The classic triad of fever, flank pain, and red-brown urine is not very common.
Often these patients only have fever and chills, so it looks like a non-hemolytic reaction.
Especially in the comatose or anethnotized patient, you're not even going to see any of these symptoms or signs,
and the very first thing you might see is DIC.
Initial approach, as with all of these, you stop the transfusion, and you maintain airway, breathing, circulation.
Most authorities, most textbooks still suggest a commencement of 0.9% saline, normal saline.
We avoid 5% dextrose water because that's isotonic.
It's going to cause absorption of water into the cells and lead to further hemolysis,
which we don't want and we don't use ringers lactate because the calcium in the ringers lactate
will collate with the citrate and might lead to clotting problems.
The initial approach continued.
Sample from the remote site.
We send for antiglobulin tests, plasma-free hemoglobin, and we repeat the type and cross-match.
We send urine to look for hemoglobin.
We alert the blood bank, and we institute a search for the clinical error
because there might be a second patient at risk.
It might very well be that the blood bags have been swapped around,
so another patient might be at risk from receiving the wrong blood.
Treatment.
If there's massive hemolysis and signs of DIC,
we can cautiously think about heparin for the next 12 to 24 hours.
There are studies, though, no recent studies shows that there's any effectiveness of this heparin.
Marked hematuria.
We can alkalinize the urine.
Also, though, the benefit is not very certain.
If there's hyperkalemia, we institute normal management of that,
such as dextrose and insulin.
It might even require dialysis.
And we continually monitor the patient as far as the hemodynamics are concerned,
as far as their clotting profile is concerned, and also their electrolytes.
Let's look at the delayed hemolytic reactions.
These are from an amnestic antibody response, often the KID or RH system.
Develops 2 to 10 days later.
There's extravascular hemolysis.
And there's a spectrum from minimal and gradual to more massive and rapid hemolysis.
Consider it in the following circumstances.
The patient with a falling hematocrit that you can't explain in any other way.
A slight fever and a mild increase in unconjugated bilirubin.
Confirm it by blood bank.
When more blood is ordered, they'll often see these antibodies by new positive direct antiglobulin test and new positive antibody screening.
We manage it according to the clinical picture, that is dependent upon how much hemolysis there is.
And we inform the patient of future risk.
Anaphylactic reaction manifests by shock, hypertension, angioedema, and respiratory distress.
It can happen within seconds or minutes after transfusion of packed red blood cells, plasma, platelets, granulocytes, cryoprecipitate, gamma globulin.
It is rare after albumin or plasma protein fraction or coagulation factors.
Mechanism.
There's presence of IgG, anti-IgA antibodies in patients who are IgA deficient.
Patients with N-heptoglobulin anemia, with anti-heptoglobulin antibodies, recipients of plasma exchange, and in recent ingestions of allergen to recipient by the donor.
There's a case written up of a donor who recently had peanuts just before donating some of the antigens or allergens in the bloodstream,
then given to a patient who was allergic to peanuts.
Management.
Stop the transfusion.
Airway breathing and circulation.
This is management as of any anaphylactic reaction.
And you might even need some vasopressors.
Prevention.
Avoid repeat by using washed products.
Let's look at the urticarial reactions.
Soluble allergenic substances in plasma react with pre-existing IgE antibodies in the recipient
that gives you mast cell and vasophil histamine release.
There are probably other mechanisms as well.
Management.
Stop transfusion.
Antihistamines.
And if controlled the transfusion can commence.
So this stands apart from all the other transfusion reactions in that you can actually recommence that transfusion.
Studies have been done on pre-medication and have been shown to be of no use.
That is why we give antihistamines before giving blood, but certainly that does not work.
As always then, wash products fare much better.
Post-transfusion purpura.
Very rare.
Most commonly in women sensitized by pregnancy.
Severe thrombocytopenia.
Five to ten days after the transfusion of platelet containing products.
So that will be packed red blood cells, platelets, granulocyte concentrates.
All of those contain platelets.
And five to ten days later the patient will develop severe thrombocytopenia.
Blood and bone marrow smears shows that it is an immune thrombocytopenia.
So we must not confuse it with any drug induced thrombocytopenia or idiopathic thrombocytopenia in purpura.
Patients sensitized with human platelet antigen 1A.
By pregnancy or by prior transfusion would be the mechanism.
We diagnose by detection of LO antibodies.
Treatment.
You can give IV immune globulin.
That's effective in about four to five days.
Further transfusion only with wash products cleared of HPA1A.
High dose steroids and exchange transfusion can also be used.
But that's only effective after about two weeks.
But the patient's...
Please.
Please.
Please.
Please.
Please.
Believe it.
Please.
Please.
