In this first section on more advanced calculus, we're going to look at differential equations.
And a differential equation, this means that y, let's say, y prime of t equals some constant times y of t.
What we have in this equation is an unknown, a variable y, and we have its first derivative.
And when you have a variable and its first derivative in an equation, it's called a differential equation.
This is a first-order differential equation. It's the first derivative that we have there.
Now, we're going to start looking at first-order differential equations by looking at a situation of exponential growth or exponential decay.
And the examples that the text would usually use is just to look at something from my field, which is infections.
And most use an organism with a sculpture in a laboratory from a specimen of a patient.
And we look at the exponential growth of a number of organisms.
The basis of getting to an equation to help us look at exponential growth stems from one simple concept.
And that is that there is a direct correlation between the rate of growth and the number of whatever is growing or decaying in actual size and number of that organism, say, for instance.
So, we would say that the rate of change with respect to time, and let's say that y equals the number of organisms.
Number of organisms.
Number of organisms.
So, the rate of change of the number.
So, the rate of change of the number, it's growing, at that specific instance, it's growing at 100 organisms per member.
The rate of change is somehow proportional to the number of organisms at any one time, y of t, so this is also the y of t.
Okay.
So, the rate of change is going to be proportional to the number that's there now.
If I have a thousand organisms, the rate of change is going to be more than when I just have a hundred.
There's some correlation.
And if we put in a constant of proportionality, we'll have that that equals k times y.
So, it's directly proportional, so we put in a constant of proportionality.
That is the premise from which we go, that the rate of change is directly proportional to the number that you have at that instant.
And we're differentiating with respect to time.
We can do some algebra on this problem.
So, we're going to say y over y dy equals k dt.
And we can simply take the integral of both sides.
We can take the integral of both sides.
And we'll note on this side, it's the natural log of the absolute value of y.
And that is going to equal k as a constant.
It can be brought out.
So, it's the integral of dt, which is this t plus c.
Now, we have solved our first order differential equation, which is that.
Let's rewrite this so we can get y on its own.
Because at any one specific time, we want to know how many organisms there'll be.
So, I can have the...
Well, there's a number on both sides.
The natural log of the absolute value of y equals then e to the power kt plus c.
This will just be y.
Now, remember, we're modeling something.
I can't have negative organisms.
Zero is the absolute minimum.
I can't have less than zero organisms.
So, on this side, we'll just have y.
And this can be rewritten as e to the power kt times e to the power c.
E to the power c is also a constant.
So, we'll have y equals...
For e to the power c, we usually use a e to the power kt.
And that is the solution to my first order...
Final solution to my first order differential equation.
So, I can work out if I know what a is.
Now, a is the initial value.
So, I start with a thousand organisms.
That will be a.
K is my constant of proportionality from there.
And that is actually the rate of growth.
And t will be time.
Good.
Let's look at a quick and simple problem.
I operate on someone.
I send the culture of the ruptured bowel to the laboratory.
And they're going to culture it for me.
Now, this is not what they'll do.
They'll do something else.
But, say for instance, there's a mathematician there.
They note initially, they take a sample of the sample that I sent.
And they note a hundred organisms.
And they put it in a growth medium, a culture medium.
Sixty minutes later, they note there are 450 organisms.
They want to know, although as a surgeon I would never want to know.
Anyway, how many organisms will they be at any time t?
Can they predict that?
We're going to go from the same premise that the rate of change of these organisms,
as they get more, is going to be proportional to how many there are at that very instant.
So, we are dealing with the fact that if I let the number of organisms be y,
that dy dt is going to equal some constant times how many ever there are at that specific time.
So, we're dealing with a first order differential equation.
Remember in the previous video, we worked it out and we said that y equals e to the power of kt.
Now, initially, at time equals zero, there was a hundred.
So, we know there was a hundred organisms at time t.
We don't know what a is, although I said we're going to see very quickly that this is actually the initial number that we are talking about.
e to the power of k, we don't know what k is, but this was at time zero initially.
e to the power of zero is just one, a times one is one, so we know that a equals one hundred.
So, we can rewrite this equation of ours now.
We can say y equals one hundred e to the power of kt.
We still don't know what k is, but we were given the number at sixty.
So, and that was four hundred and fifty.
So, four hundred and fifty organisms y equals one hundred.
e to the power of k and t was at sixty minutes.
Now, we could have said one hour, but we're working in minutes, so that's sixty minutes.
Let's simplify this.
We can certainly log off two zeros there and make this four comma five.
Four comma five, so we're going to have four point five equals e to the power sixty k.
We can take the natural log of both sides, so we'll have the natural log of four point five equals
the natural log of e to the power sixty k, which is just sixty k.
And I can make now that k equals the natural log of four point five divided by sixty.
So, in this specific instance, I can now rewrite my equation completely.
I can work out how many organisms there will be at any time in this specific sample that we're dealing with,
which will be one hundred.
e to the power less k, which is the natural log of four point five divided by sixty times t.
So, any times t in minutes, if I have hundred and twenty minutes, I can work out how many organisms I'll have.
So, we'll note that there's exponential growth of those organisms.
Now, in reality, I wouldn't want to know what this is.
They will culture the organism for me.
We won't know that it's xenomonas.
So, they'll put it in a culture medium until overnight, for instance,
there's enough of them to make a diagnosis under a microscope of what organism it is.
Then they'll put it on different disks of different antibiotics,
and they can send that to report because the next day, for instance,
they'll note that that antibiotic killed the organism and that one didn't,
so I know what antibiotic to use.
But, if we look at this mathematically, and we want an equation to tell us how many organisms there'll be in that culture medium.
Now, this is idealized, remember.
This is an idealized situation.
This is never going to be precise, inasmuch as these organisms have to look for food in that growth medium.
As long as there's enough food, the attrition rate will be so small
that this will really approximate how many organisms there are.
Eventually, the food will run out in the culture, something else might happen that'll stop this exponential growth,
and we might look at that later.
So, from our initial conditions, we can work out an equation just for this specific instance,
an equation for how many organisms we can expect at a certain time t.
Another question that you might be asked in this kind of problem is to work out the doubling rate.
How long does it take these organisms to double?
Well, let's start with 100 organisms.
We're now going to go to 200 organisms.
So, 200 equals 100 e to the power national log of 4.5 over 60 times t.
Equals 2.
Now that t is in the exponent, I need to bring that down, so I'll take the natural log of both sides.
So, I'm going to be left with the natural log of 4.5 divided by 60 t equals the natural log of 2.
And I can just take this to the other side and I'll have t in as much as t is going to equal,
t is going to equal 60 times the natural log of 2 divided by the natural log of 4.5.
And you can simplify that.
So, from 100 doubling to 200, you're going to get that t.
You might tell me, well, the rate increases of the slope of this curve increases all the time.
You know, is this t going to be constant?
Of course it's going to be constant because I'm not just adding 100 at a time.
From 100 we go to 200.
From 200 we go to 400.
So, first of all we added 100 organisms.
Now we're adding another 300 organisms.
So, you go from 100 to 200 to 400 to 800 to 1600.
Okay, but this time t, irrespective of what you put in for the doubling time,
you're going to end up with a constant change, a constant doubling.
The easiest way to do it is to start with your initial value and go to 200 and solve for t.
But if you then start with 200 and you go to 400, you're still going to divide both sides and get 2.
If your initial starting point is then 800, the double of 800 is 1600 on this side,
you're still going to end up with 2.
So, your time, your doubling time is going to be constant.
Now, this problem is going to illustrate the fact that we, in our examples before,
k was always more than 0.
And that, you will note, will pertain to the fact that there's exponential growth.
If k is less than 0, we can have exponential decay.
Now, let's see what that entails for us through an example.
We're looking at the half-life of carbon-14 and we say that's 5,730 years.
So, if you have 50 grams of carbon-14, isotope carbon-14 today, in 5,730 years, you'll have 25 grams.
But the question does not ask what will happen in that amount of time.
But if you were to look at that sample, in 100 years, how much will there be?
First thing you've got to realize that we're dealing with a differential equation.
And our old friend states that the rate of change with respect to time is going to be some constant times,
how many you have at this time.
And that is going to end up, for us, with an equation we know well by now,
and as much as y equals e to the power e times e to the power kt.
And we're going to note now that k is going to be in negative number,
and that's why we have exponential decay.
The amount of carbon-14 you have is going to decrease.
Certainly, today, at time 0, we know that we have 25.
We know that we have 25.
So, let's work that out.
So, today, we have 50 grams.
Today, we have 50 grams.
That's going to equal e to the power e.
Clearly, we don't know, but we're multiplying it by 0.
So, we know that a equals 50.
And so, that's easy for us to start.
So, we know that y equals 50 e to the power kt.
Now, we don't know what k is.
Can we work out k?
Because I can't just put in 100 there to see what I have,
because I don't know what k is.
But I do know the half-life.
I know that I'll have 25 grams if I take t to be 5730 euros.
Okay.
So, that is going to give me 50 e to the power k times my t is 5730.
5730.
5730.
5730.
That doesn't come out.
Well, at all.
Okay.
So, I can bring this across this side.
I'm going to have a half equals e to the power 5750.
I think it's 50.
5730.
Let's check on that k.
Now, I've got my variable in the exponents.
I'm going to take the natural log of both sides.
I'm going to have the natural log of a half,
which is a negative number.
It's less than 0.
It's going to equal 5730 k.
And k is going to equal the natural log of a half,
or negative the natural log of 2, if you wanted to,
divided by 5730.
So, now I know k, so I can eventually write my equation as
y equals, a was 50 in this example, e to the power,
negative the natural log of 2, divided by 5730, times t.
So, in a hundred years, if I plug in one hundred days,
I can work out how much I'm going to have.
But note that k, we're not going to go through something simple
as the natural log of a half is negative the natural log of 2.
It's clearly a negative number.
So, when k is less than 0, we have exponential decay.
Thank you.
Thank you.
