In this video we will discuss Heparin Induced Thromocytopenia or HET.
It will be a brief introduction, we will look at the incidence and risk factors, the pathophysiology,
the clinical picture, diagnosis, prevention and treatment.
Now HET is a complication of Heparin therapy and you actually need very little Heparin to induce HET,
as little as 250 units.
Usually two types are described, type 1 and type 2 HET.
Type 1 is the most common form of thrombocytopenia, there is a slight fall implanted count in the first two days
and as you continue using Heparin the count comes back up to normal, there is absolutely no consequence
and it is a direct effect of Heparin on platelet activation.
Now this video will be on type 2 HET, it is immune mediated in that there are antibodies against Heparin platelet factor 4 complex.
It has various other names such as Heparin associated immune thrombocytopenia, Heparin associated thrombocytopenia and thrombosis
that is HET with two Ts and the white clot syndrome as these clots are mainly platelet based.
We have an incidence of about 2.6% varies in the literature and you get it after about 4 days of unfractured Heparin.
The low molecular Heparin for less than 4 days will have an incidence of 0.2%
but it goes much higher when you use it for more than 4 days
although the incidence will still be lower than the unfractioned Heparin.
So the risk involved is the use of unfractioned Heparin,
surgical patients much more so than the medical patients,
females, prior exposure to Heparin and an age above 40.
So what actually happens?
Well there is different immunoglobulins, G, M and A
that are provoked by the immunogenic complex of Heparin and platelet factor 4.
Remember that 3-8% of patients have naturally occurring antibodies
and that usually comes from prior infections and antigens
which might provoke these immunoglobulins from forming.
Now the activated platelets with the Heparin platelet factor 4 antibody complex
so this complex is now attached to this activated platelet.
That platelet undergoes removal from the circulation hence leading to the thrombocytopenia
and there is also the release of some progeaculant microparticles in the circulation
which accounts for the thrombosis.
Now these mechanisms are quite complex and many of them are just theoretical.
So clinically what do we see?
Well we see thrombocytopenia.
Usually it starts 5-8 days after commencement
but remember it can be earlier if you have natural antibodies
or if you have had therapy in the last 3 months.
There is a drop of more than 50% but mostly the count remains above 20,000.
Remember you don't always need an absolute low count.
The count might still be within normal limits but we need a greater than 50% drop.
Now if we look at other immune thrombocytopenias like ITP and post transfusion purpura
they have much lower platelet counts but in HIT it is usually more than 20,000.
Average at about 60,000.
And remember this can develop even after stopping Heparin as thrombocytopenia
so it is not only whilst on Heparin.
Now thrombosis is the major clinical problem associated with HIT.
It will manifest clinically large thrombosis in 10% of HIT patients.
Some literature suggests even more.
Now more than 50% of cases are diagnosed only after thrombosis occurs.
So if a patient is Heparinized and they develop thrombosis
you are faced with the decision to decide whether it is HIT or inadequate Heparinization.
And remember HIT always goes with thrombocytopenia.
Usually it is low limb DVT with or without pulmonary embolism
but you can also get venous gangrene.
And usually you see a bit of skin necrosis starts at the site of injections
but can be anywhere on the body.
You also get arterial thrombosis with all sorts of clinical fallouts
but these are fortunately rare.
So how do we make the diagnosis?
Well first of all have a high index of suspicion.
Anyone on unfractioned Heparin for more than 4 days.
Anyone on a prolonged course of low molecular Heparin.
Patients who develop venous arterial thrombosis on Heparin.
Remember that is not always just due to the fact that they are not fully Heparinized.
If the platelet count drops by more than 50%.
If there are necrotic skin lesions especially at the injection site.
And also any patient who develops acute anaphylactic response after an IV bolus of Heparin.
Now specific tests.
Now the diagnosis of HIT is usually a clinical diagnosis.
And the problem with the specific tests is that they are not always available.
And they have quite a long turnaround time.
So here are three examples.
The first two are functional tests.
And the last one is a non-functional test.
And usually the non-functional is combined with one of the functional best ones.
The serotonin release assay.
We have washed healthy donor platelets plus the patient plasma plus some Heparin.
And sensitivity and specificity is around 197%.
100% for sensitivity and 97% specificity.
Heparin induced platelet aggregation.
That is just the washed donor platelets and the patient plasma.
The solid face immunoassays.
That is an ELISA test.
Now how do we prevent HIT?
Well we can use low molecular weight Heparins instead of unfractioned Heparin.
Also look at Heparin analogues like Fondaparinox and Heparanoids like Danaperoid.
The other trick is to start Warfarin early.
Obviously if the patient already has HIT you cannot just start Warfarin.
There are specific indications for starting Warfarin in that setting.
But to start any patient on Heparin start Warfarin as soon as possible.
So that you can get off of the Heparin as soon as possible.
So patient with HIT already diagnosed.
Stop all exposure of Heparin.
That is most important.
Any small amount of Heparin even Heparin coated catheters should be removed.
Now you can consider one of the alternative anticoagulants.
Various ones are available in various countries.
Lepirudin for patients with a paddock impairment.
Or Gatraban for patients with a renal impairment.
Now when you want to start Warfarin the patient must be fully anticoagulated by one of these alternatives.
And the platelet count must be more than 150,000.
Do not start Warfarin before then might lead to thrombotic complications.
Let's go.
Let's go.
Let's go.
Let's go.
