In the next few videos we're going to discuss the venous thromboembolism, so that is deep
venous thrombosis together with pulmonary embolism.
Quite an extensive topic, so in this video we'll do the epidemiology, the pathophysiology
and look at some risk fizz.
The precise figures as far as the incidence of venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
is concerned is unknown, probably due to the underdiagnosing of the disease and the disease
complex, as well as the variety of tests that are used and whether a positive test is of
any clinical significance.
We can put the figure of a lifelong risk of deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
at about one in a thousand patients.
The concerns with deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism lies in the fact that it
can be immediately life-threatening, specifically in the case of pulmonary embolism then, but
also due to chronic disability, due to venous insufficiency in the long term.
Because with many diseases, the emphasis should really be on prevention and that is much better
than treatment down the line.
You have to review the physiology of the clotting mechanism and we won't discuss the specifics
of that in this video series.
Remember though that the coagulation system is in a state of homeostasis and the objective
of the system of coagulation and anti-coagulation is to maintain blood flow, to repair any damage
to the endothelium should it occur and to prevent blood loss with that endothelial damage.
Now Verco's triad is well known, quite old and it says that if there is any unbalance in
this system of coagulation and anti-coagulation it can lead to thrombus formation.
And we are talking about intimal injury, stasis and hypercoagulability.
Now all the risk factors that we are going to discuss now relate to one or more of the above.
So let's look at the risk factors.
Now we are going to discuss the following.
History of venous thromboembolism, age, major surgery, malignancy, obesity, trauma, varicose
veins and thrombophlebitis, cardiac disease, hormones, immobilization and paralysis, pregnancy,
central venous catheters and the hypercoagulability.
Remember that 95% of patients have multiple risk factors.
Most important of these though is a history of previous venous thromboembolism.
Any patient that has had DVT before, pulmonary embolism before is at risk for a repeat episode.
Age is also important.
There is a sudden increase after the age of 40 and then the incidence just rises exponentially
thereafter.
The problem with age is that a number of other risk factors also increase with age.
So it is difficult to know whether age alone is a risk factor.
Major surgery is well known to us and important.
We are talking about major abdominal surgery, pelvic surgery but also low extremity orthopedic
surgery with a very high incidence.
Remember that with orthopedic procedures even if they are on prophylaxis patients still get
venous thromboembolism and even for surgeons, whilst vascular surgeons on systemic heparanization
during vascular clamping, even those patients can get venous thromboembolism.
So don't believe that the patient, it is impossible for the patient to have that after these procedures
or after prophylaxis.
Always be vigilant.
Malignancy, Trousseau syndrome, we have discussed when we discussed blood transfusion and blood transfusion
reactions and coagulable states in those videos.
And remember especially patients with a malignancy and pre-existing thrombophilia, specifically
factor V Leiden mutation, that is a protein C deficiency and those with prothrombin gene
mutations are at very high risk.
And also especially patients with some kind of hematological malignancy.
In obesity, by multivariate analysis, it is very difficult to prove as an independent
risk factor.
It is usually obesity in women on contraceptives, that combination that really increases the
risk.
Trauma, the true prevalence, is really unknown.
And the problem that we have with studies is the type of test that was used to diagnose
the VTE, whether it is of any clinical significance.
You can do studies where all trauma patients admitted with severe trauma, say for instance
with an injury severity score above 9, is admitted and they all get tested.
Some might test positive, but it is not known whether all of those are of clinical significance.
Remember in trauma there is also a wide variety of injuries, there is a wide variety of ages
and there is a wide variety of underlying pathology of patients who are involved in trauma.
So very difficult to get the true picture of VTEs in trauma.
Remember those specifically age, femur and tibia fractures, blood transfusions, spinal cord
injuries and patients who require major surgery for their trauma.
They are at specific risk for VTEs.
If we look at prolonged immobilization or paralysis, that is well known, specifically patients immobilized
post-operatively, there is a controversy about air travel because the vast majority of patients
with VTEs who had prolonged air travel have other underlying risk factors as well.
Hormones, the use of the pill, the use of estrogen in the post-menopausal period, remember it is
greater with the third generation progestogens in the modern formulations of the pill and
then in the post-menopausal women using equine derived estrogen with a progestogen seems also
to be an increase or a risk factor at least for VTE.
Pregnancy itself can happen in any trimester and also post-partum and important to note
that there is a large left leg predominance.
Central venous catheters, certainly in itself an underlying risk factor but remember many
of these patients have underlying diseases that are also risk factors for VTE.
Now if a catheter is placed in the upper extremity you can get an incidence of pulmonary embolism
of about 15% although the vast majority of these are minimal and they won't be fatal but certainly
it is possible.
It is much more common if catheters are placed in the low extremity large veins.
Varicose veins and superficial thrombophlebitis, the varicose veins have an association with venous
thromboembolism but it is certainly not causative.
And if we look at all patients with superficial thrombophlebitis there is a very high incidence
of DVT in these and they should be examined regularly.
If we look at cardiac disease that is most probably due to immobilization although if you
do studies on myocardial infarctions you might note an incidence of DVT as high as 40% and
certainly worthwhile for these patients to be on heparin prophylaxis.
The hypercoagulable states, a wide variety of them, the most important one, the most common
one is probably the factor V Leiden mutation that is activated protein C resistance.
The antiphospholipid syndromes, sticky platelet syndromes, protein C and S defects, antithrombin
defects, heparin cofactor II defects, plasminogen defects, tissue, plasminogen activator defects,
plasminogen inhibitor defects, factor XII defects, dysfibrinogenia and homocystinemia all are quite
important as factors for.
The antiphospholipid syndromes are quite important as factors for.
