We continue our look into venous thromboembolism and in this video we'll discuss the natural
history and prophylosis. Now venous thromboembolism represents a continuum from deep venous thrombosis
to pulmonary embolism. Unfortunately for the patient we interrupt it by prophylaxis and
treatment but that makes it very difficult for us to know what the natural history is
and studying the natural history is very difficult. What we do know is that the disease starts
in the infrapoproliteal veins or in the muscular venous sinuses of the calves but what happens
from there the questions we have to ask are those of propagation so when does it propagate
and when does it embolize because these are clinically relevant to us and the management
of these patients. Various studies have been done on this and there are problems because
you can get pulmonary embolism without propagation beyond the knee. So you'll do studies in which
everyone with below knee DVT have been identified and if you do VQ scans on them a lot of them
or a certain percentage of them will have high probability VQ scans without propagation. On
the other hand you might have a patient with DVT diagnosed on ultrasound but they have no lung
respiratory symptoms at all and even there you'll get highly probable VQ scans as possible in that
setting in a patient without symptoms. So you get a variety of results in the research that makes it
very difficult for us to draw a nice linear line or have nice little identified boxes as to when to
treat when patients are at risk for pulmonary embolism when are they at risk for propagation. There are no
clear-cut answers. If we follow these patients now beyond diagnosis if we look at DVT by six months
70% of them will have ultrasound resolution but remember that 45% of those will have damage to the vessel
walls or to the valves. If we look at the progression of pulmonary embolism remember death from pulmonary
embolism is in the first few hours or days and thereafter the death comes from the underlying the risk
factors or disease most notably cancers and infections and sequelae of severe trauma. Now the pulmonary
artery pressure starts to decrease by about two to three weeks and by by three months 70% will have
complete resolution after three months is very little change in the lung vascular. The important
question of prophylaxis the goal is to prevent the morbidity and mortality of of VTE of venous
rhomboembolism. You have to determine who the patients are at risk and once you've done that you have to choose
the appropriate prophylaxis. What do we have at our disposal? First of all unfractionated heparin.
We're talking doses of about 5000 units subcut three times a day. There are various regimes for this.
Low molecular weight heparins.
Quite common these days quite safe price coming down no need obviously even if you use it as treatment to
test any values. Oral agents. We're talking both warfarin and antiplatelet agents such as disperin.
Pneumatic compression stockings. Those are stockings that are applied to the legs, calves or
calves and legs, calves and thighs. And they are connected to a pump, an electrical pump that blows in air
sequentially from distally to proximally thereby simulating the pushing of blood up back to the heart
simulating walking for instance or some form of physical activity but there's a physical push of blood
towards towards the heart. Elastic stockings and graded stockings
those are not connected to any machine they simply are fit tight around the leg. Some of them being graded
in as much as the lower down it goes the tighter it becomes. Also in an effort to push blood out of
the calves. And then lastly the infiravina cava filters. We'll mention them in treatment later. There's intense
research at the moment into the placement of removable IVC filters in patients who are at high risk and
who cannot take any forms of anticoagulation. The problem with these is many of them are never removed
either because the patient doesn't come for follow-up or the underlying disease intervenes and there is
mortality before they are removed. So certainly the position of prophylactic IVC filters
are not settled yet but they certainly are an option that you have in a patient with severe trauma.
Now if we just look at the use of unfractionated heparin versus low molecular weight heparin
there are various study outcomes and the outcomes are not universal. There are certain trends though
and it does seem that low molecular weight heparin are superior to unfractionated heparin when it comes
to prophylaxis of of VTE. If that is not the case most studies will also show that low molecular weight
heparin is at least as effective as unfractionated heparin but with fewer bleeding complications.
Okay so all in all I think everyone will accept the fact that low molecular weight heparin is the best
form of prophylaxis. What you have to do in your mind is obviously weigh the risk of bleeding
versus complications of of VTE. If you look at various types of surgery if you do neurosurgery
there is a reluctance to use heparins either unfractionated or low molecular weight heparins
because of the risk of intracranial bleedings and there's a tendency in that type of surgery to lean
towards the pneumatic compression stockings or elastics degraded elastic stockings. So it depends
on the type of surgery that you do if there's a very high risk of bleeding and it's difficult to
access or difficult to diagnose initially or if the bleeding can be torrential one in the form of the
brain doesn't need to intracranial does need to be torrential but certainly very serious you might
want to steer away you might be concerned about the bleeding. One thing to remember the risk does
not disappear on the discharge of the patient the risk for VTE does not disappear once the patient gets
signed off and in many instances it might be worthwhile to continue low molecular weight heparins
once a day dose of injection no subcutaneous injection no levels or activity needs to be tested on a regular
basis and that certainly is well investigated and might be worthwhile for a period or even graded elastic
stockings if for a variety of reasons such as cost and the risk of bleeding complications if the
heparins cannot be continued. Now choosing the patient there are a variety of consensus documents to
identify the patient who needs prophylaxis. Now the majority of those are based on studies done for
people being prepared for surgery but certainly it extends to other population groups for instance
those with carcinomas as well. There are many pamphlets out on these handed out by the industry that makes
these molecular low molecular weight heparins for instance and there are even smartphone apps these
days that you can download that can put a risk profile to your patient and make a suggestion as to
where the prophylaxis should be given.
you
