We continue our look at the immunological causes of transfusion reactions and we're
looking at transfusion related acute lung injury. We'll mention the introduction, that
is the definition, pathogenesis, there are various theories as to why this developed.
We'll look at the epidemiology, risk factors, clinical presentation, diagnosis and eventually
how you should manage patients. Blood product transfusion complicated by acute lung injury
would be the formal definition given by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Working
Group and set by a Canadian Consensus Conference. Now all blood products have been implicated
in transfusion related acute lung injury. Pathogenesis, as I mentioned, we're not quite
sure why this happens. There are three leading hypotheses and they all have to do with granulocytes
and granulocyte antibodies. Firstly, the anti-granulocyte antibody hypothesis in donor's plasma. They
react with antigens on the recipient's granulocytes but it can also happen in reverse. Granulocyte
priming active substances like lipids and cytokines in donor plasma prime activities of granulocytes
in the pulmonary vessels making them more permeable. And probably there is a combination of these
hypotheses called the two-event hypothesis. Now it's very difficult to investigate. Many people
in the intensive care unit have risk factors for acute lung injury and can develop acute lung
injury for various causes and to specifically point it down, pin it down to the transfusion
might not always be so in the clinical setting. So the epidemiology is very under-recognized
but there is also bias in the reporting in as much as if this is investigated we can have
literature that points to a higher incidence probably between one and a thousand two and a half thousand
transfusions. If you look at it from a scientific point of view though it is the leading cause of
mortality due to transfusions. Happens in all age groups and is equal among men and women. Risk factors
then look at the products themselves if they are stored for prolonged period. If there is recent surgery
specifically liver surgery, if there is hematological malignancy, if there is thrombocytopenia or massive
transfusion, active infection, sepsis high, apache 2 score, chronic alcohol abuse, meltyperosidona. A female donor that has been
pregnant for many times might also be a risk factor. Unfortunately though these risk factors do not correlate with
anti-granulocyte antibody count in the product itself and using leukoreduced products makes
no difference and that has been investigated in the randomized controlled trial. Clinically we have
to suspect it if there is a sudden onset of respiratory distress shortly after transfusion. Usually between one
and two hours but even up to six hours. Patient develops fever, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypertension and
even pulmonary edema. If they are intubated they have a high peak pressure suddenly and on the chest x-ray we see
signs suggestive of acute respiratory distress syndrome. We might also see a eosinophilia and a transient drop
in the neutrophil count although how important this is is unclear. There's usually a rapid resolution over the next few
days with only a five percent mortality rate. How do we make the diagnosis? Well consider it if a blood
gas or the clinical pulmonary changes occur within six hours of blood product transfusion. You have to
think about it to diagnose it. There are criteria set but depending on how stringently we adhere to this
they might be over and under reporting. So the criteria for transfusion related acute lung injury says
no acute lung injury immediately before the transfusion so can't pre-exist which doesn't mean it didn't
happen but we can't use that as a criteria. Onset of symptoms and signs must be within six hours and
there's no temporal relationship to alternative risk factors for acute lung injury. Now many of these
patients do have sepsis and sepsis is a risk factor. Unfortunately if you want to make this diagnosis
sepsis should not be present. Just remember what the criteria for acute lung injury is. It means acute
onset of lung injury. There's no circulatory overload. Now we we talk about transfusion associated cardiac
overload TACO and it's just a volume overload that might need to pulmonary edema and we have to
differentiate these two to diagnosis. Bilateral pulmonary infiltrate seen on chest x-ray and a
PAO 2-FIO 2 ratio of less than 300 mmHg or a saturation of less than 90% on room air. We manage these
patients as any acute lung injury specifically any acute respiratory distress syndrome. As I said we have
to consider this transfusion associated cardiac overload and give it diuretic if required if we're not sure
about the diagnosis. There is some talk about IV steroids but it is the same problems as we have
in the literature regarding ARDS. Do not give any further blood products from that implicated donor
and we have to inform the blood bank because they actually have to investigate the donor.
There has been an investigation of a patient with multiple pregnancies who donated in excess of 200
times and many of the transfusions led to problems and she was subsequently barred from any further
donation. Now we can also look well that would be the blood bank that has to look at the various factors
and make decisions and policies. You can look at plasma only from male donors. We can exclude women that
have been pregnant multiple times. We can exclude high HLA antibody strength patients etc various policies
by the blood.
So
