Now we needn't only concern ourselves with problems pertaining to some physical situation,
we can just look at the mathematics of it. Here we have a first order differential equation,
a variable and its first derivative, and we're given an initial value that, you can see clearly
this is going to be differentiated with respect to time, and when t equals 1, we get a value
for y, this y of 3. Remember this is y of t. First let's use Leibniz notation, so that's
dy dt on this side equals negative 2y. I can bring that to this side and we'll have 1 over
y dy is going to equal negative 2 dt. I can take the indifferent integral of both sides,
this is going to leave me with a natural log of the absolute value of y. This is going
to be negative 2 and the indefinite integral of, the indefinite integral of just dt is going
to be t plus c. That is going to leave me with a natural log of the absolute value of y equals
negative 2 and negative 2t, sorry, times negative 2 plus or minus 2c. That is just going to be
another constant. Because this is an indefinite integral, we can change that to a constant. If
I raise this all to this power, I'm going to be left with y, I'm going to be left with y equals, where are we now? I'm going to be left with y equals, I'm going to have e to the power negative 2t and I'm going to have plus
e to the power, and we're going to have that times, sorry about that times e to the power c. This is just a constant which we can call a, e to the power negative 2t. Now we are given an initial value. So y of 1,
going to equal 3 equals, and this is going to equal a to the power negative 2 times the power negative 2 and t is 1, t is 1. So we can
rewrite that as 3 equals a to the power negative 2 over e to the power 2, that's negative 2 and t is 1, t is 1. So we can rewrite that as 3 equals a to the power e to the power 2, that's negative 2.
In other words, a equals a equals 3e squared. So I can rewrite this now. So I can rewrite this now. So I can rewrite that as a to the power e to the power 2, that's negative 2.
In other words, a equals 3e squared. So I can rewrite that as a to the power e to the power 2, that's negative 2. In other words, a equals 3e squared. So I can rewrite this now completely inasmuch as y equals 3e squared.
3e squared. 3e squared. And e to the power negative 2t. So y equals 3e to the power 2 minus 2t. So I have converted a first order differential equation into a normal equation,
but, but, but, but with this initial condition. I didn't have this initial condition. I can't go from there to there.
Now let's start getting into separable first order differential equations. Firstly, it's first order because we have a first order derivative of a variable y.
variable y in its first derivative. And it is separable. Separable means we have two variables, a y and an x. Separable means I can get all the y variables on one side of the equation,
all x variables on the other variable on the other side. And since this is really simple, we can see that y squared. And now for this I'm going to write Leibniz notation,
dy dx equals x squared plus 7x plus 3. I can simply take the dx on that side. I'm going to have y squared dy equals x squared plus 7x plus 3 dx.
I can take the integral of both sides. And I'm going to be left with a third y to the power 3 is going to equal a third x to the power 3 plus 7 over 2x squared plus 3x plus c.
Now a word of warning on this plus c. Because we are going to get initial value problems.
Let's say for instance our initial value, I think I've got it there somewhere on the board, we have that y of 0 equals 3.
The reason why this becomes important is because this is what is called the general solution to the separable first order differential equation.
Separable first order differential equation. And here it's a general solution. And it means depending on what this constant value is,
we can draw a graph and there will be a whole family of graphs that I can draw depending on what the c is.
And that whole family is called the general solution. If we pick out one, if we pick out one value of c by setting an initial value,
this becomes an initial value problem. I will just get one of those curves on the graph.
Once again I say this is important because for me now to use this to get to that one curve in the family of curves in the general solution,
I need to take cognizance of the fact that if I multiply both sides now by 3, I'm going to get x to the power 3 plus 21 over 2x squared plus 9x plus 3c.
Now this becomes important. Now this becomes important. Now it's not just a constant and I can throw away the 3 and just keep c.
It is now c3. And if I go from here and I take this to the power of a third. So not a square root but to the power of 3.
That is going to be y for me. Now I've got an initial value for 0 of x as 0. So this is going to leave me y of 0 equals 3 is going to leave me with 0, 0, 0, 3c.
I can take both sides to the power of 3 to the power of 3. I'm going to be left with 27 equals 3c and I would c equals 9.
And then this c equals 9. I did not throw away the 3 here for this general solution set, this general solution.
So for this initial value, one of those curves and the multiple curves on that graph is going to be 3.
Now we're going to have x cubed plus 21 over 2x squared plus 9x plus 9 times 3 is 27.
So that is my specific solution with this initial value of this separable differential equation.
Here's an interesting problem. In the previous problem we had y explicitly written as a function of x.
Now this is going to turn out to only be implicitly expressed, y implicitly expressed as a function of x.
And see what I mean. I can easily separate this first order differential equation inasmuch as divide the x and we're going to multiply by cosine of y plus 5e to the power y is going to equal 9x squared minus sine of x.
dx. So I've simply taken dx to the other side and take the indefinite integral of both sides.
Here I'm going to land up with a sine of y plus the anti-derivative of 5e to the power y. It's still 5e to the power y.
And on the other side I'm going to get plus 1 is going to be 3. 9 divided by 3 is 3. x to the power 3.
Is that correct? And now what does that look wrong to me? 9x squared plus 1 is 3. So 9 divided by 3 is 3x to the power 3. Anyway.
And the negative of the sine is going to be positive the cosine of x plus c. Apologies for that. 3 times 3 is 9.
Now as you can see here I can't get y on its own so I can't explicitly express y as a function of x. This is implicit expression of y with a
respect to x. I can still fill this in though because I have an initial value so I'm going to have the sine of pi.
because y equals pi plus 5e to the power pi is going to equal to the power y.
So I can still fill this in though because I have an initial value so I'm going to have the sine of pi because y equals pi plus 5e to the power pi is going to equal to 5e to the power pi.
It's going to equal and x is going to equal and x is going to equal to 0. So that's 0. The cosine of 0 is 1. Cosine of 0 equals 1 plus c.
1 plus this constant c. So I can say that my constant c is going to be sine of pi. Sine of pi plus 5e to the power pi.
e to the power pi minus 1. Minus 1. So I can rewrite this for this initial value set. This is my general solution. Now a specific solution of this initial value is going to be the sine of y plus 5 times e to the power y is going to equal 3x to the power 3 plus cosine of x.
And then we're going to have plus c and c equals plus c. So we're going to have plus sine of pi plus 5e to the power pi minus y. So that is the specific solution of this initial value problem for this general solution of this separable first order differential equation.
0. So that is an element of the
