Now we're going to discuss a very difficult concept and a few things that I'm going to mention now might not make a lot of sense initially but hopefully later it will come together. And we're going to look at standing waves and the resonances. Resonance.
And a standing wave is not like a proper wave in as much as there's no momentum that gets carried over. So what we have here is a rope tied to both ends and I'm plucking it. And it starts to oscillate up and down so we are setting up a wave motion.
We can have a situation where this standing wave resonates. As I said later on we might explain as to what the concept really means and under what physical situations we do get resonance. Playing a guitar, all sorts of things.
What I want to explain here is the concept of the standing wave and the resonance system's broadest term. No specifics.
So what are we looking at here? We're looking at these two points that will stand still. They don't move. But this wave actually passes through them. It doesn't pass through them. It actually just stays in here.
And what we call these spots that don't move. And what we call these spots that don't move are nodes, hence the end. These spots of maximum amplitude, of amplitude, the maximum displacement, we call the anti-nodes. So you'll get node, anti-node, node, always.
But now I vibrate the string at a different frequency. And we'll see later on that this for this setup is going to be the fundamental wave wavelength and fundamental wave frequency.
But now I'm going to alter the frequency. And suddenly I'm going to notice, say I do some type of videography, that there's a spot here that stands absolutely still.
So say, for instance, I can slowly increase. It's going to become chaotic. But at a certain point, I'm suddenly going to see a point that starts standing still.
And I'm going to have a node, anti-node, node, anti-node, node. Remember, I can't have node, node, anti-node. Every node's got to be followed by anti-node.
I'm looking at standing waves for resonances. So I'm suddenly going to see this at some magical frequency. I'm going to see this with one anti-node and a two node.
And that's going to be my fundamental wave for this setup where there are two nodes at the end. I can increase the frequency.
It's going to be chaotic. And then suddenly, at a specific frequency, I'm going to see not zero, not one, but one, two, three nodes, four, five, and the end.
And I'm again going to have node, anti-node, node, anti-node, node, anti-node, node, anti-node, node.
So two more are going to develop here. Two more nodes are going to develop there.
If this is my fundamental wave, this is my first resonance, and this is my second resonance, and so it can carry on.
Now I'm going to mix a little bit, and I'm going to represent here transverse waves, sound waves, as transverse waves.
But this is sound passing through a tube. So I've got a PVC plastic tube. It's open at one end and closed at another end.
So these sound waves are going to come in, but it's closed at this end. And the analogy of that for a transverse wave is going to be that this is an anti-node inasmuch as the sound waves here can move.
This area is closed off. The wave there stops. It stands still. Of course it's going to bounce back. But this point stands still.
Here the air can move. The air can't move there. It's standing still. There's an end cap there.
So this is going to be an anti-node. And this is going to be a node. So this open end is always going to be an anti-node.
And this now is going to be my fundamental wave. That is going to be my fundamental wave. These two are length L apart.
With two ends, let's make this also a length L apart. The open end and the closed end.
Now I can't put another anti-node here. I can't put an anti-node, anti-node node or anti-node node node. It's going to be anti-node node, anti-node node.
So look what happens now. I'm going to have this three quarters of the wavelength sort of thing going on here.
I need another quarter to finish one wavelength. So I'm suddenly going to increase the frequency, increase the frequency, and suddenly I'm going to see a node appear there.
And I can carry on and draw even more. And that will be anti-node node, anti-node node, anti-node node, anti-node node.
It's a quarter of five on top of each other. The most important thing to remember here, though, is that from a node to an anti-node is a quarter of the wavelength.
So from there to there will be a quarter of a wavelength. From there to there will be a quarter of a wavelength. From there to there will be a quarter of a wavelength.
From there to there will be the quarter of a wavelength. But understand the concept here of what is happening.
what is happening. I'm going to start a wave in here with a certain frequency. Suddenly
I'm going to develop resonance. I'm going to see two spots standing still and my amplitude
there. I'm going to slowly then move beyond that. The movement is going to become chaotic
as waves pass, pass, pass, pass, pass. But suddenly I'm going to get a point that stands
still at a specific second frequency. And at a third frequency I'm going to have this
setup. The same on this side. Okay, so there's a difference between node, antinode, node
and this transverse wave with this antinode on the opening node. We're also going to get
to problems where both sides are open. So the fundamental wave there is going to be antinode,
node, antinode, antinode, node, antinode, so antinode, node, antinode. So if I have the
two ends tied down, this scenario, remember this picture in your mind, it's as simple
as that. It's going to be my fundamental wave. Here it's going to be my fundamental wave and
with both sides open, I can't have this antinode node. I'm going to have antinode, node, antinode.
Because the open ends, remember we always said the S3 to move so that's got to be an antinode.
I can't have antinode, antinode. It's going to be broken up by a node in the middle. And
from there to there, from A to N, so the half of this full length here now is going to be
a quarter of a wavelength. From antinode to an antinode during resonance in a standing wave,
antinode to node is going to be a quarter. We'll carry on.
Now we're going to start with the first problem and immediately we're going to have two concepts,
two ideas that we did not discuss in the introductory video on what a standing wave
and resonances are. We are told we have a tight rope, tight behind at two points and it has
a length of two meters. And at a frequency of 240 hertz, suddenly four segments develop.
Four segments develop. And what is this segment story?
And the second concept, if I don't get to what velocity is, please, someone must send me a message
so that we can get to the velocity. I'm sure we may.
So what is a segment? First of all, we had this situation of our standing wave, our fundamental
wave, when we have the two nodes at the end, antinode, node. So from node to antinode to
node is a segment. So this is a one segment standing wave. Now it's got to be, remember I've got to
have node, antinode, node. So from there, where am I going to go? Well, if I have now something
there, something there and something there. So this is node. That must be node. That must
be node. So this must be antinode. This must be antinode. And all the nodes have got to be
on the same height. So I'm going to have this, this, this, this, this, this, this. So from
there, this is going to be my first resonance. My fundamental wave, my first resonance. Suddenly,
at a certain frequency, a new node develops. We have node, antinode, node, antinode, node.
I know from there to there is a quarter of a wavelength. From here to here is a quarter of a wavelength.
So this is suddenly going to be half a wavelength. Whereas this was a quarter of a wavelength
before. So my wavelength gets shorter, okay, in this, in this instance. But we get to this
concept of segments. There are only two segments here. It's clear to see where there are two
segments. But we need a situation where we have four segments. Where we have four segments.
So not only am I going to have this one, and this one, and this one now. But I've got to,
I've got to sort of half each of those as well. Let's see where that gets us. Does that get us to
node, antinode, node, antinode, node, antinode, node, antinode, node. Let's see. That is node.
That is node. So that's going to be antinode, node, antinode, node, antinode, node, antinode,
node. So these have all got to be on that level. So we're going to go antinode, node, antinode,
node, node, antinode, node, antinode, antinode, node, antinode, node, antinode, node. How many
segments do I have? One, two, three, four. Brilliant. Brilliant. I've got four segments.
I'm told that this is running at 240 hertz. At 240 hertz, suddenly I develop this four-segment
staining wave. And it seems as if this is fundamental, this is going to be my first resonance. Seems
at this frequency, I have my second resonance. Second resonance. And they want to know what
the velocity is. For velocity, since I don't know what the tension is, I wasn't given mass.
I wasn't told that it gets stretched at one end by some mass. I wasn't told that. So indeed,
the only thing I'm looking at is frequency times, frequency times, wavelength. Can I get
the wavelength here? Well, I was told that this whole thing is two meters. 2.0 meters, that's
a bit too far, but that's two meters. And I've set up four segments. And I know, I know, I
know from node to anti-node is a quarter. So from node to anti-node equals a quarter of
the wavelength. In this situation, it's different there, it's different there. From node to anti-node,
that'll be a quarter. So a quarter here is going to equal one meter, because that's half
half of this two meters. Okay? From there to now is a quarter. So how many of these quarters
can I fit in? How many of these quarter wavelengths? That's a quarter, that's a quarter, so let's
count. How many can I put in? I can put in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight. I
can put in eight of these. I can put in eight of these in my one length, L. Eight of those
quarter wavelengths in my one L. So my one L is going to equal two times the wavelength.
The wavelength is going to be half of L. Half of L. L is two meters. Half of two meters is
one meter. Am I correct? Yeah, it's one meter. And look at this. Look at it beautifully. If
we follow this out, up, down, up, that's exactly one. I've done one full wave. And that is precisely
in the middle of this, which is one meter, because the whole thing is two meters. So under
this second resonance, my wavelength is one meter, and I got to this standing wave, four
seconds standing wave, at a frequency of 240 hertz. So velocity is going to equal frequency,
240, 240 per second, times my wavelength here is one meter. So it's going to equal 240 meters
per second. Now that very, the proper second concept, velocity. And we'll use it later on.
The velocity here, it'll be the same as the velocity there, it'll be the same as the velocity
there. Under the same tension, the same rope, with the same mass, with the same length, velocity
of this wave will be exactly the same. At the fundamental, at the first, at the second,
at the third, at the fourth, at the fifth resonance, the velocity is going to be equal.
So you immediately see problems that you are going to be given. In as much as you're going
to be given one situation, you're going to be asked about the second situation. And in
the second situation, so this was second resonance, so let's call this frequency two and
wavelength two, they're going to tell you, well, they're going to give you another version
there. But what you can always say is F1, lambda 1 is going to equal F2, lambda 2. Because
the velocity of this, and the velocity of frequency one, lambda 1, is going to equal each other.
I'll just call this one two. We usually call this one, the first resonance will be two, the
third resonance, resonance will be three. But you understand what I'm trying to say. These
two multiply with each other is always going to give the same velocity. So as the one goes
up, the other one must go down. As the one goes down, the other one must go up. But for
that given situation, at that air temperature, at that temperature, at that air temperature,
at that air pressure, level above sea level, everything the same, same rope, at these different
resonances, the velocity of the wave is always going to remain the same. So we've looked at
what segments are. That is a segment, that is a segment, that is a segment. So it's from
node to node. Suppose we can also call that a segment, from anti-node to node to anti-node.
But it looks better like this. That is a segment. And we've looked at velocity staying constant.
Let's look at this problem. We have a guitar string. It's 50 centimeters long. Not a very
small guitar. Anyway, we are told that when it's plugged, a standing wave develops in it,
and its fundamental frequency, some will have FF, some will have F1. Nonetheless, its fundamental
frequency is 256 hertz. And we are told that when you go by the string, 80 centimeters of
it will weigh 0.75 grams. It will weigh 0.75 grams. What is the tension in the string?
Dear me, where to start? First of all, back to the concept in your mind as to what is happening
here. That is the most important thing. Equations come later. Playing with equations, very easy.
It's calculus or algebra. It's simple. But you've got to understand the concept behind this. So
it is a guitar string. In other words, we're looking at the fact that we're going to go from
node to node because the guitar string is tied to the top and to the bottom. Those don't
move. Those are going to be nodes. So we're going to have one anti-node. So in this length
of 30 centimeters, 30 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters, we're going to have our fundamental
wave. It cannot get any more fundamental than that if both ends are fixed. That is it. That
is our fundamental wave. It can't be any different. Okay? And we are told that that happens at 256
hertz. This is going to happen. This is going to happen. And we want to know what the
tension is. Well, if this is the situation, what did we say? Node to anti-node. Node to anti-node
is always a quarter of a wavelength during standing waves and during resonances. The fundamental
idea. So from there to there, it's going to be a quarter. So from there to there, it's going
to be a half. Okay? So we know that this full length of hours, this full length of hours,
is going to contain two. There's two quarters. Two quarter wavelengths. So that's going to
be a half a wavelength. In other words, our wavelength during this frequency is going to equal two
times the length. Two times the length. And that is going to equal 60 centimeters. 60 times
10 to the power of negative two meters. Okay? And what jumps out of it? It does immediately.
Velocity. Velocity equals frequency times wavelength. I know what the frequency is. I know what the
wavelength is. I know what the velocity is. As simple as that from remembering this picture.
Five at both sides. Node to one anti-node is my fundamental standing wave. It's not the
first resonance. Okay? I have a one segment there. And your note gets confusing in some textbooks
because they use this concept and this becomes an N. So there will be N times the quarter.
But it depends whether you're dealing with those PVC tubes. I talked about open at one end.
Both ends closed at one end. Now we're starting talking this N makes things confusing in your
head. Don't even look at that. Don't even think about this. Just think about I'm going to
draw you a picture of both sides closed. So those are going to be guitar strings. I'm going
to do a PVC pipe where one end is closed. I'm going to do a PVC pipe where both ends are open.
That is it. And you've got to remember those three pictures. That is it. So I have V. And
now that I've understood the concept, now I can just play with algebra with my equations
that I know. I know that this also equals T divided by M over that length that I was given.
That is the square root of tension. This L I can bring up in the numerator divided by M.
OK. So I can now. I don't even have to add V. OK. V was R sub by V. But now I know that
V squared is going to equal T L over M. I mean this is the start of algebra at school. OK.
So this is not a problem. T equals V squared. I hope I didn't make a mistake. Divided by L.
And this was this mass. The 0.75 grams. A kilogram. 0.75 kilogram. It was given the
probability of 0.75 gram. I was given the mass 80 centimeters of that. 80 centimeters
of that weighs so much. The velocity I've just worked out so I can see what the tension was
in my guitar string. But I've understood this fundamental concept. I don't have to worry about
tens here. Ten times because there's so many segments. Blah blah blah. Just understand
the concept. This is the most fundamental standing wave you can get in a guitar string because
both ends are tied. Both ends are tied. And once you understand that and once you know
that from node to anti-node is a quarter of a wavelength. And you can see that. Why is that
a quarter? From there to there. Because this is going to go back and back up again. OK. So
there is one hole. So if this was 60 centimeters long which indeed we saw. That's one wavelength. OK.
So if that is one. That's a half. And that's a quarter. From any node to any anti-node in a standing wave
with all resonance. Fundament wave, standing wave, all first, second, whatever resonance. N to A or A to N
is always a quarter of the wavelength. Fundamental understanding. And then these problems are so easy.
Next problem. We have a string it says. Tied to both ends in other words. At a frequency of 460 hertz it forms a resonance
with five segments. It forms a resonance with five segments. Let's draw that in our heads. So that will be one segment.
There will be two segments. There will be three segments. Four segments. Five segments. I'm cheating here.
This is the way to do it. Five segments. We have five segments. This is going to be a node that's an anti-node.
That's a node. That's an anti-node. That's a node. That's an anti-node. That's a node. That's an anti-node. That's a node. That's a node.
they want to know what the fundamental frequency is going to be
let's see if they've given us anything else
okay, that's it
so that's what we know
at this frequency, this is what we get
what is going to be
think about it quick
are we going to get an answer as far as it is
it is the fundamental frequency
or for this length
no, probably not, but you'll see what I mean
okay, so at the fundamental frequency
this is what's going to happen
and you know, no, no
we know that now
and we'll know that this is going to be
a quarter of the wavelength
and here
that's going to be a quarter
of our wavelength
that is going to be a quarter of our wavelength
we know that the velocity
of the wave turning there
is going to be exactly the same
as the velocity of the wave turning there
what's going to be the difference?
nothing, nothing
same row, same everything
this is fundamental
this is fundamental
so velocity here is going to equal
f times lambda
and the velocity here is going to be
frequency times lambda
it's going to be exactly the same
let's call this 5
let's call this, now as I said
we can put ff here
or f1 here
and I'll make this f3
I think, doesn't matter
let's just call this f1
lambda 1, f2 lambda 2
f2 lambda 2
this whole length here is l
this whole length is l
this whole length remains l
so l is going to equal here for us
how many of these little buggers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
this is going to equal for us
10 of these quarter lambda 1s
the exact same length
never changed it
it's going to equal how many of these
node to antinodes
quarter ls
1, 2
only 2 of them
2 of these quarter
gamma 2s now
2 of these
gamma 2s
lambda 2s
so this is going to equal
5 over 2
lambda 1
and this length is going to equal
was I writing it for you
this is going to equal
a half
lambda 2
the length stays the same
in other words
5 over 2 lambda 1s
is going to equal
a half
lambda 2
we can do that with 2s
or 5 lambda 1s
is going to equal
one single lambda 2
does that make sense?
a lambda 1
and a lambda 2
this is how long a lambda 2 is
5 little lambda 1s
is going to fit into
one lambda 2
what else do we know?
we know that these velocities
are the same
they're not going to change
in other words
frequency 1
lambda 1 is going to equal
frequency 2 lambda 2
frequency 2 lambda 2
I was given
this frequency
this one
so this frequency 1
I was given
lambda 1
I can express
as lambda 2
in terms of lambda 2
frequency 2
is what I want
frequency 2
is what I want
so let's say that
frequency 2
which remember
in this instance
is our fundamental frequency
okay
is going to equal
frequency 1
lambda 1
divided by
lambda 2
that's going to equal
frequency 1
lambda 1
lambda 1
and what is lambda 2?
lambda 2 is
5 times lambda 1
my lambda 1
is going to cancel
and frequency 2
is going to be
a fifth of frequency 1
a fifth of frequency 1
that equals
a fifth of
frequency 1
is given
460
so a fifth of
460 hertz
I'll check it now
under calculated
to see
whether I made
any mistakes
there
so that's why
I don't like
to use FF
and then F
or F1
and then the first
resonance is F2
it gets confused
to set it up
this is F1
situation 1
situation 2
don't get confused
between this
we are asked
a fundamental frequency
in our mind
we know
that this is what
the fundamental frequency
is going to look like
I can see
what the relationship
is going to be
between lambda 1
and lambda 2
I worked it out
I can replace
lambda 2
by knowing
that under these
circumstances
the velocity
is going to be
exactly the same
in situation 1
and situation 2
and I can go
further now
we've asked
for 3 segments
I'll have to
slice these videos
together
the card was full
so we got
interrupted there
I don't know
exactly when
it stopped recording
but still we've
asked what would
be the frequency
at 3 segments
we've drawn
3 segments
we know that
this will be
a quarter
and we'll know
we'll fit in
6 quarters there
so in the same
length
in the same
length
we're going to
fit in a 6
quarter
I hope it comes
out there
in a quarter
6 times a quarter
of these
lambda 3's
now I've said
this 3's got
nothing to do
with the fact
that it's 3
seconds
and that's why
that N
that you always
get in the
textbooks
will confuse
you
situation 1
situation 2
situation 3
and now
I can have
that 6 over 4
is 3 over 2
length is going
to be 3 over 2
lambda 3's
so as far
as lambda 1
was concerned
as far as
lambda 1
was concerned
or we can even
use lambda 2
in lambda 2
there was a half
there was a half
lambda 2's
in one length
so a half
lambda 2's
is going to
equal
3 over 2
lambda 3's
so I can set up
this situation
again
here I'm just
going to
that's still
going to equal
frequency 3
lambda 3
and I can
replace
lambda 3
with
I can replace
lambda 3
with a third
times lambda 2
for one
lambda 3
and I can
solve this
equation
again
without
understanding
those complex
sometimes complex
equations
with an N
in them
I can
understand
what is
happening
behind the
scenes
so to say
so that I
can solve
these very
easy
in the N
problems
for
it
makes
happy
for
people
have
è
don't
say
you
,"
,"
