Now, we've looked at exponential growth and we said that dy dt, the rate of change of
the number of anything, let's say organisms, is equal to some constant of proportionality
times the number that you have at that very specific time.
So there's a proportionality between the rate of change and how many there are.
A few videos ago I did mention that this is some idealistic situation and as much as if
I have the microbiology lab grow cultures, those organisms are going to compete with each
other and they're going to compete for resources.
So they're not just going to have this constant period of duplication.
There's going to be some maximum set and the idea behind what we're going to do now is
this.
We're going to say that the rate of change of these organisms is going to equal still the
constant proportionality times how many there are but there's going to be a second factor
as well and this factor we're going to call m minus y where m is the theoretical maximum.
m equals some maximum.
It's still a first order differential equation in that I have a variable and I have its first
derivative and it is separable.
In other words, it's a separable first order differential equation.
But just think about this.
So the rate of change, how many there are.
So if I have 100, the rate of change is going to be a certain number.
If I have 200, the rate of change is going to be different.
There's a proportionality though between how many there are and what the rate of change
is.
But it's also going to be proportional to how many there are subtracted from the maximum.
So if I have none of them, so we start with one for instance and say the maximum is 10 billion,
it's going to be very close to the initial equation that we started with.
But as y becomes larger and larger and it approaches the theoretical maximum, when it's
at the theoretical maximum, there can be no further growth because it's at the maximum.
So from this, what we call logistic equation, we have two equilibrium solutions.
Let's look at that.
Equilibrium solutions.
And that's quite easy to think about.
First of all, if we have zero, we let y equal zero.
If we have y equal zero, there's going to be no rate of change because there's a y there,
multiplication by zero, zero.
And the other one is we let y equal m.
If we let y equal m, we have another zero.
So at the maximum, if the number of organisms is at the maximum, there can be no rate of change.
And if we have zero organisms, we also can't, they can't just be manufactured out of nothing.
We also have an equilibrium state.
So those are the two equilibrium solutions.
Now, let's take this away and make some space.
We're going to go on a very, very wild ride.
And I haven't done this in a while, so I might have to look at my cheat board on that side.
So let's start with this first order differential equation.
The rate of change in the number of something is equal to constant proportionality times.
How many there are times some maximum minus y.
It's separable, so let's do that.
So we're going to have one over y, m minus y, dy is going to equal k dt.
I can take the derivative of both sides.
In fact, the integral of both sides.
And now, on the right-hand side, it's still very easy because this is going to equal some,
a k is a constant.
I can bring that out of the definite integral side dt and that's going to equal kt plus c.
The left-hand side is problematic though.
I'll have to use a method of partial fractions to do the side.
Let's do some work on the side here.
Let's do some work on the side.
Remember, the definitions we're dealing with, it was equilibrium solution.
And this is the logistic equation.
So let's have a look.
Let's have one over y, m minus y.
And that's going to equal a over y plus b over m minus y.
And remember, this m is a constant.
There's some maximum.
There's not enough food.
There is some maximum.
Or if k was negative, you know, there's going to be a minimum amount of radioactive particles left.
There's a maximum or minimum.
Oh, let's be dealing with maximum.
So let's not confuse the issue.
So I can multiply both sides of the equation by this denominator.
So I'm going to have one equal.
If I bring that into the numerator, the y is going to cancel.
So I'm going to have a, m minus y.
And if I bring that up, the m minus y is going to cancel.
So I'm going to have a b y.
First solution, let's say y equal to, oops, that must be a plus, wasn't it?
Yeah.
Let's say y equal to zero.
So what am I going to have left with?
One equals, if y is zero, this is going to be m a.
A.
In other words, a is going to equal one over n.
And you can see where this is going.
If I said y equal to n.
Remember, m is just a constant.
I'm going to have one equals, m minus m is zero.
So that's zero.
So I'm going to have m b.
In other words, b is also one over n.
In other words, if I substitute this, if I substitute a in there, I'm going to have that this one over y, m minus y is going to equal one over m y.
There's my one over m to substitute for y and y in the denominator plus.
And I put one over m in there as well.
One over m, m minus y.
So I can make my, I can substitute this integrand with this.
These are then become two separate integrals.
So I'm going to be left with this side.
With the integral of one over m y dy.
That's the indifferent integral of one over m.
m minus y dy.
And that is going to equal kt plus c.
Get some more chalk.
All done.
We are getting there.
Let's make some space.
So this is where we are.
Now, remember m is a constant.
So this is going to be one over m can be brought out of the integrals.
I'm going to be left with one over y dy, which is the natural log of the absolute value of y.
Plus, I can bring the one out of m out again.
Because that's a constant.
Then I'm left with one over m minus y dy.
And that's easy to do as much as it's also going to be the natural log of the absolute value of m minus y.
But then I have to take, look at this constant minus y as well.
So that's going to be a negative that we bring out.
So that will be a negative.
And that's going to equal kt plus c.
I can multiply this whole lot out with m.
And I know that y is going to be larger than zero and it's going to be smaller than m.
In other words, y is going to be a positive number so I can let go of these absolute value signs.
And if I multiply it out by m, I'm going to be left with the natural log of y minus the natural log of m minus y.
And that is going to equal kmt plus mc.
I can exponentiate both sides.
So e to the power of this and e to the power of that.
I can make use of my laws that I know of exponents.
So this is going to be e to the power of natural log of y times e to the power of negative natural log of m minus y.
And on that side, we can rewrite this as e to the power of kmt.
What did I want to do there?
Times e to the power of mc.
e to the power of mc.
If I do this on this side, this becomes e to the power of natural log of y over,
e to the power of m minus y.
Because it's to the power of negative that.
That means you can do it as one over natural log of m minus y.
Equals this e to the power mc.
Constant, constant, and a constant.
We're going to call that a again as we did before.
Times e to the power of kmt.
Now e to the power natural log of y is y.
Over e to the power natural log of m minus y is m minus y.
And that's going to equal a, e, k, m, t.
Now I've got to get y on its own.
Where can we make some space?
Let's do it here.
We're almost there.
Okay, I'll multiply both sides.
I'm going to get y equals a, e to the power of kmt times m minus y.
If I multiply that out, I'm going to be left with a, m, e, k, n, t.
Minus y, a, e, k, n, t.
I'll just multiply that out.
I'm going to bring this to this side.
So I'm going to be left with y minus y.
Bringing it to the other side becomes positive.
a, e, k, n, t equals a, m, e, k, n, t.
And I'm going to bring out 1 as a common factor.
So I'm going to be left with 1 equals a to the power m, e, e to the power k, n, t.
Now we have the solution, the general solution to the first order separable,
separable first order differential equation that we started off with,
which was known as the logistic equation.
We have two equilibrium solutions.
And this is the general solution.
