Let's look at this problem. I say that we shouldn't throw away the concept of n, n number of resonances as is mentioned in the textbooks that you would read.
So we told that we have a string and it's resonating and it says that two consecutive resonances is 420 hertz and 490 hertz. What is the fundamental frequency of the fundamental standing wave?
And I used a here, but I could have used n as well, that f of some n is 420. And the very next one, in other words, n plus 1 is going to be 490. Nothing in between. So there can't be n plus, and that is the very next resonance.
And what you will see in some textbooks, actually, is that f of n equals n times the f of f. The fundamental frequency, the first fundamental frequency, or the fundamental frequency will then have n equals 1.
1 times the fundamental frequency is frequency number 1. The first resonance will then be 2 times ff. And that will be f2, which is now, if this is, if n equals 1, this is our fundamental frequency.
If n equals 2, this is our first resonance. First resonance. And that's why I don't want to use the n's because this is 2 and that's 1. It's much better to understand the concept.
But if we just subtract these two from each other. So we have nf n plus 1 minus f of n. Say the fundamental frequency was, say the fundamental frequency was x. So this is going to be n times x and this is going to be n plus 1 times x.
And if I just subtract these from each other. If I just subtract these from each other. So I'm going to have nx plus x minus nx. I'm going to be left with x, which is what I chose as the fundamental frequency.
So if I do that here. So if I subtract 420 from 490, I'm just going to get 70. 70 hertz. And that is the fundamental frequency.
This is an interesting problem. We are told that we are told that the fundamental frequency in the guitar string. So we know what that means. Fix the both ends. And we can have node node, anti node. And we are not given what the length here was.
Let's call that length 1. So this length 1. So this length 1 is going to contain 2 times a quarter times the wavelength length. Because from there to there is a quarter and you've got 2 of it.
So that's going to equal half the wavelength. One. One. And we told in that situation we have a fundamental frequency of 196 hertz. We want to know where shall we place our finger on the guitar so this L2 is going to be shorter so that we have a new fundamental frequency.
So in actual fact we are going to make that shorter. A new fundamental frequency. Node, anti node, node. And that's going to have a fundamental frequency, new, of 440 hertz. Where shall we place that?
Now that's a difficult one. Now that's a difficult one. But velocity equals frequency times wavelength. And what is our wavelength 1 here? That's wavelength 1.
equals 2 times length 1. What is going to be the situation here? For length 2. It's also going to contain twice times a quarter. So it's also going to contain a half times a quarter.
weight length 2. So weight length 2. So weight length 2. So weight length 2 is going to equal 2 times length 2. Now think about it. Even if you put your finger on that guitar string. That string is still under the same tension. And it's still the same string. So it has the same mass per unit volume. Mass per unit length density.
In other words. In other words. The velocity of both situations are going to be the same. And therein lies our answer. So let's have this situation.
Let's have this situation for the fundamental resonance under this condition under this condition of the strings. Is that the length is going to equal 2 times a quarter of the wavelength. That is going to equal 1 half of the wavelength.
So the weight length. So the weight length. So the weight length is going to equal 2 times the length. So let's do that here. V is going to equal frequency times 2 times the length.
So in our situation. So in our situation. So in our situation. V is going to equal. FF.
FF. F. F. NU. Times 2 times length. NU. 2 times length. NU. This V and this V is exactly the same.
So we then have frequency fundamental. So we then have frequency fundamental.
Times 2 times length 1. This is going to equal. Frequency fundamental NU.
Also times 2 times length 2. We can take away the 2's. We can have L2 divided by L1. On that side. So we are going to take L1 to that side.
1 to that side, that's going to be frequency fundamental divided by frequency fundamental
nu, so that's going to be 196 divided by 440. Or length 2 is going to be 196 over 440 times
length 1. We were never given the length, so we're never going to get to an absolute answer.
But we can see the ratio of how much we need to shorten it. Length 2 is going to be only
a fraction of length 1. The fundamental thing to understand here is that velocity equals
tension, square root of tension times length divided by mass. And this is not now this length
that I'm talking about. It's mass per unit length. In other words, in the books it's written
T divided by mass divided by length. If I have a shorter piece, I'm going to have less mass.
Shorter length, shorter mass. But the mass per unit length, irrespective of where I put my
finger, the mass per unit length of this string is going to remain constant and it's fixed there
and there. So the tension remains the same. So the velocity under these two situations
is exactly the same. And hence we can equate these two equations and we can express length
1 as a function of length 2 or with respect to length 2. And we got length by knowing that
in this situation we're not talking about open and closed PVC pipes. We're talking about fixed nodes
at the end. We know that length equals or how many? NA. So we have two NA's. NA, AN. So 2 times
a quarter times the wavelength. Or the wavelength equals 2 times the length. Now we are going
to get to longitudinal waves. But in this section I just want to express longitudinal waves as
transverse waves. You can do that under certain circumstances. So we are told we have a metal bar
metal bar and we clamp it in the middle. And we can perhaps hit it on one side. So we are going
to have this back and forth movement. Or as a sound wave can you say you can travel through that.
We are told that it is 60 centimeters long. 60 times 10 to the power negative 2. And we are asked
we are told that its fundamental frequency is 3 kilohertz. And what is the speed of the longitudinal
waves in the bar? So we want velocity and this equals 3 times 10 to the power 3 a second. 3 hertz.
That's its fundamental frequency. We are told that it is clamped here in the middle. And that
is why I want to express the longitudinal wave as a transverse wave. So what are we looking
at? And I'll draw it here. This is what we are looking at. But under first resonance these
two ends are open. They are free to move. Free to move. And that is why I am expressing them
as an anti-node. A particle there can move up and down. Or in this case it is moving left
and right. This is going to be a node because it is clamped there. Nothing there can move.
And on this side again an anti-node. And that is the only, if you have both sides open, you
can do problems with the PVC pipe open on both ends. This is the way to represent these longitudinal
waves as transverse waves. That's what I am doing here. So that full length was 60 centimeters
from anti-node to node. From node to anti-node is only going to be 50 times 10 to power negative
2 centimeters. OK. But what do we know here? We have a certain length L. And in this instance
we are going to fit two times a quarter wavelength. From A to N, from N to A is a quarter times
wavelength. And we are fitting in two of them. So we can work out what the wavelength is going
to be. We can work out what the wavelength is going to be. So L is going to equal a half
times the wavelength. And the wavelength is going to be 2 times L. So the wavelength is going
to be 2 times, 2 times 60 is 120. 120 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters. And voila,
velocity equals F times lambda. And in our case here it's F fundamental times our lambda there.
So it's 3 kilohertz times 120 times 10 to the power negative 2 meters. Or 1.2 meters. And it's easy
for us to get our answer. The concept here is not this simple algebra. And knowing this equation,
which you certainly should, but it's so easy, is to understand how we are expressing a longitudinal
wave as a transverse wave. And understanding that these can move freely. And I'm doing that as
an anti-node. It's fixed there. Nothing there can move. It's a fixed node A. So this is going
to be the representation of both open ends, both freely moving ends, and the single fixed
position. So that is going to be the fundamental wave in this situation. Anti-node, node, anti-node.
Another problem where we're going to represent longitudinal waves is transverse waves. We have this PVC
piping. And at the one end it's closed off. At the other end it's open. We're sending a sound
wave in here. So it's a longitudinal wave. And we notice that this 90 centimeter long pipe resonates
at a fundamental resonance of 95 hertz. What is the velocity of this wave? Now once again we are taking
longitudinal waves and we are going to express them as transverse waves. Think about it though.
There's a little air molecule. And what happens to the air molecule as the sound wave comes past?
Well there's compression, expansion, compression, expansion, compression, expansion. So it's moving
left and right. So I can represent this as an anti-node because there's movement. On this side, that air molecule right there cannot move left or right. It is stuck. So this is going to end up being a node.
So for the fundamental, the fundamental wave in this sort of setup, a tube closed on the one side is going to be this. So in this instance, length is going to equal from anti-node to node is a quarter and there's just one of them. So it's going to be a quarter times wavelength or the wavelength is going to equal four times the length of that tube of
two. Four times the length of that tube. We were given frequency and we asked what is the velocity. Well it's frequency times lambda. In this instance our fundamental frequency which is 95 hertz times four times length of that tube. So four times 90, 360 or 3.6 meters down to 95 hertz. It's going to give you the velocity. This is the picture you imprint on your mind. That is the
fundamental wave in the fundamental wave in this open and one side closed pipe. And I'm expressing a longitudinal wave as a transverse wave noting that these air molecules are free to move but those are not. That's where it's stuck.
That's where it's stuck. And this is our fundamental. So what will happen. What will be our first lesson. I have to have A here and I have to have N there. It's open there, it's closed there, no debate. And I've got to go A, N, A, N, A, N, A, N, A, N. I can't go A, A, N.
Okay, so the only thing I can do is put in another N and another A. So I better divide this up into thirds. So this will be a third and that will be another third. So there and there. So over here I've got to have an N. Over here I've got to have another A. Here I've got to have an N. The N's have got to be on the same.
So we're going to go from here to here to here. From here to here to here to here. So what have I got now? A, N, A, N. So in the same L for my first resonance I'm going to have how many A N's? One, two, three of them. Three N's. Any A N is a quarter of that.
So L of the wavelength. It's going to be three quarters times wavelength or wavelength at first resonance is going to equal four thirds times the length. Because I need a, there's a third, there's a third, there's a third. I need another third just to complete my wave. If I had another third I'm going to have one complete wave. So I need four thirds of the length of this arrangement to do that.
