Our last discussion will be on transfusion associated graft versus host disease.
We'll quickly introduce the topic, look at definitions, the pathogenesis and incidence,
clinical presentation diagnosis and how we treat this or more properly how we prevent this.
It is an attack by viable immunocompetent donor lymphocyte on the recipient's antigen
and those would be cells in the skin, liver, GIT, bone marrow etc.
Now it follows transfusion but also bone marrow transplants.
Obviously in patients with bone marrow transplant there is donor bone marrow and it is not attacked.
So you can distinguish the bone marrow transplant versus the transfusion patient in that way.
If transfusion related it is near always fatal.
It is more common but then less fatal about 20-25% following hematopoietic cell transplants.
Now the pathogenesis, in most transfusion donor lymphocytes are destroyed by the recipient
unless the patient is immunocompromised or there is a specific type of HLA matching.
So if the recipient is immunocompromised we talk about lymphomas, leukemias, chemotherapy,
most notably not acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
In a specific type of HLA matching we are looking at a recipient that is heterosagous for HLA heplotype
for which the donor is homozygous.
The recipient does not recognize the donor lymphocytes but the latter recognizes recipient cells.
So at risk are HLA matched transfusions and those in close family members as donors.
You require about 10 to the power 7 lymphocytes per kilogram in the recipient.
So we don't usually see it in FFPs and in crucipitate.
It develops about 4 to 30 days after transfusion with a fever, a maculopapular rash
that can spread as a generalized erythroderma and can even end up as a toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, coughing.
On blood examination there is a pancytopenia.
There is electrolyte disturbances due to all the diarrhea and there is abnormal liver function tests.
There is a plastic bone marrow in the blood transfusion patients.
As I mentioned it is almost always fatal after transfusion.
And there are various management modalities which do not really have a positive outcome.
But steroids, azathioprine, antithymocyte globulin, methotrexate, cyclosporine has been tried,
UV irradiation, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, thalidomide I should say,
have all been tried without much success.
So, the emphasis on prevention.
We are looking at irradiating the lymphocyte containing components.
You get specific caesium type of gamma radiation.
Just to remember that that does reduce the storage time to about 28 days after irradiation.
We have also looked at leukodepletion with specific filters
but that does not universally prevent against graft versus host reaction.
You get Nicodop suffers from
your brain.
You get specificастs and被ies and don't only be talked about in the scapesso.
