Now, another example where I can express longitudinal waves as transverse waves.
I've got a metal bar 40 centimeters long, and this metal bar drops on the floor.
And we note that a wave travels through it at 5,500 meters per second.
We want to know what the fundamental frequency is.
And for that matter, the length of the wave.
So once again, I've got to set up a situation.
And this time I'm going to set it up as a tube, a PVC tube that's open at both ends.
So how can I set up the simplest waveform as a fundamental waveform?
And the simplest thing I can come up with is if there is a node in the middle.
On this side it's free to move, and on that side, on this side it's free to move, and on that side.
That's the simplest wave pattern I can set up.
So I'm going to have anti-node, node, anti-node.
So in this length of 40 centimeters, I'm going to have how many?
One, two.
I'm going to have two quarter lambdas.
It's going to equal a half times lambda.
In other words, lambda is going to equal two times the length.
So that's going to be 80 centimeters.
It's going to be my wavelength.
And velocity equals frequency times lambda.
So frequency and our distance is going to be fundamental.
It's going to be velocity times that wavelength, or velocity divided by two times lambda.
That's what we're going to have.
That's the fundamental.
I cannot set up.
I cannot just have, I can't have anti-node, anti-node.
I can't have a pipe and I have this, this.
That's not a wave.
I've got to form a wave pattern.
And both sides have got to be open.
That means I've got to have a node in the middle, to call it a fundamental wave, a standing wave.
I can have any kind of wave.
I can have a frequency lower than this, but that will not set up a resonant wave.
Well, it's not a resonant, this is the first one, the fundamental wave.
After that, I get first resonant, second resonance.
Something magical happens at those frequencies because of what that bar is made of and all sorts of other situations.
But at that magical frequency, I set up a standing wave.
And perhaps later, we'll look more closely as to what that really means, this standing wave.
Here we're going to do another problem.
Transverse waves, longitudinal waves seen as transverse waves.
We've got a metal bar.
It is 2 meters long, 200 centimeters.
There we go.
We are told that it's clamped at 50 centimeters.
So that's 100.
So that'll be 50.
It's clamped there.
And we've got a tiny little hammer here that can resonate, that can oscillate.
And it's hitting the side of this, so it's setting forth a longitudinal wave.
And we note that it resonates, or it's fundamental frequency is 3 kilohertz.
And we want to know what the speed is of our longitudinal waves.
Well, let's think about it easy.
This side is open.
These are free to move.
That is fixed.
So what's going to happen here?
That's going to be a node.
And that's going to be an anti-node.
And that's a quarter.
What other choice do I have is for there to be another anti-node there, for there to be
another node there, and an anti-node there.
So what are we going to have?
This.
What other choice do we have?
We're going to have an anti-node, a node, an anti-node, a node, an anti-node.
So from this length of 2 meters, I'm going to have how many quarter wavelengths from anti-node
to node is a quarter.
So I'm going to have 1, 2, 3, 4.
4 of them.
So that is going to be exactly my wavelength.
It's going to equal exactly the length of this 2 meters.
There's no other choice.
That is fixed.
That is completely open to move.
So from there, it's got to be a quarter, another quarter, another quarter, another quarter.
So I'm doing one complete wave from crest to crest in that same length.
And simple enough now.
Velocity equals frequency times lambda.
And now, in instance, the frequency fundamental, which we were given, times L.
So simple.
I have seen a longitudinal wave as a transverse wave, allowing me to solve this problem.
And because that one was fixed, and that is anti-node to node, and that was exactly a
quarter of this length.
It was kept at 50 centimeters.
It's 2 meters long.
So that is a quarter.
I've got no option but to set up this.
What would the fundamental frequency have been?
Oh, I made a mistake in this problem.
We weren't told that that's the fundamental frequency.
We were told that that is a resonant frequency set up.
I shouldn't say that, actually, because if there is clamped, if there is clamped there, that would
be the fundamental frequency.
So indeed, yes.
That is the fundamental frequency.
It has no choice.
This is the easiest wave I can set up if this is clamped there.
If it wasn't, if it was just open, it would be the same as open on both sides, and the easiest
wave I'd be able to set up was that.
And then the length is going to equal two times a quarter times the wavelength.
And so length is going to equal a half times the wavelength.
That would have been the easiest.
But now this clamped here, so this will be, for this bar in this situation, the fundamental.
But the very same 90 centimeters, or how long, 200 centimeters bar, if it wasn't clamped at
50 centimeters, that would have been the fundamental frequency, fundamental wave that would have
been set up.
But for this clamped situation, this would be the fundamental wave.
Now, this is not even a problem.
I just want to understand the concept.
I want exactly the same fundamental frequency in two set of pipes.
In the one pipe, we have close at one end.
Our other pipe is open at one end.
Or at both ends.
Open at both ends.
That's dead.
But anyway.
If I want to set up they're both in the same room, same temperature, I'm going to send
a wave in there.
I want to know how long these must be.
So the velocity in both circumstances for my sound wave that I'm sending in there, and I'm
going to represent a longitudinal wave as a transverse wave.
As always, I want the same fundamental frequency.
What is the difference between the lengths that these two pipes must be?
Now remember, this is closed, this is open, the only fundamental wave I can set up here is this.
This is going to be a node, there's going to be an antinode, there's going to be an antinode, there's going to be a node.
node. Let's call this velocity 1. We don't even have to. This is velocity 1. Well, this
is velocity 2 equals velocity 1. This is going to equal plus frequency fundamental times
wavelength, frequency fundamental 1, frequency fundamental 2 times wavelength 2 times wavelength
1. I want to set up the fundamental frequency 1 equals fundamental frequency 2. So here
we're going to have velocity 1 equals frequency fundamental 1, wavelength 1. Here I'm going
to have V1. It's the same. V1 equals V2. It's the same room. SP is exactly the same. It's
going to equal fundamental frequency 2, but I want it to be equal to 1. So this is also
frequency fundamental 1 times lambda 2. So the only difference here is going to be lambda
2, the wavelength wavelength. I can express wavelength in terms of the length. Here I have only 1
quarter. So this length 1 is going to be a quarter times the wavelength. And I only fit in one of
two of these quarter wavelengths. That is going to equal a half times the wavelength. Now it's the same
laboratory. Just think about this. Open air, outside. These two pipes are in the same place. The wavelength is going to be exactly the same. The wavelength of sound and the same air at the same temperature
the same pressure. That sound wave is going to have exactly the same wavelength. There's nothing different between wavelength 1 and wavelength 2. In other words, here I'm going to have wavelength equals 4 times length 1 and here I'm going to have it as 2 times length 2.
2 times length 2. 2 times length 2. So here I'm going to equate these two to each other because V1 equals V1.
Fundamental 1. 1 is going to equal 4 times length 1 is going to equal FF2 and 2 times length 2. That goes, that goes, that becomes a 2. So 2 times length 1 equals length 2.
Or length 2 is twice this long. That's why I drew this longer. I knew the answer before here. So if it's open, it needs to have twice the length as the one that's closed on one side to have exactly the same fundamental frequency. So simple.
Remembering that the velocity of air is meant to be exactly the same in both situations and the wavelength of the air, the sound, I mean, velocity of the sound wave and the wavelength of the sound wave is going to be exactly the same.
You've got the pipes next to each other in the same atmospheric conditions. In the laboratory outside, it doesn't matter.
And we note that the open-ended one is going to be twice as long as the one side of the closed pipe to have the same fundamental frequency.
So please print these in your mind. If it's closed on one end, that is my fundamental wave. Open on both sides, free to move both sides, that is my fundamental wave. Closed on one side, that is my fundamental wave.
Those three pictures are what it's all about.
