Now this is not obviously the normal blackboard and not going into the hospital except for emergencies today.
So we're doing this on the whiteboard here.
We are told that we are given a maximum sustainable population of a thousand
and then this could be measured in millions or tons or billions of organisms.
But anyway m equals a thousand and a growth rate of k equals 0.007.
In the real world obviously you won't know these things.
You've got to do experiments and sort of sort this thing out.
But they want us to find an expression for the population at any time t given an initial population
y of t and t is 0 of 350.
Let's do that.
We can start with the logistic equation.
Which remember was y equals a m e to the power k m t divided by 1 plus a e to the power k m t.
So let's have a look at replacing the sum of the variables that we were given.
So m is a thousand.
A we don't know.
E to the power k times m.
If we multiply that by a thousand.
One, two, three.
That will give us seven.
t over 1 plus a we don't know e to the power 7t.
This is an initial value problem as we can see.
As we can see there.
So let's do that.
So y is going to be 350 equals a thousand.
A we don't know.
And then e to the power 7 times we can replace the t with 0.
Because this is y of t remember.
y of t so e anything to the power 0 is 1.
So that's just a thousand times a.
1 plus a to the power again e to the power 0 is 1.
So let's multiply both sides by 1 plus a.
So we can get rid of the denominator on this side.
So 350.
1 plus a equals a thousand a.
So 350 plus 350 a equals a thousand a.
If I take this to the other side.
It's going to be negative.
That will leave me with 650 a.
Going to equal 350.
And it's going to equal.
Is that right?
350.
So a is going to equal 35 over 65.
And we can simplify that even further.
But let's just leave it there.
We can now replace it in here as well.
So that's going to be a thousand times 35 over 65.
e to the power 7t.
1 plus a is 35 over 65.
e to the power 7t.
And we can just obviously simplify this.
We can simplify this.
And we can also get a common denominator in the bottom.
I mean this is a simple algebra.
We can simplify this.
But certainly that is going to be our answer.
Let's try and get through these problems.
You'll see in some instances.
We use Newton's notation.
Y prime.
Which unfortunately doesn't work so well for this.
So I like to just convert.
Or you should just convert.
To like its notation.
And this y prime is obviously.
The first derivative of y with respect to x.
As we have the y and x variables in this problem.
And this is obviously a first order differential equation.
In as much as a variable y and its first derivative.
Is in the equation.
And we need a general solution to this first order.
Separable differential equation.
And separable because.
If you look it's quite easy to separate the.
The two variables on either side of the.
Equal sign.
So that's going to be 1 over y.
And this is dy dx.
Equals x squared plus 1.
And we're going to take dx to the other side.
So that's 1 over y dy.
It's going to equal x squared plus 1 dx.
We're going to take the indefinite integral of both sides.
Meaning this is going to be the natural log of the absolute value of y.
This is just addition of two separate terms.
So we can.
Could have done each separately.
So it's the indefinite integral of x squared.
With respect to x.
Plus the indefinite integral of 1.
And with respect to x.
So the first one is going to be a third.
X to the power 3.
Plus we're going to have an x.
Plus we're going to have.
Just x for.
For that 1 plus some constant c.
Because this is the indefinite integral.
Now we can exponentiate both sides.
So I'm not going to waste time.
I'll decide e to the power.
And e to the power that.
Remember the addition rule for exponents.
On the left hand side.
We're going to be left with the absolute value of y.
E to the power the natural log of a number.
Is just that number.
And writing it like this.
We might as well write e to the power a third.
x to the power 3.
Times e to the power x.
Times e to the power c.
That would be equivalent ways of writing it.
Now this e to the power.
The e is a constant.
C is a constant.
So this term will become a constant.
And because that constant can be positive or negative.
We can actually get rid of the absolute value sign.
On this side.
So here we're going to be left with some constant times.
Well these two we can just.
Again write as a third.
x to the power 3.
Plus x.
So that will be the solution to our first problem.
In the next video.
Let's look at the second one.
Second problem I think is just as easy.
Let's just write that in Leibniz notation.
Which is going to leave us dy dx.
x equals 2x squared y squared.
Multiply both sides by 1 over y squared.
So we're going to have 1 over y squared.
dy.
Also multiply both sides with dx.
So we'll leave us dx squared dx.
Take the indefinite integral of both sides.
I'm going to rewrite this as negative 2.
y to the power negative 2 dy.
And on this side we're going to have 2 over 3 x squared plus c.
Easy to see why.
2 plus 1 is 3.
And the 2 we could have brought out as a constant.
In any way the 3 will go into the denominator.
x to the power 3.
Did I say 3? I hope so.
On the left hand side minus 2 plus 1.
Minus 2 plus 1 is going to be negative 1.
So y to the power negative 1.
Which is 1 over y.
It's going to equal 2 over 3 x to the power 3 plus c.
I'm going to multiply both sides by y.
And if I do that on this side I'm going to divide both sides by this.
So I'm going to get negative 1 over 2 thirds x to the power 3 plus c.
We can leave it in that form.
That's simple enough.
Let's look at this last one.
Also is separable.
If we multiply both sides by y.
We're going to get y dy equals 6x squared over 1 plus x cubed dx.
This side is going to be easy.
Half y.
Half y squared.
Equals we can bring the 6 out.
We're left with x squared and 1 over x cubed dx.
First of all we're going to try substitution on this side.
Let me see if...
Let's do that.
u equals 1 plus x cubed seems to be the proven thing to do.
That is going to leave du dx as 3x squared.
What we need is x squared dx.
In other words x squared dx is going to equal a third du.
It's going to equal a third du.
So on this side we still have half y squared equals 6.
And now we're going to have a substitution.
x squared dx is going to be a third.
So let's bring that out as third du.
And 1 over 1 plus x cubed is u.
And that's just as simple to do.
Square is going to equal 6 divided by 3 is 2.
So the integral of 1 over u du is going to be the natural log of the absolute value of u.
But u was 1 plus x cubed plus c.
We're going to multiply by 2 on both sides.
So that's going to equal 4 times the natural log of the absolute value of 1 plus x cubed.
And I can just get the square root of both sides.
So that's going to be plus minus the square root of 4 times the natural log of 1 plus x cubed plus some constant c.
So there we go.
Three easy problems.
Here we have a rather long problem.
Which is not really going to test our ability to do separable first order differential equations.
But I suppose rather test our ability to do integration by parts.
It's very easy to separate this.
We're going to get y over e to the power y dy.
This is going to equal 2x over e to the power x dx.
And we can take the indefinite integral of both sides.
I'm just going to rewrite this as y e to the power negative y dy.
Indefinite integral of 2x times e to the power negative x dx.
And it's going to make it simpler for us to do.
We'll call this the left hand side.
We'll call that the right hand side.
And let's have a look at the left hand side.
First of all, let's remind ourselves what we're going to do to solve this.
Because this is the product of two variables y and e to the power negative y.
So we're going to use integration by parts.
Which says that the integral of uv prime with respect to whatever variable is going to equal uv minus the integral of u prime v.
Hopefully it makes this integration simpler if we use this.
We're going to use the correct u and v prime for these two.
Always choose something that will make life simpler in the end.
If I let u equal y.
That means u prime equals 1.
So that's going to make, because I'm using u prime on this side.
If I have a 1 there it's certainly going to make this integral easier.
That means this must be v prime.
Is e to the power negative y.
And the anti-derivative of that.
Remember that's e to the power negative y.
Which is that.
But that will also leave a negative out front here.
Which is not as a positive.
So it will have to put a negative there.
As I say this is integration from previous sections.
So I'm not going to go into the explanation of how to do that.
By now we should know how to do that quite well.
So if I rewrite the left hand side.
I'm going to have that equaling u v.
Which is y.
Which is going to be negative y.
Over e to the power y.
It's going to be left on this side.
Minus the integral of u prime.
Which is now 1.
Times v.
V is that.
I can bring the negative out.
So that's going to be positive e to the power negative y dy.
This is an easier integral to do.
And as much as here we're going to have negative y.
Over e to the power y.
And this is the same as that.
So this is going to leave us with a negative.
I can say 1 over e to the power y.
So that is as far as the left hand side is concerned.
That will be plus some constant c of course.
Let's do the right hand side.
And I've got to make this similar sort of guess.
As to which one to make u.
And which one to make v prime.
Again I need a simpler step on this side.
So I need u prime to be simpler.
And if I choose 2x as u.
Certainly the u prime is going to be easier for me.
On that side.
So I'm going to let u equals 2x.
And I'm going to let v prime equals e to the power negative x.
That will leave me with a u prime of 2.
That means the antiderivative on that side is going to be negative e to the power negative x.
Same sort of thing that's happening there.
So on this side I'm going to have uv.
Which is negative 2x over e to the power x.
I'm just taking that into the denominator.
Minus the integral of u prime is 2.
I can bring the 2 out.
I have v.
And v was negative.
V was.
Let me just see.
Let me just see.
Yes I'm bringing the 2 out.
And I'm going to bring that negative out as well.
Now e to the power negative x dx.
That's going to leave me with negative 2x over e to the power x.
And the antiderivative.
Same sort of thing is going to happen there.
So this is also going to be again a negative 2 over e to the power x.
Again plus some constant c2.
Let's make that constant c1.
It doesn't matter.
So what are we left with?
If I take this over to the other side.
This is going to be another constant.
So I'm left with negative y over e to the power y.
Minus 1 over e to the power y.
And that's going to equal negative 2x over e to the power x.
Negative 2 over e to the power x.
Plus some constant c.
I can just multiply throughout by negative it seems.
Because there are so many negatives here.
So that will be a positive.
That will be a positive.
That will be a positive.
That will be a positive.
That will be a negative.
But if c is negative.
Once again that's a positive.
So that doesn't matter.
On this side it seems I can take out a common factor of 1 over e to the power y.
That's going to leave me y plus 1.
And so I'm not going to be able to separate just a single y on this side.
So it's not an explicit term equation expressing y in terms of x.
I'm going to have this on this side without being able to really simplify this.
On this side again I suppose I can have a common denominator.
And in the numerator I'm going to have 2x plus 2 plus some constant c.
I can bring out a 2 and that would be x plus 1.
There's various ways that we can write this answer.
And I think that would be the correct answer.
So this would be then the general solution to that separable first order differential equation.
And as I said that didn't test our knowledge of differential equations as much as it has touched on us polishing our integration by parts again.
