Transfusion-associated immune and non-immune hemolysis
In this video we are going to look at transfusion-associated immune and non-immune hemolysis.
Now do not get confused between this and the previous video.
In the previous video we looked at immunological transfusion reactions.
Now we are looking at the causes of hemolysis.
In the transfusion reaction hemolysis takes place.
But that is not the only form of hemolysis that can take place.
There are also non-immune forms of hemolysis.
So in this video we are just looking at causes of hemolysis.
Under which I reiterate are the immune type which we covered in the previous video.
So we will have a short introduction and look at this classification.
Why does blood in the setting of just being transfused hemolyse?
There are immune mediated causes of hemolysis and non-immune mediated causes of hemolysis.
Under those we will discuss thermal injury, osmotic injury and mechanical injury.
As well as infection, exacerbation of congenital and acquired hemolytic anemias and drugs.
So what is hemolysis?
It means shortened survival of red blood cells.
And in this setting it has to do with being transfused with red blood cells.
So you get immune mediated and non-immune mediated or pseudo-hemolytic transfusion reactions.
Let's look again quickly at immune mediated hemolysis.
Now we discussed this under immune mediated transfusion reactions.
There is one more I am going to add.
And we will get to that.
But first let's just remind ourselves of the acute hemolytic transfusion reactions.
That is during or immediately after transfusion.
And it is complement mediated intravascular destruction of donor red blood cells due to pre-formed recipient antibodies.
So we are talking anti-A, anti-B, but can even be anti-RH, etc.
What ensues?
Well, DIC, shock, acute kidney injury, etc.
We have discussed this.
The delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions.
That is days to weeks.
Usually day 3 onwards following a transfusion.
You are noted by mild anemia and hyperbilirubinemia.
The recipient generates antibodies.
Those are anamnestic or often re-exposure to kid or RH system antigen.
That coat the donor red blood cells.
And it leads to extravascular hemolysis.
Here is the one I want to add.
The hyperhemolytic crisis.
Managed by IV immunoglobulins and steroids.
That is very rare.
Delayed type reaction with recipient red blood cell hemolysis.
And it happens in multiple transfusions in sickle cell anemia or in those with thalassemia.
Okay, so quite rare.
Let's look at the non-mediated causes of hemolysis.
First of all, thermal injury.
Remember red blood cells cannot tolerate temperatures above 40 degrees Celsius.
They can also not tolerate less than 0 degrees Celsius.
In the absence of a cryoprotective agent like glycerol.
If that freezing process is slow you get dehydration of these red blood cells.
And if it's quite rapid you get crystal formation, ice crystals and rupture.
Osmotic injury.
We can only mix red blood cells, packed red blood cells with 0.9% saline or ABO compatible plasma or 5% albumin.
Remember you cannot mix it with calcium.
With ringers lactate at least.
Because the calcium in the ringers lactate will chelate the citrate.
Which can lead to clotting.
Mechanical injury.
Remember the red blood cells can be damaged if they pass through fine needles, narrow openings,
kink lines, mechanical pumps, artificial cardiac valves.
And if there's any form of extracorporeal transit like dialysis or bypass during coronary artery bypass surgery.
And also remember the trans-jugular intra-hepatic portosystemic shunts.
Infection.
That's quite rare.
The donor blood is contaminated.
Suspect it if the unit contains clot or particulate matter.
If there's gas in or it discolours.
Remember blood that has been frozen will also discolour and have this purplish hue to it.
Now exacerbation of congenital hemolytic anemias.
If it is present in the donor.
And it's most commonly seen in glucose 6 phosphate dihydrogenase deficiency.
Exacerbation of an acquired hemolytic anemias.
Those are paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
And in these patients remember they have a sensitivity to complement.
So any type of mild antibody reaction is going to lead to hemolysis.
And also in those with autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Looking at drugs quickly.
Acute toxic exposure to copper can lead to hemolysis.
High dose cyclophosphamide.
And other drugs interfere on alpha.
But remember also commonly used drugs such as penicillin and keflosporin might also lead to hemolysis.
Okay, good evening.
You can't forget quickly.
Thanks, guys.
Just an example of a grassroots dip.
The naked mass the devil?
Pureness.
No Speaking of legends.
You can't find enough İncer from a special note speaker Arrived różer.
