In this short video we're going to look at red blood cell transfusion in the adult.
In a short introduction we'll look at the physiology of anemia, the indications for
packed red blood cell transfusions and the results of transfusions.
We're all familiar with the knee jerk reaction, a patient with an HP less than 10 or a pneumatocrit
less than 30 gets packed red blood cells ordered but way back in 1988 the National Institutes
of Health had a consensus conference and that showed that there should be no single criterion
to be used as an indication for red cell transfusion which would rather consider the patient's
clinical status and their oxygen delivery needs.
It really becomes a risk versus benefit decision.
So what is the importance of anemia?
Well we have to see it in view of the adequacy of oxygen delivery to the tissue with respect
to the demands of that tissue, it really becomes the adequacy of compensatory mechanisms.
So what happens?
Well you can manage anemia yourself or there are some compensatory mechanisms and we'll
look at those.
Just remember the oxygen delivery equation at the bottom should you ever be asked to do
so.
So how can you manage that?
Well first of all you can do a red cell transfusion, it'll increase the volume and actually deliver
a product that can carry the oxygen.
You can increase the oxygen saturation by giving supplemental oxygen if the patient is intubated
by increasing the FiO2 by increasing the PEEP or you can augment cardiac output.
What is under the patient's control?
Well they can increase their cardiac output by increasing the rate of contractions and the
power of those contractions.
We can have a rightward shift in the oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve and the tissues
itself can increase oxygen extraction.
Now this all assumes that there's no cardiovascular defects, there's adequate intravascular volume
and the tissues are healthy.
So if you're sitting with a patient with coronary artery disease or congestive cardiac failure
or there's dehydration or hemorrhage or the tissues aren't healthy by means say for
instance of septicemia.
These compensatory mechanisms are decreased.
Remember that in an unhealthy individual in a resting state the delivery is four times
higher than the demand.
So we have to keep all of these factors in mind when we decide when to transfuse.
Also remember that an unhealthy individual can tolerate an acute isovolemic drop to an HP of
5 and still compensate.
So we've said we're going to move away from a single criteria of an HP of 10, lower than
10 to transfuse.
What most studies show though is that there will be problems below an HP of 7 or you can
expect problems in an HP less than 7 specifically if you look at these patients with cardiovascular
deficits with inadequate intravascular volume and where the tissues aren't healthy.
So when do we decide to transfuse?
Well we transfuse when the patient becomes symptomatic and a healthy young patient will become symptomatic
at a way different hemoglobin level than an elderly patient with septicemia or coronary artery disease.
So specifically look at those patients with cardiovascular disease and specifically look at those patients
with tissue deficits and have a lower tolerance for prescribing red cells than an unhealthy individual.
So are there any studies that we can point to or whether you get asked that in an exam situation?
Remember there is one study that you can always quote and that's the TRIC trial the transfusion
requirements in critical care.
So specifically looking at the perioperative patient or an ICU setting.
And that looked at 480 random critically ill euvolemic patients and two groups transfused
when the HP becomes lower than 7 and keep it between 7 and 9 versus a more liberal group.
There was a statistical significant difference as far as low mortality rates are concerned
if the Apache score was equal to or less than 20 or the age was less than 55 and that is
in the conservative group keeping the HP between 7 and 9 there were equal mortality rates in the
severe cardiac if there was severe cardiac disease and there was the same 30 day mortality rate
although the in-hospital mortality rate was lower for the restrictive group.
So what does this tell us?
We do not have to go for an eject reaction of an HP below 10 and we do not have to keep the HP
higher than 10 and specifically look at that severe cardiac disease group.
Equal mortality between the conservative and liberal groups.
Lastly please remember the potential risks of a transfusion. First and foremost is the volume overload
specifically pulmonary edema and this becomes quite important in the intensive care unit setting.
Remember there's also immune and non-immune transfusion related reactions and hemolysis and I've discussed this
in previous videos. There's also the transmission of disease most notably viral disease
of which we're all quite aware. Other than the transmission of disease remember there's also
procedural infections from the bag to the patient many lines and there's penetration of the patient's
defense barriers most notably the skin and direct access to the intravascular space so a lot of chance
for contamination type infections. Remember also the electrolyte disturbances of stored blood and the
older the blood becomes the worse this becomes most notably in patients with with renal disease and
the risk of hyperkalemia. Remember there's interaction with fluids and drugs we can't
use ringers lactate for instance because the calcium in the ringers lactate might chelate the citrate
which might lead to clotting for instance. And remember there's also very difficult to quantify
effects on the immune system both as far as sepsis is concerned where there's a high rate of
septicemia and a worsening outcome in septicemic patients and there's also suppression of the immune
system as far as cancer patients are concerned. Now these are very difficult to to investigate but
certainly as independent risk factor a transfusion reactor plays a role as far as the immune system is
concerned.
