Good, we carry on in the next video. Unfortunately, I was interrupted in making this video, and I hope, so I have to redo it, and I hope I start off with exactly where I left off with the previous one.
So let me just reiterate, we add the second equation for Euler's method. Just to recap, and just to bring my mind back because I was interrupted and had to leave.
So I have a differential equation, and I'm imagining that it is not separable, so I can't solve it. I'm giving some initial point, and I want to know what the y value is at a second x value.
And I can't do this. Remember, once again, I used this because I wanted an exact answer, so I know exactly what the y of 2 is.
I can plug 2 in there exactly. I can plug 2 in there, 2 times 2 is 4, so that's going to be 4 over the square root of 2, so I know exactly what the answer is.
But imagine I couldn't do this. I need a method of estimation, and that is Euler's method.
And we just explained, and it might not make sense straight for now. I've got some initial value. I've got to move along a certain delta x value.
That's my h, so the previous x plus some delta, and then I've got to move up some, and that's all that Euler said.
And I'm going to get to a second answer, and that will be my y value.
Why this h and a and n? I can't remember if I explained what this h is. Remember, h is just a differential, first of all, derivative, so we use h as delta x.
What is this a n? I'm not sure if I explained what this a n is. Now, look at this. Look carefully.
If, remember, way back when you started doing graphs at school, if I have a point there, and I have a point there, I do have a secant line here.
Okay? And that simply is the slope. Okay? So if I do this and this, that is delta y, and that's delta x.
Remember, here we call it h. And what is that slope? Well, remember, we just said slope equals delta y over delta x.
Here we call it something different. This slope we call a n, and delta y is called delta y, and delta x equals h.
And if I solve for delta y, well, that's simply h times a n. So clever. All he did was, and remember, this is not a triangle.
It's not the length of the triangle I'm talking here. It's not x squared, because y squared equals y.
It's not Pythagoras. I'm just saying the slope. If I knew delta x, and I know the slope, I can work out what delta y is going to be.
Simple. Very simple algebra. So all he said was, well, I'm given this point. I'm going to arbitrarily choose what h is.
I know I'm going to move along delta x. Okay? And I'm just going to move up a certain slope, delta y.
I'm just going to move up a certain delta y, and I know what delta y is. Well, it's h times the slope at this point.
So what he was looking at is what is the slope at this point, which is actually going to be this. Okay?
And he's moved along a delta x, and he can work up how much it's going to go up now, and that's going to leave him there.
Note, note, that for a parabolic curve like this, the slope there is not going to stay with the line for much longer.
So you're always going to have an underestimation. If your curve was like this, you're always going to have,
because the slope there is that, you're always going to have an overestimation. Okay?
So Euler's method is always going to give you an underestimation. But you can imagine the smaller I make delta x.
So my next point is going to be there. There the slope will be there. My next one will be there. There's my slope there.
You're going to hike the curve a lot better. So your answer is going to be so much better.
If you make your delta x, your h value is smaller. But once again, just see how clever it is. I mean, it's so easy.
What he did was, he took this delta x value, he went a certain delta x across, and then he needed to know how far must I go up.
Well, he goes up by this amount. He goes up by delta y, and it was very easy to do.
He just multiplied h by whatever the slope was here. So that will intersect there, for instance.
And that's his next point, and the next point, and the next point, and the next point, until you get to 2.
OK? You might ask now as well, well, what is, how do I calculate, what is this h of n?
You know, must I do, you know, how do I get this? I need this, so I know that.
And how do I know that? Well, you were given the slope. You were given the slope by your first order differential equation.
There's the slope. There's the slope. There's the slope. It's just the f of xy.
Remember, this is written as, I've written it there, y prime equals the f of xy.
This is what this means. That's the slope. OK, so it's very easy to do this.
You just take the previous y value. We were set there. And we're just going to move up another delta y.
And this is delta y. I've just explained what that is. It's so simple.
So instead of just learning these three, memorizing them. You know, understand what lies behind them.
So let's do that. Let's have an h of a half. Let's have an h of a half. So here we're going to have n.
Here we're going to have xn. Here we're going to have yn. And here we're going to have an.
So as I said once again, if you don't want to understand this or if I didn't make it that clear,
you can memorize these three and you can draw up this table. And we know. We can get to the answer.
So let's n be 0. So x0 we were given and that was 1. We were given y0. That was 1 over square root of 2.
Once again, I got that from cheating by using a set of 1, which I could solve.
And I used a very specific c value so that I do know exactly what the answers are here.
And that leaves me with a of n. Remember, a of n is just that. So I'm going to have 1 cubed divided by 1 over square root of 2.
And that's going to leave me, let's see, 1 over the square root of 2.
Where am I now? Where am I now?
I'm just not making a mistake. I used a calculator on my board on the side there.
And just got all the answers. So 1 cubed is 1 divided by this. So that just leaves me square root of 2.
Now, one thing I want to wonder about. If you have a calculator that expresses the answers as a square root like that, use that.
If it gives you decimal places, use all the decimal places. Because we're already dealing with errors.
We're already dealing with inaccuracies. If you do this as 1.4 instead of 1.4, 1.4, the whole lot that your calculator gives.
Your next answer is dependent upon what you have there, by this equation. So you're going to become more and more inaccurate.
So use, either use this if your calculator does that, or get yourself a calculator that does that.
Or then use all the decimal places that your calculator uses.
Let's jump to n equals 1.
n equals 1.
So it's the next one. We're talking about the next one.
0 plus 1 is x1.
So that's just going to be xn, which was 0. Remember?
We started with n equals 0.
Plus h, so there's 1 plus 1 half. Remember, h is 1 half.
So that leaves us with 1 and 1 half.
1.5.
Now we need to do hn.
It was the previous n, which is 1 over the square root of 2, plus my h value was 1 half, times the previous an, which was square root of 2.
Square root of 2.
You can multiply all that out.
And for 1.5, you're going to get here to a square root of 2 as well.
You're going to get to a square root of 2.
So 1.5 cubed.
1.5 cubed divided by square root of 2.
That is going to leave you 27 square root of 2 over 16.
Please check on that with our square root.
Let's go to n2.
So I'm going to have the previous.
I'm going to have the previous xn, which is half.
1.5 plus another half is 2.
And that's the x2 I want.
That's the x2 I want.
And now we need to do this.
So again, it's the previous square root of 2 plus a half times my previous 27 square root of 2 divided by 16.
And I think I get to 59 square root of 2 over 32.
OK.
So that's going to be my answer.
59 square root of 2 divided by 32.
Now, because I haven't got a board so big that I can do all those decimal places.
So now it's about, I think I said it's about 2.607.
2.607.
Now, what is the true answer?
Yet again, I use this because I can get it to a very accurate answer.
2 times 2 is 4.
4 divided by the square root of 2 is about 2.8 something.
It's about 2.8 something.
OK.
So the real answer here was 2, 2.8.
2.8.
And the answer I get through estimation was about 2.6.
So 2, 2.6.
So my y value is 2.6.
The real answer is 2.8.
And I used the real one.
I used that because I wanted the real one.
My estimation, using Euler's number, with an h value of a half was 2.6.
So not too bad.
It's going to be about there.
So remember, if your curve goes up, if your second derivative of your curve is positive,
you have this shape of a curve, so you're always going to underestimate.
If your second derivative was negative, you're going to have a concave curve like that.
And you're always going to slightly overestimate.
And if I had used h of a quarter, I would have been even closer.
And if I used h equals an eighth, I would have been even closer.
And obviously, the further out we go, also, we're going to get more inaccurate.
So this is Euler's main method of estimating a solution, a specific value,
if you can't use separation to solve your differential equation.
I hope this makes it clear and we can run through a few examples of using Euler's method
in a non-separable first-order differential equation.
Now, I don't know where that recording stopped.
I'm having great difficulties today.
It stopped recording after a second amount of minutes.
I'm not knowing exactly where I left off.
So if I repeat something, please bear with me.
So it is so simple what he did, just knowing that how far he needs to go across delta x,
which he decided he needs to know how far he needs to go up from the previous y level.
And it's so simple from knowing that slope is just delta y over delta x.
And I can solve for delta y and I know exactly how to move up.
So you use the slope at that point and the delta x that he moves across to get the delta y that he then moves up.
And we have a second point.
And you just repeat that to get to there.
The problem will usually tell you what h value to use to get to your answer.
Please, again, as I say, use as many decimal places as you have until you obviously get to the end.
I mean, I can't draw a graph on the board here accurate to 20 decimal places.
But I've just shown you using h as a half when I go to 2.6 where the real answer is 2.8.
So I hope you now have a better understanding of what a differential equation is.
To recap, we used it in previous examples as a rate of change being proportional to what the actual value is at that time.
In other words, radioactive decay or the growth of organisms at the microbiology lab.
So that was practical examples of where to use it.
We've actually solved a few separable first order differential equations.
And I've shown you now a method of getting to some solution, estimating some solution, if you could not separate your variables.
And I used one where you could because I wanted to know what the exact answer is to show you the difference between the exact answer and the estimative method we used, namely Euler's method.
So I'm going to go ahead and submit.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
