In this video we'll look at plasma components.
We'll look at the introduction and discuss the two major components, namely fresh frozen plasma and cryoprecipia.
Now we're talking about plasma or blood product components, not plasma derivatives.
Plasma or blood product components are biological products and are prepared by differential centrifugation of whole blood.
So we're talking FFPs and cryoprecipitate.
Plasma derivatives are produced by plasma fractionation.
And now we're talking about albumin, the immune globulins, coagulation, protein concentrates.
And in that is also included some artificial manufactured products.
So those are plasma derivatives.
Now as far as fresh frozen plasma is concerned, how's it produced?
Well we produce it mostly from whole blood frozen at minus 18 to minus 30 degrees Celsius within 8 hours.
It's usable for one year in this form.
It's about 250 milliliters if from a single unit of whole blood.
And it contains all the coagulation factors and other proteins present in the original unit of whole blood.
Slightly diluted due to the citrate antiregulation.
So when do we use it?
Now plasma, or FFP at least, is probably overused.
And there are very specific indications for its use.
First of all, hemostasis.
Remember, a patient does have hemostasis if the coagulation factor activity is as low as 25 to 30%.
That's in the absence of inhibitors such as heparin.
And if there's adequate fibrinogen.
You only need 25 to 30% of coagulation factor activity.
So in an adult, an adult contains a plasma volume of about 40 mils per kilogram.
So if you want activity of around 25 to 30%, you're looking at plasma volumes, as far as FFP is concerned, of about 10 to 15 mils per kilogram.
So that's about 3 to 5 units.
And that can be around a litre of fluid that you give a patient of which you must be aware.
So the specific indications then, inherited factor 11 deficiency.
And as a source of factor 5 in severe DIC.
After you've given platelets and cryo and that does not correct the factor 5, 8 of fibrinogen consumption defects.
Okay.
So only after those products, if you still have problems, can you use FFP.
If there's bleeding from conditions caused by deficiency of multiple coagulation factors.
There's not specifics like hemophilia.
For instance, in a warfarin overdose.
We'll look at warfarin later though.
Vitamin K deficiency.
Liver failure.
Dilusional coagulopathy of massive transfusions.
So in this trauma setting.
And that's probably the most important for surgeons is this last indication.
So it's not indicated for primary therapy of specific coagulation defects.
So for instance, hemophilia A as I mentioned.
For correcting INRs of less than 2.
Now they're good retrospective of those studies that show in a patient with an INR less than 2.
Giving FFP is not going to correct the INR to normal levels.
Remember plasma itself, FFP has an INR of about 1.3.
Do not use it for volume expansion.
Especially they're not in a trauma setting.
Although in the face of a massive blood transfusion.
Where we have a dilusional effect.
We can see it as one of the indications.
And it must also not be used as a nutrient source.
Although it contains all the proteins of whole blood.
It is not a nutrient source.
Remember the side effects.
First of all the immune reactions.
We do have to use ABO identical or ABO compatible fresh frozen plasma.
And for that reason a compatibility test still has to be done.
Now there are studies that have looked at identical versus compatible transfusion of plasma.
And certainly there is a difference in outcome when using identical versus compatible.
And it's preferable to use identical.
Although it's not always available.
So for instance here.
If the patient is ABO type A.
If they get A type plasma.
That's an identical transfusion.
AB would be compatible for them.
B would be identical.
AB again compatible.
And patients that are AB can only get AB blood.
Patient with blood type O.
If they are given blood type O.
That's an identical transfusion.
And if they receive AB or AB.
All three of which they can.
That would be a compatible transfusion.
Now there is the transmission of disease.
That would be the same as for packed red blood cells.
Remember the volume overload.
You can also get febrile reactions.
Which is not prevented by giving the patient any medication to counteract the fever or anti-histamines.
We can also get anaphylactic reactions.
Remember that's an AGA deficient patient with antibodies to IgA.
That then receives plasma with IgA.
Transfusion related acute lung injury.
And those are donor antibodies to recipient HLA.
There is a video on this transfusion related acute lung injury.
And we are trying to prevent transfusion of plasma from multiple women or patients with antibodies to HLA.
Let's have a look at cryoprecipitate.
It is produced by thawing FFP to about 4 degrees Celsius.
And the precipitate can be seen in that fluid.
And that is removed by centrifuge.
It contains all of the plasma's Factor VIII, Fibrinogen, Fibronectin, Factor VIII and from the Villebrand's Factor.
From one unit of FFP we get about 10 to 20 mls of cryoprecipitate.
And the remainder of that plasma is called cryopour plasma.
Now that cryopour plasma contains all the vitamin K dependent factors.
So you cannot use cryoprecipitate if you have a problem with warfarin or any vitamin K deficiency in a patient.
That remains in the plasma poor fluid that is not in the cryoprecipitate.
So the risks of giving it to a patient is the same as for FFPs.
Now remember if you give one unit of cryo that is about 200 mg of fibrinogen, about 100 units of Factor VIII.
So if you give 10 units you are going to increase the fibrinogen by about 70 mg per deciliter.
So where do we use it with this information in mind?
We use it in congenital or acquired deficiencies of fibrinogen and Factor XIII.
So for instance once again a trauma patient where there is a consumptive problem.
If there is not enough fibrinogen even if the patient has 25 to 30% of their Factor activity they are not going to clock properly.
Also for von Willebrandt's disease when there is no other source of von Willebrandt's effect available on a patient with uremic bleed in which there is an emergency.
