In this first video on disseminated intravascular coagulation, we'll have a short introduction
and we'll look at the pathogenesis and the etiology. In the next video, we'll look at
the diagnosis and management. First of all, DIC is also known as a consumption coagulopathy
or defibrillation syndrome. It's a systemic process of thrombosis and hemorrhage. In short,
you'll get exposure of blood to a pro-coagulant, whether that be tissue factor or cancer pro-coagulant,
formation of fibrin within the circulation, breakdown of that fibrin, depletion of clotting
factors with hemorrhage and in-organ damage. Important to remember that it's a complication
of an underlying disease, not a disease in itself. Management is supportive with platelet
transfusion and clotting factor replacement and also the use of heparin. And the prognosis
is usually that of the underlying cause. Now the pathogenesis. There's uncontrolled and
excessive production of thrombin with systemic intravascular fibrin deposition. That is the
mainstay of DIC. And the blood is exposed to a pro-coagulance mediated by the extrinsic
pathway, that's tissue factor and activated factor 7. That gives you formation of thrombin
with platelet aggregation. That's what usually happens in any kind of clotting due to localized
injury. And it's controlled by antithrombin and tissue factor pathway inhibitors so that this
remains localized and under control. In DIC though the control mechanisms are overwhelmed and that
leads to tissue ischemia, consumption of platelets, fibrinogen, prothrombin factors 5 and 8 and bleeding.
Now why is it not localized? What happens? Why is there massive activation of the clotting cascade?
Well there's release of tissue thromboplastins into the circulation and there's extensive
injury to the vascular endothelium. And there's also expression of tissue factor by monocytes
due to endotoxins and cytokines. So that would be the three causes of this massive activation
of the clean cascade. Now fibrin degradation byproducts in itself, if in massive amounts, interferes with
fibrin polymerization and it also interferes with platelet aggregation.
Plasmin in itself, not only does it lyse fibrin but also other clotting factors and fibrinogen
and that worsens the consumption coagulatory. Now dependent on the cause and the rapidity of the process,
we can get a chronic compensated DIC and an acute decompensated DIC. And chronic compensated DIC,
that means the liver and bone marrow can compensate, the liver by clotting factors, the bone marrow by platelets,
and you get primarily a thrombotic state, whether it be venous or arterial. And a good example of this is Trousseau's syndrome,
which is a hypercoagulable state in malignancy. In acute decompensated DIC, there's profound systemic diastasis and bleeding.
There's microangiopathic hemolytic anemia because of mechanical shear of red blood cells by fibrin strains.
So these patients bleed. Just be careful, DIC should not be confused with thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic uremic syndrome,
and that is due to platelet activation primarily by acquired or congenital defects in von Willebrand's disease,
cleaving proteases and levels of those can actually be measured to make a distinction.
So what are the causes of this overwhelming activation of the clotting cascade?
Most commonly, it's due to sepsis trauma, malignancies and obstetric complications.
Sepsis, first described I think with forms of meningitis, but actually a wide variety of bacteria,
both gram positive and negative and even viral diseases can lead to DIC.
Trauma and also extensive surgery. Remember DIC develops in 50% of patients with SIRS,
and if you have SIRS and DIC, there's a very high rate of multi-organ dysfunction.
Especially important form of trauma is severe head injury with a high incidence of DIC.
Malignancy in itself is a hypercoagulable state, and DIC is the most common coagulopathy.
A couple of examples, leukemia will give you a picture of hemorrhage and solid tumors,
more a picture of coagulation, which is then called Trousseau's syndrome.
Obstetrical complications, we see this in amniotic fluid embolization and in abrupt show.
And we'll have a 50% incidence of DIC in these conditions.
Others that you might list, peritoneovenous shunts allow endotoxins into the vascular system.
Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions, which we've discussed before,
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria,
envenomation, vipers and rattlesnakes can cause DIC,
cirrhosis, heat stroke, amphetamine overdose,
and also purpura fulminans, that's most notably a homozygous protein C deficiency.
inaudible 002-306- decisiontables,
diffused twitch sequences,
inaudible 001-3115-5000-2000 das plantain
