In this second video of disseminated intravascular coagulation, we'll look at the clinical picture,
the diagnosis, the differential diagnosis and the measurement.
Now the clinical picture depends on the cause, that's the underlying cause of the DIC
and the rapidity of this whole process of thrombosis, consumption and bleeding.
Very artificially, we differentiate acute uncompensated DIC from more chronic compensated DIC.
In the acute uncompensated DIC, there's a massive widespread activation of the clotting mechanisms.
There's overwhelming of the anti-clotting mechanisms as well as the compensatory mechanisms,
being the liver making clotting factors and the bone marrow making platelets.
So more than two-thirds of patients will have a bleeding as a presenting sign,
about a third will have acute kidney injury, and then hepatic dysfunction,
respiratory dysfunction, shock, thromboembolism and central nervous system abnormalities.
Let's look at the bleeding. Most patients will have petechiae or ecchymosis,
but they might even develop bleeding or blood oozing from wounds, catheters,
oozing from mucosal surfaces, incision sites, etc.
And if there's bleeding in the GIT, the lungs or the central nervous system,
this of course may be acutely life-threatening.
About 25-40% of patients with DIC will have some form of renal impairment.
That might be from microthrombosis of the afferent arterioli leading to cortical necrosis,
but it might also just be from the general hypertension.
Hepatic dysfunction presents a jaundice.
It might be from the underlying liver disease,
it might be from the increased hemolysis,
but it might also just be sepsis causing this hepatic dysfunction.
Patients with pulmonary dysfunction will have hemoptysis and dyspnea,
but it might even be as bad as developing ARDS.
There might be transient focal neurological deficit,
delirium or coma in patients with central nervous system dysfunction.
Again, the causes might be microthrombi, hemorrhage or generalized hyperperfusion.
If we look at chronic compensated DIC,
as far as the cancer patients are concerned,
they might have peripheral DVT and migrating phlebitis,
but you might also get arterial thrombosis leading to organ or peripheral ischemia necrosis.
Now, how do we diagnose acute DIC?
Well, there's got to be a presence of the cause.
If you do a full blood count and a peripheral blood smear,
you'll see a thrombocytopenia,
and you'll see microangiopathic changes.
Fibrinogen levels might be low.
We'll get back to that.
D-dimus, that's the fibrin degradation product,
might be up, but remember that's not specific.
And all your tests might show multi-organ dysfunction.
There's a prolongation of the PT,
that reflects a decrease in activity of the extrinsic and common pathways.
We're looking at factors 8, 10, 5, and prothrombin.
And those are the factors involved primarily with DIC.
The PTT is also prolonged,
but this is a reflection of your intrinsic and common pathways,
includes factors 12, 11, 9, and 8.
As I say, these factors are not as involved in DIC.
Fibrinogen, we get back to that.
Please be aware of it in malignancy,
where the levels may be normal
because they are actually high,
chronically elevated in patients with cancer.
So by the time their levels are normal,
there's actually some problems.
Remember also that Fibrinogen is an acute phase reactant,
and it might be high initially.
In chronic DIC, we see the picture as above,
but with varying levels.
You may be rather confident in your diagnosis
if you have a combination of the underlying disease,
positive D-dimers, and an evidence of microangiopathy
on peripheral bloodstream.
What do we have to differentiate DIC from?
Well, severe liver disease in itself.
There's a decreased production of clotting factors
and inhibitor production.
There might also be a thrombocytopenia
due to hypersplenism secondary to portal hypertension.
Now, we've discussed this before.
TTPHUS,
thrombocytopenic purpurohemolytic uremic syndrome.
Just to reiterate,
it's another thrombotic microangiopathy.
It results from primary platelet activation,
usually due to congenital or acquired defects
in von Willebrand's factor cleaving protease.
And you can do those levels.
There's a microangiopathy on the smear,
but the clotting factors are normal.
There's usually a normal PT, PTT,
and there's no underlying disease,
as you would see in DIC.
And that's managed with plasma exchange,
which should not be done in DIC.
Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia and thrombosis,
I'll discuss in a separate video.
Now, as far as the management is concerned,
remember DIC has a very high mortality rate
of 40% to 80%
and it's usually due to the underlying disease,
so important to manage the underlying cause.
Hemodynamic support is very important.
No antifibrinolytic drugs,
because that increases the risk of thrombosis.
Now, we can give the patients platelets and FFPs,
but it's not required in all instances.
We do it when there's serious bleeding,
when the patient is at risk of serious bleeding,
for instance, active peptic ulcer,
a patient who requires surgery or invasive procedures,
patients with esophageal varices, etc.
If the INR is significantly raised,
there are no specific levels to this,
but usually more than two,
or the fibrinogen levels are less than 50 mg per deciliter.
And how much do we give?
Well, platelets one to two units per 10 kg per day,
and we give the FFPs as necessary
if we look at various clotting factor levels in the laboratory.
Heparin is quite controversial.
There's really no evidence of effect once DIC is there,
or to prevent progression of DIC
once you start off the path with massive thrombosis.
It really is only indicated for chronic compensated DIC.
If you want to use it in acute DIC,
the antithrombin levels must be near normal,
because we need that heparin-antithrombin complex to form,
and to inactivate the serine protease proceagulins,
that's thrombin and factor Xa.
We do not give a bolus of heparin,
but we commence the continuous infusion immediately,
500 units per hour,
and we're looking for a PTT of about 45 seconds.
Other forms of management,
protein C concentrate,
remember that the half-life is very short,
so using FFP is not really the correct thing to do.
We're looking at patients who are homozygous protein C deficient,
or patients with acquired protein C deficiency,
that is a meningococcal septicemia with purpura fulminins.
Antithrombin,
there's a randomized controlled trial in sepsis and DIC,
and it showed no effect,
in actual fact there was an increased risk of bleeding
if you give it with heparin.
Recombinant human factor 7a,
there's really insufficient data in this time,
although there are many instances of its successful use as a last-ditch effort.
