in the second video on hyperparathyroidism we're going to look at the clinical picture
short introduction we're going to look at the asymptomatic patient which is much more common
these days the classical picture or some of the true symptomatic patients look at some other
manifestations the laboratory findings in these patients and then lastly just quickly mention the
existence of the parathyroid crisis now primary hyperparathyroidism is mostly detected by routine
biochemical screening these days many of the laboratories include calcium in the analysis
and these patients are seen way before they develop any overt symptoms note though in
countries with hypovitaminosis d we do still see a presentation with bone and disease
so the diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism in 80% of cases is purely biochemical before the
patient suffers any clinical symptoms now what we see is that the ionized calcium is slightly
elevated and we must remember this sometimes this is intermittently so so a single value might not be
grossly abnormal if the calcium is normal but there's an increase in parathyroid hormone detected
on investigation for osteoporosis the diagnosis is evident and many patients are indeed diagnosed in
this fashion as well while being investigated for the osteoporosis if you asked many of these patients
in-depth questions though you might find that although they might be labeled as asymptomatic many of them
suffer from very mild symptoms and these would include fatigue weakness anorexia mild depression mild
cognitive dysfunction and a neuromuscular dysfunction when the clinical picture becomes evident when the patient starts suffering symptoms we are in the realms of what was seen in the days before these patients were diagnosed incidentally on biochemical investigations and these used to be termed bone stones abdominal moans psychiatric groans
now if the parathyroid
levels have been elevated for a prolonged period. We usually see the nephrolithiasis and the bone
disease and due to the hypercalcemia we see anorexia, nausea and constipation
and the polydipsia and polyureum. So different symptoms due to the parathyroid hormone itself
and due to the hypercalcemia. Now symptoms are not related to the absolute value of calcium
levels but usually to the rapidity of the elevation. So you're not going to find symptoms, they're not
going to exactly worsen by the higher level of calcium. There's no direct correlation.
Now symptoms are also worse and there's also earlier manifestation clinically if it is combined
with hipovitaminosis D. Now if we look at the classical bone picture that used to be osteitis,
fibrosis cystica. Now today obviously we see most commonly see low bone mineral density
but the old osteitis fibrosis cystica these days is rare. You see it in the developing world. You can
also see it in carcinomas and in secondary hyperparathyroidism. Patients suffer bone pain
and on radiology you see the subperiosteal bone resorption on the radial aspects of the middle
phalanges, tapering of the distal clavicles, salt and pepper appearance of the skull, some bone
cysts and brown tumors of the long bones. If we look at the nephrolithiasis remember parathyroid
hormone will cause increased calcium reabsorption but due to the overall excess of calcium there's
still an excess of calcium in the urine. Now this is the most common complaint, presenting
complaint in patients who are then not asymptomatic. So 15 to 20% of your patients if they have symptoms
will actually indeed be that of nephrolithiasis. You can also see hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis,
chronic renal insufficiency and decreased concentrating ability of the urine. Now if a patient has
nephrolithiasis and the calciums are not grossly elevated by an upper levels of normal, the suggestion
is that the calcium levels are checked repeatedly because the elevation might be episodic as we've
mentioned before. Most of these crystals in the urine are calcium oxalate but if the urine is
alkalinized for whatever reason we might also see calcium phosphate. On the neuromuscular side many
of these patients have mild weakness, complain of fatigue. On the neuropsychiatric front there's
lethargy, depressed mood, psychosis, decreased social interaction. So suppose in modern times that means
they would tweet less and there's also mild cognitive dysfunction. Cardiovascular system, hypertension,
left ventricular hypertrophy is seen in many of these patients and in further investigation there are
some reports of increased carotid intima and media thickening.
As far as the body weight and abnormalities in glucose metabolism is concerned there is a higher
incidence of glucose intolerance in type 2 diabetes. There's also increase in BMI over patients
in general without primary parathyroidism. Patients might also have hyperuricemia and gout. There's
also the condition of pseudogout where there's pyrophosphate crystals and this is sometimes seen soon
after the parathyroidectomy. Chondrocalcinosis of the wrist and knees are also described. And then as far
as mortality for mild disease is concerned it's probably normal. Same mortality rate as patients
without primary parathyroidism. Overall though if you just look at more severe disease there is an increased
mortality and this is due to the cardiovascular disease. Laboratory findings. The calcium and parathyroid
hormone we've mentioned this before. Calcium is not always overtly elevated but it might just be in the
upper limits of normal but if that goes together with an increase in parathyroid hormone that is
obviously inappropriately so and you can make the diagnosis as such. There's a condition called
normal calcemic parahypothyroidism. This can only be done though if the calcium is truly elevated above
normal levels and all secondary causes have been eliminated. There's some renal impairment slight
increase in creatinine not in all patients. Hypophosphatemia not overtly low but really at the low end of
normal. Mild hypomagnesemia. There's also mild metabolic acidosis and the reason for this is that
parathyroid hormone inhibits bicarb reabsorption. There's also a mild normocytic anemia.
One to two percent of the patients of long-term untreated patients will develop
a parathyroid crisis. There's a severe hypercalcemia and there's usually marked symptoms
especially central nervous system symptoms confusion and coma. They also have abdominal pain nausea and
vomiting and then there is the pre-cause of pancreatitis.
27UP to YEAR ITap!
37UP to 117
8
7
8
9
9
9
10
10
11
12
12
13
13
