In this video we'll discuss the management of hyperparathyroidism.
In the introduction we'll look at what the basic options are.
We'll debate surgery versus medical management.
We'll look at who the candidates are specifically for surgery
and those who are not, what the alternatives are.
And we'll briefly mention the management of concomitant hypervitaminosis D,
which is quite common in primary hyperthyroidism.
Now most of these cases are diagnosed, we said, by routine biochemical screening
or during the workup for decreased bone mass.
So the majority of them are women over the age of 50
and most have symptoms that are very difficult to quantify.
If they are symptomatic though, we still prefer surgery to the parathyroids.
If they have no symptoms or they're minimally symptomatic though,
we need to decide who to operate and if so, when.
Now most asymptomatic patients have mild disease and do not progress.
We have to identify for surgery the asymptomatic patients who will progress
and those ones that will improve even their mild symptoms after surgery.
Remember we exclude patients with familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia.
Those are not discussed under primary hyperparathyroidism.
So surgery versus medicine.
Symptomatic patient, we operate if they are fit to do so.
Now many of these can now be done with minimal access,
so the vast majority of patients with symptoms can undergo surgery.
Now we have to look at the risk and benefits of surgery in the asymptomatic patients.
And there are certainly some reasons not to operate.
For instance, we have to look at the reactions of certain symptoms to surgery.
If they are very mild and they don't respond to surgery, what would be the point?
And we have to try and identify those patients who will not progress,
whose disease will not progress, although that is not easy to do.
Now let's look at the effect of surgery on some of the symptoms.
If we look at the neuropsychiatric symptoms, it is very difficult to research
because it is very difficult to quantify the neuropsychiatric disturbances
in primary hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia.
Some research does show that there is some benefit, that there is some improvement.
Most studies will show though that doing the surgery will prevent any further deterioration.
If then there is no benefit, at least there won't be any further deterioration.
If we look at the nephrolithiasis, it is a clear indication for surgery.
If you do not perform a parathyroidectomy, almost all of these patients will progress.
The hypercalceria without stones does not predict nephrolithiasis though,
so it is very difficult to present who will develop it.
But once they do have nephrolithiasis, it is an indication for surgery.
As far as the cardiovascular system is concerned, we remember that hypertension,
cardiovascular disease can be a consequence of primary hyperparathyroidism.
There are some Swedish and Danish trials, long-term survival trials,
trials showing a survival benefit only 15 years after the parathyroid surgery.
So a bit difficult.
Patients with hypertension, they usually will not be cured by your primary hyperparathyroidectomy.
We do look at some improvements though of left ventricular hypertrophy,
even in patients with hypertension after the thyroidectomy.
So for bone disease, remember the bone calcium loss is more prominent in the cortical sites,
those forearms and hips.
There is a small decrease in the incidence of fractures after surgery,
and there is also a small increase in bone mineral density following surgery.
So indeed severe bone disease would respond to a thyroidectomy.
Biochemical, its only long-term follow-up distinguishes those with disease progressions.
The only real way to distinguish these patients which makes the decision a bit more difficult
when you are faced with it initially.
Pregnancy, remember there is fetal parathyroid hormone suppression
and the baby might be born with severe hypocalcemia or even tetany.
Surgery in women with primary hyperparathyroidism in the second trimester.
If we are going to decide on careful follow-up,
those are for asymptomatic very mild cases, very mildly elevated calciums.
These can be followed up but then we have to warn the neonatologist of the dangers of the hypocalcemia in the newborn.
So severe hypocalcemia in itself is a danger to both mother and child and we need to address this.
Remember though that ionized calcium remains basically the same during pregnancy
although the total calcium falls in a normal pregnancy.
So if total calcium is in the upper regions of normal,
there might be problems and further investigations are warranted.
The normal fall that we see probably due to a dilutional effect with water retained in pregnancy.
So what are the indications for surgery?
Symptomatic and fit.
Because the surgery is now so minimal, because of preoperative localization,
most patients even with comorbid disease will be fit for this minimal access surgery.
Asymptomatic, if any one of these are present,
ionized calcium level more than 0.25 mmol per litre elevated above normal.
Bone density in the hip, lumbar spine or distal radius,
more than 2.5 standard deviations below the peak bone mass.
Patients with previous fragility fractures and in patients younger than 50.
Any of those indications in an asymptomatic patient you are warranted to do a pariroidectomy.
So what are the alternatives to surgery?
First of all, well try and prevent the problem.
Avoid thiazide, diuretics, lithium carbonate treatment, volume depletion,
prolonged bed rest and a high calcium diet.
These are all factors that worsen the hypercalcemia.
Advocate moderate physical activity.
Advocate a moderate calcium diet.
Remember if the calcium in the diet is too low,
you are going to further increase parathyroid hormone stimulation.
And also a moderate vitamin D intake, 400, 600 international units per day.
Monitor the patient, calcium and creatinine every year.
Bone mineral density every 2 years.
And as far as the ultrasound for the nephrolithiasis concern,
there is no good data to show that that has to be done regularly.
It should be done at the initial diagnosis of the hypercalcemia,
primary hyperparathyroidism to look for nephrolithiasis.
Lastly, as far as alternative surgery are concerned, the specific drugs.
They are in two groups.
Those inhibit bone resorption, the biphosphonates and estrogen and progesterone.
You can also look at calcium mimetics or vitamin D analogues.
Remember these activate the parathyroid receptor and decrease parathyroid hormone release.
They are though only used, mostly used in secondary hyperparathyroidism,
in parathyroid cancer and in those with severe disease who are unfit for surgery.
Quick last mention on vitamin D deficiency is common in primary hyperparathyroidism.
If it's combined, some studies do suggest that the disease is worse.
At least there is more hypercalcemia, more symptoms.
It is advised to normalize vitamin D levels prior to the decision on surgery.
Once the patient is diagnosed, just remember in those with high levels of calcium in the urine
and who are vitamin D depleted, once you replete the vitamin D,
give them vitamin D, there is a worsening of the calciuria
which might precipitate nephrolithiasis and you have to watch out for that.
Thank you.
