Now, as mentioned, a matrix can represent a set of linear equations.
Such a matrix is referred to as an augmented matrix.
But how do we construct this matrix from a linear set?
Well, here we are asked to construct a matrix of a linear system with M number of equations in N number of unknowns.
So we will have our rows, M number of equations, and in our columns, N number of unknowns.
Here we go, row 1, row 2, row 3, up till the last row, row M.
And our first column will be our first unknown, X1.
The whole column will contain this unknown.
So it is for our second column.
Finally, we will get to the nth unknown in the nth column.
Lastly will be our answers.
The first equation in O1 will have an answer B1.
The second B2, the third B3, until we get to the mth equation with an answer BM.
Now for the constants associated with our M number of equations and N number of unknowns.
The first constant, that is the constant of the first unknown in the first equation, will be named row 1, column 1.
As we saw before.
So this, the constant of the first unknown of the second equation, will be named row 2, column 1.
And so on until we get to row M, column 1.
First, for the second column, things continue along our plan.
Finally, in our second last column, containing the last unknown, Xn, our first constant in row 1 will be named row 1, column N.
And last will be row M, column N.
And there we have it, an augmented matrix.
xn, that's pretty problematic To walk into row 2, column 1.
And there we go, by the way up we get all out 14.
6,' 뜨volve.
Get out of the row 2, group of families to be named row 3, row 2, column 1,ayı,
root 2, and consistently on the ground.
Popering between row 2, and you would love, and to account the ор log 3.
Plus the st했습니다 in row 2, column 4, column 2, tab, and this is a hint.
You would love to be row 2.
You would like to see if you log 3 down with L1 and to row 2, up 4.
Now we get to row 2.
And the row 2 is the number of the hours a Mayor 3, row 2, column 2, of two, raising board 2, there
