Next we're going to define certain types of elements. Some of the elements in the set
might hold special properties and the first one we're going to look at is the identity element.
Identity element.
So the identity element is going to be an element of a set. Let's make our set, our set
is the set of all elements x. We have a binary operation. Let's say a binary operation and a
binary operation is just a little generic one that we're used to now, just a little x. And we're going
to have an element, just an arbitrary element. Let's make it x sub 1 is an element of x. And we
are going to say that we now have this identity element. We're going to call this our identity
element u as an element of x if the following property holds. If I take u and our binary
operation with x sub 1 and that commutes, so it's got a commute as well, x sub 1 and u and I just get
back x sub 1. So no matter what element I take, some arbitrary element, if the binary operation
under this commutative type of binary operation, if I have this equal to each other and I just
get back my original element. If this holds, then this u, which is an element of x, is a binary,
is an identity element, a special element in my set. And if it exists, it's actually unique and we're
going to look at the proof of that. So let's look at an example. Let's look at the set of, say for
instance, natural, and let's say the set of integers. If I look at the set of integers, so zero is in there
and I look at my binary operation of addition. So I'm looking at my set of integers under addition.
So my set of integers under addition, I have this unique identity element and that is the element zero,
because I can take any element inside of z. Let's make it z1. If I add to that zero,
that's the same as adding zero to that element and I get just get back that element. If I look at the
integers under multiplication, so let's look at the integers under multiplication,
under multiplication. And then my identity element, of course, is going to be, is going to be one,
because z sub one times one equals one times z sub one, and I just get z sub one back.
So that would be a special type of identity element, but it is on a set under some binary operation
with this binary operation must have this commutative property. That's how we define it.
And I claim that if it exists, it is unique. It doesn't always exist in a set, but if it exists,
this identity element, then it is unique. How would we go about such proof? I think you can guess we're
going to do proof by contradiction. So let's assume to the contrary. So let's assume to the contrary
that the identity element, that the identity element is not unique. It's not unique. Therefore, under this
assumption, let there be at least two of them. So let p1 and p2 be identity elements of some set,
let's make it some set p, of some set p, under some binary operation, under some binary operation.
Now we've just defined a few things. As humans, we've decided that's how we're going to define it.
So if my identity element is p1, I'm choosing, because it's not unique, I can choose any one of them,
and I have this binary operation with p2, that means I've got to get p2, because that's how we defined
identity elements, and we've defined this binary, this, how we defined this identity element before.
So I have to get that. But if I choose p2 as my identity element, then I'm going to get, well,
that should be one. If I use p, so in this instance p1, now this instance of p2 is my identity element,
I'm going to get p1 back. So other words, I have here p1 equals p1, there's binary operation p2,
and that's p2. In other words, p2 equals p1. That is in contradiction to my initial assumption.
My initial assumption is therefore false. Therefore, I have to say that the identity element, if it exists,
it is unique. So a nice proof of this uniqueness of an identity element, if it exists.
The Eyest
So i will show that for everyone you might not say that, that's one of you.
So i will show that John
who should be able to maintain the identity of the identity element,
may be left the same principle as possible as one of you,
and there are any uniqueness that is under 1 of you.
What would be your integration, which would happen to you,
you just russe
that is under
