Okay, so I'll be talking about intra-abdominal hypotension and abdominal compartment syndrome.
It starts with three cases that were adapted from the World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome.
The first case was a septic child.
A five-year-old female presented with sepsis was treated with fluids, antibiotics, and vasopressors.
Twenty-four hours into therapy, developed worsening hypotension, oliguria, hypoxemia, and hypocarbia.
The intra-abdominal pressure was 26, and subsequently needed a decompressive laparotum.
The results were that they found an immediate resolution of all the physiological compromise,
and seven days later, the abdomen was closed, and the child went home.
The second case was a patient with aspiration pneumonia.
A 77-year-old male with sepsis transferred to ICU, required intubation, and subsequently developed hypotension.
Large volume of fluid was given overnight.
Next morning, patient was found to be anuric.
Lactate was raised.
Inter-abdominal pressure was measured, and it was 31.
Surgeons were consulted for a possible decompressive laparotomy.
Instead, they decided for a nasocastric tube, rectal tube, and neuromuscular blockage, all which decreased abdominal wall tone,
and so reduced intra-abdominal pressure within one hour, and improved the urine output.
Third case was a burns patient.
33-year-old male, 60% total body surface area burns.
Parking formula was used.
Escratic was done.
Large volume fluid recess.
Second day, again, increased abdominal pressure.
Decreased urine output, and a decrease in the abdominal perfusion pressure.
The catheter was placed percutaneously, and 800 moles of fluid was reduced in the abdomen.
The intra-abdominal pressure subsequently dropped quite a bit, and abdominal perfusion pressure had increased.
This was left in for a few more days for gravity drainage.
We found no recurrent abdominal compartment syndrome, and there was no need for surgical intervention.
So, the points to note here on these three examples are that trauma is not the only cause for intra-abdominal hypertension or abdominal syndrome.
And intra-abdominal pressure measurements are clinically useful.
Also, the spot checks result in delayed diagnosis.
Medical interventions are often all that is needed before progressing to your final stage, which is the decompressive laparotomy.
In an overview of what we'll look at today, just a brief history of the condition, consensus definitions, which are useful, classification of the differences, types of intra-abdominal hypertension, causes, anatomic bases, the pathophysiology, and then towards the end, just the diagnosis, measurement, and the management of the condition.
So, abdominal compartment syndrome represents the pathophysiology consequence of raised intra-abdominal pressure.
And the raised intra-abdominal pressure may profoundly impair physiology and organ function because of limited abdominal wall compliance.
There's no critical threshold volume, but once this volume is reached, small increments in volume lead to an enormous increase in pressure that quickly leads to decompensation.
Excessively increased intra-abdominal pressure may impair all your physiology, so your cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, hepatic, CNS function, all leading to multi-organ dysfunction and death.
So, quickly looking at the history, in 1876, they first looked at the relationship between intra-abdominal pressure and urine output and found that a raised intra-abdominal pressure is associated with a decreased urine output.
1911, in 1911, Emerson looked at abdominal distension and how it interferes with cardiac output.
Bogat, from where the Bogata bag arises, was in the 50s, and he recommended leaving the abdomen open.
In 1982, intra-abdominal pressure was shown to affect renal function, and that decompression subsequently improves renal function.
1984 was when intra-abdominal pressure started being measured using indirect bladder measurements as a criteria for abdominal decompression.
And our recommendations come from 2007 from the World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome, which developed the consensus definitions, which most ICUs follow,
standards for measurement, standards for measurement, diagnostic criteria, and the current recommendations, which we also use.
So, briefly just the definitions.
Intra-abdominal pressure is defined as the steady state pressure concealed within the abdominal cavity.
Your abdominal perfusion pressure is the mean arterial pressure minus intra-abdominal pressure.
And it assesses the severity of your intra-abdominal pressure as well as the adequacy of abdominal blood flow.
It's a better value to interpret than just intra-abdominal pressure alone.
Intra-abdominal hypertension is defined as sustained or repeated pathological elevation in your intra-abdominal pressure above 12.
And abdominal compartment syndrome is essentially intra-abdominal hypertension together with organ dysfunction or failure.
So, classification, either acute or chronic, acute when there's a temporary increase in pressure, that may progress to compartment syndrome, and chronic when it's a persistent problem, this may impair physiology and may benefit from decompression.
So, primary is usually more that we see and that affects us, divided by primary, secondary, and recurrent.
Primary, when the pathology is within the abdominal cavity.
Secondary, from conditions outside the abdomen.
This can either be from excess fluid recess or restrictive forces.
And then recurrent is also important because a patient that has undergone a decompressive laboratory may subsequently still develop abdominal compartment syndrome, even after being treated.
So, quickly look at the causes.
Primary, like we said, pathology inside the abdomen.
So, this can be from pancreatitis, peritonitis, rupture triple A, fractures, ascites, bowel obstruction, hemorrhage.
So, anything within the abdomen will be defined as primary.
Everything outside is essentially secondary.
So, this is your large volume of fluid recess, and there is a relationship with increased risk related to more than three liters being rapidly infused.
Sepsis, full thickness burns, again, because of fluid recess and external compressing forces.
Chronic, these are patients with abdominal tumors, cirrhosis, morbid obesity, etc.
So, the anatomic basis, first looking at the abdominal structures.
The solid organs, such as the liver and the spleen, they undergo changes slowly, and this often progresses to the chronic intra-abdominal hypertension.
But the things that respond fairly quickly are hollow viscous, so your bowel, blood lymphatics, and the peritoneum itself.
All can increase very rapidly in size as a result of trauma, infections, or ilus.
And as they distend rapidly, they increase your abdominal pressure.
Abdominal wall compliance is the second part.
So, this limits your distension, and it's limited and reaches a threshold beyond which, like we said, small increases lead to enormous increase in the pressure.
So, anyone that's with critical illness, shock, or severe sepsis, undergoes two main things.
There's ischemia happening and your SERS response.
This leads to capillary leak, aggravated by the fluid recess.
You develop tissue edema, bowel swells up, the visitory swells up, and subsequently intra-abdominal hypertension.
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
European
EU
European
