But then in the uptended patient or with these clinical findings, firstly you won't be able to test for
passive stretch or severe pain patients with peripheral nerve blockade. They won't be able to
report an increase of pain. Again, they'll be paralysed. You won't know whether or not this is a
compartmentalism or what. Then you have to measure it. In other hospitals that I've worked, we've had
a commercially available compartmentalism monitor. I don't know if anybody ever used it. We sometimes patch
something together at Victoria where we use the needle and the catheter and the A-line monitor
to get a pressure but they're quite inaccurate. I think the only value in using those is
actually if you have serial measurements and you see a steady increase in the rise of
tissue tissue patient is measured, but as a single value, very little use. But, principles of
the invasive tissue patient monitoring, which is important, is just that like I said, it must be
continuous or serial so you can see a change in treatment. And you have to test all the
compartments of the affected lip. How many compartments do you have in your lip?
So you have to check in all four of them. The anterior and deep posterior compartments are most likely to be involved with the compartments,
certainly that the pressure rises more acutely than the others.
So test all four compartments and then one study in the article I read also looked at where in the compartment you measure the pressure
and they measured at 5 cm increments from the side of the compartment with a steady decline in the compartmental pressure.
So if you test the pressure at the periphery of the muscle, 10 cm away from the fracture is going to be significantly less than it will be around the fracture.
So you have to test in different parts of the muscle as well if you want a relevant measure.
And then the treatment, your first step once you now have a very highly likely or definite compartment syndrome,
that's the first to just release all your circumferential dressings and casts and then elevate the limb not higher than the heart
because then you're now impairing the perfusion, like you said, it's not just pressure, it's also perfusion
so you want to find a balance between those two.
And then you optimize your systemic process to resuscitation, make sure the patient is not hyperbulimic or unresuscitated.
And if despite these conservative measurements, there's still signs of an evolving compartment syndrome,
you must do an emergency fasciopathy.
And then I just want to briefly talk about fasciopathy for insurgents.
I personally haven't done one myself for anything, so I'm not speaking from experience,
but there's no place for minimally invasive techniques.
When you make a big, long incision, make sure that you release all the compartments,
don't close the skin primarily because the skin will then, there's no point.
And what I use, and I know some of the other institutions also use a backdressing after the initial fascia.
To me, we look for you at 72 hours later. If you can close it, you do.
If you don't, you do. It's been dropped.
That's it. And there's some pictures here.
So for the lower leg, you can use a single or double incision technique.
I think the double incision is easier.
With a single one, you have to go around the fibula to get to the posterior compartments.
It can be quite difficult.
And they just show you...
Oh, here's some little hair about this.
There's your anterior compartment between the...
the fibula, lateral compartment, superficial posterior and the posterior.
So do make sure that you release all of those.
If you need your fasciotomy.
Here's some pictures post fasciotomy with your spit skin graft.
I'm not sure what's going on there.
And that seems like a little bit of a short incision. I don't think that's adequate.
Here's just another diagram illustrating the fasciotomies and the four compartments that you need to release.
In the lower leg.
In the forearm.
It's often not necessary, apparently, to release the posterior compartment.
That's the anterior one that tends to...
the palmar surface.
That tends to develop the highest pressures.
And then whenever you do this, it's very important to release the carpal tunnel as well.
As you get compression of your median nerve there.
That's forearm.
There's a picture.
See, they use the back for that.
And then just outcomes of complications briefly.
Sheven and Madsen did a review of it for patients.
22 had their fasciotomy before 12 hours, 22 afterwards.
And in the first group, the normal lower extremity function was found at 68% and only in 8% of the second group.
And Finkelstein then subsequently also reported on five patients who all had fasciotomy.
It's more than 35 hours after the asymptotical quadruple syndrome.
And the outcome was universally poor.
One die from sepsis directly as a result after fasciotomy.
And four later on adaptations.
So even though it's not really possible to quantify and say exactly that after this hour you do not do a fasciotomy.
And it's quite clear that late fasciotomy is a better university for outcome.
Frequent complaints following your fasciotomy is disfigurement, decreased sensibility, pain of fasciotomy sites.
Some have dead attendants and some people also suffer recurrent ulcerations at the site of the graft.
It's still better than death or losing your limb.
So when is it too late? There's a rule of thumb.
As I wish you can voluntarily contract the muscles.
There's some viable muscle and fasciotomy is indicated.
And if the contraindication is just the flip side really.
If there's a suspected duration of more than 8 hours, no obvious nerve injury or nerve block that can account for the symptoms
and there's no demonstrable function in the limb, then it's unlikely that there's anything viable left in there and you shouldn't do it.
It's just a little bit too.
And now we're moving on to crusher injury and rhabdomyolysis which is very much part of the compartment syndrome picture
because once perfusion is reinstated you can get through perfusion injury and rhabdomyolysis and myoglobinuria.
So this phenomenon was first described by Waters and Beal in 1945 during the Cinque World War.
And they described five victims that were trapped during the bombings in London under the rubble.
They were trapped extremities. They all presented later on in ibobalemic shock.
They had swollen, thin extremities. Subsequently, the bed of dark urine.
We know failure or fiber, then died.
And then histological examination of the kidneys later revealed that a kidney and the carousers occurred
and there were pigmented casts in the tubules. They didn't know exactly what it was, but then later on
they identified myoglobin as being very sophisticated.
Then, numerous natural disasters led to mass casualties, mass development of crush syndrome
and renal failure and death. And in 1995 the International Society of Nephrology created this disaster relief
of force that has dialysis units at the ready for whenever there is a major earthquake or major natural disaster
requiring lots of dialysis being administered. They just took up and low and they provided.
And the first time they did it was in Turkey in 1999, following a big earthquake.
They dispatched and delivered approximately 45,000 dialysis sessions.
And this improved mortality from, I don't know what, they didn't say in the article, but it was 19% now.
So I think it's significantly less. It was above 50 in the past.
And just briefly some definitions.
Rectomyolisis, what it says it is, liberation of components of introscalical muscle into a circulation.
And then acute renal failure, this couldn't be defined.
Either there's a sudden decline in renal function that requires some form of renal battery therapy for diagnosis.
And then according to the acute kidney injury initiative, there's a new classification.
Now we don't actually talk about acute renal failure anymore, we talk about acute kidney injury.
And the way they define your stage 3 or stage 4 AKI is you have a 3,000 increase from your baseline serial creatinine.
More than 75% increase in your glomerular filtration rate.
Or a urine output that's less than when 3.0 meters per kg per hour for 24 hours or anurea.
So that would be your adrenal failure.
Like the lastọ of your dog, thanks.
