All right, good morning you guys. Those of you who don't know me, my name is Yanni. I'm a brand,
brand new surgical reg. I started on Tuesday. The topic I'm supposed to talk about is coagulation
disorders and blood transfusion, which all of you realize is such a massive topic. So
after reading through myriads and myriads of articles, I decided on focusing on coagulation,
all these disorders in the trauma patient, and the treatment of recognition and treatment of it.
Trauma, as you know, as we see here, is quite common. But one thing, deaths worldwide, is
attributed to trauma. And the deadly triangle, they say, with trauma that causes patients to die is a
combination of coagulopathy, hypothermia, and acidosis. And this is a very confusing little
flow diagram, which I could spend an hour talking about, but it basically gives you the idea that
all of these three things are interdependent. Each one of these things cause each one of the
other ones. I'm not going to go through this whole thing with you now. First of all, I'd like to look
at the etiology of hemostatic disorders and trauma. Four basic things. The first one is dilution.
Second, hypothermia. Third, specific sites of trauma. And fourth, of course, underlying conditions.
And before I carry on with the etiology, I'll go into a broader description of the etiology.
Why do we transfuse blood and blood components? First of all, to restore and maintain normal
blood volume, to correct the severe anemia, and also, of course, to correct bleeding and
coagulation disorders. Dilution. The first one I mentioned, they're the first of the etiologies.
It seems very simple. You pour a lot of crystalloid fluids into a patient and you expect for factors
to be diluted, platelets to be diluted, but it's not that simple in trauma. In the end, what happens
is dilution is usually not such a big factor. Factor since fluids shift extravascularly. Plasma proteins
should continue to be produced while clotic factors are being utilised. And studies have shown that
dilution is usually not a problem until the entire blood volume has needed to be replaced.
That's four to five, five to six litres, ten to twelve units of packed red cells. And most
studies that says this shows a poor correlation between the amount of blood given and coagulation
defects. And it's often impossible to predict what sort of defects a patient will have in reaction
to minor or massive transfusion. Hypothermia in trauma patients, as we all know, is very
important. Exposure time of patients when an accident, the time it took paramedics to extract
the patient, time before the resuscitation could be started, cools patients down. Transfusion
pack red cells are kept at four degrees Celsius. And if we transfuse it to a patient cold, we will
drop this patient's temperature by a quarter of a degree Celsius for every unit that we
transfuse. And also fluid resuscitation, crystalloid resuscitation, will drop at room temperature,
will actually drop a patient's temperature by half a degree Celsius for every litre that
we transfuse. Keep in mind if we pour litres of fluid into a patient. And of course then
they say the quickest way to cool a person down is by operating and anaesthetising them, so
visceral exposure during surgery. And also during hypothermia, general patient platelet function
will decline even with the most modest hypothermia. And hypothermia also causes increased fibrinolysis.
Specific trauma sites, brain injury patients is known to be one of the biggest risk factors for
for DIC in trauma patients. Exposure of thromboplastin rich brain tissue to flowing blood results in
defibrination of blood clots. This also results in consumptive cardiopathy. All the clotting factors
are being used. And these patients may require large amounts of blood products to correct
discracias. And also severe liver injury and shock hyperperfusion leads to the inability of the body to
replenish coagulation factors in the body. And of course any type of severe trauma where you have
extensive soft tissue damage can also lead to DIC. And of course the last one on the etiology list
is underlying disease. Trauma is unfortunately not limited to healthy patients that young guys
don't have much wrong with them apart from the knife in their heart. Underlying illnesses like
from Willebrand and hemophilia, they said from Willebrand about one in a hundred people will have
a from Willebrand disorder. This is usually illicitable by the history. Patients that tend to bleed more
in operations will have or bruise easily, they will give you this history, but they might not necessarily
know that they have this illness. And also then chronic liver disease, of course, which is
quite common in our populations. The liver, of course, synthesizes most, most of your, almost
all of your anticoagulants and inhibitors except for factor VIII and for valibrant factor.
Chronic liver failure patients also exhibit thrombocytopenia as well as platelet dysfunction.
And it's also the most common cause of primary fibrinolysis because of decreased fibrinolytic
inhibitors that have been produced and also decreased clearance of plasma. Also then there's
the problem of warfarin. A large group of our patients is on warfarin. I couldn't, unfortunately,
get data for South Africa, but I understand worldwide one percent of the worldwide population
is actually on warfarin, which is quite a lot. And it's very difficult, but fortunately
it's been shown in data that it's difficult to prove that they actually do worse in trauma
since we generally, they're well informed people that will tell you that they're on warfarin
if they're a state to do so and they get treated very early. Right, so the recognition of abnormal
bleeding, obviously it's a patient that will be bleeding abnormally, oozing from drip sites,
oozing from surgical wounds, ongoing blood loss into drains, just from multiple sites.
Specific testing this is important, but treatment should not be delayed until your results are
available. And of course the basic test results that we will do is INR, PTT, platelet count,
fibrinogen level, fibrinogen level, I'm not too familiar with, maybe you guys can tell me,
Jeremy, if we routinely test for that, I'm not sure we do, but it does make, if I go on,
it makes a lot of sense to test for that, but I'm not familiar with testing for it.
In thrombocytopenia, they say it's the largest determinant of microvascular, of small bleeds
in massively transfused patients, and it can be avoided by keeping the platelet count above 50.
Unfortunately, there's no simple method for determining platelet function, as is caused by hypothermia
and also chronic liver disease.
