In a normal person, there's usually a response to a SIRS in the form of anti-inflammatory
mediators, and this is known as CARS, which stands for Counter Regulatory Anti-Inflammatory
Syndrome.
Then, if you get a mixed SIRS and a CARS picture in one patient, they call it MARS, which is
Mixed Inflammatory Response Syndrome, and they say when there's an imbalance of your pro
and anti-inflammatory components in a single host, it's a good predictor of mortality.
Anyway, when you get this, almost anything can happen, and so they've called it CHAOS.
CHAOS stands for something.
The C stands for Cardiorespiratory Arrest.
H stands for Hemostasis, which is good.
A stands for Apoptosis, which is cell death, which is bad.
O stands for Organ Dysfunction.
And S stands for Immunosuppression, which increases your host's susceptibility to infection.
Very important in managing these patients is to try and separate patients who are septic
from those who have an aseptic SIRS.
And this is a lot easier said than done, because the signs and symptoms of the two pathologies
overlap a lot.
So, a tachycardia, a tachypnea, a fever, a high white cell count, hypotension, organ dysfunction.
All of these are signs and symptoms of both SIRS and endosepsis.
That's why it's very important to first actively exclude causes for an aseptic SIRS.
There are various causes for this.
Some of them are due to tissue damage, such as burns or pulmonary embolism.
Some of them are from metabolic causes.
For example, a thyroid storm can give you a SIRS response.
There are drug-related things, such as the administration of blood products.
If a patient has a reaction to that, they can get a SIRS response.
And then also, various malignancies can also give you a SIRS response.
Then you need to actively look for causes of SIRS, which is something I think we all know
how to do.
You look for infections, either in limbs, in the chest, in the bladder, in the soft tissue
and in wounds.
You look at all your lines, peripheral and central.
Some infections are occult.
Some intra-abdominal infections are quite hard to pick up, and you might need to scan
your patient.
You can do a blood culture, which may yield organisms, but it's important to remember
that not all septic patients will have organisms on their blood culture.
And then there are a couple of biochemical markers and acute phase reactants.
CRP, or C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin are quite important, particularly procalcitonin.
Procalcitonin is a peptide that is usually only secreted by the C-cells of the thyroid,
but in septic patients, other tissues start to secrete it as well.
It's an expensive test, usually only done in ICUs, but the evidence does show that the
level of the procalcitonin does correspond with the severity of illness and the possibility
of mortality.
Procalcitonin seems to be a little bit more sensitive and specific than CRP, and is also
cleared from the system a lot quicker than C-reactive protein is.
N, how to manage a patient with this disease.
And after several decades of talking about this disease, there is still no clear answer
regarding the question of management, and it's probably because we don't really understand
the disease very well.
There are a few principles.
Firstly, is goal-directed resuscitation, and this is very important in the first few hours
of admission, and this should start before your patient is even into ICU.
I've got the endpoints of goal-directed resuscitation on your handout.
We look at the CBP, the mean arterial pressure, and the urinary output.
You can also look at central venous sets or mixed venous sets, but these are quite invasive
procedures and not usually done in our unit.
Secondly, the big thing is to maintain tissue perfusion, because SERS is a disease of tissue
which is a disease.
So you need to try and get your patient's sets up to 100%, or between 95% and 100%, and
this is usually not very difficult.
And what you also need to understand is that in this disease, there's not usually a problem
with oxygen delivery.
The problem lies in the actual cell itself, which has what is known as a cytopathic hypoxia,
where the tissue is actually unable to utilize oxygen.
So even though your sets are fine and 100% and reassuring, it does not mean that your tissues
are perfusing well.
And that's why you need to sometimes look a little bit deeper, apply a little bit more
insight to try and work out whether or not your tissues are hypoxic.
And to do this, you can look at lactate, and you can also look at the actual tissue functioning,
so your renal functions, your liver functions.
To assess the gut, you can look at the gastric mucosal pH.
If there is a source of infection, you can treat it with antibiotics, or in our case with
surgery.
You should start with broad-spectrum antibiotics, and then rationalize them as your cultures
become available, or as you decide what your true source of sepsis are.
And then basically what remains to us is to support the organ systems as they fail, and
most importantly, to not cause any further organ damage.
The ultimate goal is to return to homeostasis.
There are also some evidence for some other modalities now.
There's evidence that early use of high-dose corticosteroids in the septic shock patient
reduces morbidity and mortality, and also is an instrument to maintain very tight glucose
control, even in non-diabetic patients, reduces the length of time on the ventilator and the
ICU stay.
Then trying to decide whether or not your patient is going to make it.
There are several scoring systems, but most importantly I think is the Apache 2, which
is used in most ICUs, especially in this province.
The Apache 2 is very comprehensive and looks at everything from your current physiological
status to your age to your underlying conditions.
It's only a single score, usually given at the end of the first 24 hours of admission.
And that's important to remember because it's not a score that tracks progress.
It's just a score that gives you a prognosis.
I have not included the score in the handout and I'm not going to discuss it in depth here
because it's quite a long and complicated thing.
But it's available in most textbooks and also there are multiple apps for your smartphones
where you can just type your parameters in and it will give you an Apache score.
There are some shortfalls.
For example, some authors believe that there is an exaggerated weight given to advanced
age.
Also, it doesn't make allowances for organs that are being artificially supported.
So patients who are being ventilated or on renal replacement therapy, it doesn't allow
for that.
So it can sometimes give you a lower estimate of severity.
And like I said, it doesn't track progress.
It just gives you a wonderful prognosis.
But this is important when you're trying to decide how to distribute resources.
And also, you know, for your own sort of sense of comfort.
You know, if a patient is not doing so well, the Apache score is a good way to say, well,
that's the patient's disease and not necessarily your management.
Then SOFA is the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment.
And this is a score that can be used sort of at 24 to 48 hour intervals.
It assesses six major organ systems.
You get a different score every time.
And that gives you a better idea of whether or not your patient is improving or deteriorating.
And then on the handout, I've included some CNS scoring systems.
I'm not going to discuss those.
So in conclusion, sepsis and multi-organ dysfunction syndrome are all part of a serious disease that
carries high mobility and mortality and is very difficult to treat.
Any questions or discussion?
.
.
.
.
