The INR of course reflects the factor 7 pathway. It is often slightly elevated in trauma due to factor 7 depletion. It's highly sensitive for that and it is associated with a significant risk for bleed with the INR above 1.8.
Fibrinogen, they say, is essential to clotting assays. And it's risky. There's a level that they couple to risk for excessive bleed which will be below 50 milligrams per deciliters.
And to keep in mind that the end point of both the INR and the PTT is the time it reaches it takes for the formation of a fibrin clot.
So if there's not enough fibrin, a tiny insignificant indetectable clot will form and this will result in both a very long INR and a very long PTT.
But the reason is not a factor 7 deficiency. It's actually just because the fibrinogen is low.
For the treatment in patients requiring massive transfusion to monitor the HP or hematocrit, the platelet count, the INR, the PTT and they suggest fibrinogen level.
For platelet counts of less than 50 to give 6 random units of platelets, this will raise your platelet count by approximately 40.
For an INR of more than 2 to give the patient PTT, they suggest if you have just an isolated INR elevation but a normal TTT.
This means an isolated factor 7 depletion and shouldn't need FFP transfusion.
If both INR and the PTTs are elevated, like I explained earlier, to keep in mind to remember to check if it's possible to check for a fibrinogen level.
If your fibrinogen level is low, treatment for this is giving prior precipitate, 10 units will elevate your level by 100.
Occasionally for blood transfusions, for treatment of these patients, like in our setting, we don't always have lab available or never have lab available after 11 at night.
You need to treat empirically, and the interesting point that I came across is to remember that platelet solution, if you remember the risk factors for low platelets,
to remember that if you give a patient platelets, it also contains plasma, much needed plasma also required for resuscitation.
And to consider empirically giving prior precipitate in their trauma patients because of the low fibrinogen levels that they are expected to get.
I just want to go through a few complications of blood transfusion.
Of course, the first thing we always cite is hypothermia, and this could be prevented by blood warming.
And then you all know about damage control surgery, where the patient needs to control vascular injury, clean for debridements,
and just take the patient back to a high care setting, and pack bleeding wounds, take the patient back to a high care setting,
where the patient can be warmed, acidosis corrected, and clotting defects corrected as well.
Hypocalcemia, they say, is a very rare complication of transfusions.
Hypokalemia, of course, we're always worried about in elderly patients chronic renal failure, hypokalemia give blood.
But it's usually, they say, the problem with hypokalemia is much less than you would think it is,
but you must remember not to give glucose and ringer solutions in the same line as blood as this could cause hemolysis,
and create hypokalemia for the patient, always give normal saline.
Acute hemolysis, of course, from ABO incompatibility, if the wrong blood is given,
but I'm sure this is a very minor problem since all the blood gets checked, and we're very strict about that.
Very strict protocols.
Fever could be transient, should be monitored.
If the patient still has a persisting fever after giving antipyrexials after three units of blood,
the repeat transfusion should be ordered for leprosyte-depleted red blood cells.
And allergic reactions can range anywhere from a slight tachycardia to urticaria, which they say can be treated just supportively.
And, of course, fluid overload in very sick elderly patients.
It's advisable to keep CVP monitoring to see what your fluid status is for the patient.
And, of course, transmissible diseases, viral hepatitis, hepatitis C being a big factor.
HIV, sorry, I didn't mean to write that in bigger letters.
HIV, the risk of transmission has obviously gotten much less since 1985, since I started testing.
For HIV and other blood-borne diseases, they also mention things that I know little of.
West Nile virus, hepatitis G are apparently concerns.
This is just a list of things all of you will know.
In warfarin therapy, to correct INRs for patients, generally I'm used to not really calculating the dose of fresh frozen plasma.
We'll give the patient two units of FFPs and redo the INR and repeat and see what the patient requires.
And also, if you need to correct fast, it's acceptable to give vitamin K.
So the risk of clotting from the reason why the patient is on warfarin in the first place is obviously much less than from bleeding to death by trauma.
And this is something also we're worried about.
Small procedures, putting up a CVP for a trauma patient.
If it is a non-urgent thing, you can correct the INR to less than 1.5 in platelets over 50.
But it's documented in urgent situations.
It's very operator dependent.
Experienced operators have much less risk of causing the bleed even with major INR dyscrasias.
Experienced operators should do procedures if it is urgent.
They have less risk of bleed than with inexperienced.
So, just in summary, it's important to identify your high risk patients, as we've discussed.
And to do an appropriate coagulation screen before we start.
And to follow up blood product administration with repeat tests.
And to evaluate what your position is in the patient's coagulation abilities at that point.
And the last one, of course I didn't say here, is to keep your patient, is to warm your patient.
That's probably the most important thing here.
And these things are just, you'd be amazed what you find if you Google blood transfusion and comics.
Thank you everybody.
Thank you everybody.
Thank you.
Thank you.
