And then on that
I'm not even going to go through it, is obviously the risk factors of DVT and pulmonary embolism.
It's a very common complication in all hospitalized patients, up to 25%.
Prophylaxis is imperative because there's high incidence and that first presentation is often fatal.
So prophylaxis is very, very important.
Screening strategies is very limited.
Pathophysiology, we all know about Virtuous Triad.
I'm not really going to go through that.
Venostasis, endothelial damage and hypercoagulability.
General risk factors is on your handouts.
Surgery itself, once again, a risk factor.
And then your prevention, basically, or prophylaxis can either be mechanical or pharmacological.
Mechanical being stockings, intermittent pneumatic compression and venous foot pumps and pharmacological
prophylaxis.
We all know the antiplatelet agents.
Clexane, heparin, and then factor XA inhibitor, which we don't really use here.
And then Geert's guidelines, prophylaxis, is the one that they keep on mentioning in the intermediate
papers, which is in your hands out.
I'm not going to go through it.
It's a really long list.
Just to point there, a practical point with thromboprophylaxis and planning anesthesia
makes a very, very big difference, especially in things like orthopedic surgery.
We use a lot of regional techniques and neuroactual anesthesia that the timing of the thromboprophylaxis
before and after surgery and before and after the anesthesia itself is very, very important.
And, you know, complications like epidural hematomas are rare, but they're absolutely
decimate the patient when they happen.
So we have to be quite cognizant of when doses get given and when patients come to thromboprophylaxis,
et cetera, et cetera.
It requires good talking, so you all need to know what the plan is for the patient.
Okay, the next thing to consider, and this has been written about a lot recently, is the
immune-compromised patient, especially in HIV, the other two, to always consider as malignancy
as a transplant patient.
Why is this significant risk?
Because these patients are on drugs, drugs that influence their liver function, their
renal function, and their functional reserve, basically.
These patients, you always have to ask yourself, can they be optimized and how can I optimize them?
Remember that most anesthetic drugs are also immune suppressants, so you don't want
to aggravate an already bad situation.
And then really that we often have to ask, especially in our HIV population, will surgery
in actual fact really make a difference for this patient?
Nutrition, I've mentioned it before, the two opposites, the really morbidly obese patient
versus the malnourished patient.
Serum albumin, significant predictor, especially in pulmonary complications.
They consider serum albumin of less than 30 to be significant.
There is a debate about whether obesity itself is an independent risk factor because it has
been shown to directly increase post-op infections and post-op ICU stay.
But obesity invariably comes along with a whole area of other risk factors, from cardiovascular
risk factors to difficult intubations, et cetera, et cetera.
BMI is still used as a measurement.
A BMI more than 30 is considered moderate risk, and a BMI of more than 40 is considered
severe risk.
And, yeah, this is of such significance that in private medicine, your medical aides will
in actual fact charge a patient more for both the surgery and the anesthetics because
of the associated risk factors, apparently.
I'm just going to correct you, it's not a medical aides will choice.
I thought that the hospitals, the surgeons, the surgeons and the anesthetists.
Again, in the last one, finally, is age.
Okay, basically you have a decreased physiological reserve and ability to compensate for stress.
Yeah, the effects of anesthesia is different in the elderly patient than it is in the younger
patient, as it is with all other drugs.
But always remember that it's coexisting disease in the elderly that's more important than age
itself.
So don't, you know, just because somebody is old, it doesn't mean, you know.
So you've got the effects of age on anesthesia, I think that must be the effects of age on
the leethe test.
It's the effect of the surgeon on the leethe test.
Yeah.
It's a whole complicated explanation for that.
Okay, and then obviously your pain management and post-operative care for your elderly patient
is also going to be significantly different.
And then there's also psychological issues like end-of-life issues and quality of life
issues and all of that that needs to be considered in your elderly patient and should be planned
really carefully.
And that is all.
Finally.
Thank you.
