Music
Smoking is your second biggest risk factor. It's quite significant, the 1.4 to 4.3 fold increase in risk for pulmonary complications.
But only smokers with, yeah, that has bronchospasm, yeah, with a functional, what was it, I can't remember what exactly it was, FEV I think, yeah, FEV1, less than 40%, if I'm not mistaken, they have an increased risk for bronchospasm.
Otherwise, not really, but they do have an increase, but all smokers have an increased risk for mechanical ventilation.
They advise, yeah, patients should be advised to stop smoking before elective surgery.
The period that is advised is at least eight weeks prior to surgery.
There's a little bit of a tightrope.
If patients stop smoking less than eight weeks prior to surgery, you have the risk of increased secretions.
But the benefits to stop smoking in terms of your carbon monoxide still outweighs the risk of increased secretions, so they have to stop smoking, you know, it doesn't matter when.
Okay, asthma is your third important risk factor.
It's only really an important risk factor when the patient is actively wheezing or has a peak flow of less than 80%.
Also, again, light CABD should be optimized with bronchodilators and, of course, a short course of steroids.
The problem is profound bronchospasm with intubation or instrumentization, really, whether it's an LMA or a tube or suction or whatever.
And that risk is definitely increased with poor control.
How do you identify poor control?
Morning dips, like an early morning cough, a patient that is on steroid therapy, a patient that recently required hospitalization for nebulization,
a patient that had recent or recurrent infections.
Also important to note here is patients on steroid therapy will come back when we look at endocrine risk factors.
Patients on long-term steroid therapy, you must remember that you have your HPA axis that is suppressed,
that has a significant influence on surgery and post-operative care.
And the one thing that I mentioned is a recent upper or lower respiratory tract infection.
Yeah, I'm coming to that now.
Other smaller, okay, what Fizana just mentioned is a patient that had a recent upper respiratory or lower respiratory tract infection.
Upper respiratory tract infection, you advise to the first surgery for two weeks,
lower respiratory tract infection to the first surgery for four weeks.
Obesity is a separate risk factor, but a risk factor also playing into pulmonary risk.
From difficult airway and obstructive sleep, apnea with risk during intubation, up to prolonged ICU stay.
Obesity definitely has an influence on your pulmonary risk.
Then duration of surgery influences pulmonary risk.
The site of surgery, as I said, upper abdominal surgery, higher risk than lower abdominal surgery.
Nutritional status, it's the albumin that I mentioned earlier.
Renal function, and then post-operative pain, never underestimated patients are splinting,
they are immobilized, they've increased their risk for atelectasis and infection.
Anything there that you want to add?
Okay, pre-operative risk and renal function.
It's quite difficult to assess clinically.
This is the one thing where you will need special investigations.
It's often asymptomatic, but it is a very significant predictor of cardiac and pulmonary complications.
I think with us, it's a patient over the age of 45 that will require UNE.
But Jenna Piercey gave a really great talk about renal injury and renal failure.
I don't know if we can try and get hold of that at some point.
But we don't talk about acute renal failure and chronic renal failure anymore.
We talk about acute renal injury and chronic renal injury.
And what is very important is that your serum levels of creatinine is not considered that important anymore.
It is your glomerular filtration rate that is really the gold standard.
And individual patients change in levels that is assessed.
If I am admitted to hospital with a serum creatinine of 60 and post-operative, I have a serum creatinine of 80.
That is considered, that would be considered acute renal injury.
It's still within the normal limit.
But there's a formula and I really should try and get hold of it about how, yeah,
it's a graphic increase in the serum creatinine and urine output and GFR that should be considered.
Of course, we all know your renal function, electrolyte disturbance is an important thing to consider here.
I think potassium is probably one of the most important ones.
Hypokalemia leading to muscle weakness.
That definitely influences patients weaning off the ventilator, mobilization, et cetera.
And then hyperkalemia causing this, well, hyperkalemia actually as well, causing cardiac dysrhythmias, et cetera.
Your impaired acid-base balance and then also renal failure associated with coagulopathies and anemia.
Anything else?
Not really.
Okay.
You know, let's see.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
