Fracture of the ulna with the dislocation of the radiocapitular joint.
A line directly through the parallel on the shaft of the radius should always pass through the capitulum of the humerus
as that picture shows, even if it doesn't matter how flexed or extended the arm is,
and the picture next door just shows as it happens, since the ulna is fractured, it just pushes the radial head off it
and that gives the patient a reduced range of motion if it feels like that and end up with a stiff elbow.
So that's not to be missed.
Galehatsi fracture is a fracture of the radius but with dislocation of the radial ulna joint distally at the wrist.
Diagnosis made on X-rays with widening a gap between the ulna and the radius,
as well as with the deformity at the ulna.
They actually can be quite prominent and that's also then for an ARF.
Then the next thing that's commonly seen in casualties is fractures around the hip.
It's usually two mechanisms of injury, either low energy, especially in the elderly,
fall, just a stumble and a foot get caught, or quick rotation, turning motion that can also present with a fracture.
And in younger people it's usually with a high energy incident such as motor vehicle accident or a fall from a height.
The clinical picture are usually unable to bear weight and also reduce rate of motion of the hip.
And the classic position or examination is that you have leg length shortening as well as the leg length is an internal rotation
and any rotation of that leg gives them quite severe pain.
As the picture you compare the two legs, the one is in external rotation so that should be the one is suspected of hip pathology.
Two main fractures that you get between around the hip is the femoral neck fracture, the one on the top,
and the intertrochanteric fracture, the one at the bottom.
The femoral neck is usually either at the surgical neck or lower down before the trochanters,
but intertrochanteric is, this one is quite shattered and quite obvious, is quite lower down.
The reason why the distinction is made, especially for the management, is with the blood supply to the femoral neck.
Most of the blood supply comes through the capsule and along the neck.
So in the femoral neck fractures you have a tendency for the blood supply to be disrupted.
If untreated you get a non-union and if you do get union in later stage you get avascular necrosis
with collapse of the head and earlier osteoarthritis and hip pain from that.
While the intertrochanteric the blood supply is usually intact and we just fixate that with a screw.
So your first line managed would be analgesia, vapors with skin fracture and internal flexation.
The first one, this would be for a femur neck fracture.
With the Mohr's prosthesis you remove the completed femur neck and you replace it with a hemiarthroplasty.
Sometimes in the first world it would go straightly for a hip replacement with the Mohr's or the Thomson's
which is nearly the same prosthesis.
On the other side is what you do for intertrochanteric fracture with a DHS or dynamic hip screw.
You reduce the fracture and the screw can place it just to keep it in line.
Though you do get compression, the screw can move in the plate to give you better fracture healing.
Next one to discuss is ankle fractures.
Mechanical injury is usually rotation of the ankle, enforced supination or pronation.
Clinically to have a look at is tenderness especially over the medium and lateral malleolus.
Unable to bear weight as well as deformity and spin.
Deformity can be quite obvious like the picture at the back or like the one at the top is quite subtle
and there's only swelling that you can notice in the lower limb.
The management is to reduce if it's dislocated or grossly deformed which is actually quite important
because there's not a lot of soft tissue cover around the ankle.
You quickly get skin necrosis and break down on the skin which actually puts your management
if needed to do an operation later quite in jeopardy because the wounds don't heal.
You can break down in sepsis with your plates under lying.
So even if it's not dislocated or grossly deformed, reduction of midazolam or any sedation casualty
actually do help quite a bit with the swelling as well.
And it can be treated in a below knee backslap and for the conserved and off treatments the following.
They do use classification with it still but the main line is you almost always think about the fibula
if you think about any further management and classification.
The first one be a Weber A fracture with a fracture below the syndesmosis.
Now the syndesmosis is the ligament of the joint that connect the tibia with the fibula
and is roughly just below the joint line.
This is a Weber A fracture with a fracture below the syndesmosis and is actually mostly treated
conservatively in a backslap for the first week until the swelling is down and then a cast
or rather in a week to a fracture clinic.
You do have a cast after that for six weeks.
Weber B would actually be the tricky one because some of them are treated conservatively
some of them are for an open induction internal fixation and it's still the fibula and the
syndesmosis that's the main thing.
Weber B fracture is just below at the level of the syndesmosis but the syndesmosis is intact.
The one over here, you can see the syndesmosis would be over here but it's not widened.
The fibula head is displaced and on this side you can see that the medial malleholus is intact
but also displaced.
And you always look at for, decide if it needs an open reduction internal fixation or conservative
management is if this talus is shifted.
So if you have any, a guy on the other side is always going to ask you if this talus shift
with ankle mortis intact and that's what you need to tell him.
To say that the distance between the medial malleholus and the talus is similar to the top,
to the talus and the talus, if I can show you the distance between there and there,
it should be similar to the one at the top.
If it's not, it can be either close, close reduction, could be done, could get good results
with that but usually it goes for internal fixation.
And then you get a Weber C classification and that's when the syndesmosis is disrupted.
The fracture is always above the syndesmosis, like over there, and usually it's with talus
shift as well.
Because this one is not shifted but they're always getting aureth because it's unstable
and the syndesmosis you need to screw across that to keep it fixated so it would give time
to heal.
And the other one is a bimalleholus fracture.
Despite which Weber classification you get with it, the inner end unstable and needs to be seen
by the orthopedic surgeon, they usually get aureth as well.
But there are exceptional cases that you can treat conservatively, mostly because of lack
of time on theatre slates.
And then the Salda Habs...
