Preoperative Risk Assessment
Okay, so I have the honor of discussing preoperative risk assessment with everybody today.
It's one of the intermediate topics for the surgical exams.
But I think it is as important for the surgeons as it is for the anesthetist.
It is a huge topic and I think if we really go in depth you can sit here and talk for weeks about it.
The more I read on the topic the more I realized I initially chased risk index scoring systems etc. etc.
I got a whole bunch of it and then realized that in actual fact what is really important is understanding why surgery and why anesthetics poses a risk to patients.
And why it's important that we really plan and think about it before we do our surgery and our anesthetics.
So I think maybe it would be more useful if this is a discussion rather than me presenting this.
So John and Mebs, please feel free to add on and interject.
Okay, so Jeremy often say nothing heals like steel but also you cut you cry.
We often I think underestimate the insult of surgery and anesthetics to our patient.
And picking the patient is as important as picking the procedure that you're going to do.
You should continuously ask yourself will what I'm planning to do ultimately benefit my patient and improve the outcome.
And I think as surgeons we are very negligent in asking this.
We often leave it to the anesthetist to say to be the light bearer or we often think they worrypots
but actually they're bringing some sense to the table and saying listen is there a way that we can do this better?
How can we optimize the patient?
These are the risks that we need to think about.
This is the complications that we should anticipate.
Why do we need to know about risk?
We must always remember that a patient under anesthetics it is not a therapeutic state.
It poses massive strain on the patient's homeostasis.
Of note always of course is the cardiovascular system and coagulation.
Most anesthetic drugs are cardio-depressant and surgery is a pro-coagulation state.
Okay, so that of course poses risks.
The big question that you have to ask about any patient that you plan to take to surgery,
what is this patient's functional reserve?
Okay, MAPS has this thing that he always talks about.
It's like asking someone before they run a marathon.
Are they going to be able to withstand the insult of anesthetics and surgery?
And it's not just for the time period of the surgery and the anesthetics.
It is the post-operative time that we often underestimate.
All right, so in risk assessment you can really complicate it for yourself or it is actually quite obvious.
We often talk about eyeball test.
Some things you are just not going to operate on.
Okay, it's not, there's nothing, you know, there's no guesswork there.
And there's actually a term for it, it's called clinical distalte.
Mostly what you see really is what you're going to get.
There's various ways how we can divide, you know, look at our risk assessment.
The easiest I think is to divide it systemically.
Okay, cardiovascular, pulmonary, renal, hepatobiliary, endocrine, hematological nutrition,
and your immune status and your age.
What is important is always to look at the patient as a whole because all of these risk factors ultimately influence each other,
you know, one lead to the other, et cetera.
Okay, so risk assessment, how far do you go?
When do you stop?
What, how invasive should you go and when should you act on it?
How can you, how can you optimize your patient?
Start with basics, always start with basics.
Good history, a good physical examination, very specific special investigations.
And it's just what, what Jeremy just said in our meeting as well.
The BMJ, they studied, they published an article 2008 that showed that only 5% of findings on special investigations
cannot be predicted by a good clinical examination.
So nothing beats that.
Okay.
Most special investigations is very center specific.
I think we have a, quite a good protocol that, that should be followed.
If we do like to ask them in two communities or industries that have been taken,
but in two communities, say, one night where really we meet them,
which, like how we met them to take the role of these agencies and how we met them in their noisy community
and what do you see as to learning?
How do you see where you see how your babies got not Schonfall?
How do you say the job to us?
Oh, you know, who do you see how you really present in your protests?
How do you happen to them?
Yeah yeah, no, I do, how do you talk about them?
Anybody else?
That's an annualneaktine book.
Yeah, so whatever.
So this can be smart, you can find it.
