Here we are, we have a better physiology of the renal injury. The reason why I'm dwelling on this is because that's what causes death, or late death, in patients with Bratomarmosis and Crush Syndrome.
So 43% of the patients with Bratomarmosis will develop acute renal failure, and it's an independent risk factor for mortality.
And it actually accounts for up to 70% of all cancers of renal failure in the United States from Bratomarmosis.
It's a large number, it's actually quite surprising for those alcoholic stupas, I presume.
And there are three main mechanisms of injury in the renal, of renal injuries.
First is the decreased renal perfusion based on the shock.
We all know that's what I respected for developing at the end.
And then there's cast formation within the tubules, causing tubular obstruction and extraversation of fortuit.
And then there's a direct toxic effect of myoglobin on the tubules.
I'll get to that now.
So the decreased renal perfusions, inerial hyperbolemia of the syndrome, and then also stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system, and the urinal toxin and agitation axis.
And then some other factors, which is so big investigated really, is that other vasoactive substances that in the presence of myoglobin causes renal vasoconstriction, like endothelin and the platelet activating factor.
And the presence of these, or the action of these substances were driven by basically giving anti-endothelin substances, and that significantly decrease the renal injury in experimental models.
So the cast formation, myoglobin, once it reaches a specific level, it cannot be metabolized by the tubular cells in the kidney anymore, and it starts being exprited in the urine.
And then in the presence of an acidic urine, which is what you'd like to get if you're hyperbolemic and shot in aerobic metabolism, it reacts with something known as the TAM-horseful protein, it precipitates and reforms cast into the tubes for its obstruction, and they postulate that there's extraversation of your pulmonary bone, which damages to the kidneys further.
Then there's a direct toxic effect, and this is quite intense pathophysiology, but it's interesting.
And there's an iron and aene group in the myoglobin molecule, and both of these are responsible for free radical formation in the kidneys itself by redox cycling and oxidation reduction.
I'm not too clear up on that, but that further leads to lipid pro-oxidation of the minimum 2-meter cell membrane, and eventually acuity with endocrosis.
This is attenuated alkaline VH, so again, the acid urine is making this worse.
And they did show that iron chelating agents like this, beroxamine, does protect against renal injury by removing the iron from the e-group that is responsible for the renal damage.
It doesn't project very well, so I don't know if I want to really go through this picture with you, but just briefly, there's the blood vessel,
we get fluid sequestration into the muscle, we get hyperkalemia and hyperphosphatemia out of the muscle cells,
we get hypocalcemia, because calcium is out of the blood into the muscles.
Myoglobin, here's myoglobin, here's the oxidant injury from the ferro-spheric acid cycling, and this all leads to increase,
I don't know what that is, increased rhomboxane, increased neurone effect.
The necrosis factor decreased nitrous oxide, basal constriction.
And then, here's the renal things, there's the cast formation, leading to obstruction, and the direct damage of the myoglobin to the tumulus cells.
So, early diagnosis, again, early diagnosis is crucial.
There will be a suggestive history and thorough physical examinations should be due to the thought that this might be a crushing drug.
Presence of a T-coloured urine or positive dipsticks in the absence of a bug or microscopy.
So, you can, of course, get hematuria and myoglobin urea at the same time, so that's not an absolute rule, but generally.
And then you can do serum CK levels, urea, creatinine, and electrolysis.
This isn't necessarily going to help you die with nose crush syndrome,
but it is invaluable in monitoring the patient's progress and real function.
And if the CK is elevated in these clinical grounds, you have to exclude the myocardial infection.
And then the management, basically, is early aggressive fluid completion.
It's the main self-treatment of the crush syndrome.
It corrects the three main causes of death, which is hyperkalemia, hyperkalemia, and acidosis.
So, clearly, it's first, it's obvious.
And then, in 1982, they did a retrospective study, they compared six patients trapped under buildings,
where fluid therapy was initiated before extrication was completed,
to six patients with similar degree of injuries, five years previously,
where they only started getting fluid at six hours later.
And in the early group, where the fluid therapy was instituted later,
that would have been a clinical failure.
And in the later group, none of them did a clinical failure.
Okay, it's a very small study, but still.
So, but what fluid do you give?
The argument is basically saline versus saline and bicarbonate and manetal.
Why does the evidence say?
Saline and bicarbonate creates an alkaline urine,
so there's decreased cost formation,
because we said that myoglobin reacts in the acidic environment to form costs.
There's also a lessening of the direct toxic effects of the myoglobin.
It's been shown to be attenuated at an alkaline pH.
And it may also ameliorate acidosis in the hypokalemia,
which is independent causes of mortality, with the crush syndrome.
But it could also decrease the ionized calcium even further,
by proceeding with it, or binding with it.
Just actually be careful of that.
Manetal causes an osmolar diuresis,
with the theoretical benefit of washing out the renal tubules.
It's also a volume expander initially.
It decreases intercompartimental pressures,
worth by its osmotic effect,
basically sucking fluid out of the edematous muscles.
It's quite a potent free radical scavenger,
but it does cause a mycroosmolar state,
so you need to take your electrolyte in osmolarity quite regularly.
In summary, there's a study in 2004,
comparing saline versus bicarbonate and melatonin.
There's no difference in any outcome.
So I don't think we use it anymore.
There's some theoretical benefit to it,
but it's not really being used.
There's also some experimental therapies,
like fully radical scavengers and antioxidants.
We mentioned this pre-oxamine,
which decreases the harmful effect of the ion on the renal tubules.
Your plant-ed-activating effect,
your receptor inhibitors.
Don't really throw some guy down.
Some other should actually take off yet.
It's not a therapy professional.
