Hi, good morning everyone. I am talking about a fairly broad subject this morning.
Severe soft tissue injuries. And just for the sake of the presentation, it's broadly divided into compartment syndrome,
and then the whole question about pneumolysis and the kidney injury conflicts that you get.
So we'll start off with compartment syndrome, which is not as common as one would think, or as one is less believe.
The incidence, I don't have it on here, but there's about 7.3 per 100,000 in males,
and even less, significantly less in females, less than 1 per 100,000 incidence in the society.
Well, this is American data, so it might be more here, but again, it's not particularly common.
Now, compartment syndrome is often defined as a syndrome occurring when the intercompartmental pressures
within a myofascial compartment rises to such a degree that the capillary perfusion increases to a level
where it's not able to meet the metabolic demand of the tissues anymore, thus leading to cellular anoxia,
muscle ischemia, and death.
Okay.
Now, the etiology is varied and quite a few, but broadly, again, traumatic.
It can be from fracture, from crush injuries without fractures, vascular injury and reperfusion syndrome,
and burns.
And the non-traumatic could be acute insurgent states, snake bites, extrapsation of intravenous fluids,
bleeding, secondary to ganglilopathy, and limb traction in a lithotomy position,
which is not something I'm sure you don't see that often, but maybe in prolonged gynecological procedures.
And it's also quite well described in fixation of feral fractures, where the well leg is abducted
and flexed within that lithotomy position as they can to get a compartment syndrome in the leg.
And there are also certain predisposing factors.
Like, some people will suffer a fracture of the tibia in the ankle compartment syndrome.
Other people will suffer the same degree of injury and they will.
And so on, the predisposing factors is pre-existing hypovolemia.
Ischemic insult prior to swelling is actually quite important.
We'll get back to that later.
And then, if there's increased metabolic demands, for instance, sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome
or any of such systemic conditions.
Also, venous insufficiency and, interestingly, peripheral nerve locating, spinal epidural anesthesia.
There's a four times higher incidence of the development of compartment syndrome post-operatively in these patients.
This is for various reasons, but one being the sympathectomy following these procedures,
causing waste inhalation and increased blood flow.
And then, your inability to notice that there's increased pain,
which is the most sensitive sign of compartment syndrome development.
So, what is the pathophagiology leading to compartment syndrome?
Here, with following injury of your tissue swelling, this leads to increased tissue pressure within the compartment.
Now, your tissue pressure and your venous pressure are directly related
because venous venules do not have any spinal muscle in their wall,
so they're directly related to the intercompartmental pressure.
You get this increased venous pressure leading to a decrease in your arteriovenous gradient
and hence a decrease in capillary flow.
And then, as I said, that earlier compartment syndrome ensues when the blood flow can along the intermetabolic demands.
of the tissues.
So, from this statement, it is clear that the important variables in the development of compartment syndrome
is firstly your vascular tone, your blood pressure, the duration of the pressure elevation,
and the metabolic demands of the tissues.
Okay.
There is no ultimate pressure value at which compartment syndrome occurs.
There's no between 40 and 60 millimeters, nothing like that.
Okay.
We, you have to look at the differential or the perfusion pressure in this specific compartment.
And numerous studies, that I'm not going to quote each individual, has researched this.
And from their results, we now have the numbers of, if the intercompartmental pressure in the compartment is less than
than 30 millimeters of mercury from the mean arterial pressure or less than 20 millimeters of mercury from the diastolic pressure.
That is a critical pressure difference at which ischemic changes starts in the tissues and the development of compartment syndrome.
And then, it's just important to note that post-ischemic tissues, in the sense that you have an ischemic insult for instance
of vascular occlusion or something similar, CRUSH syndrome.
And then, subsequent to that, your lymph node swells, you develop compartment syndrome.
Your tissues are most sensitive to developing the histological changes associated with compartment syndrome.
So, the critical perfusion pressure of 14 millimeters is used.
And, with perfusion pressure, they do mean the difference between the intercompartmental pressure and the mean arterial pressure.
Excuse me. So, how much time do you have?
This is actually a very difficult question, because compartment syndrome isn't something that occurs,
or starts occurring the moment that the fracture occurs, or the crash injury occurs.
It's an evolving entity, and sometimes it can only present 12 to 24 hours after the original injury,
now the intercompartmental pressure starts to rise.
So, it's often difficult to say how long it's been there for.
Which makes this whole argument a little bit pointless.
But, anyway, muscles can tolerate a warm ischemia for up to two hours.
This is also why we use, in our orthopedic surgery, to encase for two hours no longer.
It remains electrically responsive four hours after the onset of ischemia.
And, there's only irreversible ischemic changes and frank necrosis of the muscle cells after eight hours of continued ischemia.
The nerves, it's got a similar picture, your peripheral nerve, will continue conducting impulses for an hour after the onset of ischemia.
Reversible on neuropraxia after four hours, and then an irreversible absolute amnesis after eight hours of continued ischemia.
So, you can use that as a rough guide.
Again, we'll get back to that later.
So, how do you diagnose compartmental syndrome?
The most important thing is you must have a high index of suspicion.
You must know which patients are prone to develop compartmental syndrome.
And, just be aware of it while you do them a little bit more closely than you would somebody with no likelihood of the better compartmental syndrome.
So, also in a retrospective study, they showed that the, by far the most common cause of compartmental syndrome being fractured.
Accounting for 67% of all compartmental syndromes.
And, of that, you're close to real fractures.
Being, by far the most common, followed by distal radius fractures.
So, those were the two most important injuries to be aware of.
Then, the second most common cause was a crush injury.
It's like a subversive tissue of an owl fracture.
And, there was a dramatic increase in the incidence of compartmental syndrome in patients
with bleeding physical illness or on offer it.
Or any other form of anticoagulation.
They just need more.
Okay.
And, then the six Ps.
We can stop on, sort of dwell on each of these Ps for a while, I think.
Pain is, by far, the most sensitive one of the six Ps.
It's a subcynocompartmental syndrome.
And, it's not just any pain.
There will be pain.
There's a fracture of Russian syndrome.
There will be pain.
But, it's a pain of proportion to the injury.
Pain on passive stretch.
It's just the most sensitive one.
Then, pressure.
This is clinical and not very quantifiable.
But, we're looking at a dense, stored limb.
Your muscle compartments are supple.
It's highly unlikely that we're going to have compartmental syndrome.
Pulselessness is an extremely late sign.
When your limb is pulseless, you basically must have both.
It's not going to occur acutely.
Unless, of course, there's a basculary injury.
So, we need to exclude that.
Keep in mind.
Same with paralysis and paresthesia.
Very late signs.
And, could also be due to the actual nerve injury.
That's completely unrelated to the hypothesis.
You just need to check that in parallel.
Again, very late signs.
So, it's not...
I think of all the six Ps,
the only two that are actually clinically relevant,
is pain and pressure.
Others, we've missed the blood.
It's 218.
One is for regard to parts of the body.
The only one that came from recall,
is reverent to push to the body.
See the pain ofƠ'm strong?
It's also fifty suicidars.
Even if you are healthy,
you know after building the body,
this denominator depends on where infected,
we've begged one the slit.
