So all the fluid, where does it all go? No matter what the cause, massive fluid
research leads to bowel edema. So this also affects all organ systems in the
body. So in the patient that's critically ill with leaky capillaries, massive fluid
recess, your bowel distents, increasing your intra-abinal pressure, this elevated
pressure then presses on your inferior vena cava, vena cava compression reduces
your preload, also splits your diaphragm, increasing thoracic pressure, decreasing
cardiac filling, decreasing cardiac output and subsequent multi-organ failure. And
then this just continues and you've got a vicious cycle that ensues. So
respiratory changes, the increase in abdominal pressure causes diaphragm
elevation, increasing your intra-thoracic pressure, decreasing thoracic volume and
compliance, your total lung capacity and functional residual capacity is reduced, as
a result of which you're predisposed to eight delectasis, pneumonia and respiratory
failure. These patients then subsequently develop the ventilation perfusion mismatch
with hypoventilation, hypoxemia, hypocarbine acidosis, all which do not respond to
ventilatory efforts. And these patients require high airway pressures for ventilation.
Cardiovascular changes, so first the decrease in the preload, direct compression of your IVC and portal vein
and obviously leads to decreased IVC flow. The increase in intrathoracic pressure decreases your superior
vena cava flow, decreasing your preload. Because of decreased cardiac output and the direct arterial compression
is in the abdomen, your afterload is increased. Cardiac output is reduced because of direct cardiac compression
and decreased cardiac compliance. Patients have a tachycardia but the blood pressure seems to remain stable.
So the common features are that the heart rate increases, the CBP is falsely high, cardiac output is reduced
and stroke volume is reduced to all organs. Renal complications, again, just simply direct compression of the aorta,
the renal artery coupled with decreased cardiac output progresses to a pre-renal impairment. Compression of your renal vein
increases your renal vascular resistance. You have decreased renal blood flow, decreased GFR, oliguria and anuria.
And this is aggravated by aldosterone and ADH which further cause certain water retention with increased renal vascular resistance.
GIT related, again, arterial compression and venous outflow obstruction are your main causes here.
You've got decreased perfusion to the stomach and other organs, decreased intestinal mucosal perfusion,
decreased bowel mortality, all leading to bacterial translocation causing sepsis and multi-organ failure.
And they found that intra-mucosal pH measurements in the stomach is an early indicator of severe ischemia
and the need for decompression. And as your intra-abdominal pressure increases, your blood flow decreases quite significantly.
Intracranal effects, well, as the intra-abdominal pressure increases, you've got increase in the intrathoracic pressure,
decreased cerebral venous outflow, cerebral venous engorgement and an increased intracranal pressure
with a subsequent decrease in your cerebral perfusion pressure.
The decreased cardiac output further aggravates this.
How common is it? This is also just adapted from the World Society website.
And in severe sepsis, the incidence of hypertension is between 41 and 85 percent,
major abdominal surgery up to 45 percent, major burns anywhere from 22 to 100 percent,
trauma and pancreatitis as well.
So the commonly occurring derangement that we see is the abdominal distention,
tense abdominal wall, increased respiratory rate but shallow breathing,
the metabolic acidosis that doesn't respond to adequate fluid recess,
the oliguria despite volume repletion, hypoxemia that is refractory to oxygenation and PEEP,
and the hypocarbia refractory to hyperventilation.
Peak airway pressures and intracranial hypertension are all commonly seen in these patients that you find in ICU.
So the diagnosis, the World Society of Abdominal Compartment Syndrome has published algorithms,
which are on there, and this is what most ICUs use.
So any patient that enters ICU or has new features of organ dysfunction gets screened for risk factors.
So the first thing when making the diagnosis is you need to be aware that it exists, okay,
all critically ill, shocked, septic or trauma patients are at risk.
You need to have a high index of suspicion and a low threshold for monitoring intra-abdominal pressure.
So the current recommendation is that all patients that enter ICU or have features of organ dysfunction
must be screened for risk factors.
And the risk factors are listed over there, and that is the decreased abdominal wall compliance,
increase in intraluminal contents, increase in abdominal contents, and capillary leak.
And under all of those headings, basically, are your common causes.
So it's grouped quite easily, and it's easy to screen patients when they enter.
So the assessment algorithm, we can go through that quickly.
Like we said, when the patient enters ICU, a new admission, or there's evidence of clinical deterioration,
you've screened for all the risk factors, what should you do?
So intra-abdominal pressure is measured at the baseline, and there's certain criteria
and a standardized way in which you should measure it.
First of all, bladder pressure is what is used, and we'll get to that next.
And it's expressed in millimeters mercury, measured at the end of expiration,
performed in the supine position, and so on.
So if a patient has sustained elevation in the intra-abdominal pressure,
according to the consensus definition, that patient then has intra-abdominal hypertension,
and then we'll follow the management protocol.
So measurement, firstly, the sensitivity of physical exam is very low.
It can be measured either directly or indirectly,
and the measurements reflect intra-abdominal volume and the abdominal wall compliance.
And this is variable depending on, obviously, if the patient is being ventilated,
the position of the patient, BMI, et cetera.
Grated according to grades one to four, based on what you find.
Measurement, so the indirect measurement urinary bladder pressure is the gold standard,
and there are several devices in ICU that can measure this,
but even if you don't have any of the fancy equipment, it's quite easy to do,
just by putting in a catheter, connecting a CVP, and measuring sort of the height of the urine,
and then that can be converted to millimetres mercury.
So and here we are.
