So, urinary bladder pressure monitoring is the gold standard.
This is what everyone uses. It was first described in 1984.
The bladder is extraperitoneal and intra-abdominal.
And any changes in intraperitoneal pressure is reflected by parallel changes in the bladder.
And measuring it has to be done according to the standardized method,
which is the patient needs to be obviously horizontal, the bladder must be emptied,
25 moles is inserted, catheter is clamped and you connect to the transducer.
And it's important to zero it and that's how you adequately and accurately measure it.
It's unreliable in the following situations.
If there's a small neurogenic bladder, patient has intraperitoneal adhesions,
pregnant patients, gastric distension, hematomas or bladder trauma.
And the intramucosal pH combined with bladder pressure monitoring is the most sensitive indicator
for early intra-abdominal hypertension before your cardiovascular or renal dysfunction starts to set in,
which is quite late.
Other measurements include gastric pressure, IVC pressure and transrectal pressure.
Gastric can be measured either with a nasogastric tube.
The correlation that says acceptable, but there's a big discrepancy with very high pressures.
IVC pressure, a federal vein catheter measures it as invasive, correlates well with bladder pressure.
And transrectal can also be used but it's not that common.
Directly, obviously this includes inserting a needle into the abdominal cavity and measuring it directly,
but this is invasive so it's not really practiced.
So, quickly looking at the management, four general principles.
Firstly, serial monitoring is important.
You need to optimize systemic perfusion and organ function, institute all medical procedures,
and if they fail or there's refractory intra-abdominal hypertension,
early surgical decompression has better outcome.
So the critical pressure that causes end organ dysfunction varies from patient to patient.
And abdominal perfusion pressure is actually a better indicator of the severity of intra-abdominal pressure
as it measures the relative adequacy of abdominal blood flow.
And that's measured by a mean arterial pressure minus intra-abdominal pressure.
It is superior to intra-abdominal pressure, pH, lactate, base deficit and urine output.
And an adequate abdominal perfusion pressure is anything between 50 and 60,
and this should be your recess end point.
Inability to maintain it indicates the need for decompression.
So, medical options employed to reduce intra-abdominal pressure early.
Abdominal wall compliance is the one element.
So, sedation, analgesia, neuromuscular blockers, all of these things decrease abdominal wall tone,
increase in your compliance, and it is recommended current practice.
Body positioning.
In ICU patients are always managed head up to decrease the risk of aspiration ammonia.
But any elevation above 20 degrees increases intra-abdominal pressure.
So you need to weigh up the benefits and risks of putting the patient head up or keeping them supine.
Evacuating intra-abdominal contents.
Again, nasogastic tube and rectal tube is beneficial.
And all your patients, no matter the cause, whether this trauma, peritonitis, surgery, fluids,
or electrolyte abnormalities, can progress an anus.
This distends your bowel, increasing the pressure.
And nasogastic tubes are recommended.
Prokinetic agents are also available and they can be used.
For abdominal fluid collections, whether it's fluid, abscess or blood,
CT or ultrasound-guided percutaneous decompression is useful.
Correcting fluid balance and particularly a positive fluid balance.
So, fluid-directed, goal-directed fluid recess is important.
Preventing, sort of, excess fluid.
Achieving adequate intra-vascular volume to maintain your perfusion pressures of about 60.
And in humanodalically stable patients, diuretics can be used.
Organ support.
Again, just maintaining your intra-vascular volume and maintaining perfusion pressures of about 60.
So this slide is quite a bit, but I think it's on one of those.
This is what they use in the management algorithm.
If the patient's got hypertension and you've already started all your medical treatment options,
but pressure is persistently elevated and there's organ failure,
that patient has now got abdominal compartment syndrome.
If all your medical treatment options fail, you need to progress to decompressive laparotomy.
And so, from there, it's important to continue monitoring intra-abdominal pressure, continue with your other medical treatments as this patient may still develop a recurrent abdominal compartment syndrome.
And this is usually what you would follow.
Surgical intervention.
Abdominal decompression.
So the timing is important.
Anyone that has intra-abdominal hypertension that is refracted to all the medical treatment options and they've now developed organ dysfunction needs decompression.
Temporary abdominal closure, either with a backpack or the Bugatta bag.
And even these patients may subsequently develop recurrent ACS and then you need to go back, take them back, remove the temporary closure and reapply.
Leaving the abdomen open at the time of laparotomy also shows improved patient outcome if these patients have risk factors for hypertension.
And then definitive closure, either early or late.
Patients that make an early recovery can have fascial closure within five to seven days.
Those who have delayed or prolonged course and have abdominal muscle retraction, SSG and the delayed reconstruction is the second option.
So in summary, it's very common in critically ill patients.
It cannot be clinically detected.
The outcome is time dependent.
Delayed detection and intervention results in high mobility and mortality.
And aggressive monitoring and intervention leads to better outcomes.
So finally, do not wait for any of the signs to develop before you decide to check the pressures.
Monitor all high-risk patients early and often.
And intervene early before your critical pressure develops.
And that is from the World Society.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
So if you start reading from the World Society,
If anyone is speaking to tells you about how you do that,
some of your promoting your life,
any of your social justice,
whatever it has been,
you may hear an awareness,
havingоло framers,
having apo也是,
ligtensaly,
any of some disorders,
how we're all in our choices,
from aiding locations,
all the medicalonomian biofeed,
and we're all aware
