Thank you.
Again, risk stratification and endocrine disorders, the most important one is diabetes.
What is important is to note that hyperglycemic episodes, even in non-diabetic patients, correlates with an adverse outcome after surgery.
If you look at it, we all know about a high infection rate in diabetics, compromised wound healing, ischemic complications, longer hospital stay,
frequent undiagnosed atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, and then also potential increased thrombotic sequelae.
I don't know if it's really, but hyperglycemia in the previously well-patient is a well-known surgical stress response
that has definitely been shown to be associated with prolonged ICU stay and prolonged morbidity and mortality.
Control of diabetes mellitus, there's debate about how tight the control should be preoperatively and postoperatively even in ICU.
I think, in general, patients on oral agents, the oral agents are stopped, patients are put on a sliding scale.
I don't know if the patients are put on a sliding scale.
It's done here for ease of nursing care.
I think it's the general consensus for managing all of those.
Yes, but patients on insulin therapy definitely need to be on a sliding scale.
In where you have better staff training, actually what is advised is insulin infusions,
but it's very, very hard to manage, and you really can only do it with well-trained staff.
Okay.
And then I mentioned it earlier, it's just to consider your hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis.
It's a critical illness.
This is where steroid therapy comes in.
Really, the Surviving Sepsis Campaign brought this to the foreground,
and they currently advise hydrocortisone 200 mg to 300 mg per day in four divided doses over seven days
to improve your response to cataclyle amends.
I don't know, is there anything else that we need to add here?
It's not something really that you can assess prior to surgery as a risk factor.
It's just something to always keep in mind postoperatively as a risk factor.
Then hematology, there's a whole lot that you can talk about from clotting disorders
and all sorts of funky stuff, but the big two is anemia and coagulation status.
The big thing about anemia is you have to treat the cause because you want to limit transfusion.
Why is anemia important?
It's all about physiological reserve, basically your oxygen-carrying capacity of your patient.
What you want to do is you want to have a sustained oxygen flux.
If a patient can compensate and maintain oxygen flux, a transfusion is not necessarily necessary.
It is when your patient cannot compensate that you need to think about transfusion.
This has been, I think it was the TRIC trial.
Was it a TRIC trial that showed that a patient, a normal stable patient with an HP less than seven
should be transfused, but up until seven does not necessarily benefit from transfusion.
Between seven and ten, HP of seven and ten is really the gray area,
and this is where the patient that cannot compensate is important.
So a patient with known cardiovascular disease, limited cardiac output, they will need transfusion.
And then a patient with an HP higher than 10, definitely no transfusion needed.
Just remember, with transfusion, there is risk.
It's the known risk that, you know, allergic reactions, fluid overload, et cetera,
but there's also been a recent trial published in the BMJ
that there's an associated increased bacterial infection.
With patients that have been transfused, especially in trauma surgery,
I have no idea what the pathophysiology of it is,
but a definite increased risk to postoperative infection.
Okay.
