When do we supplement our patients?
Firstly, pre-optimization, and this is not so applicable in our system because we don't really have these kinds of patients.
But you would start 10 days to 2 weeks before your operation, and this would normally be something for, let's say, a colon CA.
If you've got a malnourished patient who comes in and they need a big colectomy,
you would try and optimize these patients before they come to theatre so that they are not malnourished when they arrive at the table.
And then, I think it's just important, the gist of this talk is actually about more invasive ways of supplementing your patients,
so through tubes and through lines, and these things carry complications.
So you don't start these, you know, just for fun in an otherwise healthy patient.
You need to look at whether or not your benefits outweigh the risks.
So whether or not your risk of complications is actually greater than the risks that the acute malnutrition injury poses to the patient.
And then how to supplement your patients?
And there's a lot of talk these days about feeding the gut versus feeding the pain.
So that's either enteral versus parental nutrition.
And it looks increasingly like enteral feeding is first prize.
It's the most physiological and it seems to give the best outcomes.
But they're not mutually exclusive.
If you can't meet your caloric needs through enteral nutrition, you can supplement with this with parental nutrition.
So who should get a tube feed?
And this is any patient with pro-oral intake.
So any patient who is getting less than 60% of their daily caloric requirement and cannot feed well.
And there are many reasons that they cannot feed well.
Many patients are just too weak to be able to eat all the meals that they want them to.
Major full thickness burns.
They will need a tube feed.
Anybody with swallowing problems, so a head injury or a stroke.
And then low output intra-cutaneous fistula.
There is evidence that shows that the way you manipulate your tube feed can hasten the time to closure.
And then when you're thinking about tube feeding, the tube can go in several places.
And you just need to think about your digestive system.
Because different parts of the upper GIT have different roles.
Firstly, the esophagus is in the rear system.
The stomach, and this is very simplified, obviously they have more complex roles as well.
But just for our purposes, the stomach corrects osmolality.
So what happens is you eat with a big hypotonic bolus, which your gut is actually not well-equipped to deal with.
The stomach secrete something that becomes more isoismolar before excreting it into the jejunum.
The jejunum digests proteins and simple sugars.
And as the food moves down your GI tract, it becomes more and more digested by various enzymatic images.
And your more complex carbohydrates and proteins become digested so that they can be absorbed.
And the terminal ion is of interest in that B12 is absorbed there.
And that's important in developing different issues in there.
So, how do you decide if somebody should have a tube feed?
And what kind of tube feed they should get?
So, when I read, because many of our patients, for example, take the example of severe appendicitis.
These people often have a severe post-opilius.
And when are you going to say, we have to feed this person now even though their gut is not
ready?
And it would seem that you can wait five to seven days in a patient who is not previously
well-nourished.
But if you think a patient now does need to be feed and they're unable to take orally,
there's short-term goals and then there's long-term.
So, any patient who you think is going to need a tube feed for less than six weeks can
have a nasogastric or a naso-jejunation tube.
If you think they'll need it for more than six weeks, you can start putting various stomas
in and you can put it in the very, very proximal GRT in the pharynx, the esophagus or the stomach.
I have not really seen many judenostomies and people often do feeding jejunostomies.
I'm not going to go into detail about the various methods for putting these in, but it's important
to be aware that they all carry complications.
And the complications can be quite severe, including perforation of organs you were planning
on perforating, strictures, necrosis of your stomach wall.
You can get that from a gastrostomy tube that has got too much tension on it.
I just wanted to talk about the complications of nasogastric and naso-jejunation tube.
Because it's something that we use quite a lot and does actually carry high risk.
Firstly, you get mechanical complications.
So they can get, we all know about the pressure necrosis on the nasal ola, but they can also
get noquatic sequelae in their esophagus or their stomach.
They can get strictures.
The tube can block so that the person, and this can go, especially in our city, this can
go unnoticed, the person will miss their feet.
As soon as you pass a tube through that OG junction, you render it useless.
So your patients have an aspiration risk.
And then there's also metabolic sequelae, and this is of all nutritional support.
The malnourished patient who suddenly gets a lot of calories is at risk of refeeding syndrome,
which is almost a compensatory mechanism in a person who's been chronically malnourished.
They tend to get glycemic abnormalities, so they've got swinging blood glucose.
And then they get micronutrient and electrolyte abnormalities, acid-based disturbances, hypercalcemia,
hypermagnesemia, and you need to watch for that quite carefully.
And be very generous with your supplementation.
So yeah, how do you do enteral feeding?
You choose your appropriate feeding site, and we discussed that,
and you decide how long your patient is going to need this particular feed for.
And the higher up in the GIT you can deliver the food, the better,
because the more physiological it becomes.
And then you start early, you start low, and go slow.
The evidence now shows that, you know, in the old days we used to rest the gut
for quite a long time after major procedures.
But it now looks like you can feed the patient as early as 24 hours post-op,
unless there's complete gut failure.
On your sort of gastrostomy, you want to start at a small volume,
so you start at 10 mls per hour, and you go up every 24 hours
until you're happy that your patient is tolerating, not refluxing,
doesn't develop diarrhea or hyperglycemia.
And then you must be very aggressive and watching for complications.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Great.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Transcription by CastingWords
