So, I'm not going to dwell on this very long. The etiology of an epidemiologist is even more varied than compartment syndrome. It can be caused by virtually anything.
The traumatic one is your blood injury, vascular interruption, shock burns, drowning, and also prolonged immobilization.
It's interesting, in America, the highest or the most common cause of rhabdomolysis is alcoholic stupor.
Who knew? Excessive muscular activity, exercise, seizure, and asthmaticus are quite common causes of rhabdomolysis.
Toxin-mediated, many pharmaceutical agents, things we commonly use, like statins and some of the muscular,
or the peridetic agents that they need to use, so what we call that, and then under herbs, venomous problem, and oxide.
Hypro-hypothermia, some metabolic derangeants, numerous viral bacterial bacterial infections,
that all lead to rhabdomolysis. And then also, as one of the connective tissue disorders,
probably myositis, dermatomyositis, and then other myopathies, and sickle cell anemia,
so it's a big discovery to both of you. So, I did mention this in the earlier part of the talk,
but skinful muscles get from a radioskemia for up to two hours, and then afterwards, we start seeing,
first reversible and then irreversible changes, and the maximal change occurring after 24 hours.
Now, this is a, in understanding rhabdomolysis, and why does the muscle cell break down,
there's actually numerous factors contributing to this phenomenon.
So, but it's quite involved, so just bear with me.
And within the normal muscle cell, there's a very critical relationship between your sodium-potassium,
and your, um, your intracellular sodium, and your intracellular calcium.
But there's an active pump that pumps out sodium out of the cell.
This creates a concentration gradient for sodium to now come back into the cell,
and this, via a separate ion channel, leads to extrication of calcium out of the cell again,
with the net result being a low intracellular calcium in the muscle cell.
Now, if you have a capable compression of the cell, of the muscles as you have during clutch injury,
the stretch-activated channels open with an influx of sodium and calcium into the cell,
thereby increasing your intracellular calcium and leading to cell swelling.
This intracellular calcium that's now higher leads to several pathological processes.
You'll get activation of your proteases, which destroys proteins,
and you'll get activation of calcium-dependent phosphorylases,
which breaks down your lipid membranes.
Activation of nucleases, which breaks down your nucleic acids,
and then, um, also diminution upon your ATP production.
Now, so that's one part of the pathophysiology.
Then, prolonged ischemia leads to anaerobic respiration,
which further decreases the function of your sodium potassium ATPase,
which leads to a further increase in intracellular calcium,
because of that whole process I explained earlier.
Now, you get more increased calcium,
and again, more of all the previous mentioned pathological processes.
And then, thirdly, there's a high concentration of neutrophil chemoattractants
in post-ischemic tissues.
It's just, um, normal with quality response or trauma.
And once the reperfusion is instituted,
a high concentration of activated neutrophils gathered in the cells,
and that was further damaged by releasing proteolytic enzymes,
release of oxygen-free radicals.
And then, also, large amounts of hypochlorous acid,
and increasing the microvascular resistance,
leading to further ischemia, it's like a vicious circle.
So, the free radicals cause lipid for oxidation,
further cell membrane damage, swelling,
more ischemia, more cell lysis,
and then, with the eventual release of all the intracellular contents,
plus the ventrophils, plus the breakdown products into the circulation.
And this is just a table to illustrate what I just said.
So, you get the compression, you need to stretch calcium influx,
also ischemia, decreased ATP, arrest,
cellular respiration, inhibition of the sodium potassium ATPase,
and all this leads to activation of these harmful substances.
And then ischemia, also leads to neutrophils,
and, you know, gathering there, increasing the concentration,
increasing the microvascular resistance, vicious circle.
So, what is crush syndrome?
It's the systemic manifestations of rhabdomyolysis
caused by hyperbolemia, firstly, and then toxin exposure.
Um, hyperbolemic shock is often the first minute manifestation of the crush syndrome.
Why do you get the hyperbolemic shock?
Because of the massive sequestration of fluid in their affected limb.
Yeah, it's just interesting to note, again, one of the articles that I read,
they did a study in rabbits,
where, um, they would induce ischemia in the limb by applying to a tonicase.
And then after several hours, they would release the, um, the, the tonicase now to cause the crush syndrome.
And prior to releasing the tonicase, the, um, the rabbits were happy,
and normal bulimic, and metabolically intact.
And then as soon as the tonicase was released, they all developed human concentration,
hyperbolemic shock.
And, in fact, if they did that with two limbs, they would die of hyperbolemic shock.
So, it's, it's, it's quite a massive amount of fluid that can sequestrate in the limb.
It's important.
And, um, yeah, in the study in 1997, in Corbeck, they showed that, that is actually the most common cause of death
in the first four days of the crush injury.
It's just hyperbolemic shock.
Then the metabolic derangements following the refusion is numerous.
Firstly, there's hypercalcemia.
Like we just described, there's a massive influx of calcium into the damaged cells.
And now you get systemic hypercalcemia.
There's hyperkalemia, because of release of the interest of potassium.
Acidemia, secondary to anaerobic metabolism.
And then hyperphosphatemia, again released from the cells.
And the hyperphosphatemia and the hypocalcemia actually further acts to exacerbate each other
because hyperphosphatemia decreases alpha-hydroxylase.
So you get decreased production of vitamin D.
So further worsens your hypocalcemia.
Plus it precipitates.
In the tissues causing metastatic calcification, further decreasing your hypocalcemia.
And then they also said here that hyperkalemic cardiotoxicity is the second most common cause of early death following your crush injury.
So this is what I just mentioned.
So hyperphosphatemia worsens the hypocalcemia.
And other derangements is you get elevated tissue thromboplastin.
This is just from damage to the endothelium in the cells.
And we do DIC and platelet consumption.
And then myoglobin demoeia, which causes such an emergency restrict to the kidney.
Which we'll get to that now.
