I'm going to do a quick talk on the nutritional support of the surgical patient this morning.
Once again, it's quite a broad topic that can't comprehensively be covered in the time that we
have. So I'm just going to sort of try and highlight the saline points by answering a
few questions about it. I'm just going to say right off that I'm not going to go into detail
regarding the composition of various nutritional supplements and TPNs that we have. You can
go and read that and it's quite a broad and extensive topic as well. So getting surgical
patients, why do we do that? And that is because the malnourished patient presents many problems
to the surgeon. They have increased morbidity, they have a longer hospital stay, they take
longer to get better, they die easier, they tend to be readmitted more often and they also
tend to cost the system more. Then according to the World Health Organization, malnutrition
is the cellular imbalance between supply of nutrients and energy and the body's demand
for them to ensure growth, maintenance and specific functions. And I think what's important
about this definition is that this is not only thin people, you can get a cellular imbalance
in extremely obese people as well, even overweight people as well. So just a little bit about nutrients,
this is very sort of basic knowledge. You've got macronutrients and micronutrients. Macronutrients
are your carbohydrates, your lipids and your proteins. The bulk of our caloric intake in a day
should come from carbohydrates and then lipids. And then we need protein intake as well for
synthesis of various tissues. Deficiency in your macronutrients gives you your malnutrition disorders.
In more modern literature, it's referred to PM, which is protein energy malnutrition,
and that's either with or without edema. But classically, we used to refer to merasmus,
which was your very thin, bultongish-looking patient. And kwashi loko, which was your very puffy,
edematous, leaking patient. Then you can also have a deficiency in micronutrients, which are
vitamins, minerals and trace elements. And here, deficiencies may be present in otherwise well-nurried
individuals. So this, and that kind of, many of our overweight patients fall into that category,
where they have very high caloric intake, but 95% of what they eat is actually processed corn.
So they aren't really getting any vitamins or trace elements in. And they have malnourishment on a
biochemical level. So our goals of surgical nutrition. It used to be in the olden days just
to keep your patient's lean body mass stable. But what we know now is that acute malnutrition,
even chronic malnutrition, it creates a hypermetabolic response, which leads to all of those
negative sequelae we spoke about in the first slide. So what we try to do by maintaining nutrition
is to attenuate this response, to reverse the loss of lean body mass. You don't want your inpatient
to actually lose weight. We want to prevent all those inflammatory responses from oxidant stress.
We want to modulate the immune response. Glycemic control is important. And then we just want to,
you know, administer the appropriate nutrients for health. So identifying a malnourished patient.
Firstly, we go clinically. So any patient who's got, has more than, has had more than 10%
of weight loss without actually trying. And in this setting, I think this is quite difficult,
because most of our patients don't really know what they weighed before. And patients I found will often
tell you that they've lost weight when their clothes still fit. So you can ask patients about the size
of their clothes. Is their belt looser? And then the typical things. Is your patient correct
that they have temporal wasting? Does he have skin changes? And this is very typical in your sort of,
when you think about this, you can think about your kwashi babies, who've got sort of
breaking skin lesions, thinning hair, angular stomatitis, eye infections,
fungal mashes and the skin creases. And then a malnourished patient, there's also any patient
that has a disease influencing the intake, like esophageal CA. And then any patient with a catabolic
ongoing process. So even a severe appendicitis, any massive inflammatory process like that puts you
into a catabolic state and puts you at risk of becoming malnourished. Then there are other more
technical ways that we can decide whether or not our patient is malnourished. We can measure them.
The body mass index was traditionally used. The validity of that is coming into question because
it's a very simple measurement that is actually not universally applicable to your patients. So you
can measure your mid-arm muscle circumference, you can measure your triceps skin folds, and you can do
hand grip dinometry, which measures muscle function. You can do some biochemistry. You can look at
albumin. Albumin is not a very good predictor of current nutritional status because it's got a long
half-life of 20 days. So even if your albumin is fine now, you may have had an incel 20 days ago.
But it is a good predictor of morbidity and mortality.
We also have started to look at micronutrients like prealbumin, which is transthyretin and transferrin.
These have a more acute change in acute malnutrition, but it's also important to remember that they're
negative acute vasoreactants. So any patient with a disease process or an inflammatory response will
drop those as well quite quickly. Then I'm not even going to go into immunological markers and
dynamic nutritional assessment. Body composite analysis is usually only used in research situations
where they're MRIU or CTU, and look at whether or not you're malnourished. And then there are a couple
of scoring systems like the prognostic nutritional index, nutritional risk index, nutritional risk screening,
and subjective global assessment. If you guys would like to look at those scores, I have them.
But they take into account various things like the anthropometry, the BMI, the albumin,
the skin folds, and you can score your patient according to this. But I think what Jeremy would
say is the eyeball test. You know, take a look at your patients. We all know what a malnourished patient
looks like, and just think about it a bit when you look at your patients. And even patients who do not
have HIV can be malnourished. Malnourishment does not always equal HIV, and that's important for us.
Then who becomes malnourished? Like I said, certain disease states, pancreatitis, oh sorry,
who are we going to supplement? Certain disease states require nutritional supplements. Pancreatitis,
not so much the mild pancreatitis, but the acute severe pancreatitis,
that we need supplementation. Burns is a very hyper-cateabolic state. Your energy requirements
can go up by 150 to 200 percent. A major full thickness burns patient can lose 15 percent of
their body mass a week. Intracritaneous fistula may require surgical, we will talk about that a bit
later. Any kind of bowel failure, so inflammatory bowel disease, people who've had lots of
infections and end up with short bowel syndrome. Your liver disease and your chronic alcoholics.
Any critically ill patients, the energy requirements go up. Polytrauma and head injuries. All of these
people have increased energy requirements, even though they're just lying in the hospital there all day.
...
a lot of cameras do not go up.
Most of these people have finally had to be a!!!!
Thešeofy in韓国 Mini
forsake the whole and the body嗚b
in the hospital.
