Music
We'll be right back.
I'll try and give some guidelines as to how to do it.
Okay, one of the most important scoring systems that everybody has to know that has been showed
to be very accurate in predicting post-op mortality and mobility, especially determining pulmonary
risk, is the ASA score.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists, the physical status classification, just I'm
sure they need to know it all for the surgeons, ASA1 is a normal healthy patient, ASA2 a patient
with mild systemic disease, ASA3 a patient with severe systemic disease that is not incapacitating,
4 is a patient with incapacitating systemic disease that is a constant threat to life,
5 is a modern patient that is not expected to survive 24 hours with or without the operation
and is just a suffix that you use to indicate an emergency procedure.
Okay, the ASA score they use especially in pulmonary risk stratification.
Okay, so the first system that you have to look at is pre-operative cardiac risk assessment.
The commonest post-operative problem in terms of cardiac risk is a supply-demand issue, okay?
It is not the thrombotic state that causes your silent infarcts, which is what you are scared
of in a patient with cardiac risk factors.
As many as one-third of surgical patients will have significant coronary artery disease
and hence cardiovascular risk.
Patients with known peripheral vascular disease obviously are at high risk.
Your type of surgery that you're going to do is of great importance when you look at cardiovascular risk,
especially surgery that you anticipate major extracellular fluid shifts.
And then where the surgery is, the anatomical location obviously also influences the cardiac risk.
Vascular, thoracic, upper abdominal and major orthopedic procedures being the biggest that you have to think about.
Okay, so in the handouts there's a whole bunch of risk predictors, et cetera, that you can just look through.
The ones that's most commonly used that I saw in the previous papers,
is they talk a lot about the Goldman's risk stratification, but that's old.
They don't use it anymore.
At Groteski they barely ever mention it anymore.
The two that's now talked about that's used is Eagles and Lee.
I think that's the other one, mostly used for cardiac risk stratification.
But again, start with basics, a good history, nothing beats that.
The patient's age is very important.
Risk factors like hypertension.
And then when you ask about risk, about hypertension, of course,
how many drugs are the patient on, how well is the patient controlled,
all of that makes a big difference.
The history of myocardial infarction is of quite significant importance,
especially the timing of the MI.
If it was, I think, what was it again, zero to three months post-infarct,
you have a 35% risk of reinfarction post-operatively.
Three to six months I think is a 15% risk of reinfarction,
and more than six months is down to 4% reinfarction.
But it's still quite significant risk.
So that needs to be kept in mind.
Your New York Heart Association's classification is quite helpful
in, again, stratifying how, you know,
what your patient's cardiovascular risk is.
And then going on to your physical examination, keep it simple.
You know, a normal cardiovascular examination and an ECG.
There's lots of debate when to echo a patient,
when not to echo a patient.
But really, as far as I can see in the articles,
it is patients with significant cardiovascular disease,
with previous cardiovascular surgery,
or recent cardiovascular insults that should be considered for echo.
For the rest of the patients,
even if there is quite significant abnormal clinical findings,
an ECG, a blood gas, a normal chest x-ray is sufficient.
But, yeah, and also remember to look for other things.
Look for signs of peripheral vascular disease,
lung disease, et cetera, when you do your physical examination.
Any concerns?
And to your members, it's very important to see your thriving health for it.
You know, you look back at the viewpoint of the health experts
that wasn't a part of breathing,
and that's part of the science.
If you understand, the government ofoting in the鼓sộc
have found spurами thereainnasspebs thatroads that kosten
