Alright, so we're going to discuss vascular, and I'll ask you questions first, and then my colleague here will ask you some more questions.
Okay, is that fine? Now, have you ever managed a patient with a limb that comes in that is obviously necrotic and dead?
Yes. Can you just run me through the causes of necrotic lower limbs?
So, but if an initial necrosis refers to tissue that is no longer viable, the causes for necrotic limbs can be classified into infective causes,
and then vascular, like purely vascular, non-infective, or infective and non-infective.
Going down the non-infective route, causes can be classified into thrombose and emboli.
Under your emboli, there are different causes for emboli, so they can have cardiac soles, they can have aneurysmal soles.
Okay, that's that limb done. In terms of your thrombus, they can be an existing thrombus that caused obstruction of the blood supply to the limb.
It can be something that's propagating. Moving on to your infectious causes.
Infectious causes causing a necrotic limb would really be your very severe infection, so like your neck fascia, rather than your superficial tissue infections.
Now, you mentioned obviously arterial causes, wouldn't you suggest that, you know, which is a vascular compromise, a blood supply compromise, other than just thrombus and emboli,
certainly there are other causes of blood not flowing to a limb causing a dead limb.
Yes, they are, you could have trauma.
How would trauma lead to a dead limb?
So, if you've got occlusion of your arterial supply, a complete occlusion of your arterial supply secondary to trauma, you could result in a dead limb.
From what mechanism?
Penetrating trauma.
Mm-hmm.
Blunt trauma could do it, so for example, crush injuries, compartment syndrome can...
Mm, there's compartment syndrome. Tell me a bit more about compartment syndrome leading to a dead limb.
Because that's certainly a large percentage of patients that you left out of your causes there.
Compartment syndrome, by definition, refers to a condition in which the pressures within a particular osteofascial compartment exceed the pressure required for capillary flow to supply the tissue with oxygen and nutrients and to remove the by-products.
How compartment pressure, how compartment syndrome results in a dead limb would be as follows.
So initially, clinical presentation, patients would present with pain of the limb, pain, swelling, they would complain of pain, swelling, edema.
On examination, the limb would be tender, the compartment may be tense.
What I've asked you about, for me, is this the pathogenesis, pathophysiology of compartment syndrome and how that leads to a dead limb?
Okay. So what happens is, in compartment syndrome, if you've got, for example, due to crush injury, you've got damage to your muscle, which results in edema,
that the edema in the compartment results in a rise in the compartmental pressure, which reduces the, once that pressure exceeds the pressure required for capillary flow to occur,
there's no longer any flow, with no flow there's no oxygen supplying your tissue, resulting in ultimately a dead limb.
Okay. You mentioned the infective causes of a dead limb. What are common causes? You said necrotizing fasciitis, but I think it's a bit more than that.
What infective causes have you seen that has led to a dead limb? What was the underlying pathophysiology?
Was it purely the infection? Was there a spider bite that led to so much infection that the limb was actually non-salvageable?
How does infection lead to, or what role does infection play in the dead limb? Is that a primary thing or do you think it's a secondary thing?
So infection or toxins, for example spider bites or snake bites, would result in a dead limb by means of the, for example, compartment syndrome.
What is the most common infected limb that you've ever seen that required amputation because the limb was un-salvageable?
A diabetic foot. Diabetic foot. So what's the pathogenesis behind a diabetic dead limb?
There are multiple factors which play a role in resulting in a necrotic limb in a diabetic patient.
There are microvascular, macrovascular and neurological parts which contribute to it.
So patients who are diabetic, firstly they already have a compromised supply.
So when they have any source of infection which, sorry this is not an organised answer, may I begin again?
Yes.
Okay, so the pathogenesis of a patient, a diabetic patient and a dead limb.
Any insult to a diabetic patient's foot, be it due to trauma or a snake bite or rather any trauma will result,
it doesn't heal as normally because the patient's got, firstly, poor blood flow.
Come on.
Diabetic, what vascular pathophysiology does a diabetic have?
So basically polycontrolled diabetics have increased blood glucose, leading to glycosylated hemoglobin and glycosylated other proteins,
also glycosylated, which results in reduced or rather increased stiffness, if you will, of the blood vessel or capillary wall,
leading to reduced blood supply to the tissue.
Okay, there are many factors in a diabetic which would result in a dead limb.
Okay, but that certainly is the vascular issue.
Yes.
Okay, as far as there's neurological things as well, but vascular.
Now you've got the patient with this diabetic foot, what criteria, what are all the aspects that you have to consider
before deciding that this can be treated conservatively or requires immediate imputation?
Well, you've got to assess the...
What are the criteria that you think about?
So, the criteria we think about is the patient's baseline and then the actual infection or presenting problem at hand.
So, in terms of the patient's baseline, how is the patient's diabetic control?
Usually, does the patient have any other comorbid factors?
Is the patient a candidate for surgery?
What is the patient's activities of daily living?
In terms of the actual presenting problem, so the dead or infected foot, I would want to assess the degree of the problem.
So, is it just a superficial infection that will be treated with antibiotics?
Is it something that requires minimal debridement?
Is it something that I've assessed on x-ray involves the bone and requires more extensive debridement, possibly amputation?
That's how I would go about deciding.
You've lost me a bit in as much as the specifics are concerned.
If we just look at the clinical examination of the limb itself, what factors in the clinical examination would you consider to decide that this limb is salvageable?
So, basically assessing viability of the limb.
I would look at the extent of the infection.
I would assess the pulse status, assess sensation, see the degree of edema or erythema surrounding the infection.
I would also ask the patient about just, often patients with diabetes have other comorbid diseases.
So, often those smokers who have atherosclerosis and would have peripheral vascular disease.
So, that would affect my management as well.
You mentioned that the poorly controlled diabetes leading to these microvascular changes and perhaps calcifications in the wall etc.
you mentioned the stiffness.
Is there direct correlation with poor control versus how much vascular changes there are?
Or can a well controlled diabetic also present with peripheral vascular disease and the complications of their diabetes?
Is it purely the poor control?
So, there are two issues at hand as I understand it.
One, you can have a patient who is a diabetic only and that patient can have microvascular complications secondary to their diabetes.
Then you can have a patient who has two concurrent pathologies running.
So, they can be diabetic and they can also have peripheral vascular disease secondary to either their…
or combination of factors, their smoking or their…
My question really pertains to the fact, is this the poor control that leads to diabetic peripheral vascular disease?
Or is it the disease of diabetics even if they are well controlled?
You seem to have made that distinction.
Is that so?
Is there direct correlation?
Do you think?
I don't know for sure.
Okay.
Alright, my colleague will ask you a few questions.
Now, we needn't go as long as I did.
Right.
I just want to…
Get me thinking along the question mark.
Yes.
First of all…
It would be questions, you know, that might be pertinent in your mind.
Right.
The answers that you would like answered or, you know, stuff that you've read.
Okay.
Okay.
In terms of assessing the limb itself or whether you will amputate or not, I think you've
done a very good job of elaborating on local sort of clinical features that would suggest
a limb that needed to be amputated.
Are there any sort of systemic features that you might focus on where you might sit there
and think that this patient may require an amputation?
If so, would you elaborate a little bit on that?
What I'm trying to say, is a localised sepsis, the things you've discussed so far seem to
pertain to a localised sepsis.
Obviously that is not always the case in the way that diabetic ulcers and diabetic footsepsis
presents.
Yeah.
There are other sort of instances where you would strongly consider an amputation in terms
of…
Oh, I see.
Okay.
So you're basically alluding to DKA of patients presented in severe, deranged, hyperglycemic
states.
Not only DKA but in terms of not just localised sepsis but now we're talking more systemic
sepsis.
So according to the Surviving Sepsis Guidelines, they've got many campaign bundles which basically
guide our management in these cases.
And one of the very important points that are brought out is that source control.
Right.
So if a patient came to me whether they were diabetic or not and they had systemic sepsis
and we identified a source and the source was a limb that could be drained, divided or
was so extensive in the initial assessment that required amputation, yes.
Right.
So I suppose the answer would be that I would be guided by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign which
uses certain campaign bundles to guide our management, one of which includes source control,
others include illegal directed therapy, optimising the patient for theatre, so ensuring patients
often with diabetes have other comorbidities and we would optimise the haemoglobin to above
10.
Other endpoints that we would aim for are a lactate level of below 4.
If not, you would administer fluid, repeat the lactate.
You would also measure CVP.
I don't want to mention CVP, but mention it.
Okay.
So we would also aim for CVP between 8 and 12.
I think we've done a good job in terms of covering the septic side of things.
Obviously we've said before that not all ischemic legs require amputation.
In another sort of vein of assessing limbs, can you think of any traumatic related injuries
that may require some sort of criteria to assess whether that limb needs to be amputated or
not?
And if so, maybe perhaps elaborate on that for us.
So something that comes to mind are patients with acute or severe trauma.
Right.
So, gosh, trauma due to any mechanisms, train accidents, accidents related to work.
So patients come in with severely mangled fingers or limbs for that matter.
In terms of assessing, the principles are pretty much the same.
The question, well, actually, there are two things that I would consider.
One, the patient, and under the patient should it be the patient's comorbidities, et cetera.
Not safety.
Ability to be operated on.
And then the actual problem, so the mangled limb, is their pulse, how far does the tissue
damage, how extensive is the bony involvement.
In addition to that, so like local factors, if you will.
When I say local, I'm talking about hospital related.
What facilities do we have?
What are our surgeon's capabilities?
Are we able to re-anastomose certain vessels?
Or is it a case of we're doing a bit of damage control because we are poorly resourced?
So it's not just patient factors that I would take into account.
It wasn't recording.
Are you serious?
Okay, apologies for that.
My colleague is now going to ask you some questions.
Sorry, I didn't even see that.
Sorry, I didn't even see that.
So we're going to be in keeping with the theme of vascular.
How does a patient with, you mentioned acute and chronic causes of gangrene.
Can you tell me how a patient with an acute cause for gangrene of the foot would present?
Or the toe?
In most of the cases that I've encountered is that most of these patients are elderly patients.
And most of them prefer vascular disease.
And on top of that, they get acute presentation on the basis that they might have other comorbids.
And mainly patients with cardiovascular problems, they can get emboli.
Like patients with AF, they get emboli that goes down to the already diseased narrowed vessels in the peripheries.
And thus causing acute presentation on a chronic patient that is known with peripheral vascular disease.
Okay, but what do these patients come in complaining of?
Mainly presentations of these patients, mainly acute presentations, though they are known with chronic vascular disease.
They might have claudications before.
That's a history that has been known.
They might have been following up in the clinic with their claudication.
But this presentation that presents now is an acute presentation that presents with pain,
complaining of sudden onset of pain.
It depends on how long the pain has been.
Patients may present with parasthesis as well.
They can also present with loss of motor function as well.
On examination, so from the history, you can get that patient.
These patients have cardiovascular disease.
Or they might be known with other vascular problems like patients who are having aneurysm.
They might have aneurysm above the level.
Okay, I'm just going to steer you a little bit away from the history because you've covered that.
I'm happy that you've covered it adequately.
But coming down to when you examine your patient now, what do you see?
Do your patients complain?
They've come in, they've said the pain started.
They've had two days, the pain just won't go away no matter what they do.
You're examining the patient now.
What do you find?
Okay, on examination of the patient, you need to also initially inspect the limb.
Looking at an inspection of the limb, you can see the limb is pale.
You can't move the limb, or you can move the limb but with pain.
These are some of the things that you can see on inspection.
On examination, the limb will be very cold compared to the other limb.
Function-wise, patient may not be able to dorsiflex the limb.
That's also one of your examinations that may give you now the criteria of whether you should categorise them as Ratafort classification, whether they are class 1, class 2 or class 3.
Can you tell me about the Ratafort classification?
Ratafort classification is classification of the presentation of the patient with an acute presentation of acute limb ischemia.
It's divided into Ratafort 1, 2, 3 and 2B and Ratafort 3.
Ratafort 3 being a dead limb that is unsalvageable and patient may need amputation depending on how unsalvageable the limb is.
Ratafort 1 is still a salvageable limb where patients present with paresthesis, pain, but still they have motor function.
Ratafort 2, 2A, still they can have motor function, but the sensor is lost.
Ratafort 2B, there is no function where you need this patient to do a fasciotum and see whether there is any muscles that are contracting or not.
Otherwise, they become Ratafort 3 and they will need amputation.
That's right.
Uh, that's good.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Now, I'm sure you've seen patients with necrotic dead limbs before.
Yes, I have.
Okay, so a patient comes in and is obviously a non-viable limb.
What are the causes that run through your mind or reasons for a necrotic limb, an unsalvageable
limb?
Let's stick with the lower limb.
I think two broad categories depending on the patient would be your trauma patient that
has an unsalvageable dead or necrotic limb for reasons ascribed to trauma and then you
have a patient that has underlying chronic disease, specifically vascular disease, that
could be the cause of this.
So depending on your etiology or your underlying cause that would then definitely determine
your approach and your management of this patient.
Can you be more specific about these groups now that you've described to us?
So in the trauma patient causes that I could immediately think of is the threatened limb
in terms of where you have a mangled limb, you have underlying fractures and you have
a patient that had an untreated compartment syndrome where your blood flow was compromised, you're
saying a dead necrotic limb, so this is a patient that's presenting quite late, trauma is an underlying
etiology, but what happened is a compartment syndrome, etc. and that's the cause of your
limb.
Obvious vascular injury, and then when you're looking at your chronic disease patients, it's
your vascular path, your peripheral vascular disease, which can be, again this is a dead
non-viable limb, you can divide it, further subdivide it into a patient with wet gangrenous
limb or dry gangrenous limb.
In your dry gangrene you're thinking more chronic vascular paths, in your wet gangrene
you're more thinking of your diabetics with nephropathic feet, etc., which can lead to this
problem.
Is there a patient that can have absolutely healthy, beautiful arteries and present with
a dead limb?
No external trauma involved.
You've sort of mentioned the diseased arterial system, is there a patient that can present
a dead limb and they have beautifully normal peripheral arteries at least?
Yes there is.
Patients with deep venous complication, this is one of the rare, or more serious complications
of deep venous thrombosis would be your cerulea dolens alba, sorry I can't remember the exact
term, but your more severe complications of your deep venous thrombosis, where your venous
system is the underlying etiology.
There are other more common causes of an necrotic limb, with normal peripheral arteries, than
complicated venous disease.
I suppose where you've got severe obstructive disease, something that if you say there is
a normal healthy artery, yet...
But external compression?
I suppose you have to take external compression, but more common than that.
No trauma?
No trauma?
No trauma?
You've mentioned the thrombi, you've mentioned all the thrombi.
Emboli?
Emboli, what's the mechanism of an embolus, and how does an embolus cause a healthy artery
to occlude?
I use the term healthy loosely here.
These patients with emboli inherently have some underlying pathology that might lead to
them having peripheral vascular disease, but let's say early in the disease and they're
healthy otherwise.
So how does the emboli cause this occlusion?
Where does the emboli come from?
Yeah, so one of the questions when you see patients with embolic phenomenon is once again
to determine the underlying etiology.
Most commonly patients with two big classes that you need to speak to mind would be patients
with valvular heart disease, and then also patients with chronic intravenous drug abusers
also commonly could present with embolic phenomenon.
So these patients need to be thoroughly investigated.
That's just emboli from hematological origin.
Emboli could also be infective, and you also can get air emboli.
Okay.
Now you mentioned diabetes in passing there.
What is the mechanism, what's the pathophysiology and diabetics leading to peripheral vascular disease,
and unsalvageable limbs?
Tell me down the mechanism.
So the problem with diabetes is especially long standing poorly controlled diabetes is end organ damage.
And besides the eyes and the kidneys and the heart, part of the peripheral problems that you deal with
is peripheral neuropathies that these patients develop.
Meaning that they've got atrophic changes peripherally to their feet and sometimes even hands.
Where I think the most common, these patients lose sensation in their feet.
They often injure themselves without knowing.
And because of compromised immunity, they are already at increased risk for susceptibility to infection
and decreased ability to fight it off.
So not only do they now have injuries that can't be attended to and they're not aware of,
but they also have an underlying vulnerability to the sepsis.
And then there is the microvascular disease in itself, which compromise tissue healing and wound healing.
Okay, so you see a patient with diabetic foot sepsis.
What are the thoughts that run through your mind to decide whether this patient needs immediate ablation
or they can be treated conservatively?
What are all the questions that are in your mind to help guide you in making this decision?
Okay, so obviously you would start by looking at the patient as a whole in general.
Let's call it the eyeball test.
That's maybe a bad term to use, but systemically how your patient is looking.
Is there any signs of systemic sepsis?
Which of course would be an immediate indication for sepsis control, which most often would be ablation.
Part of the general assessment for me would also be your patient's glucose control.
That might not necessarily influence when you would ablate the patient, especially if there's sepsis involved,
but it would give you a good indication as to how your post-operative management of this patient might look.
In terms of the local sepsis, first of all you need to assess the sepsis.
Is it wet or dry?
Not so common in your diabetics.
What's the level of spread?
Is there obvious pockets of pus when you do an x-ray?
Is there any signs of osteitis, bone involvement, obvious gas in the soft tissue?
The surrounding cellulitis, what is the pattern of spread?
You're also going to assess your vasculature, which in diabetics is not often easy to assess accurately, especially in acute sepsis.
Patients are often edematous, they're lightest, so difficult to assess.
You're going to have to do Doppler's and discuss with your patient and plan the procedure, which often might be a stage procedure.
So getting rid of the sepsis and then doing…
So what would be reasons to do a stage procedure as to definitive amputation as your primary procedure?
How do you make that distinction?
Well, I think once again you have to look at your patient in general.
A patient that's systemically septic, where this is a case of sepsis control, you would want to do the quickest procedure possible to get rid of the sepsis,
which most often is not a definitive procedure, a TMA, SMA or a through knee amputation.
Quick, less anaesthetic time.
It's a resuscitative procedure in my mind.
Again, if that's not the case and you're looking more at local factors, when there is obvious pockets of pus or bony involvement,
but there is also spreading cellulitis, where you can reason that you could get rid of the overt sepsis and pus
and attempt in order to preserve some functionality, treat the more superficial sepsis like the cellulitis with good broad-spectrum antibiotics.
That would be one of the considerations.
Thank you, Kylie.
My colleague is going to ask you just a very few short questions.
Okay.
You are calling casualty to see a patient that presented with an acute painful limb.
What are your approaches?
So, once again, acute painful limb, whether this is a patient with a history of trauma,
or whether this is a patient that has just acutely presented with this problem without necessarily a history,
would definitely influence how I would manage the patient.
Should this be a patient that has had a history of trauma, whether it be soft tissue or bony injury presenting with a painful limb?
It is a patient that is known with chronic vascular disease.
Vascular disease.
So, it would be a threatened limb.
So, immediate assessment of the patient, again, would be a full systematic evaluation of the patient.
In terms of history, what is his, you know, what his current status is.
And then…
What do you mean by current status?
You know, is it just a limb that's a problem, or is this already a systemic problem?
In terms of the limb specifically, let's go there.
Is it just, what exactly is the patient presenting with?
Is it just a painful limb?
Is it absent pulses?
Is there already signs or evidence of tissue loss?
What is the extent of the vascular disease?
Evascular disease is indeed what we are dealing with.
So, there's various investigations that I could do to aid me in that.
Okay.
This patient present in casualty.
He doesn't have any tissue loss.
But he had been complaining of short-distance claudication and now presents with an acute onset of pain.
Okay.
By your approach.
Okay.
So, what you're thinking is an acutely threatened limb here.
So, once again, it would be that this patient sounds as if he would be a candidate for a revascularization procedure.
Most important is to determine the level of disease and to then subsequently adequately prepare the patient for theatre.
So, part of determining the level of disease would be a thorough clinical examination.
Is all these patients are going to go to theatre or do you have a procedure where you can...?
No.
No.
You could have open vascular procedures and then you could have endovascular procedures as well, which you can choose, select certain patients for.
So, clinical examination of the patient, feeling impulseless, testing sensation, basically putting the patient in a Rutherford scoring system might aid you in aids of special investigations like Doppler, a handheld Doppler.
What is that about classification?
Can you tell us about it?
The Rutherford classification one to four basically looks at pulse status and tissue loss.
Unfortunately, I can't remember the detail of the classification.
Okay.
Thank you.
Okay.
So, welcome to this oral examination.
I'm going to ask you a few questions and my colleague will take over from that.
Okay.
I take for granted the fact that you've seen dead necrotic limbs before, lower limbs.
I have here.
Okay.
After all of that interruption, there are various causes for necrotic lower limbs or necrotic
legs.
What are the thoughts that run through your mind as to causes of non-viable limbs that need
ablation?
Is this an acute setting?
Any setting.
So, from a broad category, I'd look at it in terms of timing or duration.
So, acute ischemia and more chronic progressive things that have happened.
With acute, break that down further into trauma, traumatic causes and then vascular causes as
well.
Arterial venous, thrombotic and embolic phenomena.
And traumatic can further be broken down into physical trauma as well as toxins and bites
and of course those sorts of things you can get.
So, this is by no means a comprehensive list but some way of breaking it down and then chronic
forms very much in peripheral vascular disease would be a progressive chronic form of ischemia,
limb ischemia.
and if I'd further differentiate, further causes, well that would be a broad category.
Let's go down, let's start with the acute, let's go down and you very interestingly mentioned
toxins as a cause of necrotic non-viable limbs.
And from that I presume you mean exogenous or extrinsic toxins leading to non-viable limbs.
Have you got some more specific examples for that and what the pathogenesis is from that
initial insult to the situation of the non-viable limb?
So, a traumatic toxin or it could be infective causes secondary to a bite, unlikely to, you
know, that could progress into an ischemic or a necrotic limb, a bite from a dog, a bite
from a snake, a bite from scorpions and those toxins can cause…
By what mechanism do they cause non-viable limb?
Well, each bite would be different.
So, in terms of a dog bite there's very many organisms within a dog, so that would be
a later sort of sub-acute progression of an infective process.
With snake bites you generally get, you either get neurologic compromise or you get hematological
compromise or you get ischemic or vascular compromise from a snake bite.
That's the question, how do you get the vascular compromise?
The… I don't know the exact… I don't know the path of physiology of how a snake bite
causes direct ischemia.
Say for instance I have a cytotoxic snake.
Yes.
How is that cytotoxic snake's venom going to cause vascular occlusion and… or vascular flow
occlusion at least and a necrotic limb?
Through what mechanism?
Through what syndrome?
It may not definitely be the sole mechanism but there is definitely microthrombi and it's
sort of a disseminated vascular, disseminated intra-vascular coagulation, localised coagulation
or microthrombi that contribute to the ischemia and the development of a threatened limb.
And over and above that inflammatory process that further compromises the blood supply.
What happens in that compartment due to all these changes?
We see swelling, increased blood flow initially, increased and then decreased return of that
blood flow.
What do we call that increase in the compartment?
You have a compartment syndrome.
Compartment syndrome.
Okay, compartment syndrome.
Moving on to the more chronic side you mentioned the sepsis.
What's the leading cause or what's the most common cause of sepsis in a dead limb that
you've seen?
I can't quantify in terms of, but in diabetics, diabetic foot would be the…
What is the path of physiology behind diabetic leading to a non-viable limb?
Diabetes predisposes to immunocompromise or being in a situation of immunocompromise.
There are certain mechanisms for that.
One is of course the glycosylation of the white blood cells in their bloodstream.
Further, the actual peripheral vascular disease that happens with diabetes.
The atherosclerosis that they're predisposed to.
So if you have somebody at risk for infection and you have a decreased blood supply to those
areas and you have minimal trauma, that combination can predispose to an infection that is inadequately
controlled and progresses.
You see a patient with diabetic foot sepsis and you have to decide between conservative
management and immediate ablation.
What thoughts lead you in that decision, to make that decision, between these two modalities
of surgical management?
Very good history, also including social circumstances.
But if you need to be more aggressive, you need to despite social circumstances.
But a good history as to how long it's been.
Other comorbidities that are associated with that.
And then obviously a very good examination with regards to having a look at the skin,
having a look at the pulses, having a look at the atrophy, having a look at…
Can I do all these?
Just give me an example of each of these that you mentioned.
How does that guide you between the two modalities of treatment, ablation or conservative management?
I think more suggested than history would obviously be our clinical examination.
So if I can allude more to that.
So the actual wound itself, if there's gas in the wound, if it's very, very purulent,
if it is ascending and very erythematous, if it's completely gangrenous, black,
then that would be more suggestive of more aggressive ablation to a level.
And also in a systemic point of view, of course, if somebody is more septic and the focus is that lesion,
then I would be more aggressive, you know, to try and achieve source control.
Then obviously the actual use of their limb already, often you see they may be, it's been long standing,
their limbs are contracted and fairly useless.
That would be more suggestive of, you know, if somebody has a completely contracted knee
and distal ischemia, I would suggest more aggressive.
Okay, now if I suggest to you the patient rather than the diabetic footsteps that says external trauma,
any form of external trauma, what are the thoughts that might lead you to decide between ablation
as far as the external trauma is concerned versus reconstruction and conservative serum management?
What would be factors that would influence you to decide to rather amputate the limb from external trauma
rather than to try and save the limb?
If I look at the limb, the soft tissue, the bone and the nerve involved in that limb,
the soft tissue is very, very important to supply the nerve and the limb, the nerve and the bone
with adequate nutrition and support.
So if you have completely devitalized limb or soft tissue that is very, very contaminated and torn,
sort of a mangled limb, that would be more suggestive of ablation.
Very comminuted fractures in multiple places that are not amenable to exfixing,
then that would be more suggestive of a more aggressive surgery.
And of course with nerve, if you have complete transections and drop foot and those sorts of things,
that would also be very unlikely to recover and that would be more suggestive of aggressive surgery.
And blood supply, if you have, it depends on obviously how long, but if you've had a traumatic aneurysm
and that has been missed and the leg has come back dead, then of course that would need more aggressive surgery.
Okay, thank you. My colleague will ask you a few short questions.
Richard, you mentioned the Compartment Syndrome earlier. How would you go about diagnosing a Compartment Syndrome?
In context, just to give you a clinical suspicion and then of course on a clinical examination,
commonly referred to the five, six, there are many P's involved, but palo, pulselessness,
paresthesia, as well as paralysis, polythermia or coolness to the limb.
There has been reference to purple, but I guess that's also in the same context.
But that would be very suggestive. Compartment pressure, so the definition of Compartment Syndrome is when you have
increased pressures within a confined space, or your fascial confines within a limb.
And that pressure is often referred to as 25 to 30 millimetres of mercury.
And then you have that sort of syndrome of those five P's, that's the context in history of trauma or a bite or something,
that would be in his own Compartment Syndrome, yeah.
In a patient with a lower limb Compartment Syndrome, how would you go ahead and manage the problem?
If somebody has, the concern is ischemia. So you would need to relieve those pressures in order to, you know,
salvage the limb, to salvage the limb and reperfuse the tissue. Obviously being very wary of reperfusion
and not going to try and salvage a limb and sacrifice the patient at the same time.
But you would need to do fasciotomies, if they are clinically indicated.
And for the fasciotomy of a lower limb, we would do two incisions.
One on the medial aspect, just posterior to your tibia, and one on the lateral aspect.
And that would give you access to all four compartments within the leg in order to decompress the fascial confines
and reinstitute adequate perfusion.
Okay, you mentioned reperfusion syndrome. What do you understand under reperfusion syndrome?
So reperfusion is a scenario where you have had ischemia
and the tissues have been compromised. Ischemia by virtue of withheld blood.
So they haven't had adequate blood supply for a period of time.
And because of that, you have the poor functioning of the cells.
On a cellular level, you have poor functioning of the cells.
A lot of electrolyte abnormalities are at risk when you then reinstitute blood.
And those electrolyte abnormalities can reperfuse.
Particularly calcium, potassium, lactic acidosis.
Patients are at risk for that on a systemic level because of the by-products of the anaerobic metabolism at a local limb level.
Okay.
Alright, is there anything that you can do to prevent or minimise the effect of the reperfusion syndrome?
I think be very wary of it in these sorts of contexts before.
So always try and prevent it. Always think ahead.
If you're going to have that sort of scenario, always keep your patients well hydrated.
There is growing literature towards antioxidant treatment.
And to have that, bear that in mind, high dose vitamin C is one.
Manitol is another and has been referred to.
The efficacy of that is for debate.
But it is a method that is used at a good hydration and of course monitoring of these electrolytes in that context.
And aggressive replacement or even dialysis if need be.
So I'm going to ask you a few questions.
My colleague will then take over and it's going to pertain of course still to vascular surgery.
A patient presents to you with, to casualty, referred to you with acute lung pain.
You cannot absolutely stand that pain.
Excruciating has never had it before.
Has never completed with claudication.
And giving you a clue obviously that this is about vascular surgery.
What is your workup of this patient?
What are your thought processes as to possible causes and your eventual management?
Right.
From the description of the patient, it sounds like this is a patient who is suffering from something called ischemic pain.
And ischemic pain is a pain we define as pain derived from a vascular sort of compromise of a limb.
Particularly the tissues of that limb including the muscles, the nerves and a relevant sort of connective tissue.
This patient, like we've already established, is suffering from some sort of vascular insult.
And when we talk about vascular insults we talk about thrombotic events, we talk about embolic events.
To me it sounds as if this patient is lying more along the embolic sort of route.
Which involves, and that's given away by the fact that there's no claudication history whatsoever.
So this is an acute new onset event, which is sort of typical of embolic events.
Just in terms of the embolic event, embolisis in this case would be described as a foreign sort of material that has included a blood vessel.
And is now compromising the circulation of the tissues as we said before, which is resulting in the patient's ischemic pain.
In terms of the workup of this patient to try and establish what is the cause of this embolisis and where that embolisis has come from.
You would first obviously establish whether the patient is stable following your ABCs of ATLS principles.
Make sure everything is fine, this patient doesn't need any form of resuscitation.
A particular concern is the fact that one of the major originating areas of embolic events is atrial fibrillation.
So obviously you want to make the patient's cardiovascular stable in particular, but that's just focusing on the ABCs.
We'll get back to that now.
You would obviously now establish that the patient is stable and once they are stable, you can determine that this patient is now eligible for investigations.
So investigations that I would...
Well, sorry, I'm jumping the gun a little bit.
We want to start with the history taking.
Again, you want to establish onset of pain, particularly maximum pain in terms of establishing ischemic time.
The golden sort of time period that you're looking for is under six hours.
And that's in terms of revascularising with intent of having viable tissue afterwards.
You would also want to know if the patient's had any previous surgeries, whether the patient's got any comorbid medical disease
that may contribute to vascular pathology.
It includes diabetes, hypertension, any sort of other vascular events that the patient has had.
In terms of the patient's history itself, you would talk about claudication is to establish whether there's any underlying vascular pathology.
And that's important not only just in terms of establishing the cause, but you would also establish what kind of a treatment this patient would get.
Obviously trying to treat a patient that's really got a compromised limb in terms of vascular pathology would be a little bit more difficult than an acute onset with healthy arteries.
Let's suggest that this patient has no claudication and that you clearly suspect an embolic event.
In a patient with clinical examinations found to have atrial fibrillation, what would be the clinical findings in a patient with an acute embolic event with no underlying atherosclerosis?
Acute embolic event, again, going back to history would be the acute onset of sudden pain, moving on to the clinical examination, depending on what level that embolus was now sitting.
Typically, with emboli thrown up from atrial fibrillation, you would expect, I would want to say, sort of a glove and stocking kind of a distribution of the ischemia.
You would probably find that the toes are now becoming ischemic. In terms of the time, those toes may be gangrenous.
Early signs of that ischemia would include paresthesia, swelling of the extremity, pain out of proportion, you may start seeing skin discoloration,
you may have pulses as limbs, but that would come quite significantly later. And that's in terms of the now clinical examination.
Let's suggest that that's the showering of smaller emboli. How would that differ from a patient who shoots off a sizeable embolus that, say for instance,
occludes the bifurcation of the common femoral artery?
Now we're talking about an ischemic event over a much larger tissue surface area, which comes with a whole myriad of problems.
Particularly now, like I said before, you would look for signs of ischemic compromise, and that would be pain out of keeping,
a pulseless limb, paresthesia, swelling of that limb. Obviously now with the ischemic events going on, blood flow is not circulating to the cells,
particularly the muscles, and the nerves, and the bone of that tissue. Each of them have their own preference in terms of ischemic times.
But with the lack of blood flow, you have a lack of oxygen and nutrition that leads to destruction of cell membrane action potential pumps.
Cells now start swelling and start activating calcium mediated.
Just looking at the limb, what does it look like compared to the other limb?
It will be swollen, it will be pale, it may have, well, pale in the early stages, it may be discolored later on.
And on palpation?
Palpation, the limb will usually be quite tender.
As opposed to the other one, yeah?
It might be swollen compared to the other one, obviously with the cell destruction that's going on.
And obviously decreased pulses or absent pulses, distantly.
As far as temperature is concerned?
The ischemic limb will obviously be a lot colder.
It will be a lot colder.
It will be a lot colder.
Right.
Okay, you mentioned warm ischemic time.
So certainly, you know, you don't have ample time to play with.
Are there any special investigations that you would consider in this patient?
Special investigations, look, again, time is something that you need to not play with.
Special investigations to investigate sort of vascular pathology.
This is now not looking at the origin of the vessel.
This is in terms of looking and establishing the level of the ischemia.
You could consider an angiogram.
Dopplers, sorry, before that you could consider Dopplers, flow Dopplers.
You could look at certain ultrasound investigations.
I think that would be quite hard to establish arterial insufficiencies.
But I would think that the gold standard would be an angiogram to establish exactly where that is.
Okay, the patient has a white, acutely threatened limb.
Right.
With no preceding history of peripheral vascular disease.
Is the arteriogram a waste of time because time is of the essence
or is there something that you can learn from that formal DSA or CT angiogram?
Look, a CT angiogram would give you a sort of cut-off level.
Could you learn that from clinical examination?
You would know where the establishment of the embolus is now sitting.
But in terms of the exact size and propagation of that embolus.
In other words, it may be difficult to treat a prolonged, long kind of segment of embolus.
Where as a shorter segment might be.
How is the angiogram going to show you that?
It probably wouldn't actually because it would have a cut-off.
So it wouldn't show you the distal segment.
So probably not.
I would think, you know, you might establish in more chronic diseases, collaterals.
But that's about as well.
Just talking in broad terms about the surgical management of this patient.
What are the principles involved with an embolectomy?
At the level of the bifurcation of the common femoral.
The principles involved in embolectomy is obviously to…
Surgical principles.
You are performing the embolectomy.
Okay.
We won't elaborate on the pre-op preparation of the patient.
We will demonstrate the procedure itself.
What you need to do is to have adequate exposure of the vessel involved in which you intend to insert your catheter.
In this case, I would think that…
Sure.
If it's sitting at the bifurcation of the common iliac…
Physical principles.
I am exposing the artery…
Right.
You would have adequate exposure of the artery.
You would want proximal and distal control.
You would want to enter the vessel in a sterile and safe manner.
You would advance your guide wire through the…
Okay.
So I've got proximal…
I've got good exposure.
I've got proximal distal control.
Yes.
And now what?
What is the proximal control of what vessel at the bifurcation?
The bifurcation would be the origin of the common iliac.
Or would it be the…
It would be the distal aorta, I suppose.
You are exposing the vessel in the groin for an embolectomy.
Where is your proximal control?
Proximal control would be more towards the…
What archie do you sling?
The common iliac.
The common iliac.
Why would you want to go that high?
Sorry, I thought we said that the embress was sitting at the…
Common femoral.
Oh, sorry.
The common femoral.
Right.
So you would go to the…
Sorry, the internal external iliac vessel.
What is the level…
What is the distinction between the external iliac and the common femoral?
The…
Where does the name change?
The…
Sorry, it's at the level of the inguinal ligament.
So you wouldn't cut through the inguinal ligament to get to it?
No, you don't.
No, you don't.
Okay.
So the proximal control is of there?
Of the proximal femoral artery.
The common femoral.
Okay.
And your distal control?
Would be…
Before you make your incision?
Would be more distal.
I wouldn't go down as far as the popoteal artery.
I would sort of mid-common femoral or femoral vessel.
Distal to the origin of the…
What are the two vessels distal to the bifurcation?
Distal to the bifurcation…
The common femoral.
The common femoral.
The common femoral is your profundus and then your femoral artery itself.
Better known as the… something femoral artery?
The…
The…
The…
The…
The profundo-femoral artery endo?
The superficial.
The superficial femoral artery.
The superficial femoral artery.
Okay.
So you need control over all three of those vessels.
Yes.
Otherwise you can make your incision that's going to…
Bleed.
You know, the blood's going to squirt up to the roof.
Hmm.
Is there something that you should administer to the patient before you occlude those arteries
before your incision?
Yes.
You can heparanise the vessels.
You've got to heparanise the patient.
Okay.
So you make your incision.
Now what?
Uh…
What would you be clotted blood?
Well, you would remove the clotted blood that's clearly visible.
Uh-huh.
Obviously your intention is to be on the distal end of the clot.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
You would now advance your… your guide wire.
Oh, it would…
Sorry.
You would use…
The principal would be using a Fogarty catheter.
Uh-huh.
I'm not 100% clear on whether there's a guide wire involved.
Uh-huh.
But you would advance your… your Fogarty catheter through the clot.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
You obviously wouldn't be doing this under fluoroscopy.
Uh-huh.
And the intention would be to advance it up until the point that you were getting fresh
arterial blood through the… I'm so cross against drugs.
Yeah.
Uh-huh.
The principal behind it would be to advance the Fogarty catheter through the clot,
inflate it, and retract the clot out.
Uh-huh.
And remove it that way.
Uh-huh.
The exact details is whether this guide wire is involved.
So obviously it's something I need to do.
So you get good… you get a clot out?
Right.
How do you know that your procedure is now adequate?
You would have good flow from the vessel, obviously would you just remove the clot from.
Good back flow.
Okay.
To go down both vessels or just the one?
You would probably go down both vessels.
To go down both of them.
Okay.
Okay.
So you close up the artery now with a good…
Yeah.
How do you release your clamps?
Okay.
You've got control over all these three vessels now.
How do you release…
You would release your distal clamp first and then you would release your proximal clamp.
Why the distal first?
Before you retire your last switch off?
No.
Before you retire your last switch off?
Sorry.
I retract that statement.
I would release the proximal clamp first, assess whether you have got any active bleeding
from your repair and then if that is safe enough.
Okay.
My colleague is going to ask you a few questions before I'll correct all your numerous technical
mistakes.
Okay.
Alright.
So with this patient perioperatively, what sort of complications would, in broad terms,
what sort of complications would you consider?
Any time we discuss complications involving any sort of procedure, we want to talk about
early…
We've obviously discussed the intraoperative complications.
We'll now talk about the early perioperative complications and then the late perioperative complications.
Early perioperative complications would include further bleeding from the site, damage to vessels
and arteries that would have been sustained that are now becoming evident after the procedure.
If there is a closed bleed, there would be a hematoma formation, also possibly AV malformation
depending on what iatrogenic injuries were caused by the thing.
The hematoma itself could cause pressure compromise of the area including nerves and arteries and
veins.
You could get an infection in the site which would obviously fall more under your intermediate
to late complications.
And then obviously any time you're involved in the vascular system you must worry about
thromboembolism that could form from the procedure itself.
We've gone to late complications.
Okay.
I'm bored of that question.
So the thromboembolism that we've formed, we said we're going to anticoagulate our patients.
Yes.
When about in this whole time do you anticoagulate?
In terms of the exact sort of timeframe in terms of number of days prior to procedure is not
something I'm 100% familiar with but I would think if you're going to now do a procedure,
I think at least six hours prior to procedure you would need to start.
Right, but this is an emergency procedure.
Well then you would need to, if it's an emergency procedure you would have to pretty much give
it just prior to operation and then intraoperatively and then continue that operation.
Do you have any idea on how to give anticoagulation in this instance?
In terms of the, depending on which form of anticoagulation you choose to use, which
would you choose?
I would preferably use low molecular weight heparin and that's because it's been shown
to have as much benefit as unfractionated heparin but far fewer complications and obviously
you don't have to monitor the low molecular weight heparin as much as you do the unfractionated
heparin.
I think in this instance, correct me if I'm wrong, we use an infusion of unfractionated heparin
to be able to monitor perioperatively and also as a therapeutic, not only I think in the
context that you're speaking of, is from prophylaxis point of view.
Yes, venous lymphoma.
Yes, so we're using as treatment doses of unfractionated heparin and infusion.
Right, so unfractionated heparin and infusion.
Alright, so welcome to the oral examination.
I'm going to ask you whether you've seen patients with necrotic unsalvageable dead legs before?
Yes I have.
Plenty I'm sure.
What are the causes of necrotic unsalvageable dead limbs that run through your mind when
you see a patient?
What are all the possibilities as far as causes are concerned?
Okay, acute limb ischemia, it can be chronic limb ischemia with an acute onset and it can
be chronic on itself.
So, in the acute setting it could be trauma, it could be a pulmonary, a dislodged thrombus,
thromboembolic disease, it could be intimal injury that has, so an embolic source can come
from the heart, patients with atrial fibrillation, it could be an intimal injury which has caused
thrombosis and then an emboli which has gone distally and caused an acute limb.
Acute on chronic could be a patient who has already a chronic arteriosclerotic disease which
has now and has an acute hit on that which could also be trauma and all those things that
I've mentioned already.
In such patients you get atherosclerosis which can lead through a thrombus formation in itself
and that can also occlude acutely.
And then there's the chronic limbs which take a natural progression of which one of third
get better, one of thirds remain the same and one third get worse and that could be with
patients with risk factors of diabetes, smoking, hypertension and hypercholestremia.
Okay.
So those are the innately arterial causes of a dead limb.
Are they non-arterial causes of a dead limb?
Yes.
I mean in essence every one of them has to end up being no blood flow.
Yes.
Okay but you've mentioned sort of intraluminal causes.
Are there other causes as far as all these dead limbs that you've seen before?
It can be…
Or should I say you've mentioned all the large vessel causes.
Are there other causes of non-viable legs?
They can be compartment syndrome which can be caused by different reasons.
One of them could be trauma, then they could be a simple pop causing external compression.
It could be…
Other causes of compartment syndrome?
What about toxic causes?
Yes.
It could be from a snake bite which causes necrosis.
It could be from…
I think those would be ones that we've all seen before.
Now you mentioned very quickly there.
You mentioned diabetes in these chronic patients.
What is the pathophysiology of diabetics leading to non-viable limbs?
Why do diabetics develop non-viable limbs?
Yes.
Why do diabetics develop non-viable limbs?
Okay.
It's the pathogenesis of…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes…
It causes—
It causes…
And…
And it also predisposes to hypercholesterolemia.
which increases the atherosclerotic disease. So there is microvascular damage which then
leads to propagation of fibroblasts, which then leads to fibrin deposition, which then
leads to cholesterol deposition and a thrombus.
Now you see a patient with diabetic limb, diabetic sepsis and diabetic foot sepsis,
through the mechanisms that you've mentioned, infected. How do you decide, what guides you
in your decision to decide whether to amputate this leg, to do an ablation or to manage diabetic
foot sepsis conservatively? What are factors that you would consider making this decision?
Okay, I want to first assess if the limb is viable or not. And you want to go through,
and then you want to see if there's wet gangrene or not, which could, in a patient who has hyperglycemia
would predispose more infection. So you want to assess if the limb is viable itself.
How would you go about that? How do you make that decision?
Okay, if a patient is spreading sepsis with a patient who has a leg which is obviously not viable,
or a foot or a toe, that's not viable. But how do you assess that? How do you know it's not viable?
Well, there's Rutherford 3 classifications. The one…
I'm just talking diabetic foot, diabetic foot with sepsis. Are there other things that might,
that help you to decide whether this patient needs to go straight to theatre and have their leg amputated,
or you can treat it conservative with antibiotics and blessings?
Okay, you want to…
Which patient, or sketch to me the patient that needs to go directly to theatre and have an ablation?
Okay, I look at the x-ray, there's gas in the soft tissue, it needs an ablation. If there is,
if there's obviously a black toe distal, that needs ablation. If there's a patient who has…
Are there any systemic symptoms and signs that might need to do?
Oh, a patient who has sepsis. A patient with an obvious tachycardia, with raised white blood cells,
with a high or low temperature, normal to subnormal. Yeah, an increased respiratory rate.
So there are signs of systemic sepsis. Okay, I want to move you from the diabetic that you have to decide
to amputate or not, maybe to the external trauma patient, patient with external trauma.
What factors would influence you to not try and salvage this limb by various procedures,
rather than to amputate a lower limb? What findings in an acute trauma will lead you to amputate a limb?
Okay, you know, there's all that option of a mangled limb, reconstruction versus all this early, early amputation.
You amputate early, the patient heals better, goes home, whereas you do many procedures and then in the end they fail.
So there's the mangled limb score. Whereas in an acute setting, obviously the foot is dead, you know, the foot is dead.
It's a Rathafat 3 and it's unsalvageable. You'd want to do an early ablation.
But the other things that would influence you is, you look at how many structures that are damaged.
That's the soft tissue, the bone, the nerves, the blood vessels and the vein, the blood vessels which include the artery and the vein.
So there's no point of saving a foot that has obvious peroneal nerve injury that's going to cause a foot drop.
So you look at the mangled limb score and assess from their owners.
Any way that comorbidities influences you or other injuries?
Well, yes, if a patient is, you know, you want to do damage control surgery also.
So if a patient is on a massive transfusion, is hypothermic, is oozing, so you want to do damage control as well, life over limb.
Okay.
Thank you.
My colleague will ask you a few short questions.
Well, I think the vascular questions have been covered quite well in the door, Dr. Kloppers.
In terms of complications, one could expect post-amputation of a limb.
Let's talk about a diabetic limb now, going back to the diabetes.
You've now amputated this patient, so it's a blurry amputation.
So what are the perioperative complications one would expect with the amputated limb?
So the perioperative limb, meaning intraoperative?
Right.
We'll go past the intraoperative complications straight to the patient.
Okay.
So you get the immediate, the early and the late.
The immediate would be, of course you want to control the hyperglycemia, you want to control
the bleeding, you want to make sure, hyperglycemia, bleeding, you want to decrease the perioperative
time.
We're talking about complications now in the post-operative period, I'm talking now in terms
of manner you are now, you've operated this patient, what are some of the complications
one might expect and what one might pre-empt and actively maybe sort of intervene in.
Discuss those complications.
You're doing fine in terms of the early and late complications, but focus particularly
now on early and late complications and how would you manage this patient in the ward?
What are the things you would look for?
Okay, so…
How would you, was there any medications that you would add to the patient's treatment
that would now help the patient?
Okay, so number one, there would be, there would be the bleeding, which you want to make
sure you want to get, you know, you want to assess on the dressing changes and all.
You want to look at the infection.
So you want to make sure the hyperglycemia is well controlled, the patient is on adequate
antibiotics.
You want to also make sure that the wound doesn't break down.
So, you know, assuming you had good technique and the wound wasn't under tension and all.
Then you want to manage his chronic illnesses as well, because that can lead to hyperperfusion
of the affected limb, like adequate blood pressure control and all.
And then the late complications would then be, for the stump breakdown, would be reinfection.
Now, particularly in terms of the vascular sort of trend, you now have a diabetic patient,
possibly hypertensive, who has now had an amputation.
What are some of the factors that would influence your decision to treat this patient with a
particular procedure or medication now?
The patient now is immobile in the ward.
She used to be able to walk around.
She cannot walk around anymore.
Would you consider any sort of prophylaxis against something in particular?
Okay, what I'm trying to say, would you put this patient on DVT prophylaxis now?
The patient's had no right.
Yes, yes, of course.
Is there any particular DVT prophylaxis you would prefer in this patient?
And if so, why?
Well, I'd prefer Clexane over heparin because it's easy to administer, it gets better, it's
well controlled, the heparin is a bit tricky in terms of it's, you know, you have to do
a lot of, it's difficult to administer, just because of the doses itself.
I'd put him on a prophylactic dose, which is half milligram per kilogram.
We're not particularly, we're more concerned with the principles here, not so much the
dosing.
Okay.
Right, so you'd put this patient on DVT prophylaxis, you would choose an unfractionary
approach, which I think is a wise choice.
Let's go back to sort of assessing this limb now.
You've decided to do an amputation on this patient.
Say the sepsis is somewhere sort of mid-calf area.
What are those sort of influencing factors that you would look at in terms of the level of
amputation you would do on this patient?
Okay, so I want to see at what level the sepsis is.
And how would you be guided by that?
What are you looking for in terms of that?
In terms of, well, you want to look at the things that are causing inflammation in that
area, so basically that would be redness, that would be how far the foot is warm, just
the swelling of the foot or that part of the leg.
So you want to go just proximal to that, especially in a patient who you know can tolerate a surgery
later on.
You want to do a guillotine and then come back to later formalise to make sure the sepsis
is under control.
Right.
And in terms of baloney amputation, obviously there's a certain point at which you're cutting
a bit too high.
Do you know what that level is now soliciting it?
And why we sort of look at that level and why it's important?
Sorry, say that a little?
You've just said we'll go to the level of erythema, the clinical signs of infection,
but now in terms of baloney amputation.
So if it's up to mid-calf level, I want to see if I can, well this is what I would do
personally, I want to see if I can get it at an area where I can do a guillotine and
still preserve a bit of a flap that can later be formalised as a BKA, but in a case where
I feel like I can't leave a flap enough, it's better to do a through knee and then later
realise it doesn't above knee amputation.
