Now before we move on to a totally new concept, just filling up our toolbox with
some knowledge, we have looked at this distributive property of our operations
and so in this video I just want to bring down the concept that we can
really combine these. So imagine that we have two binary operations as per usual
we'll have these two and we'll just talk about this distributive properties of
combining these two. In the first bit we're going to call left distributive, left distributive.
And let's have the following example, I think I've got an example here, I'm going to say A
and then I'm going to have B for instance in C, B and C, there we go. And I'm going to say that
combining these two are left distributive if we have, if we really have the following properties.
That if I were to do this, it is going to equal the following, that I have, that I have this
and then A with C. If this property holds, if I were to do this I'd call it left distributive and if I
were to do the following right distributive, right distributive and it will say the following and
in this instance I'm going to have let's say again my B and C and then A and if that equals, if this
were to equals, there's my A, if this were to equal the B and the A and we have the C and the A, if those,
if those hold, we're going to say that we have, that these properties, this is a distributive or at
least right distributive property of this, let's just be clear about this, of this binary operation
with respect to that one. And you might wonder well, we, it's natural for us just to see this in terms of
plus and addition and multiplication and of course these will hold. But what if we were to do something
a bit different? We, we said that we are expanding our world so we are not only seeing these as
addition and multiplication, we might see it as something different and I've got a nice example
here. So let's have these elements x and y and they're all elements of, of the integers. Any of these
elements, any two elements of the integers I should say. And I have the following. I would say
that I have a property that my binary operation, that one is addition. I define that one as addition,
but I define this one as the following. That is x squared times y. So whenever I see that it is x squared
plus y. So let's have a look at this left distributive property. So I'm going to start with the following.
I'm going to say a and then b and c. So that's what I have there. So is it left,
is it left distributive? So remember there's my left distributive. So it's going to be a with b
and a with c. And remember this is now, this is defined as that. So I'm going to have a squared b
and I'm going to have, that is addition, plus I'm going to have a squared c.
So that is what I would have if I were to do this. But remember, just look at this. This one says,
square the first one multiplied by the second one. So it's the same as doing the same as doing the
following. This would be the same as that because there is my defined binary operation. So it's going
to be a squared times b plus c and that's a squared b plus a squared c. And those two are exactly the
same. So we would say that this is left distributive. Is it right distributive? Let's just have a look at
that. Let's just have a look at that. If I were to have b and c and then a. So it's right distributive.
My example is with respect to this, with respect to this. So if I were to do this normal distribution,
I would really get out here b a and I would get c and a. That is what I would get.
This normal distribution, normal distributive property. Now this is now that which is going
to give me b squared a plus, on this side I'm going to have, that's my plus, that's c squared
times a. So b squared a plus c squared a. That is what I would get. But if I just had to look at this,
let's see if this is the same. So it's this one squared times that one. That's what I have there.
Okay. So I'm going to have b, that's a plus, b plus c squared times a. And what am I going to get
here? I'm going to get b squared plus 2bc plus c squared, all multiplied by a. So I'm going to get
ab squared plus 2abc plus ac squared. And these two are definitely not the same. They are definitely
not the same. So this is not right distributive with respect to that. This binary operation is not
left distributive with respect to that. Because if we were to do this, we get two different answers.
If we do it in the right distributive though, right distributive on that side, we see,
now I mustn't get these two. Please don't get these two confused as I've just said. This is left
distribution. Is it left distributive? And this is, is it right distributive? This with respect to that.
And yes, it is. And indeed, no, it is not.
