Before we look at diseases of the parathyroid let's look at the causes of hypercalcemia.
Brief introduction and we're going to classify hypercalcemia based on bone resorption, calcium
absorption in the GIT and some miscellaneous causes.
Now when do you get hypercalcemia?
Well the entry of calcium into the circulation whether that comes from the GIT, the small
bowel or the bone is larger than the urinary excretion or bone deposition.
So if the intake overwhelms the ability to pack it away in the bone or to excrete it
in the urine you're going to get a patient with hypercalcemia.
Now specific diseases may target more than one system.
So the parathyroid, bone, kidney and GIT these are the organs we're talking about and some
diseases obviously involve all of them.
If we look at primary hyperparathyroidism and cancer combined they make up more than 90%
of cases of hypercalcemia.
So what goes wrong in bone resorption?
In bone resorption means the calcium is set free from its stores in the bone.
So first of all let's look at primary hyperparathyroidism.
We usually get normal to high levels of calcium and you might find that the hypercalcemia is
episodic so a single blood sample might not always show you the hypercalcemia.
Parathyroid hormone activates the osteoclasts and you get bone resorption and calcium
the set free from its stores.
You also get increase in GIT absorption and that is the active absorption into the
enterocytes in the small bowel.
If we look at secondary and tertiary hyperparathyroidism now remember what happens in renal failure.
There is an increase in phosphate and there is a loss of calcium in other words you can
get hypocalcemia so your calcium levels are usually low or normal.
But as the disease progresses you can get instances of hypercalcemia and I'm going to get back
to this.
We usually see it in patients with a low bone metabolism or in the cases where the parathyroid
hormone becomes autonomous which we then call tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
Just remember what happens after renal transplant, two things, the parathyroid hyperplasia subsides
over time and you might get a resolution of the hypercalcemia if that was the case in your
patient with renal failure and as the phosphate levels normalize you get an increase in the activation
of vitamin D3 to get calcetriol and that might lead to increase calcium until the hyperplasia
subsides.
So for various periods after the renal transplant you might still have hypocalcemia but remember
usually calcium is low or normal in a renal failure patient.
For under bone resorption we look at malignancy those are solid tumors and leukemias even lymphomas.
Methods are direct bone invasion by metastases or cytokines released by certain tumors.
You also get parathyroid hormone RP in non-metastatic malignancy and calcitriol actually itself increases
in some cases of lymphoma.
Thyrotoxicosis, 15-20% of patients with thyrotoxicosis will have bone resorption due to thyroid hormone itself.
Immobilization, peges disease of the bone, tamoxifen and hypervitaminosis A might also increase bone resorption.
If we look at calcium absorption in the GIT it happens in the small bowel under active control
by vitamin D metabolites but if you take a large amount it is absorbed passively.
Increased calcium intake gives you hypercalcemia but usually only in the presence of renal impairment.
Chronic kidney disease, the hyperphosphatemia and the decreased activation of vitamin D3
gives you decreased calcitriol and that gives you a hypocalcemia.
I mentioned this before.
But if you take oral calcium carbonate or calcium acetate to bind dietary phosphate
in the presence of a dynamic bone disease or on the patients on calcitriol will give you hypercalcemia.
And I said I'll get back to this.
This is the cases where you usually see hypercalcemia in the setting of renal impairment.
Remember those patients usually have high phosphate leading to the lower calcium.
But this is the most common instance where you see hypercalcemia in them.
Eventually as I mentioned the parathyroid can become autonomous and then you have tertiary hyperparathyroidism.
Now milk alkali syndrome, high intake of calcium carbonate for instance in the management of osteoporosis might give you hypercalcemia, metabolic acidosis and renal impairment.
And once again hypervitaminosis D plays a role in calcium absorption as well.
Just remember what is the metabolism of vitamin D3.
Well you get the precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol under the influence of UV light.
Turns into cholecalciferol.
That's inactivated vitamin D3.
In the liver 25-hydroxylase enzymes will hydroxylate.
Position 25 and that gives you 25-hydroxycholocalciferol.
And in the kidney there is the 1-alpha-hydroxylase enzyme.
That hydroxylases the position 1 and that gives you 125-dihydroxycholocalciferol which is activated vitamin D3.
That 1-alpha-hydroxylase enzyme is impaired in renal failure.
Hence the hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia.
Miscellaneous causes in the end.
Remember these as a list if you ever need to use it.
Lithium, thiazide diuretics, pheochromocytoma, adrenal insufficiency, rhabdomyolysis and acute kidney injury.
Theophylline toxicity, familial hypocauric hypercalcemia,
metaphysial chondrodysplasia and congenital lactase deficiency.
