Here we go with another example, and I think you know by now this one's going to diverge.
Okay, so we're left with this sequence, and we want to know what happens as n approaches infinity.
So again, that's just in the limit as n goes to infinity of this sequence.
n squared plus 4 divided by 2n plus 7.
Once again, this is a limit that's indeterminate for, because if I plug in infinity for the variable n, I'm going to get infinity over infinity.
Once again, you cannot apply L'Opital's rule here, inasmuch as, inasmuch as, well you can, I think you are going to get to the answer if I just look at it, if I just look at it quickly.
You are going to get to the right answer, but you're only lucky that this has actually happened.
Okay, it's not a continuous function, it's not a continuous function, so you can't take the first derivative of that.
Once again, the only thing left to me is to divide both the numerator and the denominator by the largest-powered variable in the denominator, which is n to the power of 1.
So I'm going to equal, I'm going to get the limit as n goes to infinity of n plus 4 divided by 2.
n plus 4 divided by 2, and if I now plug in infinity plus 4 divided by 2, I'm going to get infinity.
So this is not a specific value L, is it? Infinity is not a value, it's not a number.
So this sequence diverges.
Now the question that immediately comes up is, is it only when the value of our sequence goes to infinity that it's divergent?
No, it's not. It need not go to infinity as n goes to infinity for it to be divergent.
And this is a clear and simple example.
If you look at values, let's take the values of n and let's take the values of a n.
If you take 1, that is going to be negative 1.
If you take 2, that's going to be 1.
If you take 3, it's going to be negative 1.
If you take 4, it's going to be 1.
And so on.
So this sequence is going to alternate between negative 1, positive 1, negative 1, positive 1, negative 1.
It's never going to settle on a value L.
And also, it's not going to infinity.
In other words, you needn't have the sequence go to infinity for it to be divergent.
It can also play around like this and still be divergent.
Okay, just a few minutes ago, I mentioned that there are circumstances in which you can use log to 0 for indeterminate form.
And this is it.
If the limit of x goes to infinity of the f of x equals L, in other words, this function is convergent,
then the sequence of hours, the limit is the limit as n goes to infinity of f of n.
I'm using function and notation here, but I mean by this the sequence is also L.
Because this function, you know, contains all the points in between the integers.
Because remember here, we're only dealing in sequences, only dealing with integers.
But this contains the integers and all the points in between.
But the one takes with it the other one.
This is contained within this.
So this goes to L.
This will also go to L.
And under these circumstances, under these circumstances, you can apply it also.
It does not work the other way around, though.
So I can have the limit go to as n goes to infinity of this sequence, be convergent, and the function n won't be convergent.
Look at this.
What about the f of x equals the sine of 2 pi x versus the f of n of the sine of 2 pi n?
Now, the sine of 2 pi is the sine of 360 degrees, which is 0.
But the sine repeats itself every 2 pi, the value of every 2 pi.
So that becomes 2.
It still remains the sine as the sine of 4 pi, which is still the sine of 2 pi, which is also going to be 0.
So this converges because there is some L which equals 0.
But what about this?
This doesn't.
It's going to oscillate between negative 1, positive 1, negative 1, positive 1.
Now, this is definitely not convergent, where this is.
So remember, it is the function in x that has to be convergent.
That means the sequence will be convergent.
Not to say that the sequence is convergent means the function will be convergent.
It doesn't work the other way around.
But certainly, if the stop statement is true, then you can apply L'Hopital's rule.
To illustrate this point, let's look at an example.
So actually, our sequence here was n plus 1 over e to the power n.
And we're going to look at that sequence from n equals 1 to infinity.
And meaning we've got to take the limit of this sequence.
We're going to take the limit of the sequence.
Anyways, let's do the function part of it.
Let's look at the limit as x goes to infinity of x plus 1 over e to the power x.
Okay.
If I plug in infinity now, I'm in indeterminate form.
In other words, this can be infinity over infinity.
So I can take independently an enumerator in the denominator.
I'm not looking at the first derivative of the whole function.
I'm looking independently to these two polynomials, these two functions.
So what is, let's say that equals the limit as x approaches infinity.
What is the first derivative of x plus 1?
This is 1.
What is the first derivative of e to the power x?
This e remains e to the power x.
Which becomes 1 over infinity if I do substitution, which equals 0.
And that means this limit is also 0.
And remember this didn't be 0.
I said if this goes to L, this will also be L.
The L didn't be 0.
But certainly, if this is true for the function in all the x values, which are now real values, not integers,
if that goes converges to a specific value L, then the sequence will also converge on the same value.
Just a quick note on the arithmetic of the limits of these sequences.
They're exactly the same as the limits for functions.
And as much as if I have the limit as n goes to infinity of the addition or subtraction of two sequences,
that will be the same as adding or subtracting the limits of both these sequences separately.
The same goes for multiplication.
That will be the limit for both individually multiplied with each other.
And then the same goes for division.
Those will be dividing these limits of these sequences separately,
barring the fact that this denominator here does not equal 0.
Good.
Now, we've already seen two tools.
We've used two tools.
We've seen two techniques of looking at what happens to a sequence if it goes to infinity.
In other words, we're looking at does it converge or not.
We've used two tools.
First of all, remember, we divided both the numerator and denominator by the largest power
variable in the denominator.
Secondly, if we could, we used Lafittal's rule.
Now we're going to get to a third method.
Our third method.
So when you do get these problems, you're going to run, obviously, through these three methods.
And here we're going to go back to an old friend of ours, as far as those are concerned,
and that is the sandwich or squeeze.
Squeeze zero.
And let's look at the sine of n divided by n squared from n equals 1 to n equals infinity.
Does it converge or does it diverge?
Well, first of all, we can just look at the sine of n, any integer n, and that's obviously
going to oscillate between negative 1 and positive 1.
No matter what integer, positive integer value you put in for n, from n equals 1 to n equals
infinity, you're always going to get a value between these.
Now let's divide all of them by n squared, divided by n squared, divided by n squared, divided
by n squared.
Now let's take the limit as n goes to infinity of both of these, and I think it's quite simple.
You'll know where this is going.
To infinity of negative 1 over n squared, that is going to equal 0, same as the limit as n
goes to infinity of 1 over n, positive 1 over n squared, that is going to be 0.
So the limit as n equals, n goes to, tends to infinity of the sine of n over n squared
is also going to equal 0, which means this function, this sequence is convergent, it converges
to 0.
Now we're going to move on to our fourth tool, and it's not really a fourth one independent,
it's a corollary of the squeeze theorem, okay, it's a corollary of the squeeze theorem.
But let's call it tool number 4.
Let's look at this sequence.
There's no ways that we can compute the limit as n goes, as n tends to infinity of this sequence.
So what can we do?
And this is our fourth tool, which says, which says, if the limit as n tends to infinity of
the absolute value of n equals 0, then the limit as n tends to infinity of n is also 0.
So this is not the same, remember, as using L'Opital's rule, where there could be any value,
L, this has got to be 0.
So don't get the two confused.
This has got to be 0.
And let's look at this.
Negative 1 to the power n over n is going to oscillate between a negative and positive value.
If that's 1, it's going to be negative 1.
If that's an even power, it's going to be a positive.
But if I take the absolute value of this, what's going to happen now?
Now there's going to be no oscillation of the numerator, is there?
Because it'll be positive 1, positive 1, positive 1.
It's never going to change.
So this equals 1 over n.
And if I now take the limit, as n tends to infinity of 1 over n, that equals 1 over infinity.
That equals 0.
And because this equals 0, once again, do not make the mistake, this is not the same
as for applying L'Opital's rule, where we use the function f of x, where we use the function
f of x that converges to some value L, then the sequence will also converge to that value.
This is going to be 0.
So if the absolute value equals 0, then that sequence will also converge to 0.
Okay, so it's actually a corollary of this theorem, but for us, let's call it tool number
4.
That's tool number 4.
So remember, first tool, we divided both the numerator and denominator by the largest
power variable in the denominator.
Then we applied L'Opital's rule, only if the f of x converges to a single value L, then
the f of n will also converge.
Our third tool was the squeeze theorem, and now our fourth tool, if the absolute value of
that sequence, if it converges to 0, then the sequence will also converge to 0.
