In this first video on primary hyperparathyroidism we're going to look at the causes and pathogenesis.
A short introduction, we look at parathyroid hormone and calcium homeostasis, the most common causes of primary hyperparathyroidism
and some conditions associated with primary hyperthyroidism.
Now there's been a curious rise and then fall in the incidence of hypercalcemia.
Before 1974 calcium was not included in blood analysis machines in the laboratory.
After that it became part of the normal screening and the incidence rapidly increased.
Since then though there has been a steady decline in the diagnosis of hypercalcemia.
And it's actually at the moment in certain large centres that look at these numbers lower than it was before 1974.
It has also moved from a clinical evident disease where hypercalcemia had to be really prolonged and levels very high
so that you have bone and renal symptoms to a disease that's much more subclinical
and where it's actually picked up or the hypercalcemia is diagnosed before the symptoms really occur.
It's more common in females and more common in those older than 45.
So let's remind ourselves of parathyroid hormone and calcium homeostasis.
We're talking about the ionized calcium which is the active form.
And calcium is important in very many intra and extracellular metabolic processes.
And the levels are very tightly controlled by parathyroid hormone.
You get calcium sensing receptors in the parathyroid
and they respond almost immediately to a very small drop in ionized calcium levels.
The release of parathyroid hormone causes an increase in ionized calcium levels.
How is this done?
Well there's bone resorption within minutes by activation of osteoclasts.
There's increased activation of 1-alpha-hydroxylase in the kidneys.
That leads to 1.25-dihydroxycholocalciferol or calcitriol, the active form of vitamin D3.
And those levels increase a few days after parathyroid hormone levels increase.
And that leads to increased absorption from the GIT.
There's also a direct increase in calcium reabsorption in the distal tubules of the kidney
within minutes of an increase in parathyroid hormone.
So, the causes.
Most common, by far the most common, are single adenomas of one of the parathyroid glands.
90% of them are single adenomas.
5% of cases though are double adenomas.
You also get glandular hyperplasia where all four glands, most notably the distal tube,
the bottom tube, that is the cause in about 5% of cases.
And then very rarely you might get parathyroid carcinoma that causes an increase in parathyroid hormone.
And hence primary parahypathyroidism.
There are some diseases associated with primary parahypathyroidism.
One is familial hyperparathyroidism.
These are very rare.
Most commonly are these MEN1 and MEN2 syndromes.
But you also get familial isolated hyperparathyroidism where it is not associated with MEN1 and MEN2.
Also, although not primarily, cause of primary parahypathyroidism is thiazide therapy.
Remember thiazide diuretics will give you a decrease in calcium excretion.
So in any patient on thiazide therapy, it might get a small increase.
But most commonly it might unmask a mild hypercalcemia.
So a patient who is just developing primary parahypathyroidism, whether from an adenoma or hyperplasia,
might be unmasked sooner once they start their thiazide therapy.
So frickin' strategical Shk
for being taken can he?
So like we're a patient at the conf freezing your organization.
Thank you, Simon Melvin.
Well, John Hance, what about that?
Keepra Se- disease.
los giocavathyroidism.
We need Kollegahいた方.
He had a very good plan that we were answers to theаль forbiddenlusive
and his wife came around here.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
