Now here's an interesting problem. And as I said, initially some textbooks start by just giving you some examples from real life and eventually give you a few ways to solve differential equations.
Here I've started the other way around. But now that we can solve some equations, at least we have a few methods in our pocket, let's have a look at this.
So we model this real life situation and we note that the rate of change of some variable is directly proportional to 100 minus that variable.
So let's make this temperature for instance. Imagine we have this situation, some real world situation where the rate of change of temperature, as far as time is concerned, is proportional to 100 minus whatever that temperature is.
Now, let's just rewrite this. Well, let's do this in two ways. We noted dt dt. Now what are we used to? It's so banged into your heads dy dx.
It's much easier for your mind to work with this than to work with this. So one little trick initially is just to say let t equal y and let lowercase t equal x.
Now you can certainly do this in the beginning until you're used to doing these differential equations, irrespective of what the variables are called.
Because it's not that difficult. But if you want to make life easier for yourself, initially just do this. But remember that you have to revert back.
So what we have here now is dy dx is proportional to 100 minus y. Now to get rid of something that's proportional, we can just put a constant of proportionality in, remember that.
dy dx equals k times 100 minus y. Or dy dx equals, shall we say, 100k minus ky. Now look at this.
If k is a constant. That's a constant of proportionality. Let's bring this over to this side. So I have dy dx plus ky equals 100k. And what is this?
This is a linear equation. This is a linear equation. And my p of x equals this constant k. And my f of x is another constant, 100k. It's not a variable that's a constant.
So I can use a constant. So I can use a constant. So I can use an integrating factor, which will be k dx. And that equals e to the power kx.
I can multiply throughout here. So I'm going to have e to the power kx dy dx plus k times e to the power kx y equals 100k e to the power kx.
This left side can be rewritten as d dx of e to the power kx dy. This left side can be rewritten as d dx of e to the power kx and y.
And that equals 100k, which are constants e to the power kx, which I can now take the integral off of both sides. I put my integral sign there because these are constant coefficients that I've brought out.
So I'm left with e to the power kx y equals 100k. What is the antiderivative of this? Well, it's 1 over k e to the power kx plus a sum constant c.
Plus some constant c. Just think about if I take the first, I hope you can see there, 100k 1 over k e to the power kx.
So this is just the antiderivative of that. Because if I had to take the first derivative of this, it would be 1 over k e to the power kx plus the derivative of kx, which is this k.
So k's would cancel and I'll be left with that. Now these k's do cancel. So I'm left with e to the power kx y equals 100 e to the power kx plus some constant c.
If I divide both sides by this, I'm left with y equals 100 plus c over e to the power kx.
Now I just have to revert. Remember that's t. So the t of t equals 100 plus some constant over e to the power kt.
And that's beautiful. I now have a real life situation which I've muddled and I've noticed this direct proportionality between the rate of change of a variable and that variable.
And if I introduce a constant of proportionality, I can solve and I can say at any time t, at any time t, I'm going to get this value for t by just plugging in this value for time.
For instance, if I plug in this value for time and I know the constant of proportionality, I'm going to have this family of solutions and if I have, for instance, two or so in my experiment, I've got two data points.
I can plug it in and I can get values for c to see which one of this family of solutions models my real world situation.
Let's move on to next question.
