Now we're going to see whether a sequence is bound, and what it means to be bound is that if a sequence A to N is bound, it is bound if for some M larger than 0, called the bound, of the absolute value of A to N is less than M for all N.
Now that sentence might not make absolute sense. Let's look at an example. So, I have got this sequence. Now let's take the absolute value of that. It's going to be, I'm going to take a negative out. So it's negative 4N squared minus 3, provided by N squared plus 1.
And the absolute value of that just means I'm going to get rid of this. Okay? That's the absolute value of it. So, I've taken the absolute value. It says I've got to take an absolute value. Now, it's got to be less than a certain maximum.
And that maximum is here, called the bound. And that bound's got to be more than, larger than 0. Let's do that. If I look at 4, so I'm not taking the limit here. Notice.
For the bound, I'm not taking the limit. I'm just looking at this and thinking logically. 4N squared minus 3 over N squared plus 1, over N squared plus 1.
Now, certainly, that is less than 4N squared divided by N squared plus 1, isn't it? Because here, I'm subtracting another 3 from the numerator.
So, the denominator is exactly the same. I have a smaller numerator. So, of course, smaller numerator here. It's 4N squared, 4N squared, but on this one, I'm subtracting 3.
So, this numerator is smaller than this numerator. So, this traction's got to be smaller than that one. Okay?
And you will also agree that that is smaller than 4N squared over N squared. Why is this one larger than this one? Think it through. Why is this larger than that?
Certainly, the numerators are the same. So, for this one to be larger, its denominator has got to be smaller. The smaller the denominator, the larger the fraction, isn't it?
And, indeed, it is smaller than this one because this one has got N squared, but it's got an N and 1. N and 1. So, this denominator is larger than this denominator.
Therefore, this fraction is smaller than that fraction, isn't it? So, look at these equalities here. These equalities are absolutely true.
And, unfortunately, you have to figure it out this way. And this is 4, isn't it? 4N squared divided by N squared. This is 4.
In other words, the absolute value of my sequence will never, ever, ever go beyond 4. It cannot go beyond 4.
And that's what it says. The sequence is bound. If for some value M, which is now 4, which is larger than 0, the absolute value of what I started with, this was my absolute value, is less than that M value.
Okay. And this is actually very, it is for sure, it is less than 4. It can never be more than 4, as I've shown, as I've shown here.
Okay. So, 4 is the bound that I have, which also means 5 is a bound and 6 is a bound and 1 million is also a bound.
I can also call that a bound, but we usually say, we usually go for the smallest one there, 4. Okay.
So, it will be bound by 5, it will be bound by 7, it will be bound by 777. But, it is more than 0, and it will never be larger than that.
And you don't take the limit. You logically think of, you know, it's got to be smaller than that, it's got to be smaller than that, and eventually, you have to try,
through what I think of fraction modes here, try and get to a number. So, this is bound. So, if it's monotonic, in other words,
either it's always increasing or decreasing, bar making the small first little bit, 1 or 2 or 3, I'm talking about in the limits,
always increasing, always decreasing, and it is bound, this is an indirect method to see whether my sequence is convergent.
And if it is monotonic and it is bound, then my sequence will be convergent.
Now, it's time for some exercises. Here, we've got three. All we want to know is what happens to the nth element in the sequence as n tends to infinity.
So, the infinite element in my sequence, what will it be?
To do that, we're just going to take the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n cubed.
This is going to equal 1 over infinity, and so this is going to equal 0. So, this one converges, converges to 0.
Simple. n divided by n plus 1. Let's take the limit of that.
I can immediately see there's probably more than one ways to do that.
We'll go to infinity. Now, we can or can we not apply L'Hospital's rule?
Let's first look to it. This is divide the numerator. Remember, that was my first tool.
Divide the numerator and denominator by the largest power variable in the denominator, which is this n to the power of 1.
So, I'm going to have n divided by n divided by n plus 1 over n. That is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 divided by 1 plus 1 over n.
That equals 1 over 1 plus 0, and that equals 1.
Now, let's just turn this into a function of x.
So, we're going to have that the f of x equals x over x plus 1.
If we take the limit of my function as x tends to infinity, we're going to have x of x plus 1,
and that is going to equal infinity divided by infinity, which is in determinant form.
So, let's apply L'Hospital's rule.
So, that's going to be the limit as x tends to infinity.
Fifth derivative of x is 1. Fifth derivative of x plus 1 is 1.
That equals 1.
And because this limit tends to converge to 1,
that means my sequence is always also going to converge to 1.
So, I could do any of the two rules there.
Last one, my sequence is n over square root of n.
Remember, that means n equals 1 to infinity.
That's what it means.
So, those are going to be elements.
1, 2, 3, that 1 is an element, 2 is an element, 3 is an element.
The n element, if n tends to infinity, is the infinite element.
That's what the one we're looking for.
It's not a series.
We're not adding these things, multiplying them.
Okay.
So, let's take the limit.
As n tends to infinity of 2 over n to the power of half.
Now, infinity, the square root of infinity is still infinity.
So, I'm dealing with constant divided by infinity, and that's just going to equal 0.
So, this converges as well from converges to 0.
There's nothing special about making that a square root.
The square root of infinity is not some specific number.
It is still infinite.
So, three easy exercises to start with.
Let's look at our next exercise.
We have our sequence, n squared plus 1 over n plus 1.
Let's take the limit.
We just want to know, does the sequence converge or not?
And if it converges, obviously, what does it converge to?
So, the limit as n tends to infinity.
Once again, I, you know, if I plug in infinity, I'm going to be left with infinity of infinity.
Like it was a rule, and I'll have to see if I change that into a function, whether I can apply it.
Let's not apply it.
Let's just divide the numerator and the denominator by the largest power variable in the denominator.
So, that is going to leave me n squared plus 1 divided by n.
That's going to leave me n plus 1 over n divided by 1 plus 1 over n.
And if I replace that, I'm going to have infinity plus 0 divided by 1, and that equals infinity.
So, that sequence diverges.
Now, these following two examples are not going to try to be too clear about.
We have our sequence, negative 1 to the power n times n plus 2 and 3 n minus 1.
What happens in the limit?
Does this converge or diverge?
So, we're looking at the limit as n goes to infinity.
Now, we know what happens to negative 1 to the power n.
Anytime n is an even number, it's going to be positive 1.
Anytime n is an odd number, n's going to be negative 1.
So, it's going to oscillate.
Positive 1, negative 1.
Positive 1, negative 1.
That is what my, at least here, what my, what is going to happen to n as n goes to infinity.
That's going to be my, my element of my sequence there.
And on this side, well, once again, I can divide both the numerator and denominator by the larger tower variable of a denominator.
So, I'm going to get n divided by n is 1 plus 2 over n.
I'm going to get there.
And here, I'm going to get 3 minus 1 over n.
And so, I'm going to be here left with a third.
So, it is going to be this oscillating term times a third.
So, it's going to be negative a third, positive a third, negative a third, positive a third.
So, this is going to diverge.
Very clearly, this is going to diverge.
So, without being too clever, I suppose I could use the limit of this times the limit of that.
But here, we can see that this is going to be some positive constant.
And this is going to oscillate.
Multiplying that together, obviously, that's going to continue to oscillate.
But, let's look at another example, which is much more interesting.
And let's make this n squared plus 4.
Now, what's going to happen here?
What's going to happen here?
Now, clearly, this is still going to oscillate between negative 1 plus 1, negative 1 plus 1.
But what's going to happen here?
If I divide both the denominator by n squared, I'm going to be left with 1 over n plus 2 over n squared.
And I'm going to be left with 1 plus 4 over n squared.
So, and if I substitute nr with infinity, it's 0 plus 0.
0 divided by 1, that is going to equal 0.
So, this, the limit of this is going to be 0, whereas the limit of this goes up and down, you know, 1 plus 1.
But whatever that is, at that specific term in my sequence, or element of my sequence,
I'm going to multiply by 0, and that's 0.
So, the limit of a n here equals 0.
So, it's just because we squared the term in the denominator here, which now is going to make it 0,
whereas before, if the higher power was 1 and the higher power was 1, it was going to diverge.
Now, suddenly, it's going to converge, and it's going to converge on 0.
Here we have a nice little exercise.
We have our sequence equals n to the power, times e to the power negative n.
Not much I can do there to look whether this converges or diverges.
I can't really divide the numerator and denominator, as it stands there is none.
I can't really use the squeeze theorem here.
What about L'Hopital's rule?
Yes, yes, indeed.
Let's see if we change this to a function of f of x.
It's going to be x e to the power negative x.
Let's take the limit as x tends to infinity of x e to the power negative x.
Now, what is that going to be?
It's going to be infinity, or I can rewrite this as x.
x times 1 over e to the power x.
So I'm going to be left with infinity times 0.
Infinity times 0, which is an interterminal form, but as it stands, I cannot apply L'Hopital's rule.
I've got to go for an interterminal form at least of infinity of infinity, which in our case is very easy to do.
Remember, if you get this form, what you have to do is you have to make a fraction of this.
So we're going to change this to x over e to the power x.
Now I'm going to be left with infinity of infinity, an interterminal form to which I can apply a differentiation separately to the numerator and the denominator.
So that's going to be the limit as x tends to infinity of the first derivative of x is 1, and the derivative of e to the power x is e to the power x.
And if I now substitute, I'm going to get 1 over infinity, and that equals 0.
So this converges to 0.
Converges to 0.
More exercises.
We have this sequence.
e to the power n plus 2, and what is the number to the power n minus 1?
And we can't just divide the numerator and the denominator.
Let's see if we can apply, let's see if we can apply L'Hôpital's rule.
Let's say the limit of x tends to infinity of e to the power x plus 2 divided by e to the power x minus 1.
So if I put that in there, and it's going to be, oh, I made a mistake.
This is going to be a 2.
I thought this was going nowhere.
So let me just rewrite this.
e to the power 2x minus 1.
So if I plug in, I'm going to get infinity divided by infinity.
So we can, it's an indeterminate form to which I can directly apply L'Hôpital's rule.
So I'm going to get the limit of x tends to infinity of e to the power x plus 2.
The first derivative of that is e to the power x.
And this is going to be 2 times e to the power 2x.
And what will happen here?
This will cancel with that one, so I'm left with the limit of x tends to infinity of 1 over 1 over 2 e to the power x.
And if I now substitute, it's going to be 1 over infinity, and it's going to equal 0.
So this converges to, it's going to converge to 0.
Remember this e to the power, let's just look at this e to the power x.
Provided e to the power 2x, it's going to be e to the power x.
Which is going to cancel with that one, so it's going to be 1 over.
It's going to be 1 over that.
Okay.
So let's look at this example.
I suppose what you could do, you could say b of n equals n.
You could say c of n equals 2n over vn.
So you're going to be left with an equals bn times cn.
And the limit of this is going to be the limit of this times the limit of that.
So we're looking at the limit as n goes to infinity of n times the limit as n goes to infinity of 2 over 3 to the power n.
That's what I'm looking at.
As this term goes to infinity, this is clearly going to go to infinity.
But it doesn't matter what happens is on this side, remember, if a value is between 0 and 1.
So x is between 0, x is between 0 and 1.
And I raise this, so say for instance a half.
If I raise this to the power x, let's not use x there.
If I have any constant between 0 and 1, it's not 0, it's not 1.
And I raise it to the power x and I let x go to infinity.
This is going to 10 to 0.
If it is exactly 1, 1 to the power of anything is 1.
And if it's more than 1, if my constant is more than 1,
so for instance 2 or 1.1 or 1.0001,
to the power of infinity is then going to go up to infinity.
So this is a fraction between 0 and 1.
So this side is going to go to 0.
So I'm not dealing with indeterminate form now as applied to just normal limits.
I'm looking at the limits of sequences here.
So if this was 1, or 2, or 3, or 4, or 5,
as it gets bigger, this is going to get bigger and bigger and bigger,
but as this gets to infinity,
this side is going to tend to, this side is going to tend to 0.
So this is also going to converge to 0.
Also going to converge to 0.
