Before we start looking at limits and I teach you how to work with the very exciting world
of limits, I think it's always good to start with a tangible example. Can I use limits
in real life? Now look at this very busy slide we've got here. We seem to have two equations,
a p of t and a c of p. So that p would refer to the first p and the p of t. So these equations
are somehow locked in and we see one is marked red. So we presume that's the red graph at
the bottom and the blue one seems to just go up and up and up. And what's the story behind
this? Well, I said we should make it real life. So let's come up with a good story. Aliens
are about to invade the earth. Oh, and everyone is concerned and the president asks, what can
be done? And the scientist says, well, actually aliens have landed before and we did some
experiments on them and we came up with these two equations. What's these two equations?
The president says, well, he says, well, he says, one is we had a population model there
and we called it p of t. And as time increases, that is in this area where we had the aliens
and we experimented on them. That's the population of the people there. And this c of p, that seems
to be the rate at which the alien bugs can multiply and infect people and people turn
into aliens. The president asks now, what kind of losses are we looking at? The scientist
says, not a problem. Let's see what happens as time reaches infinity. Let's see how many
people we're going to lose. And so if we take the limit as time goes to infinity of p of t,
20, there's the sum. You don't need to know how to do it. It ends up at 20. The answer
is going to be 20. And if we plug that p value of 20 into the c of p, we see, oh, the answer
is 4.2. So out of a maximum population of 20, we're going to lose 4.2 because the humans
are going to fight back. So very useful example, real life example there for you. So let's look
at these equations again. We have p of t, and there's the red graph. You can see it sort
of starts to climb, but it reaches this maximum, and it seems not to go up any further. It's
hit some form of a limit there. It doesn't go up. And if we let these bugs just go, and
we gave them ample humans to feed on, these alien bugs, you'll see the infection rate just
goes up and up and up and up. The blue line is going to go up to infinity. It's just not
going to stop. As time reaches infinity, it seems as if in the y-axis, the number of
infections we're talking about is going to go up to infinity as well. But if we combine
these two, it says to you that, well, these bugs can't just really infect humans and turn
them into aliens ad infinitum. There's going to be some rate limitation here. So the population
is only going to get to 20. That means these bugs don't have a resource of food that's
limitless, and the humans fight back. And so if we combine those two, then we get this
little green line here. That is the c of the p of t, of drawn a in green. And you see that
also reaches some limit. So with this very useful in real life example, I want to show
you that we can model things. We can model what might happen in the future. And we can
see we can end up with these graphs that seem to increase, might as well decrease, but they
reach some sort of limit. As opposed to this blue line, this is going to go up and up and
up and never stop. But you can get these other equations that seem to go up or down, as I said,
but they reach some form of limit. And then we know, we usually model time to go to infinity.
And realistically, that might mean months or the next couple of years or the next couple
of decades, whatever the situation might be. We can now estimate what the result might
be under a set of circumstances. And yeah, I've constrained the circumstances by allowing
the population only to reach 20 over time. I can put some constraints on my equations there.
And there seems to be this natural limit things can get to. And that is how things work in
medicine, in the disease and the spread of disease. Some limit is reached. So very exciting
stuff, limits. And it's well worth the effort to learn how to do the mathematics of limits.
Let's get started.
Let's get started.
Let's do it.
Let's get started.
