Now we've got to move on from a sequence to a series.
And how do we define this? First of all, let's look back at a sequence.
If I have a sequence, my sequence, let's have an example.
a1, a2, a3, a4, and on and on we go to a infinity.
That would be a sequence.
And I can write that sequence in a different manner.
I can say a n, and n is going from 1 to infinity.
That would be a sequence.
Now we build a series as a sequence of partial sums.
I build a series as a sequence of partial sums.
What does that mean?
It's a sentence that you read in many textbooks.
So if I have the sum from n equals 1 to infinity of, let's keep it now very simple, a n.
So what is that going to be?
This is going to be a1 plus a2 plus a3 plus a4 dot dot dot plus a up to infinity.
That will be this sum.
And this is what in general we know as a sum with summation, sigma, and rotation.
What if I call this sum, it shouldn't be done this way, but that's a sum up to infinity.
But let's look at a partial sum.
A partial sum, let's say partial sum number 3.
That means n has got to equal 3.
So I'm going to have a1 plus a2 plus a3.
That will be the sum of the first three terms.
Let's look at s4, and this is very trivial, a1 plus a2 plus a3 plus a4.
s3 and s4.
So if I want to sum n, it's going to be a1 plus a2 plus a3 plus dot dot dot dot dot am minus 1 plus an.
Now what I can do is, these are my sums, I can make them into a sequence.
In other words, I can have a new sequence, which is now my sequence, s1, s2, s3, s4, whatever, to sn.
So I'm making the various sums of this sum, this is this summation, sigma notation, of a normal sum day.
But I'm changing it into something different, a different mathematical object.
And that object is called a series.
It becomes a series if I view each partial sum.
So this is not the full sum, because the full sum goes from 1 to infinity, so this is just a partial sum.
If I view these partial sums as a sequence, that means I am seeing this sum not as a sum, but as a series.
So that is how we define a series.
It is a sequence of partial sums of the sum.
Okay, so we'll build from this definition of what a series is.
We'll look at convergent series, divergent series, and all the mathematical properties that we have for a series.
And most notably for us, we have to differentiate and integrate series.
But you can also add series, multiply them, divide them, etc.
But this is the definition of series.
So we're not looking at this as a sum, but as a sequence of partial sums, a sequence of partial sums.
And now you can see, if this, if the limit, if we take the limit as n goes to infinity, the limit as n goes to infinity of this sequence, the sequence of the partial sums, if that converges to a single, to a single value L, for instance, that means that this series, because it's now a series, also converges.
And that's why we have the initial lectures on sequence, because we now have at least a few ways of showing or determining whether a sequence converges or diverges.
And if that sequence of partial sums diverge or converge, this series will also converge or diverge.
