In this video series we will discuss antibiotics and other antimicrobial agents.
Start with a short introduction in this video and we will have a summary on drug interactions and resistance.
Now, antimicrobials can be classified in various ways.
Let's look at the mode of action where it is actually effective.
If we look at the beta-lactams such as the penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems,
have their effect on the cell wall.
The polymyxins on the production and working of the cell membrane
and for instance the quinolones or sulfonamides will have various effects on important bacterial enzymes,
for instance those important in cell division.
You can also classify them according to the spectrum.
What range of organisms will be affected by these antibiotics, for instance broad antibiotics.
We look at most penicillins or for instance the carbapenems or more narrow spectrum.
beta-lactams, for instance cloxicillin.
You can also classify them according to the biological effect.
Bacteriocidal versus bacteriostatic.
Bacteriocidal means the organism is actually killed.
For instance, interfering with the cell wall by beta-lactams will lead to cell death.
And that is bacteriocidal and bacteriostatic is just a slowdown in the production rate of these organisms.
And for this to happen we obviously need active cell replication for the bacteriostatic agents to infect.
We can also look at the methods of production.
There is still semi-synthetic modification of natural compounds.
Most of the beta-lactams are manufactured this way.
You still get isolates from living organisms, for instance the immunoglycosides.
And you get drugs, antibiotics that are completely synthetic, for instance the quinolones and the sulfamides.
Antibiotics came in the first half of the previous century.
And it's been almost 40 years since any new class of antibiotics have come along.
And certainly today we have four new classes.
The lipopeptides, for instance daptomycin.
The glycycline, for instance degecycline.
The oxozolidinones, for instance linozolid, which most people are familiar with.
And the lapiamycin, for instance fodexomycin.
A brief word on drug interactions.
Certainly we won't discuss here all the various drug interactions.
But some of the important ones might be the birth control pill.
Remember that the rate of failure of the pill due to antibiotics stands only at about 1%.
Not as broad an effect as one might imagine.
There is some increase in liver enzyme activity, which might lead to an increase in the breakdown of active ingredients.
Many mentioned the altered colon bacteria, which might lead to a lesser amount of estrogen being reabsorbed in the colon.
Put it back into the system, but that is very controversial.
And there is certainly not evidence against and for this theory.
As far as alcohol is concerned, metronidazole is well known to have a disulfurum like chemical reaction with alcohol.
And that inhibits the breakdown of alcohol by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase.
And then we must also just remember the doxycycline and erythromycin, which in effect might be lowered by alcohol.
Quick word on resistance.
Two types of resistance.
There is an intrinsic antibacterial resistance.
And there is acquired resistance.
This acquired resistance might be vertical or horizontal.
Where there is an acquisition of extra-chromosomal DNA directly from other bacteria.
The intrinsic antibacterial resistance comes from the fact that you can obviously not use certain antibiotics for certain organisms.
In that certainly the target of the antimicrobial agent just does not exist in a form, in a specific form in that bacteria.
In the next set of videos we will discuss various groups of antibiotics on their own.
