Now that we've seen the definition of a series seen as a sequence of partial sums, I just want to use this to illustrate exactly the difference. I can think of three things going on here.
So if you look at the series, you have to see it as a sequence of partial sums. In other words, I can say s of 1. That means n equals just 1. It starts at 1 and it's 1. So that's going to be 1 over 1 plus 1 plus 1. That equals a half.
Now, s2, once again, that's going to be 1 over 2. 1 over 2. Let's do that. 1 over 2 and 2 plus 1. So that's 3 times 2 is 6. That's a 6 plus the previous s1. Plus the previous s1. This is summation.
Now, this, let's do that. That's a 6 plus a half. And that equals a 6 plus, what is that, 3 over 6. That's 4 over 6. That's 2 over 3.
So my sequence now is going to be a half. The next one, next element is going to be 2 over 3. It's going to be 2 over 3. That is a sequence of the partial sums.
But note that as they get bigger, it is this summation. It is this summation.
Now, when we, and that's what we mean by it is a sequence of the partial sums. In this partial sum, I am doing this summation.
But we, as I said, we're not seeing this as a summation. We're seeing this as a series.
And the reason why we're looking at series is that we're going to explain functions that we do know, polynomials, transcendentals.
We're going to explain them as, for instance, Taylor series or on Claude's series.
And we can do differentiation and integration on that series if we can't do it on whatever the original function was, for instance.
We'll get to those things.
So this is still, I'm still summing this. I'm still summing this.
But in a series, I'm actually seeing things as the sequence of these partial sums.
And remember, a sequence is just elements. That element comma, the next element comma, the next element comma, the next element comma, the next element.
So don't get confused. I think in a later video, and I'm actually redoing this one because I'm changing something in it.
So this is a second attempt at this video.
When we say a sequence, I can also take this expression in my series.
And I can look at that, and I can call that A, and we can use sequence notation.
So there's 1 over N times N plus 1.
And I'm going from N equals 1 to infinity.
And now I can look at the infinite term, the infinite term in this.
In other words, I'm going to take the limit as N goes to infinity of A.
That is the limit as N goes to infinity of 1 over N and N plus 1.
And we can just see that's 1 over infinity, and that's 0.
So we can say that this sequence converges.
It converges in as much as the term in the limit, the element of my sequence in the limit is 0.
What I can also do is I can just change this.
Remember all the methods I have.
So I could write this as the f of x now being 1 over x and x plus 1.
And I can take the limit as x goes to infinity of the f of x.
And then this is going to be, I can plug in the limit that it's going to be 1 over infinity, which equals 0.
So now I can say that this sequence converges.
So if I have the sequence of elements, first I'm going to have N equals 1.
So A is going to equal, there's two of you as well, that is 1 over 1 over 1 half.
It's going to be my first element.
My second element, if I plug 2 in there, is 3.
2 times 3 is 6, so that's the 6th.
6, and so on.
And it's going to converge to 0 using one of my methods of checking for convergence of a sequence.
But this is my sequence, the half of 6th.
Now look at my series.
My series is not, 6 is not, here we're not talking about, look at it clearly, we're not talking about elements.
We're saying that, we're summing these.
So this will be 2 thirds.
And I'm going to carry on, carry on.
S3 is now going to be the sum of S2 plus, I'm going to put 3 in there.
3 times 1 is 4, 4 times 3 is 12, plus a 12th.
That's going to equal 2 thirds plus a 12th.
Now I can make a new sequence out of all these partial sums, out of all these partial sums.
That is not the sequence.
You can clearly see the difference.
That is not the sequence.
But as you'll see in a later video, I can use this, just looking at the convergence here,
what the infinite term is, it's actually called the 10th term test.
I can see what it goes to, and that can help me decide whether this is convergent or divergent.
Well, I can tell me if it's divergent, if it can only suggest to me that it's convergent,
and we'll see later if it's got something to do with this, exactly with this zero,
we'll see later what's going on here.
But please note the differences.
I'm going to harp on this.
This is a series.
The series can be seen as a sequence of partial sums.
The full sum is going to be when I let n go to infinity.
That's the full sum.
But now I don't let n go to infinity.
I let n go to 1, just to 2, just to 3.
So this is a part of this whole sum, and I call it a series.
And I can view this series as a sequence of the partial sums.
That has got nothing to do with this sequence, just of my expression here, 1 over n times n plus 1.
Okay, that is something different.
This is just the expression itself, and it is expressed as a sequence of numbers.
There's no summation here.
And as I said, we're later going to have a look at this to decide,
help us decide whether this series is convergent or not.
I want to give up a hint of a good 1 over n times in ошиб
