So the first series we're going to look at, the first type of series, is called the geometric
series. And that series is if you do any kind of algebraic manipulation to your term here,
if it can be written as the sum of a, which is a non-zero constant, r, which is a non-zero
constant, to the power k, and k goes from zero to infinity. If you can write an expression
like this as part of your sigma notation, and keeping in mind that we are talking about
the partial sums, the sequence of the partial sums as the series, let's write one of the
partial sums. We're going to write the partial sum to n. That means what we're doing is we're
saying k equals zero, and instead of going to infinity, we're going to n, ar to the power
k. Now let's write that quickly. As n, what is the first term going to be? If k is zero,
a non-zero positive integer, this is related to the power zero, is just one, one times a
k, plus my second term, I'm going from zero to n. So when k equals one, when k equals one,
I'm going to have ar. And you can quickly see we're going to have ar to the power
two plus ar cubed, plus, we're going to carry on until we get to ar n minus one. Minus one
means I now have n, n terms. Okay. Let's multiply both sides by r. In other words, we're going
to have ar, ar squared, ar cubed, ar to the power four plus, at the very end, I'm going
to have this ar to the power n. I'm just multiplying this by r. What if I subtract these two from each
other? I'm going to have sn minus r, sn, equals. I'm going to be left thing now, I'm not going
to rewrite out this whole thing, but think if I have this, minus this. The a term is not
going to be there. I have a positive ar. Now subtract from that an ar, so I'm going to get
nothing. ar squared and a negative ar squared, ar cubed, a negative ar cubed. I'm going to have
a positive ar to the power negative one. I'm going to have here minus that. So at the
end, I'm just going to be left with another ar to the power n. What can I do with this?
Well, I can take sn out as a common factor, so I'm going to be left with one minus r, and
on this side, I'm going to have an ar, and I'm going to have one plus r to the power n.
Now, I can divide both sides. I can get sn on its own. It's going to be a one plus r to
the power n divided by one minus r. Minus, remember this is, I'm subtracting this bottom one. Minus.
Sorry for that one. Okay, now, notice one thing. I now need s. I'm trying to get to s. That
means I'm taking the limit as n goes to infinity of sn. This is my partial sum now, letting n
go to infinity. Now, notice something very carefully. If I choose a specific value for r, and watch
this. If the absolute value of r is less than one, what is going to happen? What is going
to happen? What is going to happen to n? In other words, if I write this, it means negative
one to r to one. So, for instance, I can choose r to be zero, zero to the power anything, even
infinity is still zero. So, I'm going to be left with a over one minus r. And similarly,
if I choose, say for instance, a half. If I chose a half. A half to the power n as n goes
to infinity is going to go to zero, isn't it? Okay, so if I restrict myself to r, and this
has a main, this has a main, we'll get to that. I'm going to see that this term goes to zero,
and s is going to equal, s is going to equal a over one minus r. A equals one minus r. Okay.
So, if for instance, now this looks funny because I say that this as it goes to infinity equals a
over one minus r. But, I'm restricting myself for what this r is for this series to converge. Okay.
Think about anything that you take outside. If r equals two, you're going to have two squared,
two cubed, two, you know, as n goes to infinity, that numerator is just going to expand. So,
that's going to diverge. But, if I restrict myself to an r value in a geometric series,
in a geometric series of this form, and I restrict myself to this. Now, this is called the radius
of convergence. The radius of convergence. And if I stick within that radius of convergence,
I keep on putting pluses here. Minus, minus. Okay. If I stick within this radius of convergence,
that means this will converge to this value. So, for a geometric series, it's going to be less than one.
You might say one is going to converge to zero because one to the power of infinity stays one.
One minus one is zero. So, this will converge to zero. Be very careful with that. That is on the border,
and it's very delicate on that border, but you'll certainly see if you put a negative one in. That series will diverge
because you go up and down. So, don't include those. For any absolute value greater or larger than one,
this series, this geometric series will diverge. It's only if we restrict ourselves in the radius of convergence as far as this r level is concerned that this converges.
So, this becomes very important later on when we do some calculus and differentiation and integration and expand an expression as a series and we do differentiation and integration on that.
We have to be very careful whether our series converges or diverges. It won't make much sense now, but it will make some more sense later.
So, this is a geometric series and it will only, this is its answer, and it converges only if we restrict ourselves to an odd value within the radius of convergence.
Let's look at this example of this series. First of all, we just want to know is this convergent or divergent.
And it's easy to see that this is actually a geometric series. If you remember that the geometric series was going to go from zero,
we're not interested in what happens on the smaller side, zero or three, we're interested in what happens at infinity always, remember, of a r to the power of k.
We can even have made this a negative eight or positive eight, doesn't matter. So, our a is five, our r value is negative eight over three,
or negative eight over three, doesn't matter, and our k is what is increasing in the time.
Now, remember, we said that this equals one over, oops, should be a. Remember, we said that this equals a over one minus r.
So, what we have here, a for us is five over one minus, and let's make this, let's make it negative, negative that.
So, that's going to be positive eight over three. Positive eight over three, and if we make this three over three,
that is going to be five over eleven over three. Okay, doesn't matter where that goes.
So, what we do see is, though, what is our r value here? Here, for us, it's eight over three. If it was negative eight over three,
one from a geometric series is the following, that r, the actual value of r is going to be less than one.
And what do we see the value of r here? We see it as eight over three. If we have r equals eight over three,
that is definitely more than one. So, we are outside of our radius of convergence. So, as it stands here, this diverges.
This series diverges. This series diverges. Purely because r is outside of that. Even if it was negative, remember,
it's an absolute value of this little piece, an absolute value of that. That is still more than one. Okay.
If it was negative eight over three, obviously, it's smaller than negative one. It is outside of the radius of convergence
of a geometric series. Therefore, this series will diverge. Now, what might have sprung to mind is,
it looks like there's a very easy test to see if a series diverges, a geometric series like this diverges.
And I'm going to hop back slightly to what we did with sequences before. Remember, I said if we take this expression
and we make a sequence of it, and I'm looking at the nth term. Now, this is slightly in that sort of direction
that we are moving, but notice just the subtle difference. I'm also not suggesting that it is the sequence
of the partial sums. I'm just looking at the expression. And I'm going to say the limit. If the limit is k goes to infinity of a k there.
If that does not equal zero, then the series diverges. First of all, first things first. If it equals zero, it does not mean it converges.
It might or it might not. Okay, so if it does equal zero, we still have it either diverges or converges. We still have to do further tests.
Diverges, converges. We still have different tests if it equals zero. But if it doesn't equal zero, the term in the limit, as that k goes to infinity, it will mean it diverges.
And let's look at what this happens. So let's express this. And as I say, this is where it slightly hops back, but notice just the subtlety.
So if I say this, I'm just looking at the term, not the partial sums, so not the series, of 5 times 8 over 3 to the power of k from n equals zero to n equals infinity.
In our instance, it was 3. It doesn't matter. What happens at infinity? Now, I can't do that as it stands, but I can rewrite this as f of x.
That's going to be 5, then 8 over 3 to the power of x. And if the limit as x goes to infinity of the f of x is the limit of this, and if this is anything going to infinity, this is infinity.
It is not zero. It is not zero. It's not zero. It means it diverges. I can stop there. I don't have to do anything else to this. I can immediately say that this geometric series diverges.
If this was zero, if it did go to zero, I still need to do other tests. But look, I'm not looking at the limit as n goes to infinity of that partial sum.
So I haven't added a lot of these together and looked at the partial sum where k equals n. I'm just looking at this and sort of what I did before.
I said, look, we're not going to do it that specific way, but in a slightly different way of that is this. And this is what we're doing.
So I'm just taking that and I just want to know what the, what the, that specific term, that specific term is as k goes to infinity.
So I'm just taking this expression, I'm just taking that expression and I'm, so this will be a sequence of values.
And I just want the, I just want the element in my sequence where n goes to infinity.
So I'm using one of those four methods, remember, so I'm doing it as an f of x, and it goes to infinity there.
It is not zero, so immediately I know that this series, this series diverges.
