In this first video we'll look at penicillins. We'll classify them, look at their spectrum of
activity and their phycology. Now the penicillins form part of the beta-lactam group. Quite a big
group and they all share the same internal chemical ring structure. And penicillin, the
name penicillin itself is also a common term for quite a wide variety of antibiotics, not
just a single antibiotic. They work by inhibiting the growth of an organism by inactivating enzymes
in the cell walls, specifically those involved in the third stage of wall synthesis. And
there are three modes of resistance to all beta-lactam antibiotics, specifically penicillins,
and that is a decrease in penetration of the target site. The target site itself, which
is the penicillin binding proteins, can alter. And lastly, probably most important, the inactivation
by bacterial enzymes, the penicillinase enzymes. Remember that almost all gram-negatives have
genes that can express penicillinase enzymes. Some of these bacteria, they express them poorly
and they need plasma transfer of more active genes, but certainly almost all gram-negatives
will have this gene. So let's classify penicillins. First of all, well there's a long list. We'll
start with benzyl penicillin, that's the famous pen-G, injected. Very short half-life, not very
stable, can be stabilized a bit more in two forms, the procaine penicillin and the benzatine penicillin.
And then all three of these are for parenteral use, either intravenously or injected subcutaneously.
And then we have phenoxymethyl penicillin or Pen-V or Pen-VK, which is in stable oral form.
Then we move on to what is sometimes referred to as the second generation penicillins. These
would be ampicillin and amoxicillin. Then the anti-staphylococcal penicillins, of which
we mostly use Cloxacillin. Note there that methicillin is a part of this group. Methicillin
is not available in many areas and when we refer to MRSA, methicillin resistant Staph aureus,
we're actually referring to Cloxacillin resistant Staph aureus. The third generation penicillins,
the Ticacillin for instance, and then the more widely used fourth generation penicillins,
of which a good example is Peperacillin. Now what is the spectrum of activity? Let's
start with Pen-G, obviously for gram-positive cocci. We're talking in this instance, we're
talking as far as surgery is concerned, surgical site sepsis and cellulitis, where we expect
gram-positive organisms. Remember though that it cannot be used if there's penicillinase
producing Staphylococci, if there's penicillin resistant pneumococci, most enterococci, and
of course MRSA, which I've explained in our situation means Cloxacillin resistant Staph aureus.
But we all use the term MRSA for methicillin. As far as the enterococci are concerned, you
can still use the penicillins, but with that you'll definitely have to add a second drug
such as an aminoglycoside and clinically relevant enterococci. When we come to the gram-positive
rods, Listeria, which is not of great concern to surgeons in this area, gram-negative cocci,
Neisseria, remember not Neisseria gonorrhea, most of those will be resistant. And most anaerobes
except Bacteroides are sensitive to penicillin and of course the Bacteroides that we are interested
in from a surgical perspective will not be sensitive to penicillins. The anti-staphylococcal
penicillins, they're active against penicillinase producing them and positive strains. So we can
add to them, we can use them, but not when there's MRSA. Once there's resistance to Cloxacillin,
we can't use these anti-staphylococcal penicillins. And remember they have a narrower spectrum than
Pen-G. One other method of classifying them, we can group some of the ones that we've mentioned
already as broad spectrum penicillins. So included in that would be your second, third and fourth
generations for instance, apicillin, amoxicillin, fourth generation, papiracillin. That extends the
spectrum of Pen-G to the Gram-negatives, more towards the Gram-negative side with the concomitant
loss of some activity against your Gram-positives. So if it's a sensitive Gram-positive organism,
stick to the first generation Pen-G. Remember the broad spectrum penicillins are not effective
against Penicillinase producing staphs. So once you produce Penicillin staphs, these broad-spectrum
penicillins become inactive. If we look at the second generation Keflosporins in a bit more
detail, specifically the Ampicillin and Ampicillin, they have the same spectrum basically as your
Pen-G. They do extend it to Gram-negatives because they can enter the Gram-negative porin
channels at a very high dose. Amoxicillin is obviously better for oral administration. Once
again there is no activity once there is Penicillinase production. If there is, you can still go on
to Crocsicillin, Flu-Cloxicillin but once there is MRSA, you can't use those either. If we look
at the fourth generation Penicillins, Perpericillin is a derivative of Ampicillin. It further extends
the Pen-G activity against Gram-negatives and used for usually severe Gram-negative infections,
specifically pseudomonal infections and then we do add that to a beta-lactamase inhibitor
for use specifically in anti-seudomonal or any severe gram-negative intra-abdominal infections
and even then we might add to it another antibiotic.
Pharmacology, all penicillins basically have very good tissue penetration as far as surgery
is concerned specifically in the bile concentrates in bile so the concentration there will be
higher than in plasma. They have a very short half-life except for papiracillin which has
a slightly longer dose-related half-life and that means if we do have serious infections,
if we do have serious cellulitis infections we do have to give these drugs on quite a
regular basis. Remember though that you have to reduce the dose if there is renal insufficiency
except for cloxicillin, flucloxicillin etc which you can still use the normal dose.
and again with those old lovely guys.
thank you for your natural skills.
감사합니다.
Thank you.
So,
bless you.
Thank you.
