Example time. We now have the series of the sum of 4 over k times k plus 2 from k plus 1 to infinity.
Does it converge in the series? And if so, to what? First of all, I can do the kth test.
Now I think up till now I've sort of skipped a step. Let me show you that without skipping a step,
I'm going to say my sequence equals 4 over, now usually we call this the kth test.
So, you know, we can't really have k, so let's just substitute that with n.
So that's n times n plus 2, okay?
Now I'm going to look for the kth element, okay, so that is from n equals 1, was it 1, to infinity.
And now I'm looking for the kth element in my sequence, this is not a sum.
So 8k is now going to be 4 over, that is k, and k plus 2.
And now, so this is why we call it the kth test.
So now I'm just looking for the limit as k goes to infinity of 8k.
So k is now, goes to infinity.
And if I put infinity in the denominator here, I get 4 divided by infinity.
4 divided by infinity, which gives me 0, 0.
So my, in effect, I could have just jumped and just put the infinity there,
and I said that is my infinite element.
But now I've done it properly, so I've gone for the kth element,
and I let k go to infinity, which still means my infinite element is 0.
So it is 0, so I know this series might converge.
It might converge.
Now, how do we do this?
Now, we've already seen a couple of examples.
There are a few methods.
In one, for instance, we made little rectangles.
And we saw that if we drew a curve and we took the area under the curve,
that this series would be more than the curve, so that would diverge.
There are all sorts of ways to do it.
In this example, let's look at another method,
and I think we might have done an example before.
Let's just break this up into partial sums.
So if we say 4, and we have k and k plus 2.
So that's going to equal a over k, and we're going to have b over k plus 2.
k plus 2.
So we're going to have 4 equals a k plus 2 plus b, and we're going to have k.
I think that is what I did.
Yeah, let's have k equal to negative 2.
So that's going to leave us 4.
So we can get rid of this a negative 2 plus 2 is 0.
0 to my 0.
So that's just going to be b times negative 2.
So that means what is b equals negative 2.
If I let k equal 0, I get rid of this k.
So I'm going to have 4 equals a times 2.
Or I have a equals 2.
So if I rewrite this, I can write it as the sum of,
the sum equals, the series equals the sum of k equals 1,
to infinity of my a is 2.
So it's 2 over k, 2 over k, and then becomes a negative 2 over k plus 2.
So I've just written this as partial fractions.
Okay.
So now we've got to find out, does this converge and what does it converge to?
And what I do suggest for this problem, and maybe I'll just summarize all the techniques.
Remember the one technique was actually drawing the rectangles, the graph, and looking at the area under the curve.
But in this instance, once I've done this, let's look at the partial sum is n.
That means I'm going to let k go from 1 till n.
Not to infinity, but to n.
So let's start with 1.
So now k equals 1.
2 divided by 1 is 2, minus 1 plus 2 is 3, so it's going to be minus 2 thirds.
Plus, let's look at the next one, where k equals 2.
2 over 2 is 1.
2 plus 1 is 3, so it's going to be minus 2 over 3.
I can already see something interesting, something interesting.
2 plus 2 is 4.
What am I doing?
I hope you were screaming and shouting there.
So 2 for 1 is 2 minus 2 over 3.
So 2.
2 plus 2.
2 over 2 is 1.
2 plus 2 is 4.
2 over 4 is a half.
Minus a half.
Sorry.
There we go.
Plus.
Let's say k equals 3.
That's going to be 2 over 3.
Minus 3.
3 plus 2 is 5, so it's going to be 2 over 5.
Plus.
Let's do 4.
2 over 4 is a half.
Minus 4 plus 2 is 6.
2 over 6 is a third.
It's a third.
Now I can start seeing interesting things develop.
Let's do 5.
Let's do 5.
That will be 2 over 5.
2 over 5 minus 5 plus 2 is 7, so that will be 2 over 7.
Plus.
Plus.
This is going to be doing a partial sample n.
So that will be 2 over n.
And minus 2 over n plus 2.
Now if you know, very interesting, you'll see a few things like this.
So that will be 2 over n minus 2 over n plus 2.
Now if you know, very interesting, you'll see a few things like this.
There's a negative 2 thirds plus 2 thirds.
I'm just adding these all, getting rid of the brackets.
I have negative 1 half here.
I have positive 1 half here.
I have negative 2 over 5.
I have positive 2 over 5.
And if you carry on and on and on, you'll see that this one will have something to cancel
with.
This one will have something to cancel with.
And this one will have something to cancel with.
I could do a n minus 1 and I could show you that.
So what do I have left for my partial sum?
I'm going to have left 2 plus 1 is 3.
And I'm going to have minus 2 over n plus 2.
Now let's take the limit.
Now as n goes to infinity.
So not the partial sum, I'm now letting n go to infinity.
Of this is n, which is now 3 minus 2 over n plus 2.
Now if I plug infinity in there, it will be 2 over infinity plus 2.
So 2 over infinity is 0.
So I'm just going to be left with 3.
So indeed it converges and it converges beautifully to 3.
So here will come on through the push I believe the point.
I will not move on to the left.
I'm just going to be okay!
You will not move on to the right.
