Let's do a few examples. The first one we're going to do is the series k equals 1 to infinity of 4 times minus 1, k plus 1, and we have divided by the square root of k.
First of all, how can we determine whether that is divergent or convergent? Now, we can see here that we do have an alternating series, and if you look carefully, you'll note that 8k is going to be 4 over the square root of k.
So don't be concerned that this was written in a form that you're not used to. Certainly that is. So the first step we need to see is what happens to the limit as k goes to infinity.
Now, in disguise, actually, what we're doing here is just the kth test. And the kth test for convergence you must use all over the ship. It is not the kth test inasmuch as we're not taking this whole expression. Indeed we are not.
We are applying this only to 8k. We are applying this only to 8k. And in our instance, this is 8k. This does not form part of 8k. So just be careful. Just be careful with that.
So the limit of that of 8k is going to equal 0, as is going to be 4 over the square root of infinity, which remains the square root of 4 over infinity, which is the 0.
Secondly, I need to show that 0 is less than 8k plus 1 is less than or equal to 8k. How do I do that? Well, I'm going to just divide 8k plus 1 over 8k.
And plus 1, that's going to be 4, divided by the square root of k plus 1, times, I'm going to have the square root of k over 4.
Just remember, I'm dividing by, I'm just changing the due rate and denominator there. So I'm left to the square root of k and k plus 1.
And clearly there is less than 1 for all k equal to or larger than 1. As much as I have k and I have k. And here I add 1. So my denominator will always be larger than my numerator for this range of k.
So there is less than 1. So I satisfy this. So this is indeed a convergent series. Let's do a quick other one. Which one can we do?
Let's do the sum of k equals 1 to infinity of negative 1 of k plus 1. So we're dealing with alternating series.
And we have 4 to the power of k divided by k squared. Divided by k squared. First thing I need to show is what happens in the limit of my sequence.
My sequence is 4 to the power of k divided by k squared. What happens in the limit as k goes to infinity.
k goes to infinity of 4k divided by k squared. Well if I plug infinity and I'm going to get infinity over infinity.
And I cannot divide by the largest power variable in the denominator because I can't divide that k squared into that.
And this is going to leave me with 4 over k divided by k squared divided by 1. So I'm just left where I started.
Now, remember it said now if I change this into the f of x. So now my f of x is going to be 4 to the power of x divided by x squared.
And I take the limit as x goes to infinity of the f of x. And I take the limit as x goes to infinity of the f of x. That is going to equal the limit as x goes to infinity.
So I can't apply L'Opital's rule on a sequence. Not on a sequence, but I can on a function. So that's going to be 4 to the power of x divided by x squared.
Remember if this thing, if this converges, oh not converges, if there is a limit, then this sequence converges.
But if, remember it doesn't work the other way around. So that will be infinity divided by infinity.
Now I can apply L'Opital's rule. x goes to infinity. That is going to be 4x natural log 4 divided by 2, by 2x.
And there is still going to be infinity divided by infinity. So I have to apply the rule again. Limit as x is still an indeterminate form.
And I did that before I get, ooh, 4 to the power of k natural log of 4 squared divided by 2. So that's infinity divided by 2 and that's infinity.
In other words, this sequence, this sequence does not converge. And furthermore, if it doesn't, that means it doesn't equal 0.
So this series up here diverges. Diverges. I have to go no further. It diverges.
Let's do one of these examples. I want an error. I want to know to what partial sums I go to have an error no more than 1 over 10,000.
And I know that this is an alternating series. So I know my equation for that. S minus S of n absolute value is less than or equal to a of n plus 1.
Indeed, in this instance, I have the a of n plus 1. What is that? Well, that is going to be 2 over 2 over n plus 1.
And I want that nothing more than 1 over 10,000. I can multiply this out, so I'm going to get 20,000.
And now remember my n is a positive integer, so I don't have to flip the sign when I multiply that out by 1.
So I have n larger than or equal to 19,999. Now, that says equal to. What is going to happen when I use n equal to 19,999?
Am I going to satisfy my requirement for my error? No, I am not. Because I said I want in a question, even though this is stated as this, the question stated I want an error less than that.
So in actual fact, I am asking this. I just want an error less than that. In other words, I better choose one more. So I've got to have a partial sum of at least 20,000 for me to fall within this error range.
And don't make, don't make this mistake as far as that's concerned. Just a practical point. Just think it out. I want an error no less than that.
But here I've had my equal sign put in due to the way, you know, that we do write that. But the question asks, I want an error no more than that.
I want to be guaranteed that I am within a certain error. That means I've actually got to go here to 20,000.
Let's just do that. Let's just say, let's say, let me take, let me take 19,000. So we have S minus S of 19,999.
Okay, and I'm going to say that that's going to be less than or equal 2a of n plus 1, which is for us 2 over 2 over n plus 1.
So what's going to happen here? It's going to be 2 over 20,000. So my error here, my n plus 1, is going to be 1 over 10,000.
Okay, but my question asks, I want to be better than that. I want to be, I want to have an error better than that. And that means I've got to make this 20,000.
If I make this 20,000, it's 1 over 10,000 and 1. Okay, so now it becomes smaller than this. So just ask, see what the question asks.
I want an error less than that was the question, was in the question. So I'm not going to use this equal to 19,000.
I've actually got to go 1 better than that.
