Very quickly, I want to show you an alternating series that does not converge, diverges in k equals 1 to infinity of, I do have to have this part, k plus 1, I have k divided by k plus 2.
Very quickly, first of all I need to show that as k tends to infinity, the kth element in the sequence of my a k has got to be 0, and from that 0 is going to be less than a k plus 1 is going to be less than a k, so subsequent elements in the sequence are going to be ever smaller.
So first of all, what is a k from this one? Easy to see that this is going to be k over k plus 2, what is going to be the limit is k goes to infinity of k over k plus 2, well the first way to do it is just to divide the numerator and denominator by the largest, by the largest, um, uh, powered variable in the denominator, I can do that, so I'm going to have the limit, as k goes to infinity, and you can also, you would realize that you'd also
I, uh, lock those rule after changing this into a function, you can also do that in this instance, but that is just going to be 1 divided by, I'm going to have 1 plus 2 over k,
and if I plug in the limit there, I'm going to get 1 over 1 plus 0, and that equals 1, so immediately, my kth test shows that my kth element, when k tends to infinity, is not going to tend to 0, in other words, this series is divergent.
All series that does not pass the theorem for convergence for alternating series are indeed divergent. Apologies for the change in clothing, I want to call, and I'm running up and down to theater.
Now, we're going to look at estimating the error, as we did a few videos ago, but now for the alternating series, we're going to look at the estimation of error. If I take a certain partial sum, um, versus the eventual answer s, as k goes to infinity, uh, there'll be a certain error, and I need to know what that error is going to be.
And the same thing is going to apply when we're looking at s minus whatever the partial sum is there, whatever the remainder is, is my error.
This is an example that we looked at before. We can show that the, as k goes to infinity, the element of this sequence of ak goes to 0, and I can show that by dividing this one by that one that I'm always dealing with this situation, so I know that this was a converging series.
Let's just look at the partial sums there. I've written them on two sides of a line, and this line is the eventual answer s, as k goes to infinity.
s1 is going to be 1, s2 is going to be 0.5, so going from well beyond or larger than s, suddenly I'm jumping to well below the eventual answer s.
With s3 I'm jumping again as greater than the eventual s, s4 I'm jumping to less than the eventual s.
But you can see that this does converge to sum of 0.6 or whatever the answer is, I can't remember exactly.
it does converge to this, but the even-numbered ones are smaller than the eventual s.
The odd-numbered ones are larger than the eventual s. Look at the even-numbered ones.
s is going to be larger, for instance, than s6 would be, s6 would be larger than s4, s4 is larger than s2.
The other way around here, for the odd-numbered ones, inasmuch as s is eventually smaller than s5, which is smaller than s3, which is smaller than s1.
As far as the partial sums go, they get larger, 0.7, 0.8, 1.
So these ones go smaller, 0.58, 0.5.
So we can write this long for these two, even in us, for these two.
We can write this, s2 is less than s4 is less than s6, eventually less than s, and s is smaller than s5, which is smaller than s3, which is smaller than s1.
In other words, s1 was the largest.
Now, let's just look at the even and the odd-numbered n values in my partial sum.
Okay.
So if I look at the even ones, I've got s, I have s there.
And s is larger than sn.
So if I choose snn to be 4, this s4 is smaller than s.
But if I add 1 to this 4, I make it 5, I make it 5, I know that s will be smaller than 5.
So this is indeed the correct statement.
You can do the same with this statement.
You'll see if you choose an odd one to start off with, it will eventually then be smaller than the preceding one.
So the second idea is we've subtracted.
We've got three terms here, and we are standing with inequality.
So if I subtract sn from this, I get 0.
If I subtract sn from this, I get s minus sn.
And if I subtract sn from sn plus 1 minus sn, what am I going to get?
If I take 1 and I just subtract the previous one.
So let's just rewrite this.
0.
We're going to be left there.
s minus sn.
It's smaller than, what is this?
This is nothing other than a n plus 1.
Because I add this to that to get me there.
I add the next element there to that one to give me that one.
Okay.
Now, because this is always a positive number, see here?
It's always positive.
I can put minus a n plus 1 on this side, which will then be less than 0.
And look what we have here.
This we can rewrite as the absolute value of s minus sn is equal to,
smaller than or equal to a n plus 1.
a n plus 1.
And we're going to do the same on this side.
So if I subtract sn from all of them, I'm also going to be left here.
And just think about what these values, this must always be positive.
That must be positive.
So this indeed makes sense.
But it leaves us with the same error estimation.
s minus sn is smaller than or equal to a n plus 1.
And there we have our error estimation for an alternating sum.
For an alternating sum.
So the error is never going to be larger than the very next,
wherever you measure cutoff for the n value for your partial sum,
is never ever going to be larger than just the very next a term.
The very next 1 over k in our instance, the very next a n term, n plus 1.
So wherever that counterforce, the very next one, it will never be,
your error is never going to be larger than the size of your very next term.
Example time then.
Let's solve this problem.
First of all, we have this.
And we can clearly see that we are dealing with an alternating series.
And we can see that we are going to have our a value, our k-th element in the sequence is going to be 1 over k to the power of 4.
Now, first of all, I need to show whether this is convergent or divergent.
First of all, I can just take the limit as k goes to infinity of 1 over k to the power of 4, and that is indeed 0.
And what I can do then is divide 8k plus 1 divided by 8k.
And I've done it there on the board, and I show that that is less than 1.
Less than 1.
Do that.
You'll get k to the power of 4 over k to the power of 4 plus some other terms, making the denominator larger than the numerator.
So, indeed, I also have that 0 is less than a k plus 1, and that is less than or equal to a k.
In other words, this is a convergent series.
Now, I want to know if I take, I think the problem asks for, if I take the partial sum with n equals 40, what is going to be my error in that estimation?
I'm estimating this series as the partial sum is n equals 40.
And we know that the absolute value of s minus s n is nothing, will not be larger than a n plus 1.
So we are looking for s 40 for this one.
And so what is going to be the a of n plus 1?
Well, if I put a of n plus 1, my n is 40.
So I'm looking at 41 there.
That's going to be 1 over 41 to the power of 4, which is about 3.54, 3.54 times 10 to the power of negative 7.
So, if I take the partial sum with n equals 40, my error is going to be exceedingly small.
Based on what I'm dealing with, if I'm dealing with the size of the nucleus of an atom, certainly this is a huge error.
I guess it just depends in what context you are seeing this, but certainly this is a very small number.
Of much more interest though, much more interest though, is I want to be accurate to a certain error.
And let's say that my error, I want nothing less than, nothing more than, I don't want my error to be anything more than 1.00 times 10 to the power of negative 10.
So, now I want, I mean that was to the power of negative 7, now I want to go to the power of negative 10.
And so I need to be extremely accurate, extremely accurate.
So, what did we say this is?
Well, this is nothing other than a of n plus 1, so I want that to be less than 1.00 times 10 to the power of negative 10.
And what is a of ak is this, so I'm looking for 1 over n plus 1, n plus 1 to the power of 4, and that has got to be nothing then.
Now you can write this in a clever way, remember that will be 1 over 1.00 times 10 to the power of 10.
In other words, I want n plus 1 to the power of 4 to be less than or equal to 1.00 times 10 to the power of 10.
I can take the root there of 4, of 4, which is this times 1 over 4 there, and I can just subtract that.
So, I'm going to get n minus, just do this on your calculator, although you can probably do it roughly in your head.
That's going to be 315.22.
So, for this error, for this error, I need n to be smaller than this.
And the first integer smaller than this is going to be 350.
So, from n equals 316 upwards, I'm going to have a larger error than I required.
And this makes a lot more, I use a lot more in practice.
I want to estimate my series, but I cannot deal with it in my experiment or in my calculations with an error larger than this.
So, you choose your error and then you see to what level of martial sums should you go to estimate the full answer of the series.
Okay.
