Let's get to the ratio test, which is the second last test we do here, a very powerful test.
And we can also be used for the geometric series that we look at next.
Before we get to these two things, let me state the ratio test.
If I take the limit, the scale goes to infinity of the absolute value of this element divided by that element.
And that equals some absolute value L.
And what this test says, so if L is less than 1, the series converges absolutely.
If L is more than 1, so even infinity, I think which is the most cases you're going to get infinity, this series diverges.
And if L equals 1, well, you'll have to do some other test we don't know.
And later on, if you do some P series, remember which is 1 over Kp, you'll note that all of them work out to 1.
And you can't use for any series, you can't use if P equals 1.
We know that it's the harmonic series that diverges.
We know if P is more than 1, we know that all of those converge.
So we have another test for the P series, and we know what happens with our harmonic series with P is 1.
But that's just on the side.
You'll notice that all of them are trouble.
They all end up there.
So let's look at this series.
Notice very carefully, it's negative 1 to the power K, not K plus 1, it's not an alternating series, K, times K, and 2 to the power K.
This is just a reminder of what a series is.
Remember we said a series is a sequence of partial sums.
And here we have 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, as K goes from 1 to infinity.
And here we'll have our first partial sum, our second partial sum, our third partial sum, and so it goes.
And we can see that the sequence of partial sums do, they do look like they converge, and they look like they converge at about 2.
Remember all of these tests, the answers that we get there is not the answer as to what the series converges to.
Never make that mistake.
Let's look at this.
Let's look at what the absolute value of A, K plus 1, is going to be.
Well, it's the absolute value of the numerator and the denominator.
If you take the absolute value of negative 1 to the power K, and K goes from 1 to infinity, that is always going to be 1.
So all we're left at the top is a K, which is always positive anyway, because K goes from 1 to infinity.
And at the bottom we're going to get 2 times 2 to the power K, as much as I have 2 to the power K plus 1.
And you've got to know your rules there for exponents, that is 2.
So, okay, let's divide this by the absolute value of a K, to say K, and that's going to equal then, divided by this slot, that is still going to be 1, that is still going to be a K.
K, sorry, that must be K plus 1, I thought something was wrong.
So that's always going to be 1, this is now K plus 1.
And this is going to be divided by 2K.
I can immediately see those two are going to go, so I'm left with, I'm left with K plus 1 over 2.
K plus 1 over 2 times 1 over K.
So I'm just going to have K plus 1 times 2K.
And what I'm doing here, I'm taking the limit of this, I'm taking the limit of this as K goes to infinity, so I'm taking the limit of this, the limit of this as K goes to infinity.
Now, that's going to be infinity over infinity, and right at the beginning of sequences and series, we looked at, first thing we can do, we can't plug in and get an answer,
we'll divide the numerator and denominator by the largest power variable, which is not an exponent, in the denominator, so I'm going to get that equals the limit.
This K goes to infinity of K divided by K is 1, plus 1 over K, divided by, divided by K is 2, if I plug infinity in here, that becomes a 0, so I'm left with a half.
It's going to be that half, now see clearly, this is not that, that goes to 2, so that's a half.
A half is less than 1 by my ratio test, this is called the ratio test, the ratio test, and it is less than 1, so this series converges absolutely.
Let's see if we can apply the ratio test there, let's just first of all get a, actually value of a K plus 1, so that's going to equal,
this actually value of this makes that a 1, 1 to the power, anything from K equals 1 to infinity is going to be a 1,
so here we're going to be left with K plus 1, K plus 1 factorial, over e to the power of K plus 1, is e times e to the power of K,
we're going to divide that by the absolute value of this element, and we're taking the limit as K goes to infinity,
here we're going to be left with still that, so we're going to be left with K factorial divided by e to the power of K,
and we can immediately take those two away.
Now I've got to rewrite this, let's make K 3, what is 3 factorial?
That equals 3 times 2 times 1, what is 4 factorial?
Well, that is 3 plus 1 factorial, isn't it?
And that is 4 times 3 times 2 times 1, and is that not, if I'm looking at 3, K equals 3,
and now I'm looking for K plus 1, is that not K plus 1 times K factorial?
Because K is 3, 1, 2, 3, K plus 1 is 4, this gives me that 4, so I can certainly rewrite this,
this is going to be the limit, this K goes to infinity, of, I'm going to have K plus 1,
1, 1, K factorial, over e, times, the other way around, so times 1 over K factorial,
those K factorials are going to go, so I'm left with the limit,
as K goes to infinity, as K goes to infinity of K plus 1, over, K plus 1 over e,
and if I plug that in, this gives me infinity, in other words, by the ratio test, this series diverges.
The last test that we're going to look at, test for convergent,
before we get to the geometric series, is called the root test, the root test,
and the root test is very much the same as the ratio test,
when it comes to whatever the value of the limit is,
and the root test says, given,
we are given this series,
infinity of K,
and we suppose, you can write all of these tests like this basically,
and we suppose that the limit,
as K goes to infinity of,
this root,
K,
absolute value of AK,
equals L,
and again,
if L is less than 1,
there's absolute
convergence,
if L is more than 1,
including infinity,
there is divergence,
and if L equals 1,
who knows,
we've got to do some other tests.
Let's do a quick,
let's do a quick example,
I think,
the one that I've got on the board there,
is this series,
K equals 1 to infinity,
I have
2K plus 4
over 5K minus 1,
all to the power of K,
which obviously you can see,
this is going to make it quite simple,
seeing that they're all to the power of K,
I'm going to have a limit,
as K goes to infinity of,
the,
we're going to have a K there,
and then the absolute value of this,
well,
think of it,
if K equals 1 and higher,
the absolute value of that is just going to be that,
then we're going to be a negative,
and the absolute value of that is also going to just be 5K minus 1,
and this is all to the power of K,
instead of taking this root here,
I can just also multiply all of this,
to the power of 1 over K,
these will cancel,
so that's just 1,
so I'm looking at the limit,
as K goes to infinity,
of 2K plus 4,
divided by 5K minus 1,
my variables are all,
are not in the exponents,
and in the numerator and denominator,
if I just plug in this,
I'm going to get infinity over infinity,
I can't do that,
I go to my next step,
for sequences,
because remember,
this is a sequence of partial sums we're dealing with,
called a series,
so I'm going to divide the numerator and denominator,
by the largest power variable,
in the denominator,
which is just K,
so this is going to be the limit,
as K goes to infinity,
of,
this divided by K,
is going to be 2 plus 4 over K,
and we're going to have 5,
minus 1 over K,
if I plug in infinity over here,
that's left to 0,
if I plug in that 0,
so I'm left at 2 over 5,
2 over 5 is less than 1,
in other words,
this series converges absolutely,
2 over 5 is less than 1,
in other words,
this series converges absolutely.
