Good, we're back. We're going to calculate position and velocity given the acceleration
vector. As I said, we're going to work in reverse. Now, at least for these parts, the next few parts
in these lectures, I'm not going to do explicit coding. By that, I mean the lines of code that
you can write that will do all of this for you. I'm not going to make use of these images here
to explain the physics behind things. Definitely later, we're going to do the simpi.physics.mechanics
library, and you can see you can do most of these things with the lines of code. So I'm going to use
sparse amounts of code. You can see there's some down here just to explain stuff, but I would never
use this code to solve this kind of problem. But let's go. So imagine you're given this acceleration
vector. You can see it's a vector in three space. The x of t would be 6t, the y of t would be 12t,
plus 2, and the z of t would be e to the power t. So what that describes is an acceleration
vector. So at every point in time for different values of t, an acceleration vector is going to
change. It'll change in magnitude, and it'll change in direction. We are also given the velocity as far
as an initial velocity vector. Time equals 0, we have this velocity vector pointing in the direction
2, 0, 1. And we're also given an initial position vector, 0, 3, 5. So that's at time equals 0,
we have that. Now we asked, can you calculate a velocity vector, which will be a vector in
three space with, so it'll have three sections as well, each containing the variable t. Can you do
that? Now we are using the simpy.physics.vector library here, and it does have a .div, remember
we could say vector.diff, and with respect to what variable and in what reference frame, but there's
not a .integrate function. So we have to do this, at least if I use this type of code, the long way
around. So what I've done here is I've introduced these three computer variables, a underscore x, a
underscore y, and a underscore z, and you can see there a 6 times t, which is the 6t up there, the 12
times t plus 2 up there, and the e to the power t up there. So I've introduced that, and now I can use
the integrate function, now this is part of simpy, not part of the simpy.physics.vector
library, it's part of the normal simpy library, so I could just use it because I imported from
simpy.import.integrate right at the top, at the beginning of this lecture 4. So again I'm making
these three, I'm making these three computer variables, velocity x, velocity y, and velocity z,
you could call them whatever you want, and all I have to say is integrate, and then the expression
I want to integrate, a underscore x is 6 times t, comma, what I want to integrate with respect to.
The same for y and the same for z. Now this is going to give you an indefinite integral without
the constant coefficient. You have to just put in that constant coefficient yourself. Beware though,
here we are dealing with vectors. It's not going to be a constant coefficient for an indefinite
integral, it's going to be a constant vector. C is now going to be a vector, not just a constant
of integration. So let's go. So I now have vx, vy, and vz, and if I just print that to the screen,
and you know the indefinite integral of 6t would be 3t squared. And there you go, so if I just,
there's vx, I'm just printing it to the screen, the indefinite integral of 12 times t plus 2 is going
to be 6t squared plus 2t, and the indefinite integral of e to the power t would just be e to the power t.
So just to bring the point home, I'm just going to show you here an image of what it now looks
like. We have the v of t, and for vx, vy, and vz, there it is. 3t squared, 6t squared plus 2t,
and e to the power t plus c with a line under it. That is now a constant vector. And I have to figure
out what that constant vector is. And we do it in the following way. Remember, we were given the
initial velocity vector, v at 0. So if I take this v of t, and I plug in 0 for every t, which is what
I've done here, 3 times 0 squared, 6 times 0 squared plus 2 times 0, and e to the power 0, plus this constant
coefficient should equal this initial velocity vector that I was given, 2, 0, 1. Remember up there,
we were given the initial velocity, 2, 0, 1, and there we have 2, 0, 1. Remember, this is a constant
vector c, so it has three components in the x, y, and z direction, or otherwise the i, j, and k direction,
whichever way you want to call it. Well, let's do this. 3 times 0 squared is the 0. 6 times 0 squared
plus 2 times 0 is 0. e to the power 0 is 1. So I can simplify this bit as 0, 0, 1 plus that should
give me 2, 0, 1. Now remember how to do vector addition. We just sum the individual components.
So it will be a 0 plus this c in the i direction, 0 plus c in the j direction, and 1 plus c in the k
direction. So I'm just simplifying this addition here. So that should give me 2, 0, 1. So we have
that c sub c in the i direction is going to equal 2, c in the j direction equals 0, and c in the k
direction plus 1 equals 1. In other words, if I take that negative 1 to the other side, c in the k
direction is 0. So now I have solved c i, c j, c k is 2, 0, 0. That is my constant vector. So finally,
I can get my velocity vector. It's going to be 3t squared plus 2, so it's that 3t squared plus 2,
the 6t squared plus 2t plus 0, and e to the power t plus 0. So there I have solved, because I was given
the initial conditions, initial vector at v at time equals 0, I can solve for this constant vector.
So if you do integration of a vector, you sit and it's an indefinite integral, as we head up here,
then most definitely that is going to be c with a line under it. It is a vector, and you have to
write it in its component form there to solve this problem. And the very same thing, I haven't done it
here, or go for the position vector. You're going to do it in exactly the same. So given an initial
acceleration vector, I can integrate it to get the velocity vector, which I can integrate again
to get the position vector. Just remember that you have the constant vector of integration there when
you do integrate vectors.
