Let's continue with motion. Very often in working with any kind of motion you are going
to deal with constant circular motion. Many things can be modeled as circular motion.
So not really any coding again we're going to do. I just want to show you so you're just
familiar with things that you might see when you are going to encounter circular motion.
So just an image here. We are dealing with constant circular motion. Here's a position
vector. Now imagine you can see the arrows here. Imagine there is something that you're
modeling that is moving on this path. Over time it changes. At any time t there is a position
vector that points to that. That will be a certain angle away from wherever it started.
So it started here on the x-axis and a certain time later there will be an angle change.
There will be an angle change. Also note though that this position vector has a magnitude b
because that's just the radius of the circle. That's easy enough to see.
So just if we look at this image. If we just do this. The rate of change of that angle with
respect to time we call that omega. That's this angular velocity. How many? What is the angular
change per second? And that's what we define it as lowercase greek omega which is this curly
w. Now I can do a slight bit of algebra. What I'm getting is just the differential. The change
in theta equals the angular velocity times the change in time. Now I can take the indefinite
integral of both sides which will leave me with theta on this side. And on this side it will
leave me this omega is a constant. I bring that out. So I'm just left with omega t plus some constant.
But we're dealing with angles here. Theta is an angle. So this constant is actually also an angle
and we just call it phi. And that's just the initial. It turns out just to be the initial angle.
So I can start along here. I can call this my zero radiance line and I can start on it. Then phi would
be zero. But I might start my t equals zero there. Now if I want to describe that according to this
xy coordinate system it has an initial velocity which will be this angle here which we'll have to
call phi. So just putting phi as zero we have the following fact. Now you've seen this many times.
Circular motion as far as a vector based equation is concerned will be the cosine of something comma
the sine of something. If you wrote cosine of something comma sine of something that is going to
give you counter clockwise rotation. And we put the b in front and the b in front there and I'll show
you now why that works. So constant circular motion that's this position vector is going to change over
time if we model the following. b times the cosine of omega t and b times the sine of omega t. Remembering
there I showed you omega equals theta I should say theta equals omega t. So it was the cosine of
theta the sine of theta but I've just shown you now that it can be rewritten as omega t. Let's see
if that works. So if I do have a position vector as such and I take the first derivative of that with
respect to time. If you take the first derivative of that that's going to be negative b times omega times
the sine of omega t and in this side b times omega times the cosine of omega t. That's just the first
derivative of each of those separately. As I said I'm not using code here I'm just using these
pictures to show you these images how to do it. Now what is the magnitude of the v of t? So that
means the speed what is that? Well that would just be the square root or the square of this plus the
square of that and the square root of all of that. If you were to do that you'd see very quickly that
all you are left with is omega b because you're going to have a sine squared of omega t plus a
cosine squared of omega t by trigonometric identities those equals one and you're going to have the b
squared the square root of b squared is just going to obviously be the square root of negative b squared
and the square root of b squared that's just going to end up with a b there. Now if we take the first
derivative of the v of t that's going to give us acceleration or the second derivative of the
position vector then if I had to differentiate that again this is what I'm going to end up doing.
Do it on a piece of paper you'll see that's easy to see.
I can now clearly show that if in here is the original position vector b cosine omega t there
is a b there's a cosine omega t there is a b sine omega t there's a b sine omega t so the only thing
we're left with is this common constant omega squared and the negative so if I bring that out
it would be the same as negative omega squared times the original position vector
and think about it why does why does if if I were to distribute this negative omega squared into this
position vector I'm going to end up with this and it tells us something it tells us now omega squared is
a constant and it's the negative of that constant anything squared is going to be positive but there's
a negative in front of it so that's going to be a negative and that shows you if this is the
position vector in this direction outwards then acceleration to keep constant
constant circular motion is going to point in the direct opposite direction it's going to always be
in the direct opposite direction of the position vector and it clearly comes out just from this
little bit of explanation so obviously that would be some form of centripetal force let's see if we
can express that centripetal force remember force equals mass times acceleration which is showing you
what acceleration is it is negative omega squared r of t so I'm just replacing a of t with that
quickly what would be the norm or the magnitude of that with in other words just just the size of
that force not its direction well I just take the norm of this side now a constant the norm of a
constant is just the absolute value of that part so it'll be the absolute value of negative m omega
squared and then the magnitude of the r of t remembering though that means that upside down a little
triangle of dots say that means because but because the r of t is that the norm of r of t will be this
remember it's the square root of that part squared and that part squared that means this position
vector the norm of this position vector just as we had with velocity before I'm going to have this b
squared and I'm going to have the cosine squared of an angle oh there's a little plus missing there
there should be a plus the sine squared that equals just one the square root of b squared equals just b
just to show you that the norm the magnitude of the position vector is the radius
ends up b if we write it like this if we write it like this b times the cosine of omega t b times the sine
that b is always going to refer to the radius and because of that remember we had the norm there
the absolute value of negative omega squared is just m times omega squared and I've just shown
you the r of t its magnitude is just b so this magnitude of the centripetal force this is going
to be mass times angular velocity squared times the radius so again not really difficult all I wanted to
show you is just for you to become familiar with some of these things you're going to see it all over
the show and you can always fall back just to see how this was derived and how it all fits in together
