In this series, we'll start discussing sepsis and the systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Now, these are usually covered in lectures in critical care, but we need to look at a
few things from a surgical perspective, as many of these patients have surgical disease
as the cause of their sepsis and SIRS.
So, first of all, we just need to get a basic understanding and some knowledge, and specifically
look at these terms.
So, we'll look at definitions, epidemiology, and the prognosis in this first video.
We'll introduce the topic, look at some risk factors, the epidemiology, and also some prognostic
markers.
So, sepsis is a clinical syndrome, and you can view it as one or two things, either as
a complication of severe infection or as being at one end of a spectrum of infectious disease.
Now, there's one characteristic that you need to be aware of.
There's inflammation remote from the site of infection.
And those markers of inflammation are really vasodilatation, leukocyte accumulation, and increased permeability.
SIRS, the systemic inflammatory response syndrome, is identical clinical syndrome to sepsis, but
this is due to a non-infectious insult.
That's the difference between the two.
So, here we're really looking at acute pancreatitis and extensive tissue injury and trauma, severe
burns, and those kinds of things.
It's probably, for sepsis and SIRS, probably based on a deregulation of the inflammatory response
with a massive and uncontrolled release of pro-inflammatory mediators, and that forms the
basis of sepsis and SIRS.
Now, the terms SIRS, sepsis, severe sepsis, and septic shock was defined way back in 1991,
and there are definitely newer consensus documents out, newer definitions, based on the fact that
we understand these to be a spectrum of the same syndrome, and it all ends in multi-organ
dysfunction syndrome.
So, let's look at a few definitions.
Start with infection.
That is an invasion of normally sterile tissue by organisms.
Bacteremia is the presence of viable bacteria in the bloodstream.
SIRS is a clinical syndrome of inflammatory response dysregulation, and it requires two
or more of the following.
So, a temperature of more than 38.3 degrees Celsius, or less than 36, a heart rate of more
than 90 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of more than 20 beats per minute, or a PaCO2
of less than 32 millimeters of mercury, and then a leucocyte or white cell count of more
than 12,000 or less than 4,000 cells per cubic millimeter, or more than 10% of immature forms.
Sepsis is a syndrome of deregulation of the inflammatory response due to infection.
It requires positive culture, or visually identified infection, and two or more of the following.
Again, temperature of more than 38.3 or less than 36, a heart rate of more than 90, a respiratory
rate of more than 20, or PaCO2 of less than 32, and a leucocyte count of more than 12,000,
less than 4,000, or more than 10% of immature forms.
Severe sepsis is the previous sepsis that we've just looked at, plus at least one of the
following signs of hyperperfusion or organ dysfunction, which are areas of mottled skin,
capillary refilling that takes three seconds or longer, and a urinary output of less than
half mil per kilogram for at least an hour, or, of course, in the patients on renal replacement
therapy already.
Lactate of more than two, abrupt changes in mental status or abnormalities in the EEG, platelet
count of less than 100,000 platelets per milliliter, DIC, or acute lung injury, or ARDS.
Lastly on our list is left ventricular diastolic dysfunction, that's on E, C, G, or if on cardiac
indices measurement.
Septic shock is now just the previous severe sepsis, so you have to make that diagnosis first
based on that definition, plus one of the following, mean blood pressure of less than 60 millimetres
of mercury, 80 if it's a known hypertensive patient, despite adequate fluid resuscitation,
and adequate fluid resuscitation per definition is then 40 to 60 millilitres per kilogram of
crystalloid, or 20 to 30 millilitres per kilogram of colloids, and the requirement of adrenaline
of less than a quarter micrograms per kilogram per minute to maintain your mean blood pressure
over 60 or 80 for hypertensives.
Refractory septic shock, that is maintaining a mean blood pressure, requires more than a
quarter micrograms per kilogram per minute.
Then multi-organ dysfunction syndrome, it's progressive organ dysfunction in acutely ill patient requiring
intervention to maintain a homeostasis, so you don't really include chronically ill patients
in this definition.
It is at the severe end of the spectrum of SERS and sepsis.
Multi-organ dysfunction syndrome, two types we have to identify, primary and secondary.
Primary is the result of a well-defined insult with early occurrence of organ dysfunction directly
attributable to the insult itself, and secondary is not a direct response to the insult itself,
and it's a consequence really of the host's response.
Now what are risk factors for the development of this whole spectrum of severe infection?
Well, first of all, bacteremia.
Older patients, there is a progression in the incidence and morbidity and mortality rates,
but as a pure risk factor, age above the 65.
Any form of immunosuppression, whether that be from drugs, acquired immunodeficiency,
diabetes, alcoholism, any form of suppression of the immune system, malnutrition.
Then community-acquired pneumonia in itself is a risk factor.
Then there are various genetic factors, and of course a lot of research is being done in this area,
understanding the genetics and the molecular basis of the human's response to severe infection.
Definitely the incidence and disease severity have increased,
with the increased sophistication of medical care.
Patients survive their primary insult, much more so these days,
and we have ability to take care of them,
and that skews the incidence and our numbers as far as disease severity is concerned.
Fungal infections are in the increase,
but the vast majority of patients are still due to gram-positive organisms.
Mortality rates, with our increased sophistication of our medical care,
is decreasing, but we're still sitting at between 20% and 50%,
depending on the unit and the type of patients that are seen.
Prognostic factors, the host response, is key in this whole scenario.
Anomalies in the host defense,
that indicates susceptibility to severe disease and mortality.
We know their genetic abnormalities that make patients susceptible.
Of course, patients with various comorbidities and functional health status,
and this goes together, obviously, with age being a risk factor,
but this makes it a prognostic factor as well.
The site of infection, we know that various gastrointestinal for surgeons
and also other pulmonary sites have a higher incidence of mortality.
The type of infection, important,
those are comial pathogens of much more concern than community acquired.
Separate from that, obviously, stands for community acquired pneumonia as MRSA,
non-candidal fungus, cetomonas, and polymicrobial organisms.
Antimicrobial therapy is very important.
Timely, appropriate, correctly dosed intravenous antibiotics decrease mortality.
That is well known.
The administration of intravenous antibiotics goes with the initial consultation
and initial resuscitation of the patient is just as important as the ABCs.
Another thing to remember is that antibiotics in the prior 90 days
increases mortality specifically from gram-negative sepsis.
And lastly, how quickly you can restore the patient's perfusion.
Although it might already be a sign of the severity of the sepsis,
it is well worthwhile to try and restore the patient's perfusion as soon as possible.
And if that is impossible, it does have a bad prognostic sign.
It is a bad prognostic sign.
