Now we're going to move along to something very exciting called the power series.
The whole chapter just of the power series.
In the power series you can write in this following form.
Any time you can write a series in this form,
it's going to be bk x minus c to the power k.
If you can write something in that form,
then it is a power series.
Now we need to do something with the power series first
and then we need to get to the subsections for testing, for instance,
where it converges, if it does converge and if it does diverge.
And the reason we want to do that is going to happen when we do the Maclaurin series or the Taylor series.
And what we are going to do is we are going to have a function.
And that function we are going to change into a series.
And the interval of that function, those values of x where this series converges,
the partial sums can be used to approximate that function.
Look at this.
I have a function.
I've got an example there.
Or I'm going to do it the other way around.
I'm going to go from the series to the function.
And then we'll work back from the function to the series.
And I'm going to have x minus 2 to the power k.
So up until now, we have not had variables in our series.
Now we do.
We call them the power series if they take this.
Remember that c can also be 0.
So this could just have that one have been x to the power k.
But we have x minus 2 to the power k.
Now, if we just look at this series, it does remind us though of the geometric series.
And the geometric series said k equals 0 to infinity of a r to the power k.
And that is going to be 1 over a minus r.
Which is going to be that for the radius of convergence being less than 1.
Or less than 1.
There we go.
So if we stayed with r, for r within these parameters.
That was going to equal our, look at this.
It's going to converge if it stays here.
But we actually do get an answer.
We get a function.
And that's exactly what we have here.
And as much as we have a equals 1, r equals x minus 2.
And then we have k.
So we have to let r be between negative 1 and 1.
So we're going to have that the absolute value of x minus 2 is going to be less than 1.
Or minus 1 is less than x minus 2 is less than 1.
I can plus 2 on all sides.
So I'm going to have 1 smaller than x smaller than 3.
So as long as x stays between 3 and 1, this series will converge.
And it's going to be equal to, I can actually work out what it converges to.
Because we had tests to show convergence.
But we hardly ever have checked what it converges to.
Remember if we use the ratio test, that gives us a limit.
And if the limit is less than 1, that will help us out.
But look at this now.
If I stay with x in this domain, this is going to equal a, which is 1, r, which is x minus 2.
So that's going to equal 1 over 1 plus 3, or 1 plus 2 is 3, minus x.
I'm just going to change battery, and then we're going to carry on.
But look at this series.
If I stay with this in this domain, I can write this series as this function.
1 over 3 minus x will continue.
So now we do have that this series equals this function.
If I maintain that 1, it was 1, wasn't it?
1 is less than x is less than 3.
So what that means is if you take a graphing calculator or a graphing application on your computer
and you graph this function on an xy coordinate system, you graph this function.
We are suggesting that between x equals 1 and x equals 3,
I can approximate that section of the graph with this series.
And I can get more and more accurate because we're going to call this now the partial sum in n of x.
Our function is now going to equal k equals 0 to n of x minus 2 to the power of k.
Okay, so I can approximate.
Now this is an easy function.
But what if this was a horrendous function?
If I could get a series, it will approximate between these because I said that is where convergence took place of my series.
And that's why it's so important.
That's why we have all these tests for convergence.
So when it converges, in my radius of convergence there, if I let n,
now it's just to n and not to infinity, but if I let this grow sufficiently large,
I can approximate my graph of this function almost exactly.
Now let's do what is going to be p0 of x.
Well, that is just going to be this first thing to the power 0, meaning to the power 0 is 1.
What's going to be p1 going to be of x?
Well, that is going to be 1 plus the next term.
And the next term will have 2 in there, or 1 in there, sorry.
So that is going to be x minus 2 to the power 1.
And that is going to be x minus 1.
x minus 1.
p2 of x is then going to be x minus 1.
Okay, plus.
Now we're going to put a 2 in there, so it's x minus 2 squared.
So that's going to be x squared minus 4x plus 4.
And if I do that, I'm going to get x squared, x squared minus 3x.
And I'm going to get minus 1 plus 4 plus 3.
And the next one, I'm going to have that plus this cube.
And start putting these into your graphing calculator,
or your graphing application, your computer.
And you'll see in this domain, it's going to more and more accurately lie
on top of this function.
So that is what we're trying to do.
We're going to get grandest functions.
We are going to represent them as a series.
And when this series converges,
I can approximate my function in that domain
by getting more and more larger and larger partial sums.
So the higher I go with my partial sums,
the more accurately I can represent.
And it might very well be in the end that this partial sum in that domain
is going to be easier for me to differentiate, integrate,
than the horrible function that I'm going to be dealt with.
And obviously, I'll use something simple
and an example where I can easily get to this answer.
But what we're going to do is we're going to have this
and work our way back.
So this is what the series and power series are all about.
Now we're going to step back and we're going to look at some power series
and we're going to just first of all look where they are convergent.
Because if you go from this and you get this,
first of all you need to know does it converge
and what is the radius of convergence.
Because it's only there that I can then use partial sums
to approximate my function.
So let's start by looking at convergence of the power series.
As promised, now we're going to look at the series
and there's going to be a power series
and we want to know where it converges
or if indeed it does.
Now is this a power series?
Yes it is because my b term is going to be
k over 3 to the power of k plus 1.
My x minus c is going to be x minus 0 to the power of k.
I just have an x here so my c is 0.
So let's see.
And the most important test to use for a power series
is going to be the ratio test.
So we're going to look at the limit as k goes to infinity
of the absolute value of a, the very next one after that one.
So what are we going to have here?
We're going to have the limit as k goes to infinity
of absolute value.
Let's have that.
That's going to be a k plus 1.
Then we're going to have an x to the power of k plus 1
divided by, we're going to have a 3 to the power of k plus 1 plus 1
so that's k plus 2.
Then we're going to divide this but I'll just multiply it
and just have the reciprocal of that just with k.
So then I'm going to have 3 to the power of k plus 1 divided by k
and then an x to the power of k and the absolute value of that.
Now that's not as horrible as it looks.
We're going to have the limit as k goes to infinity of the absolute value of
we're going to have a k plus 1.
Here we're going to have an x to the power of k.
We're going to have another x and that's how we get k plus 1
which is our simple rules of exponents.
Here we're going to have a 3 to the power of k and we're going to have a 3
and in the numerator, denominator we're going to have a 3k
we're going to have a 3 squared which is 9
we're going to have a k and we're going to have an x to the power of k
and we have the absolute value of that.
Let's see what goes.
x to the power of k, x to the power of k
3 to the power of k, 3 to the power of k
3 and that.
So we are left with the limit.
The limit as k goes to infinity
tends to infinity of
I've got a k plus 1 and x
I've got a x
I've got a k plus 1 left
and I've got an x left
and it's still absolute values
and I've got a 3k
a 3k
a 3k
Now just look at this
it is only
it is only
k
that changes. x in this
limit is a constant
I can bring that out
value of x
and the limit
as k goes to infinity of
so I've got
k plus 1 over 3k
that will be
just infinity of infinity
so I can't have
I can't just replace
Now the next step
I'm going to divide the numerator and denominator
by the large power variable over the denominator
that is k
so I'm going to be here
plus 1 over k
and here I'm going to be left with
I'm going to be left with 3
so that will be a 0
so I'm left with a third
so I'm left with
that's with value of x divided by 3
Now you might think
now what now?
Oh well
remember I was using the ratio test
so for this series to converge
this is now my l
and l has got to be less than 1
l has got to be less than 1
in other words I can multiply this there
so the absolute value of x
has got to be less than 3
in other words
negative 3
smaller x
smaller than 3
so if I stay
within this domain
for my x value here
I can use
negative 2
negative 1
0.00001
this series will converge
what the ratio test does not tell
please please do not forget this
is what happens at negative 3
and at 3
so you will actually have to plug that in
you will have to plug in negative 3
and you will have to plug in positive 3
and you will have to plug in positive 3
and redo this
to see whether
you will get then an l value
which will be less than 1
more than 1
or equal to 1
if equal to 1
you have to do some other test
so you have to
the ratio test does not tell you
what happens
it is less than 1
for sure
as far as the l values are concerned
but this is l
it's got actually nothing to do with x
the x is now the domain
and it does not tell us
exactly what happens at negative 3
and 3
so those you have to test separately
thealla
in
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
the
