Let us continue looking at various topics in sepsis after we looked at some definitions initially.
We are now going to concentrate more on the management of severe sepsis.
There will be an introduction, we will look at therapeutic priorities,
what should actually be done as part of early management once you have identified these patients.
We will talk about the control of the septic focus.
We will look at some additional therapies and also say a few words about the surviving sepsis campaign
and international guidelines that have recently come under some scrutiny.
Now, it does follow on the lecture on the definition of epidemiology and prognosis of severe sepsis, septic shock, SERS,
and I invite you to watch that lecture before looking at this one.
I remind you that sepsis represents a spectrum of responses to infection or initially to injury that might lead to infection.
In the previous lecture we looked at the differences between these
and specifically at the systemic inflammatory response syndrome as one of the definitions.
Now, severe sepsis ends in multiple multi-organ dysfunction syndrome and death.
And depending on how your unit is set up, the unit in which you work, what the patient population is,
the mortality rate is up to 50% and even higher.
So what should be our therapeutic priorities?
First of all, we've got to distinguish sepsis from inflammatory response.
Because we really want to identify infection as the cause of the patient's clinical picture,
infection requires prompt antimicrobial cover and the management of the source,
together then management of the physiological derangements.
Now, early initiation of supportive care to reestablish the homeostatic parameters,
to prevent new abnormalities from occurring and to support established dysfunction,
depending on what the time period is that you actually start to manage the patient
or the patient was referred to you.
The emphasis here is on early intervention, early therapy, early diagnosis, early management.
Everything has to happen as soon as possible.
Now, what do we do during early management?
Let's first look at the respiratory system.
We've got to stabilize respiration.
So we assess and we continuously monitor oxygenation.
And we do that by pulse oximetry and blood gas analysis.
We provide supplemental oxygen to all of these patients, even if it requires intubation and ventilation.
And together with the pulse oximetry and blood gas analysis, we also, in most cases, get an initial chest x-ray
that will help us to diagnose any complications, might even help us to distinguish the source of the sepsis as in pneumonia.
Perfusion is very important.
First of all, before we get to that, always be aware of the patient taking beta blockers.
They're not going to have the ability to respond as people are not taking those drugs in as much as that they can't mount a tachycardic response
to their falling systemic blood pressure.
Second of all, always remember, it's important to get the lines in.
It's important to get all the parameters from arterial lines.
But don't waste time by struggling to put it up while the actual physical management of the patient gets left behind.
So perfusion, we've got to monitor the blood pressure.
We've got to do that invasively.
And we also obviously monitor the heart rate, specifically response to what we're trying to,
or to look at the response to therapies that we are initiating.
We monitor the peripheries.
Are they cold and clammy?
Good old fashioned clinical signs of poor tissue perfusion.
We can monitor perfusion by looking at the patient's central nervous system.
Are they restless or is there any obtundation?
We look at specific organs.
Is oliguria or even anuria developing?
And we can look at lactic acidosis.
So all of these would be measurements of perfusion.
And there are even more, and we'll get to some of these specifically.
Catheters.
What catheters to put in specifically for the hemodynamic or perfusion parameters?
Well, a CVP.
Why do we put the CVP in?
Well, we need intravenous access, both to take blood and to give various medications and fluids.
We can also get specimens from the central venous catheters.
And here we're looking at central venous oxygenation saturation.
There are studies to show that management guidance by the central venous oxygen saturation reduces mortality.
And many centers taper or set their fluid resuscitation based on these values.
We'll see later that it's not always as effective as we hope it to be.
And we can also get hemodynamic parameters through the CVP catheter, central venous pressure itself.
Obviously, although that, and once again we will mention it later, that's really fallen out of favor.
It's been shown to be a very poor marker of fluid responsiveness and effectiveness.
Pulmonary artery catheters.
In theory, they should be better at monitoring the patient, but there is no clinical evidence that it improves mortality rates at all.
What we can measure through it is the pulmonary artery occlusion pressure, and that's a very poor marker of fluid responsiveness in sepsis.
And there's complications to having these catheters inserted, of course.
They're expensive, and you need a certain skill set to place them.
What you can get from these catheters as well is mixed venous oxygen saturation.
And you'll see that is S with a subscript V versus central venous with a subscript CV.
So the first one, the CV, is via the central venous line, the CVP line.
And the second one then through a pulmonary artery catheter.
But there are studies to show that the usefulness are equal, and that mitigates also against the use of pulmonary artery catheter.
Now I'm using the term CVP loosely as a line.
Be aware that some examiners and some of your mentors are a bit edgy when it comes to using CVP as a term for a catheter as loosely as I have.
Now let's look at what kind of hemodynamic measurements we can take.
And these days we really divide them in two large groups, the dynamic and the static hemodynamic measurements.
Dynamic ones, respiratory changes in the radial artery pulse pressure.
So you've got to have a radial artery monitor inserted, catheter inserted, and we look at changes in the pulse pressure with respiration.
We can also look at aortic blood flow peak velocity or brachial artery flow velocity.
And those are called dynamic because on a stroke for stroke basis you can see change.
As fluid runs in you can see a change.
This is opposed to static measurements.
And those would be CVP or pulmonary artery occlusion pressure.
So through a central venous line or a pulmonary artery catheter.
Those are static hemodynamic measures.
Now the dynamic measures are more accurate predictors of fluid responsiveness compared to static measures.
They are a bit more difficult to set up and get used to.
And many people are used to at least to CVP, urine output, those sort of things.
But those are really static measures.
And as time goes by more and more emphasis is being placed on the dynamic measurements.
Remember though that dynamic measures is for passively ventilated patients with adequate tidal volume and for those in sinus rhythm.
For those we use the dynamic measures.
In an actively breathing patient or if abnormal rhythm we monitor response to the passive leg raise test by echocardiography or arterial pulse wave analysis.
So most of us won't have echo available when we do the passive leg test.
We just look at the response in the mean blood pressure and the increase in that.
Or we look at the arterial pulse wave swing itself.
And remember though that that is initially or just described actually for actively breathing patients or those with an abnormal rhythm monitor.
So for people that are passively ventilated with an adequate tidal volume and in sinus rhythm we should actually be looking at the dynamic measures as I've mentioned before.
So let's look at central venous versus mixed venous oxygen saturation.
Now there are many studies who target values of greater than 70% equal to greater than 70% with early goal directed therapy.
And this was all initiated by the study by Rivers et al. which you all should have read.
And the studies show changes in mortality.
Unfortunately there are also studies to show no effect.
And the reason why we have this disparity between these two is basically that many ICUs have different populations.
And a population, an ICU with populations with a lot of comorbidities, elderly patients with a lot of comorbidities might start off with a low mixed venous or central venous oxygen saturation.
And the improvement thereof might be indicative then of decreasing the mortality.
But ICUs which manage mostly healthy trauma victims, young patients might not have those initial lower values.
In other words, it's a bit difficult to use it then as a goal directed therapy.
And it's, I've simplified it now, it gets a lot more complicated than that.
But certainly it is population based.
It's going to have an effect on any study that you do to see whether you, through goal directed therapy and increasing the SCVO2 to more than 70%,
whether that's going to show any difference in mortality in your study.
And then also there's a problem with temporal measurements.
Some of the studies, specifically those built around the six bundles of early goal directed therapy,
where we start monitoring the effect of our management by doing central venous oxygen saturation.
It's going to have different outcomes from studies that only start measuring these a couple of days down the line in the intensive care unit.
So you've got to look very carefully at how the study was set up that you are reading.
If you want to interpret fully whether chasing SCVO2s of greater than or equal to 70% really makes a difference.
So look at those studies carefully before you draw any conclusions or base your management on those.
Lactate.
There are algorithms with the early goal directed therapy that we tried to achieve a lactate clearance of more than 10%.
And it has been shown to be as effective as goal directed therapy in targeting central venous oxygen saturation to be more than 70%.
And all the caveats that I've mentioned about SCVO2 obviously apply here to the lactate clearance as well.
But certainly it seems to be as good a parameter at least to be using.
Now remember there is an initial increase due to anabolic metabolism.
But it may remain high later as the tissues get more oxygen and your therapy becomes more successful.
Obviously there is an increased metabolic rate in the tissues.
So there is not a direct linear relationship really between the exact type of aerobic metabolism that is taking place in the cell and lactate levels or lactate clearance levels.
So you always must remember this.
Now mean arterial pressure.
We all manage those.
CVP we have spoken about.
Urine output.
We want at least half ml per kg per hour.
And gastric tonometry we should mention as well.
Now the ideal would be, and I'm sure in the future we might get to this.
The ideal would really be to have a method of monitoring individual organ cellular metabolism and oxygenation on a cellular level, organ by organ, second by second.
Obviously we don't have that.
Gastric tonometry is not new.
It's certainly been around quite a while and hasn't really caught on massively in as much as the unique equipment setup.
There needs to be availability of it which unfortunately there isn't.
But it can give you some estimation of the, at least how well the gastric mucosa is oxygenated.
And from that you can extrapolate how the rest of the tissue in the patient is doing as far as oxygenation is concerned.
Now we've got to spend a minute or two on intravenous fluids.
Now if you look at the guidelines with the early goal-directed fluid therapy, most of the time it would work out to give the patient about five liters in the first six hours.
And there's certainly that has come under severe criticism.
And the emphasis these days is to individualize the patient.
You cannot blindly fluid resuscitate someone according to some pre-set guideline.
Each and every patient is different.
They have different comorbidities.
They have different causes for why they are with you in their sepsis.
They have different sizes.
So, so many factors play a role that you have to individualize each patient.
We call it an intensive care unit.
It should actually be an intensive monitoring unit because you need to monitor each and every patient by all the methods that we've mentioned earlier in this lecture.
Now, most of the time it will work out about 500 mil boluses and you monitor the patient before giving the 500 mil bolus, during the 500 mil bolus, specifically with the dynamic measurements that we mentioned, and measure after the 500 mil bolus.
So we look at the response based on those dynamic measurements.
Now, we also look for the development of non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema, which is basically overloading the patient.
And they do have a capillary leak.
And for that we can use things like a chest x-ray and blood gas analysis.
And we also, not only looking for the response, but also to identify the patient's unresponsive
because we know that continuing just to give that patient fluid is not going to get you anywhere.
So we don't only want to know the patient that keeps on responding, gets a bit better, all the parameters get a bit better, but better as the fluid gets administered.
We want to also now catch the patient who now becomes unresponsive.
Even though you continue with the fluid resuscitation, the parameters do not improve or they get worse.
So we've got to pick that patient up because we've got to add something else to their therapy.
And we must also remember that liberal fluid resuscitation prolongs mechanical ventilation.
They certainly do worse than patients who are fluid restricted.
Now, you cannot fluid restrict these patients initially.
But just seen as a global reason to monitor these patients on a continuous basis is you want to catch the patient becomes unresponsive.
And because we know liberal fluid resuscitation does prolong the time on mechanical ventilation.
Now, there's the very old crystalloid versus colloid debate.
And if we continue for any time longer, it's going to become a centuries-old debate.
Okay. Fortunately, we're not there yet.
Now, there's some good recent data out.
It comes from Australia and New Zealand.
You've got to get your hands on these articles.
I might later just put a link to those on.
Now, first of all, it was looked at hysteryl in 0.9% saline versus 0.9% saline.
It clearly showed that the patients at least who received the colloid were worse off as far at least as the requirement for renal replacement therapy is concerned.
And I think evidence is really mounting these days that colloids are not the panacea that they once were thought to be.
Now, once again, even though this was a large, robust trial, and there are at least others to support this, once again, we've got to put the emphasis on individualization.
I think there's a lot of voices out there that would suggest in a healthy, young person, no comorbidities, fit otherwise, lands up with septicemia, or SERS, would respond quite well to a colloid and won't have any of the adverse effects that someone who's older with perhaps more comorbidities might fare.
You've got to individualize these patients and their management.
Overall, though, the evidence seems to be mounting that colloids are inferior to crystalloids, at least as their safety and side effect profile is concerned.
Now, as far as the type of crystalloids are concerned, also a recent analysis done, and the move here is away from 0.9% saline or normal saline.
There's specifically nothing normal about saline, and as you all know, saline would go through trials to be approved by the authorities these days.
It won't make the first stage of any trial, because certainly it's a very unphysiologic solution,
and the problem basically lies with the high concentration of chloride, and the problems inherent to a high cloremic load, acidosis involved with that.
Certainly, these days, we are leaning towards a lower chloride-containing crystalloid in the form of a good old-fashioned ringer's lactate or similar, plasmolyte L.
Now, one criticism against the recent large trial with the colloid versus crystalloid is that the colloid was suspended in 0.9% saline,
so actually both patient groups, both arms received a high cloremic dose.
It's only then the patients in the colloid group that had a high incidence of requirement of renal replacement therapy.
Now, vasopressors, there's a second-line therapy.
In other words, we've given our boluses, and we've caught the patient now that becomes unresponsive to our fluid resuscitation.
We need to add a vasopressor to that patient, so that's why it's second-line therapy.
So it's the patient who has fluid unresponsive, or then, remember, the one who develops his non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Now, there's no definitive evidence of the superiority of any vasopressor over the other, and it really depends on, once again, who your masters are or the unit that you work in.
Various units will have various vasopressors available to them and will be just comfortable in using one over the other, but there's really no definitive evidence to show superiority.
Now, additional therapies over and above fluid and then vasopressor therapy, we've got to consider inotropic therapy.
Those are for patients who show no response to fluid and then to the vasopressors.
And the drug of choice, well-established, I suppose, is dibitamin.
The problem, remember always though, is initially it does lower the dose and cause peripheral vasodilatation as you up the dose, so certainly that will correct itself,
and the initial drop in blood pressure will be corrected.
Red cell transfusion, there's really conflicting research over that, whether this makes a difference or not.
It's purely based upon when and how much blood is given, certainly in the goal-directed therapy bundles,
there's an aggressive early administration of red blood cells, but you've got to watch the videos on blood and blood products,
and because there are certainly a lot of harm done by, or potential harm in blood transfusion.
So depending on how the study was set up, there are studies that show a better outcome, low morbidity and mortality,
and certainly ones that show no effect whatsoever.
So certainly the jury is not out on early aggressive red cell transfusions.
Now control of the septic focus.
Now remember, while aiming at early therapy, identify one team member who is going to identify the source of infection and initiate management,
whether that be antimicrobials or antimicrobials and surgery.
What I mean by that is, don't waste time by doing all the therapy and neglecting the fact that someone needs to look at where the source is and start therapy,
antimicrobials plus or minus surgery.
Now right before giving the antimicrobials, that person should be sure that all cultures have been taken, blood cultures, tissue cultures, urine specimens, four cultures.
Now a quick word on procalcitonin.
There have been a lot of studies now and meta-analysis, and there's really a mixed bag.
So much so that there's no real evidence for you to base a management algorithm on specific procalcitonin levels.
In certain instances though, it can help higher levels, specifically higher levels in the surgical patient versus the medical patient as an indication of a bacterial infection.
Other parameters that we can look at, the plasma levels of the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 1.
Now there was initial small study, as these things always go, shows good results.
Later the larger prospective studies come out, showed really poor sensitivity of about 50%, which is like flipping a coin.
Specificity a bit higher at 86%.
Then increased expression of CD64 on neutrophils, much better sensitivity and specificity.
And certainly something that has been actively investigated at this time, just to identify the patient with a bacterial source of the picture of sepsis.
A few words on antimicrobials.
Number one, ASAP.
As soon as you've gotten all the tissue cultures, which someone should really be identified, do so that that person can administer antimicrobials as soon as possible.
They should not waste any time in giving those antimicrobials.
There's a definite relationship between a lag in the administration of antimicrobials, appropriate antimicrobials, and mortality.
So, of course, obviously don't delay forced surgery or MCNS results.
By that I mean if the specimen that you require can only be gotten through surgery, for instance opening the abdomen, that should not delay the administration of the antibiotics.
Then we're going to treat, we're just going to do empirical treatment.
Now, there's lots of local regimens for unclear sites and causes, and depending on the unit that you work in, certain antibiotics would be identified.
Broad-spectrum antibiotics specifically for most people, or most units would look at vancomycin and one of the, or Meronym for instance, as a combination.
Duration really depends on whether you want pseudomonal cover or not as well, and that really depends on the unit that you work in.
Now, duration is important, how long to give this, when to discontinue.
Once again, every unit will have their own algorithms as far as it's concerned.
One thing that you specifically have to get away from is to say, we're going to prescribe a course of antibiotics.
There's no such thing as a course, and there's also no such thing as a five or seven or ten day course.
Antibiotics are given as per indication and as per response.
Specific patients that we need to look at, obviously neutropenic patients,
who require a more aggressive approach to their antimicrobial therapy.
We've also got to consider the side effect profile of the drugs that you are using.
We specifically need to look at renal functions, at liver functions for some of the drugs,
as far as the clearance and side effect and toxic profiles are concerned.
Also neurological, for instance, tear numb with its increased risk of convulsions.
And many units will also have set up their regime of de-escalation.
So once your MCNS results start returning, you can de-escalate to a lesser broad spectrum antibiotic,
if I can use that term, to a narrower spectrum antibiotic.
Additional therapies, now these are covered, should be covered in lectures in intensive care unit,
and I might set up some of these lectures a bit later.
Glucocorticoids do specifically have their place as a rescue therapy initially,
increasing the responsiveness to the vasopressors and inotropes, etc.
But we'll certainly get to those.
Nutrition seems to be very important, obviously pushed by various companies.
But there's really very little proper evidence, on a large scale at least, that it improves outcome.
Now intensive insulin therapy was also in vogue a few years ago
that some of the trials showed the adverse results or outcomes of actually embarking on implementing intensive insulin therapy in a unit.
And certainly that very tight control is now not in fashion any longer,
and we are aiming for good control.
And that is that external cooling has now been shown to be effective.
Many smaller trials, up to a couple of hundred patients actually,
have shown a shorter time on ventilation and a decrease in mortality rates with external cooling.
Most units, they have not employed this yet,
as we're really waiting for larger randomized control trials to come out to show that that is really effective.
Last word, and that's on the international guidelines.
Now these are largely based on the work by Rivers et al.
And we're really talking about the surviving sepsis campaigns, the bundles of care.
Now international guidelines were published under these in 2004,
and it was adopted by many illustrious international organizations,
both American, European, and elsewhere in the world.
Since then, since 2004, these have really come under a lot of criticism.
First of all was the Eli Lilly that were heavily involved in the sponsorship of those initial trials,
especially of Rivers.
And so much of that evidence, so much of those guidelines were really based on eminence-based work,
or level five work at least, level five evidence.
Astonishingly small number of robust evidence was used to set up these guidelines.
And it is as bad as some people describe it as bad as really a bandwagon that everyone got on.
Obviously there are excellent points in these surviving sepsis campaigns,
so by no means think that I'm totally against these.
I'm just making you aware of what is going on in the literature and in the research out there at the moment.
Now newer guidelines were set in 2008 without any involvement of any external companies.
And the criticism that that is coming in for really is that there is very little change from the actual 2004,
the level five evidence-based work that has really gotten on.
In the end it boils down to the fact that you've got to individualize monitoring and care of the patients that you see,
and that they really should not all be managed by a broad stroke.
