In this lecture, I want to look at intra-abdominal infections.
We look at certain factors that prevent infection.
We look at the pathogenesis of infection, how to prevent it,
the principles of treatment once it's established,
and we look at a few specific surgical conditions.
First of all, the factors that prevent infection.
Under normal circumstances, remember, there's a balance between the bacteria,
the host of fens, and environmental factors.
And any unbalance in this is going to lead to infection.
If we look at the bacteria first, your skin and the GIT contains a large number of organisms,
especially the lower GI tract.
But what you have to remember, though, is that the organisms responsible for infection
make out a very small percentage of normal flora.
If we just look at your colonic flora,
and we look at the types of bacteria that cause peritonitis,
those bacteria make up less than 0.1% of the normal bacterial flora.
Now, the most common organisms that cause peritoneal infections,
abdominal infections, would be E. coli and Bacteroidus fragilis.
On the E. coli side, we get more diffuse peritonitis,
and it is a leading cause of mortality.
If you look at the Bacteroidus side, lower mortality rates and chances of forming abscesses.
Remember, though, that most infections are polymicrobial,
and there's a definite trend towards microbial synergy.
In other words, a combination of E. coli and Bacteroidus fragilis
would increase the mortality rate due to the E. coli,
even though the Bacteroidus on its own carries a low mortality.
Now, the bowel flora is significantly altered by prior antibiotics,
so any patient who develops and has a comial type of intra-abdominal infections
obviously have a deranged bacteriology.
If we look at the host defenses, your first-line defense is your soluble factors.
Those are complement and antibodies in the peritoneal cavity.
And your second line is your cellular defense, monocytes and microphages.
They phagocytose the organisms, they present antigens,
and they recruit leucocytes, specifically neutrophils.
Now, these neutrophils are key effector cells in the inflammatory process,
but they're also responsible for the parenchymal destruction,
and it's usually through reactive oxygen intermediates.
Environmental factors.
You do require an intact skin, mucosal surface, and GIT.
So, anything that breaks that, for instance, elective surgery and trauma,
influences the environment under which the organisms and the host defenses are
and can lead to infection.
Remember, the position, again, in the GIT,
that more proximal in the GIT, it can be sterile or lactobacilli,
or with lactobacilli, but as we go further down,
negative and anaerobic organisms, negative bacilli and anaerobes predominate.
Let's look at the pathogenesis of infection.
We usually classify infection as either local or diffuse.
Local, we're looking at localized fluid collections or localized abscesses.
These can be subphrenic, subhepatic, Morrison's pouch, pelvic recesses,
paracolic, interloop abscesses, and even intraorgan abscesses, for instance, the liver.
So, diffuse, we're talking about purulent or feculent peritonitis,
where larger volumes of the peritoneal cavity are involved.
Now, bacteria in the peritoneal cavity gain access to the circulation
via the diaphragmatic lymphatic channels,
and within minutes of introducing bacteria to the peritoneal cavity,
can you find organisms, viable organisms in the bloodstream.
You know, antibiotics alone in serious infections are seldom successful.
You do need some sort of intervention together with the antibiotics.
Now, once the host defenses are overwhelmed and infection ensues,
so there's a certain inoculation number required with a certain virulence
and a certain subset then of defense and environment that will lead to infection.
Remember that oxygen is required by the key effector cells
and it's very important, therefore, to have well-resuscitated patients
and to take away or devitalize tissue.
Now, the factors that influence virulence and decrease your defenses
is the presence of the following in the abdominal cavity.
Blood, bile, chyle, foreign bodies, gastric mucins, pancreatic secretions and urine.
The presence of any of these in the abdomen will lead to an increased rate of infections.
Now, abscesses, remember, they're walled off and they're in essence removed from the body.
There's certain things about the abscess center, though, that's important.
It has a low pH, a low partial oxygen tension, large number of bacteria,
obstinate, deficient fluid, necrotic material and proteolytic enzymes.
And as I mentioned, it's walled off.
What is important about all of these is there are antibiotics that are of no effect
in the presence of abscesses.
And we think, for instance, of the immunoglycosides
that form part of many hospitals' triple regime.
Now, immunoglycosides do not penetrate abscess walls very well
and they are not effective in areas of low oxygen tension.
And they also break down and are not very efficient in areas of low pH.
So, very poor choice in intra-abdominal abscesses.
Antibiotic prophylaxis is a form of prevention.
Now, we have to say a few words.
There are three most common antibiotics listed there.
Kefazolin, kefoxetan and vancomycin.
Kefazolin, first-generation keflosporin.
Kefazolin is used very commonly as a prophylactic agent in all types of surgery
by lower GI tract surgery where we expect the anaerobes to predominate.
Now, the usual dose is about one gram.
You need to start it before the skin incision.
And what is important to remember is that if procedures are prolonged
or a large volume of intravenous fluid is given due to continued losses,
kefazolin needs to be given at four hourly.
Kefoxetan is a kefamycin which falls under the second-generation keflosporin.
It is separated, though, because of its activity against anaerobes.
Kefoxetan also gets started preoperatively as any prophylactic antibiotic,
usually in a dose of a one gram.
And then again, if it's a prolonged, difficult colonic procedure,
remember that kefoxetan needs to be administered two hourly.
Vancomycin also registered as a prophylactic agent.
And the only indication for that would be in surgery
where any kind of bacterial complication would be catastrophic.
We're talking, for instance, in any kind of implants, cardiac, orthopedic implants.
And we're also looking at institutions where there is a very high rate
of documented MRSA infections.
One can look at vancomycin, for instance, there for your vascular grafts.
Now, antibiotic prophylaxis must be continued before 24 hours.
There's very little evidence anywhere that continuation until drains are removed
or some other factors present before discontinuing the antibiotics
does not decrease the rate.
And in actual fact, down the line, you will have higher incidence of resistant organisms.
So it's discontinued before 24 hours.
And in most cases, it is stopped in theater.
Normothermia is important to prevent infections.
Adequate volume resuscitation and supplemental oxygen.
It's quite all important factors and have been shown
to decrease the rates of intra-abdominal infections.
We have to say something about bowel preparation.
Now, there are various studies out that show
it may increase the risk of anastomotic dehiscence
and it certainly does not reduce your rate of infection.
What is important is most studies here will exclude
ultra-low rectal work,
very low resections of the colon with coloanal anastomosis.
In most of those cases, we still prefer the bowel preparation.
But in normal colonic work, there's certainly no indication for bowel preparation.
And it might even be deleterious to the patient.
As far as drains are concerned, I think there are two good studies.
In 2004, evidence-based review, grade A recommendations
that no drains are required for hepatic, rectal, or colonic surgery,
or appendectomy.
And there was only grade D recommendation for drains
after gastric and esophageal surgery.
Same year, prospective randomized control trial.
Large trial showed no evidence for drains after colorectal surgery.
So certainly the placement of drains perhaps points to the fact
that you don't understand the specific methods of draining
or the dynamics that go into the draining of the intra-abdominal cavity.
The intra-abdominal cavity is not a large, voluminous, all-connected space.
It's a very complicated space.
And the placement of a drain right next to an anastomosis
will not guarantee that any of the fluid from a dehiscence
is seen in the drainage bag.
It's unfortunately not a simple process.
And certainly there's really very little recommendation
for the placement of drains.
Delayed wound closure within about four days
for grossly contaminated wounds
has shown to decrease infection rate.
Certainly does lower the incidence of skin and soft tissue infections.
And we've got to think about our planned versus on-demand relux as well.
Any severe infection warrants planned relux within the next 24, 48, 72 hours
as opposed to on-demand relux
where you wait for the patient to show some signs of new
or continued intra-abdominal infection.
Certainly I think I should look in the future for a separate lecture
just based on planned and on-demand relux laparotomies.
The principles of treatment.
Now we divide peritonitis into primary, secondary, and tertiary.
If we look at primary peritonitis, usually immunocompromised patients
or children, single organism, usually exogenous,
and surgery is seldom required for this treatment
based purely on antimicrobials alone.
We think, for instance, here of dialysis catheter patients.
Secondary peritonitis, which basically this lecture is about
and certainly the rest of the lecture is based on,
it's a polymicrobial infection of the patient's own flora.
And we do usually need some form of intervention,
whether that's percutaneous or surgical.
Tertiary peritonitis develops in ICU patients,
usually with multiple organ dysfunction syndromes.
And fungi are usually involved in this.
So for secondary peritonitis,
the intervention, as I mentioned, can be percutaneous or via surgery.
That's open or laparoscopic surgery.
Usually have about 24 hours for upper GI surgery
and about 12 hours for lower GI surgery.
If you perform surgery within this time period,
you do lower the incidence of infective complications down the line.
As far as the antibiotics are concerned,
remember, as early as possible,
there is a direct relationship between the severity and rate of infections
and the time that have elapsed since the infection was established
or the surgery was started and antibiotics was given.
Antibiotics need to be appropriate to the site.
If we're talking distal small bowel,
it's really different from stomach
as far as the type of antibiotics that you would consider.
You have to look at the comorbidities of the patient itself
and you have to look at the side effect profile of these drugs,
specifically things like renal dysfunctions and hepatic dysfunctions.
Most of the time, these antibiotics are started empirically.
You don't have specific results yet
and it's a good idea always then to de-escalate
once your MCNS results become available.
Let's look at a few specific infections.
Appendicitis itself,
the current trend is towards conservative treatment
in early non-complicated cases.
There's good studies coming out of the Scandinavian country
of even treating these patients conservatively without antibiotics.
Now, most of these patients in first-year countries
are now diagnosed by CT scan
and that does impact on your choice of doing the surgery laparoscopically or open.
Now, if you do a CT scan,
one of the advantages of the laparoscopy
is that you can diagnose other pathology as well
and that certainly is now negated that advantage by preoperative CT scan.
Certainly, though, there is a trend towards laparoscopic repair
for patient discharge,
but there's also some financial gains for laparoscopic surgery.
Obviously, the initial setup is longer, is more expensive,
but it's certainly showing the patient stay in hospital for shorter periods
and the total cost might be less for laparoscopic work.
So, certainly, the trend is towards laparoscopic repair.
As I mentioned, diagnosis in first-world setups these days
have moved from a periclinical to a CT diagnosis
with the added benefit of being able to identify the patient
that you might treat conservatively with or without antibiotics
and for the diagnosing of other pathology.
Now, uncomplicated appendicitis, if that is found at surgery,
the recommendation is for no more than 24 hours of antibiotics.
Do continue your antibiotic coverage for longer, though.
If it was a complicated appendicitis,
we're talking about perforation, local abscess formation,
or perillin fluid in the abdomen,
and also for immunocompromised patients,
we're thinking specifically of diabetics.
What antibiotics do you choose?
Well, you want to cover gram-negative bacilli and anaerobes.
So, we are looking at your combination of your older quinolones
like suprafloxacin and metronidazole.
There's suprafloxacin for its gram-negative cover,
metronidazole for its anaerobic cover,
carbapenems and metronidazole for more complicated infections,
or if you really do suspect on CT that this is going to be an uncomplicated case,
you might even consider one of your prophylactic agents
only preoperatively with a single dose of gefoxetine.
If we look at acute cholecystitis,
remember many cases actually have no bacterial contamination,
but there's no way to distinguish those patients from those that do.
So, the mainstay of therapy really is the commencement of antibiotics
prior to surgical removal of the gallbladder.
Your choice of antibiotic,
choose an antibiotic with liver excretion
and that reach high concentrations in bile.
So, we are looking really at the older quinolones again,
suprafloxacin,
excreted almost unchanged in the bile
and reaches very high concentrations in the bile,
certainly higher than the MIC of most organisms.
So, a very good choice there.
In more serious infections,
you can consider the carbapenems
or even look at the fourth generation kephalosporins.
Now, mainstay of treatment is cholecystectomy.
When there are severe comorbidities,
contraindications to general anesthesia,
we can also look at percutaneous drainage.
Most procedures these days are performed laparoscopically
and they really have become the standard of care
where once what used to be termed a hot gallbladder
or acutely inflamed gallbladder
as a contraindication to laparoscopy
has really died away
and very complicated cases
can indeed be taken on by an experienced laparoscopic surgeon.
In most cases of uncomplicated cholecystitis
with cholecystectomy,
24 hours of antibiotics is really the most you need
unless the case of, of course, complicated
with perforation of the gallbladder
or in the immunocompromised patient.
Once again, we're thinking of the diabetic patient.
Acute diverticulitis,
there's been a great move towards
very conservative management of these patients.
really a topic for your final exam,
but we can say that the real only indication these days
for open surgery is a fecal imperitonitis.
Otherwise, treatment has moved in the conservative direction
of either antibiotics only,
percutaneous drainage if there's an acute collection
or an abscess or just laparoscopic lavage
together then with some antibiotics.
We are looking at your older quinolones once again
together with the metronidazole,
although those would be only for mild and non-operative cases,
more serious cases with peritonitis,
periolimperitonitis or then fecal imperitonitis.
We are looking at your carbapenems with metronidazole,
your fourth generation keplosporins with metronidazole,
and of course, the pseudomonas is a problem.
We can look at, obviously, combinations,
including perpericillin with taserbactam
plus your metronidazole.
If we look at cases of trauma cases,
there's a dependence on various factors.
You have to look at the time from injury
until you get into the abdomen,
the longer it is.
Of course, it's more important than going to continue antibiotics,
the type of organ injured stomach versus distal colon.
You've got to look at the amount of contamination once again
and where the source control was obtained
during the first surgery.
Any of these being deleterious effects,
you are thinking of prolonging your antibiotic coverage
for longer than 24 hours.
Remember, though, the continued antibiotics
in simple cases where you have source control,
where it was done quickly,
there was no time delay,
there is no other organ injury as well
that has necessitated large blood transfusions,
hemodynamically unstable patients.
Really, if you continue antibiotics for longer than 24 hours
in these circumstances,
you are not going to decrease the late-rate infection
and you are going to increase the rate of resistant infections.
Remember to keep large fluid shifts in mind
when you do give the antibiotics
that you really do change the pharmacode dynamics
of most of the antibiotic drugs
and they need to be given more frequently
in their normal doses.
