In this lecture we're going to get to something very important and actually quite a bit of fun, curvature.
I'm going to import everything that I need first of all for curvature, my usual pretty printing for Simpi,
ignoring all those ugly pink warnings. I'm going to make a reference frame and I'm going to call it C
and I'm going to introduce a mathematical symbol T.
Let's look at curvature. Curvature tells us how much the direction of the velocity vector changes per arc length of a motion path.
Now think about this a little bit. Actually I think when I show you this little picture it'll make more sense.
Now imagine this blue road is a road a car travels in.
Now imagine it travels at the exact same speed. If it looks on the speedometer it stays.
Here at the bottom here it's a very gentle curve and we see at each point these little orange points.
We see the velocity vectors. Instantaneous rate of change there.
At a constant speed though those two will be the same magnitude they're just different directions.
And the car won't slip from the road I suppose there. But if we get to the top here there's quite a sharp bend.
Quite a sharp bend. If the car doesn't slow down it might even go off the path. It might even leave the road.
And if you look at these two orange dots at the bottom and these two at the top.
The arc length between these two. Now this is not, this is just a hand drawing.
This is not 100% to scale. But imagine the arc length, the distance.
If I just travel along the blue line from that one to that one and from this one to this one is exactly the same.
If I look at these two blue, these two green velocity vectors and I look at these two red velocity vectors.
There's quite a bit more change in the velocity vectors, these two red ones.
As opposed to these two down here.
So for the same arc length, for the same length of this blue bit, that length equaling this length up here.
There's a lot more change in this velocity vector for that little bit of arc than for this little bit of arc.
So curvature tells us this, actually this rate of change of a velocity vector. Let's make it a unit velocity vector.
So I take that vector and divide it by its magnitude. So just imagine these are just unit vectors.
So it's a rate of change in those unit vectors per arc length.
Now, so it doesn't matter anymore. I can drive fast here and then I can stop the car and I can go slowly around this bend
so that I don't skid off the road. So it's got nothing to do with the pace at which I'm traveling there.
This is the rate of change of those tangent velocity vectors, make them unit vectors, per arc length.
Not per speed or per velocity or anything like that.
That gives us curvature. You can just intuitively see that this curvature, there's more curvature here than there is down here.
But we need a mathematical way to say how much curvature there is.
First of all, before we get there, we need to define this tangent normal vector.
What does that mean? It means the velocity vector at that point divided by its norm.
So that becomes a unit vector in the direction of that instantaneous velocity vector.
And I'm going to call that, we're going to call this T. We call it the unit tangent vector.
I should say, I hope I didn't call it something else before. The unit tangent vector.
So there's a tangent to the path there and it's a unit vector.
Now pay particular attention, later on we're going to learn what the tangent normal coordinate system is.
We know what the Cartesian coordinate system is.
But there's one of the body coordinate systems is the tangent normal coordinate system that you're going to learn a lot about.
And for that you need this. You need this unit tangent vector.
It is nothing special. It is the unit vector in the direction of the velocity vector at any point.
And there it is. Really nothing difficult. Let's do an example.
I've got four times the cosine of T in the X direction of my C coordinate system.
And four times the sine of T in the Y direction.
And if I just print that to the screen. There we go.
Let's run everything. Shouldn't do that.
Otherwise Python is not going to execute any of my code.
There we go. There we go.
Four times the cosine of T and four times the sine of T in the X and Y directions.
I remember my old friend. This arc length equation.
It is the definite integral in going from some initial to some final time of the square root of the first derivative square of the one component
and the first derivative squared of the other component with respect to U.
That's usually how we write it. So let's do that.
So imagine we have this position vector.
So in time this is going to trace out a little arc for us.
We can see it's going to be a circle.
But anyway it's going to trace out an arc this position vector as time goes on.
And between two bits of time I want to know what the arc length is.
What the arc length is.
Now that means I'm going to do integration here.
So I better break up this one into two separate computer variables.
So I've called it R underscore X and R underscore Y.
That's just the four cosine T there.
Four times cosine T there.
Four times sine.
So I've just broken it up.
I'm going to get the first derivative because I need the first derivative squared.
So I'm getting the first derivative of each of them.
My integrand is now the square root of this one squared times the other one squared.
So I'm just doing it by long way.
And now I just want to integrate my integrand with respect to T going from zero to T.
And that will give me the S of T.
If I were to run that I get this.
So this I know from my trigger identity is this is going to be one.
So I can say simplify S of T just using normal Python and that leaves me with four of T.
So my arc length going from zero to T is just going to be four T.
So that's very simple to do.
I know I can.
I can.
This is just a quick reminder actually how to do arc length.
Very easy to do from this equation here.
Now let's define curvature.
It's given this Greek letter Kappa.
And it is the norm.
So it is a scalar of the rate of change of the unit vector with respect to arc length.
DT dS.
Look again.
It is how much this unit vector changes, which we've just introduced here, the unit tangent vector,
how much it changes per arc length.
Per that bit of arc length there's not much change, or at least not as much as look at these two red ones.
I mean there's a huge difference.
If they're both normal vectors, I mean obviously their magnitude is the same, but there's a huge change in direction.
There's more curvature there than there is there.
So that's how we define this.
It is the rate of change of this unit tangent vector per arc length.
Can we get a better equation for this?
Because that's not the kind of derivative that you'll just be able to do.
It's very easy.
Look at this.
There's my definition.
Kappa equals this norm of dT dS.
If I were to take the first derivative with respect to t of the t of t, this unit tangent vector,
and I just do it like this.
It's dT dS times dS dT.
Now I've got to be a bit careful there.
This really only works in two dimensions, but later we extrapolate it to three.
Don't be too concerned about it.
Just think I'm doing implicit differentiation here.
So it's dT dS times dS dT, and in two dimensions it's really like you can cross out these two dS's
and you're still left with the capital T dT.
Don't worry about that.
In other words, if I get dT dS on its own, I take this dS dT and I bring it to the denominator on this side.
So that would hold simple algebra for all this upside down A for all dS dT not equal to zero.
I can't divide by zero.
So dS dT is arc length divided by time.
That's the speed.
So it can't be zero speed.
That's all I'm saying, just being mathematically rigorous there.
So kappa now, remember dT dS is kappa.
So kappa is this.
But I know that dS dT is the norm of the r prime of t.
Speed is just the norm of the velocity vector.
In other words, kappa is the norm of t prime of t divided by the r prime of t.
So we've just seen how to do t.
Remember t is just the unit velocity vector.
So it's the rate of change of the velocity vector divided by the norm of the velocity.
And that gives us kappa.
So it's a very simple setup there.
Go through it again.
Really there's nothing to it.
There's another equation for kappa which is sometimes a lot more useful.
I'm going to show you what it looks like, but it's going to be a couple of lectures before I show you the derivation of the other form.
For now, this is the one we want.
Now let's look at an example.
So I'm just going to introduce these mathematical symbols, a, c, and e.
They just represent some constants.
I have this position vector, at in the x direction, ct in the y direction, et in the z direction.
That's linear in t, linear in t, linear in t.
So this is just a straight line.
Just think about it.
Would a straight line have a curvature?
I bet you it doesn't.
I mean it's a straight line.
But let's see.
Let's just make sure.
So v of t is going to be the first derivative of that, which is simply a, c, and e.
What do I need?
Well, I need its magnitude of velocity.
There's my, in my denominator, I need the velocity, which if I get, I call speed.
It's just the magnitude of the velocity vector, which is now just a squared plus e squared plus e squared.
Remember what t was?
My unit tangent vector.
That was the velocity vector divided by its norm.
There we go.
So that's my t of t.
t prime of t, I just take the first derivative of that, and that becomes my numerator, which
I'm going to call kappa numerator.
It's its magnitude there.
Simple enough to do.
So, t prime of t is the first derivative of t of t, and in the numerator I'm going to
take its magnitude.
So the denominator takes speed, so kappa is just going to be kappa and num, the numerator
up there, divided by speed.
And if I were to run that, lo and behold, I get zero, which is to be expected because
the initial parameterized position vector was a straight line.
No problems there.
You can do this in a variety of ways.
You can give it different values.
You can do it all in one.
But if you go through it slowly, you'll see this makes sense.
And this is one way to do it.
Let's do another one for fun quickly.
So, I have a much more complex path there.
Looks like it's going to be some form of a spiral.
I need the velocity, first of all.
Of that velocity, I make the unit tangent vector by dividing the velocity vector by its
magnitude.
t prime would just be the first derivative of t.
Kappa is just going to be t t prime's magnitude divided by v t's magnitude, which was the speed.
And if I look at that, the answer is going to be 1 over 10.
Now, let me quickly, so that gives us curvature.
Let me quickly just show you there's a whole other way of doing it.
I don't know if I should really introduce this example, because I'm not going to show you this equation
and I'll show you right at the bottom what it looks like, but we're going to derive it in a later video.
And sometimes when you're given something like the, you're given different values in your problem to solve,
sometimes this alternate form, more difficult form of the curvature might be easier to use.
So for that I need not only velocity and position, but I need acceleration also.
So there I just get the acceleration vector.
Same position vectors we had before.
I'm going to now take the cross product of the velocity and the acceleration vector.
And that's going to be the numerator.
Or the numerator at least is going to be the magnitude of that, I should say.
The denominator is going to be the magnitude of the velocity vector cubed to the power 3.
And now if I get kappa, I get this massive solution here.
And if I just simplify that again, I'm going to end up with 1 over 10.
So I had 1 over 10 with a simple equation there.
1 over 10 with a difficult one there.
Very difficult to run through here.
So you're not going to understand this until I show you the equation.
But just to show you there are two ways to get to 1 over 10.
Fun thing, what is the radius of curvature?
Let me just go back up.
Radius of curvature is, if I have the curvature here, imagine I can put a circle there.
This circle will have a much bigger radius there than this tiny little circle that will fit in.
But every point will have its own curvature.
Its own radius of curvature.
And radius of curvature is just the reciprocal of the curvature.
1 over kappa.
So for our previous example, it was just going to be, no matter which way I do this, it was just going to be 10.
So, radius of curvature at any point there.
Remember, now it's going to be the same because this was a spiral initially.
So it's going to have the same, there's not going to be t.
The variable t is not going to appear in every spot.
It's going to have the same radius of curvature.
But radius of curvature is just 1 over the curvature.
Let me get closer to this second example.
I'm going to show you the equation for it now, but not how to derive it.
But let's imagine that we have a position vector.
And it's parametrized by letting x equal to t.
That makes y equals the f of t, I should say.
For this curve, y for f of x.
If we then parametrize it to x equal to t, we're going to have this.
The r of t equals t and the f of t, and let's make it in two dimensions.
It's in a plane, so nothing's going to happen.
If I take the first derivative of that to get velocity, the first derivative of t is 1.
The first derivative of the f of t with respect to t is f prime of t.
The first derivative of 0, 0.
And there's the second derivative.
And lo and behold, here we get to this other form of kappa.
It's the norm of the velocity cross acceleration, I did it up there, divided by velocity cubed.
So, if I were to get this cross product of this and this, divided by this.
I'm not doing the derivation, but this is what it ends up with.
It is the norm of the second derivative of the f of t over 1 plus the square of f prime of t all to the power 3 over t.
So this is the other way you're going to do this.
Let's look at a parabola.
I'm just going to show you something quickly.
Let's look at a parabola.
Don't worry about that.
Of course you'll have to memorize this if you don't learn how to derive it.
But I'll show you the derivation in another video.
Then you've got a lot of ways to calculate curvature.
So let me just introduce these symbols a, b, c and x.
And I have a function.
I'm going to call f, the mathematical variable f is now a function.
And the function is going to be a t squared plus b t plus c.
What is that?
It's a parabola.
Nothing other than a parabola.
Now using this other format of getting the curvature.
Let's just get f prime and f double prime.
In other words, the first and the second derivative of that parabola.
My numerator is f prime prime.
It's up there.
Divided by 1 plus f prime squared times 3 to the power 3 over 2.
So that would be, I hope I've run all of these.
Have I?
Yeah.
Kappa is now this.
That is my curvature.
Now think about it.
If you have a parabola, what happens as x or t, it's t versus y.
What happens if t goes to infinity?
Well, on the y axis, that thing is going to climb almost straight up.
It's going to turn into almost a straight line.
And what is the curvature of a straight line?
So I'm just calling, this is kappa, my curvature.
I'm just calling the curvature when t approaches infinity.
The kappa dot limit.
That means I take the limit as t approaches infinity.
And lo and behold, that curvature is going to be zero.
That curvature is going to be zero.
Just think of a parabola as t approaches infinity.
It's going to go straight up in the air almost.
So as t approaches infinity, the curvature is going to be zero.
So that's a lot of fun with curvature.
Introduction to curvature is really not that difficult.
You've got two equations.
Three almost, I should say.
Although these other two are basically the same there.
If you take the cross product, this is what you can end up with.
So you've got these two, this one and the top one.
Two equations now for curvature.
And better still you understand what curvature is all about.
And simply the radius of curvature is just one over the curvature.
Very simple.
So you have the same equations.
So Rolling.
And this one's going to be three challenges.
You've got nothing to be four.
And the famoso lid travels already.
So you guys have no chance.
I wasn't that great.
I wouldn't mind if I'm getting any other rumors anymore.
You can see me.
You can see me.
Can't see you.
