So in this chapter, we're going to look at transcendental functions.
Well, what are they?
For the purposes of this lecture, we're just going to view them as not being polynomials.
So let's look at some examples.
We see all the trigonometric functions there, sine, cosine, tangent, cosecant, secant, cotangent.
But then also the logarithm and the natural log.
And we have exponent a, Euler's number, or something such as a constant to the power of variables.
So a to the power x or a to the power t, as we've been using here.
Now, just to show you here very quickly, these are not difficult to do.
To some of the basics, we have the limit as t approaches some constant of the sine of t.
That will just be the sine of a.
Same goes for the cosine.
Same goes for exponent t there.
The natural log.
Just remember that the natural log of a number is only defined for values larger than 0.
Simply, we're just going to replace the t with a there.
The arc sine, the arc cosine, and the arc tangent.
Look at those.
Remember, though, that the arc sine and the arc cosine are only defined between negative 1 and 1.
Just think of the function, the sine of t.
It goes up and down, up and down in a periodic fashion, but it never goes above 1 and it never goes below negative 1.
So it's only defined for that.
Let me show you why.
Look at this.
The limit as t goes to 0 of the arc sine of t plus 1 over the square root of 2.
So here, instead of what we had before, look at that, we just had the limit number, where are we?
Well, it's not shown there, but if you just look at sine and cosine, there we just have the arc sine.
Sorry, it is there, number 5.
We're just going to replace t with a there, but here we have t plus 1 over the square root of 2.
If I plug in 0 straight away, which is one of the techniques that we know,
I'm just going to be left with the arc sine of 1 over the square root of 2.
And at 0, at t equals 0, we can see clearly the green graph there crosses the y-axis at pi over 4.
And remember, we said the arc sine is only defined between negative 1 and 1.
So look at that green graph.
It just stops on the left-hand side and stops on the right-hand side.
And you can see in the algebra down there, negative 1 is less than t plus 1 over the square root of 2 is less than 1.
I multiply by the square root of 2 throughout, and then I just subtract 1 from either side,
and I'm left with t alone in the middle, and now you can see why t is only defined as far as that green graph is concerned.
So that was quite easy.
Look at this one.
The limit as t goes to 0 of t times e to the power negative 3t plus 1 over 2t squared plus t.
And if we have a look at the graph, it does seem something happens at 0.
The graph suddenly crosses the y-axis there, and it looks like between 2.5 and 3, maybe 2.7, somewhere there.
If I were just to plug in t equals 0 into my expression there, I'm going to get 0 over 0.
So now, later in chapter 8, I'll show you another way to deal with that kind of problem.
But yeah, I just note that in the denominator, at least I can take t out as a common factor,
which will cancel out t in the numerator and denominator for me.
And now I'm left with the limit as t goes to 0 of e to the power negative 3t plus 1 over 2t plus 1.
And if I were to replace t with 0, now I'm left with just Euler's number, which is 2.7 something,
something just as we see in the graph there, no problem.
Look at this though.
So what happens to the functions sine and cosine of t as t approaches positive or negative infinity?
Well, we know, we said, sine and cosine is just this periodic function that just goes up and down, up and down.
It does not settle on a specific y-axis value.
So there is no limit.
The limit does not exist as far as sine and cosine are concerned as t goes to either positive or negative infinity.
It never settles down to a specific value.
What happens to the tangent?
Well, what happens to tangent as t goes to, you see there, n times pi plus pi over 2.
So there's certainly this periodicity of n pi.
Let's make n 0 now.
So just t goes to pi over 2.
And as you can see clearly, the red graph goes up to positive infinity on the y-axis.
So certainly infinity is not a number.
So you can't say that the graph settles on a certain value on the y-axis.
It will climb forever.
Therefore, that limit does not exist.
If I make n 1, so t goes to pi plus pi over 2, that's 3 pi over 2.
You see that will happen again.
The red graph will go up to infinity.
And you'll also see that approaching that vertical asymptote, which is what we'll call it, from left and right-hand side,
it's either going to be positive infinity from the left, negative infinity from the right for all these vertical asymptotes.
The arc tangent of t is a beautiful graph, though.
There you see it.
It does settle on a value.
It does not climb forever and ever.
This is one you can remember.
Certainly, that is going to settle, get closer and closer and closer.
So for whatever number you have, a larger and larger value of t as you try to approach infinity,
approach infinity, it's only going to settle on pi over 2.
So that's a beautiful one to remember.
Usually, with these transcendental functions, it's difficult to solve some of them,
and we're going to make use of the infamous squeeze theorem or sandwich sandwich theorem.
Ugly words for something in mathematics, but that's what we have.
And it's a very easy rule.
If you look at the three graphs at the bottom, right at the bottom, you'll see negative t squared.
That's the red one at the bottom.
The red one at the top is t squared, and somewhere in between, we have half t squared.
And if we look at a certain interval on the t-axis here, say from negative 2 to positive 2,
that orange line, all the y values on that orange line fall between the two red ones.
There's not one that jumps out.
Now, I can have, I'm just wondering you, you can have a piecewise defined function
which will say that that orange graph at 0 might be 10.
That doesn't matter, because it will tend to stay between those two.
So if I take a limit, that means where the orange graph tends to go,
that is certainly squeezed between the other two.
So if I can work out the limit as t approaches 0 of the top red one,
and I can work out the limit as t approaches 0 of the bottom red one,
that will be exactly the same as the limit as t approaches 0 of the orange graph.
That's all that's going on there.
So let's have a look at this.
Our g of t is our red one now, wiggling up and down, up and down, up and down.
It's t squared times sine of 1 over t.
What happens as t approaches 0?
If I were just to plug in 0 there, I'm going to have 0 times the sine of 1 over 0.
That's just not on.
That's just not on.
But I see that it is constrained from the top and the bottom.
We have the blue graph there, t squared, the red graph, negative t squared.
We can certainly work out that the limit as t approaches 0 of those two is 0.
So therefore, the limit of t squared times sine of 1 over t will also be 0.
Another thing that you're going to encounter a lot in the transcendental functions
are the piecewise defined transcendental functions.
Here we have the limit as t approaches 0 of t squared plus 2 times the cosine of t plus 2
when t is less than 0.
So look on your t axis to the left of y equals 0, or t equals 0, I should say.
There's our red graph.
So as we approach t equals 0 from the left, we're dealing with the top part of the piecewise function,
the red graph there, and at the bottom, we're approaching it from the right.
And we can clearly see in this piecewise defined functions,
the left-hand side and the right-hand side are not equal.
If you just were to plug in 0 into the values there, you're going to see from the left-hand side it's 4,
from the right-hand side it's negative 3, so this limit does not exist.
There is a left-hand limit, there is a right-hand limit, but they are not the same.
One interesting limit to memorize, you'll see it all over the show, probably in your tests and your exams,
is the limit as t approaches 0 of sine t over t, and that's just 1.
You can clearly see on the red graph there, it's 1.
And one way, the only way that we have to solve that now, because we have to plug it in, it's been 0 over 0.
I said in chapter 8 we're going to look at another way to solve this problem,
but for now, one of the techniques that we can do is plug in values closer,
make t closer and closer and closer to 0,
and you can clearly see the f of t tries then, which is sine of t over t, tries to go to 1.
You can clearly see that in the two tables at the bottom.
So the sine of t over t is 1.
There's a beautiful other way to solve that, but you can just memorize the fact that the sine of t over t equals 1.
The same goes for t over the sine of t.
The limit there as t approaches 0 is also going to be 1, and you can see in the red graph there clearly it's 1.
Last problem here,
the limit as t approaches 0 of sine squared of t over t squared.
We make use of our limit laws.
We see that sine squared t over t squared can be written as sine over t times sine over t.
Our limit laws as far as the product of two functions are concerned,
so I'm doing the two limits separately.
I know that the limit as t approaches 0 of the sine of t over t is 1,
so this is going to be 1 times 1, and the solution is 1.
So there you go, the basics of transcendental functions and limits.
Ple captivity from transcendental functions is 1, It's going to be three,
and I don't want to go, right?
Especially in modern derive for 1, and it's going to .
Absolutely we do not.
This is an extra threshold for that Estados invert 15th.
More speaking of entscheiden means I can't훈ie, I want to.
I try to close one.
Remember what you made to be?
I度 is going to be 5 for 20.
But he's going to be five.
