A few words about the use of propofol.
Now propofol is becoming an alternative to the use of barbiturates and certainly is a
drug that is now under investigation or actually being used where other treatments like mannitol
or surgical management fails to manage your intracranial pressure.
Now there are certain advantages to propofol inasmuch as it has a very short half-life,
which actually means that the time to onset of action is very short and within about 10
to 15 minutes of stopping it you can do a neurological examination inasmuch as the effect of the
propofol will be lost.
A few things to remember though is that it can cause hypotension.
Be quite aware of that.
It can cause hypotension and it can also decrease the perfusion pressure.
Perfusion pressure in the brain.
Perfusion pressure.
So even though it decreases the intracranial pressure the total circulation in the brain
might decrease due to this decreased perfusion pressure because of the hypotension that it
might cause.
If it is used for prolonged period the other problem with it is hyperlipidemia.
Hyperlipidemia is the way that the product is made up and also remember that it cannot be used
not for pediatric use, not for pediatric use.
But as people become more afraid with the use of propofol it is certainly starting to be used as an alternative
perhaps to the use of barbiturates.
A few words on the barbiturate coma.
It is considered in the hemodynamically stable patient with severe traumatic brain injury.
When other forms of therapy like the mannitol and hyperventilation might have, or surgical
evacuation might have failed.
And so also second, let's call it a second or third line, second or third line therapy.
As I say when other modalities have failed.
And it has several distinct mechanisms of action.
It is felt that it does change the vascular tone.
Definitely it decreases metabolism with the hope of at least when less substrate is required
the provision of that less substrate will not cause as much damage.
There is also thought that there is inhibition of free radical oxygen mediated lipid peroxidation.
So decrease oxidation.
Definitely decrease oxidation.
And it also alters through a change in vascular tone actually the regional blood flow
and thereby changing the, to a change in metabolic demands.
So in areas with changed metabolic demands is going to lead to a change in blood flow.
Unfortunately though your serum concentration and your therapeutic benefits correlate very poorly.
And that also correlates very poorly with systemic complications.
So it is very difficult to suggest specific doses in these patients.
Also very difficult when you are going to perform a neurological examination.
Say for instance to rule out or to rule in brain death.
You have to have an extended period off of the barbiturates to be able to do a reliable clinical examination,
neurological examination.
The next important topic to discuss in the management of traumatic brain injury is that of seizure prophylaxis.
Now seizures post a traumatic brain injury is classified as either early, early or late.
So these are the two definitions we have to look at.
And if we look at early, that is up to seven days.
So less than seven days following and that is seven days plus.
So seizures developed within the first seven days.
That would be early onset seizures and late onset seizures.
And we have to look at drugs to try and prevent these.
Now it has been shown that we can prevent or we can use drugs to prevent early post traumatic brain injury seizures but not late.
So actually the use of these drugs for longer than seven days is not really recommended.
We are talking phenytoin and carbamazepine amongst others.
But certainly the most commonly used will be phenytoin.
And that does decrease.
You do get a decrease in the incidence in patients that are at high risk for seven days.
But that certainly does not change the mortality rate for these patients.
And it does not decrease the incidence of late seizures.
So you are not going to do that.
You are only going to decrease early.
And prolonging it after seven days is certainly not going to prevent this.
So if a patient does develop late onset seizures or if the seizures persist after seven days,
these patients can be treated just the same as new onset epileptics.
Patients with new onset seizures are the same as you would in a patient without a traumatic brain injury.
One problem for instance with the phenytoin is that of drug induced fever.
Drug induced fever.
And that can develop within one to eight weeks.
One to eight weeks after initiating therapy or having had therapy with these drugs.
Now it is difficult to manage these fevers because they are a diagnosis of exclusion.
You have to look at infection and non-infectious causes of fever to rule out the phenytoin as a cause for prophylaxis.
So remember early and late.
Remember that we are only trying to prevent the early.
We are only going to give it for seven days because it is not going to decrease our incidence of late seizures.
And if we do develop late seizures or if the seizures do persist after seven days,
if the patient hit early, we have to treat them as new onset seizures as in any non-traumatic patients.
And remember the drug induced fever that might confound your management in these patients.
Yes?
It's not negative that we do this, so youain- Veil and those days,
but the natural suppressor is high down the charge.
If you ask for rejection that we lose to the impairment.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Maybe there's an opportunity for someone to give the relaxation and submit a mentalció from a duty where
you can run through buy-in.
The hour into a meal where even there will be a definite event in the kasih workplace with safety.
cigar-up.
He will increase the stress ounce.
All the arithmetic boosting.
Of course, of course, in particular reasons when I choose the brain of the rapid increase the peформation
which will be the same response bias.
Normal of my memory of the worst.
This is not so long as the right staff rather than a treatment woman 솔 that may experience.
So here is an almostwegian.
