Now let's look at the management of severe traumatic brain injury.
So those are the Glasgow Coma Scales of between 3 and 8.
In the pre-hospital setting, I don't want to say much about that but all according to
ATLS principles, we're going to look at airway, breathing and circulation and according to
the American Association of Neurological Surgeons, we're certainly going to keep the systolic
pressure above 90mm of mercury and that is with intravenous fluid resuscitation and we're
going to keep this oxygen saturation more than 90% whether by supplemental oxygen or intubation.
Very important in severe traumatic brain injury, that is your Glasgow Coma Scales between 3
and 8, the patient has to be intubated irrespective of the fact that they can maintain their airway
and breathing.
They still need to be intubated.
All patients with severe traumatic brain injury remember they need their spine protected.
Once they're in the hospital, there are a few points that I'd like to highlight.
First of all, if there's a history of loss of consciousness, they should get a CT scan.
Now a bit of a controversial statement and it certainly depends on the resources available
to you.
But the standard of care and for medical legal purposes obviously, if there's any history
of a loss of consciousness, a CT scan of the brain is indicated.
If the patient has mild or moderate traumatic brain injury, the patient really needs to be
admitted or kept in the trauma unit and neurochecks provided every 15 minutes.
Now what we need to look for during this neurocheck is any deterioration in the mental status of
the patient.
Because what we're looking for is clinical symptoms and signs of an increase in intracranial pressure.
And what would those be?
Well, first of all, nausea and vomiting.
So any patient who develops nausea and vomiting.
A patient with a worsening or a new onset headache should always alert you.
Something might be up.
A patient who suddenly becomes restless.
This might just be to hypoxia but might also be to raise intracranial pressure.
And that patient should probably be considered for a CT scan.
A patient who develops pupillary asymmetry.
We should be included in this deteriorating patient who should be considered for a CT scan.
A patient who develops seizures.
A patient who becomes lethargic or increasingly lethargic.
These are all deterioration during the neurocheck and these patients should be considered for or should undergo a CT scan.
Remember, pupillary changes can precede a significant change in mental status.
So this is a really formed part of the protocol in any hospital is looking for pupillary asymmetry.
Now, as far as blood test is concerned, depending on the legal system.
We practice a blood alcohol level and certainly urinary toxicology screen is very important.
Routine blood.
We're talking full blood count.
Urine electrolytes.
CMP.
Blood gas.
Very important because of the saturation.
We're going to look at the saturation but we're also going to look at the partial oxygen pressure.
Coagulation.
Very important specifically in the multi-trauma patient.
Coagulation studies is important.
Don't forget the tetanus prophylaxis.
Also important in trauma patients.
Now, another controversial statement.
Severe traumatic brain injury.
For all patients with symptoms.
The second one would probably not be so controversial.
Should get a CT scan of the spine.
Any tenderness in the spinal region.
But also any patient with a severe CT scan is already going for a CT.
Is already going for a CT of the head.
And they should get a CT of the C spine as well.
There is some thought certainly of penetrating traumatic brain injury with low velocity gunshot wounds.
So low velocity, velocity, low velocity gunshot wounds to the head.
It probably is not required to immobilize the spine and get a CT spine.
But certainly for safety sake the statement is that a severe traumatic brain injury.
All symptomatic patients as far as the C spine is concerned should get a C spine CT.
Now there are various things that we are going to look at to decrease the intracranial pressure.
We are going to look at ventilation.
Types of fluid, mannitol.
The use of steroids.
And we can I think right here, right now put a big red cross next to that.
Because that's not going to work.
And we'll also discuss the placement of intracranial pressure monitors.
In this video let's discuss the intracranial pressure monitor.
Placement of a probe inside the cranial cavity to measure the pressure.
What would be the indications?
Not all units use this.
But there is some evidence suggesting now that it does lead to a lowering of mortality rate.
So in the text books that do suggest this.
That would be for severe traumatic brain injury.
In other words we are talking about a Glasgow colon scale of 3 to 8 in those patients.
With an abnormal CT scan.
Abnormal CT scan.
Or if they do have a normal CT scan.
If they do have a normal CT.
Now remember a certain percentage of initially normal CT scans.
Between 10 and 40% will on subsequent CT scans develop an abnormality.
But if they do have a normal CT scan.
And they have 2 or more of the following noted upon admission.
A systolic blood pressure.
A systolic blood pressure of less than 90 mmHg.
So severe TBI with a normal CT scan.
If they have an age more than 40 years.
More than 40 years of age.
More than 40 years of age.
Or if they have unilateral.
Unilateral or bilateral.
Bilateral motor posturing.
Motor posturing.
That would be an indication for.
For the placement or monitoring at least of that.
So what are the uses of it?
Well first of all it's going to lead to early detection.
Of an increase in intracranial pressure.
So earlier.
We can say earlier detection of raised ICP.
Of raised ICP.
It can also manage the different modalities.
So let's say manage the different modalities.
That we use to decrease intracranial pressure.
And it can also be a form of therapy.
In as much as cerebrospinal fluid.
Can be taken off via this catheter.
To help us in the decrease of the intracranial pressure.
What we are dealing with here is cerebral perfusion pressure.
And remember the equation for that.
That would be mean blood pressure.
Minus the intracranial pressure.
And we want to keep that at about 60 millimetres of mercury.
There is certainly no indication to be at 70 plus millimetres of mercury.
Because with the fluid loads.
To try to achieve that.
We are really dealing now with lung problems.
And we are looking at acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Etc.
So the ideal is to keep it at 60 millimetres of mercury.
Next we are going to discuss methods that we can employ to decrease intracranial pressure.
We are all familiar with measures to increase the mean blood pressure.
But how do we decrease the intracranial pressure.
And also when do we start that.
Well the intracranial pressure monitor helps us with that.
Because if we start reaching intracranial pressures.
Above 20 to 25 millimetres of mercury.
We are really going to start instituting these measures.
Which we will discuss next.
