Subdural Hematoma
Let's move on to the subdural hematoma.
Now you actually get two types, obviously acute and chronic subdural hematoma.
And here we're discussing in traumatic brain injury or severe traumatic brain injury,
the acute subdural hematoma.
Now this is a bit more common in patients with severe traumatic brain injury.
It makes about 10 to 30%.
Which can round that off to about 10 to 30% of patients.
Now this is also in a bit older category.
We're talking about 30 to 50 year old.
It would be the average age of patients who present and instill with the male predominance.
So in the trauma setting we're really talking motor vehicle accidents, falls and assaults.
Now as opposed to the exadural epidural hematoma,
up to 80% of these are almost 4 out of 5.
Almost 4 out of 5 will be comatose.
Comatose when they present.
And by that we are talking the severe traumatic brain injury.
Which is what this whole series of talks have been about.
And we remind ourselves that it's a Glasgow Coma Scale of 3 to 8.
So most of them will indeed be comatose.
So our indications for non-operative and operative management will actually be a bit different.
So a severe traumatic brain injury is not necessarily an indication for evacuation of these patients.
The ones that you can treat conservatively are those with a clot thickness of less than 10 mm on your CT scan.
So you have less than 10 mm clot thickness on your CT scan.
Or you have a midline shift of less than 5 mm.
These patients can be treated non-operatively.
Providing that you do the following for them.
You have to place an intracranial pressure monitor.
So that you can measure those pressures.
They remain neurologically stable.
Neuro stable.
In other words they don't deteriorate.
The Glasgow Coma Scale does not deteriorate.
They have no pupillary abnormalities.
Pupillary abnormalities.
As well as far as the intracranial pressure is concerned I should have mentioned.
As long as you keep it below 20 mm of mercury.
These will be indications for non-operative management of these patients.
Now regardless whether they are comatose or not.
If they have a clot thickness more than 10 mm.
Or a midline shift of more than 5 mm.
They should have evacuation of the subdural hematoma.
Remember the subdural hematoma is also between the brain and the dura.
Considering the parenchyma lesions inside the brain tissue substance itself.
The incidence of this is in the order of about 10% of all patients with traumatic brain injury.
But if we just look at the severe.
That can go up to 35% of patients with severe traumatic brain injury.
Will have some form of parenchyma lesions.
Or then lesions inside the brain tissue itself.
Now if we look at patients that we do need to consider operative management on.
Is those that have progressive neurological deficit.
The vast majority of these will be managed non-operatively.
But if they have progressive neurological deficit.
They should definitely be considered for surgical intervention.
Specifically then if they have raised intracranial pressure.
Which is not amenable to any forms of non-operative management.
Using the modalities that we have discussed before.
Or if they have frontal or temporal contusions.
Let's put that down.
Frontal or temporal contusions.
Because that's the other word for.
I should have mentioned it's the other word for this.
Of greater than 20 milliliters.
Of greater than 20 milliliters.
If they have a midline shift of more than 5 millimeters.
If they have a midline shift of more than 5 millimeters.
Or they have cisternal compression.
You can also look at the basal cisternae.
Cisternal compression.
Specifically in these patients with progressive neurological deficit.
And refractory increased intracranial pressure.
And they have any of these.
They should be considered for surgical management.
Or any patient.
Any patient for that matter.
With a clot volume of more than 50 milliliters.
These would be seen as indications for surgical management.
The patients that then show no evidence of neurological compromise.
Or have none of these.
You can consider for non-operative management.
Which may or may not include the use of intracranial pressure monitoring.
But certainly admitted with various modalities for decreasing that.
For instance the bed up at 30 degrees.
And the use of at least of mannitol.
Another modality to decrease intracranial pressure.
That we discuss under surgical management.
Is of course surgery.
You get subtemporal decompression.
You can do a temporal abectomy.
Quite an aggressive form of management.
To decrease intracranial pressure.
Or a hemispheric decompressive craniectomy.
Now these are aggressive forms of therapy.
To decrease intracranial pressure.
And really only considered in a young patient.
And we expect or develop severe post-operative brain swelling.
And intracranial pressure.
After relief of intracranial mass lesion.
It's going to lead to some.
The vast majority of these.
It's going to lead to.
The case is going to lead to some.
Long term neurological deficit.
If indeed mortality does not ensue.
Just a few words on the depressed skull fracture.
It complicates about 5%.
Say about 5% of patients with head injury.
And if you do have a skull fracture.
There is an association.
With intracranial mass lesions.
So intracranial mass lesions.
If I can write it like that.
Certainly of neurological deficit.
Neurological deficit.
So if you do see a skull fracture.
Consider that there be a high incidence of this.
And definitely a poorer outcome.
If we just compare patients with intracranial mass lesions.
With an outed skull fracture.
They definitely will have a poorer outcome.
Now when do we surgically address this?
Well an open skull fracture.
Compress more than the thickness of the skull.
So an open fracture.
Open fracture more than the thickness of the skull.
Thickness of skull.
If they have a depression of more than that.
That's certainly an indication for surgical intervention.
And basically to prevent surgical infection.
Any patient with an open skull fracture anyway.
Should receive 24 hours of antimicrobial prophylaxis.
And we are trying to deal here with gram-positive prophylaxis.
If I can spell today.
Of prophylaxis.
Next factor.
I'm going to confirm my spine.
This is a aunty fasting.
Okay.
Cool.
I'm going to go back.
Loop still.
Celebration師.
there are.
Altice regards.
Maree.
I'm going to professor Herr권.
To hear what you're doing.
It just briefly cobweiyor yourself.
Do no know.
There are any time to getzer that you need.
I'm going to go ahead.
Like in you.
What if you're going to make a sequence of DNA on your đang ADAM?
Comm princesses of lighting.
Suddenly.
Like in front of the Questions.
