In this chapter, we're going to discuss traumatic brain injury, certainly one of the most devastating
of all the organ injuries during blunt or penetrating trauma. First thing we need to
do is to categorize or classify. So let's look at certain classifications. And we want
to do that because classification is going to help us decide on management of the patient.
The management of the patient is also going to help us set prognosis. And in the management
of the patient, that will mean the initial evaluation of the patient. And we do that
according to ATLS principles, the acute care management, the further investigations, and
whether we do investigations and whether we do any procedures on this patient. Procedures.
And the prognosis is not only for mortality, but as far as the brain is concerned, mortality,
mortality, but also about the neurological state of the patient, the functioning of the patient,
neurological functioning of the patient. Now, let's just do something with this light,
which seems to be problematic. There we go. So there's various reasons then why we want
to do this classification. And the reason why we do, or one way to do this classification
is according to the patient's Glasgow Comer Scale. Glasgow Comer Scale. And it's usually
not the Glasgow Comer Scale on admission or on route to the hospital or at the scene, although
that does pertain to some extent at least to the prognosis, is that we do this after initial
resuscitation. Initial resuscitation. Because before initial resuscitation, the patient can
have an altered Glasgow Comer Scale as caused by other organ injuries. And severe hypotension
or et cetera, or hypoxia from lung injury, et cetera, can also alter the Glasgow Comer Scale.
So after resuscitation, we look at the Glasgow Comer Scale. And according to that, we have
three. We have three categories. And these are, we'll put them in green because we use green
for definitions. We have mild traumatic brain injury. We have moderate traumatic brain injury.
And we have severe. Severe traumatic brain injury. So what are the Glasgow Comer Scale
Values attached to these? Well, the first one is really just concussion. And we're talking
Glasgow Comer Scales of between 13 and 15. So really what we're discussing here is concussion
or severe concussions. And the prognosis for these is usually excellent. There's excellent
prognosis with patients regaining their mental functions. Although we might find some short-term
memory issues. Short-term memory issues. And also concentration issues. Concentration. So
those two might be a bit impaired with these. If we look at moderate brain injuries, that will
be a GCS of 9 to 12. Anywhere from 9 to 12 is classified as a moderate. And these patients
are usually stuporous. Let's say that's concussion. But these are stuporous. Or when they are, so
they come in with a stupor. Or they're very lethargic we could say. I suppose that would
be another word. Lethargic. And they have various neurological deficits when they do recover.
And then from 3 to 8, those would be the severe traumatic brain injuries. And here we see the
high mortality rates and very poor function. Now certainly that's one classification system
to base it on the Glasgow Comer scale. But there's a more overarching classification system
as far as brain injury is concerned. And that is the primary brain injury. The primary brain injury.
Brain injury. And of course where that would go. The secondary brain injury. And secondary brain injury.
So that's probably the overarching classification system. And in each of those, specifically primary
will get mild, moderate and severe. But the changes that we've made to the management
of the patients. To the management of the patients as we see here. As really ATLS acute care
further investigations and the procedures that we do. That is really impacted on the secondary.
That is really impacted on the secondary brain injury. And by improving or lessening the secondary
brain injury, we've really improved prognosis and long term outcome. And what is the secondary
brain injury? Well, that is where the surrounding tissue, the area surrounding the primary brain
tissue through various mechanisms that we'll discuss get affected. So the initially normal brain
tissue around this primary injured area. And that happens because of arterial hypotension.
Let's write that down. So because of systemic hypotension. Hypoxemia. Hypoxemia. And then also swelling
of the brain. And let's put the brain swelling and the three types of brain swelling and we'll get
to those. Those affect the normal brain surrounding the primary brain injury. And actually then
enlarge the area that is injured. And it's principally due to our modern forms of management
of these traumatic brain injury patients that we affect or lessen the secondary brain injury
that gives us a better prognosis or initial outcome and final outcome.
So let us discuss secondary brain injury. That is where nutrient rich blood...
does not reach the brain tissue. Now directly after a primary brain insult or up to days later,
the brain tissue is very vulnerable to a drop in blood pressure and oxygenation. And secondary
brain injury is actually the most common cause of in hospital mortality after traumatic brain
injury. So once the patient actually reaches the hospital, it's not the primary brain injury
that is the leading cause of mortality but actually the secondary brain injury. If we look at the
pre-hospital phase, we note that a quarter to a half of patients have hypoxia. So here in green
we've got to define hypoxia. Hypoxia is an arterial oxygen saturation of less than 90%. And we also see
that a sixth to a third have at least one episode of hypertension. So arterial hypertension
in traumatic brain injury, that would be a systolic blood pressure of less than 90mm of mercury. So
quite a few patients with severe traumatic brain injury are now vulnerable to developing secondary brain injury
due to these two causes. Now a single hypertensive episode increases your mobility and actually
doubles the mortality rate that has been shown. Due to this, the American Association of Neurological Surgeons
have set some guidelines and they suggest that the arterial systolic blood pressure is kept at above 90mm
of mercury at all times for patients with traumatic brain injury and that the cerebral perfusion pressure
is kept at more than 60mm of mercury. What is the cerebral perfusion pressure? Well, that is very simply
the systolic blood pressure minus the intracranial pressure. So that is the pressure, the difference
between those two is actually the perfusion that will take place in the brain. Now if this drops, obviously,
or if that increases, we're going to get a smaller value here. We're going to get a smaller value
and the smaller that value is, the less the perfusion is. So we're trying to keep that up, but what
we're trying to keep that up and we're trying to keep this down, but what increases this intracranial
pressure? Well, remember the skull is rigid, that we know, and the brain can swell. Three reasons, three causes,
three forms of brain swelling. The hyperemia or venous engorgement, that takes place directly after the brain injury.
Due to the trauma itself, there's vasogenic edema. What is vasogenic edema? Well, very quickly, after a traumatic brain injury,
there is a loss of the blood-brain barrier function. Blood-brain barrier function. And water leaks from the intravascular space
into the extracellular space into the extracellular space. And that leads to edema. Most important, though,
is cytotoxic edema. And that is loss of the function of the sodium-potassium pump. Sodium-potassium pump.
And the function of this pump is lost. Ions and water into the cell. Water into the cell and you actually get
intracellular space swells up. Now, as this vicious circle develops, now we get a smaller value here for the
cerebral perfusion pressure. Nutrium-rich blood does not reach the brain. There is, at least inside the brain,
hypoxia in the brain tissue, worsens the situation and this vicious circle continues. And that is what we
try and break because the tissue, brain tissue not involved in the primary head injury is now very,
very vulnerable to this secondary brain injury, leading to a worsened outcome as far as
mobility and mortality is concerned.
