Now let's look at the modalities available to us to manage, raise intracranial pressure
or how can we lower the intracranial pressure.
Now here I've listed what is available to us, the use of mentol, hyperventilation, forms
of hypotonic saline, glucocorticoids, propofol, barbiturate coma and then surgical management.
Let's have our first look at mannitol.
First of all let's look at the dose of mannitol.
That's usually in a dose of about 0.25, that's a quarter to one gram per kilogram body weight.
It's a diuretic of sorts and it's going to lead to a decrease in intravascular volume
and thereby decrease in extracellular volume as that intravascular volume needs replacement.
It's actually going to draw water, so it's going to lessen the brain edema.
If we use it, there are some studies to suggest that it is better in bolus dosis.
They're trying to bolus those and that's going to be versus a continued infusion, a continued
infusion and it certainly seems as if bolus dose is going to have slightly more of an effect.
Now, if you give mannitol and you watch the intracranial pressure, it reaches a maximum
or the reduction reaches a maximum within about 30 to 60 minutes is when you can start
seeing a maximum effect and it's going to persist for about 90 minutes up to about 5
to 6, let's say 6 hours.
You're going to see the effect of the bolus dose of mannitol.
You should not use it with furosemide.
That question always comes up, furosemide should be used.
The problem with that is that there's a rapid diuresis and depletion of your intravascular
volume with electrolyte disturbances and it really should not be recommended.
What you are trying to end for is a serum osmolality, a serum osmolality should be kept below 320.
It should be kept at about less than 320 because we want to try and avoid acute renal injury.
We should monitor the urine output of these patients.
Urine output monitoring is important and fluid replacement because that will help you judge
your fluid replacement.
So it's a good drug to use and probably always the first line of therapy in the management
of raised intracranial pressure.
In the next video we'll look at the do's and don'ts of hyperventilation.
Just a few important words on the use of hyperventilation.
If you hyperventilate a patient, what are you doing?
You're increasing the minute volume.
The minute volume.
And remember the minute volume is determined by two things.
That's the tidal volume and the rates at which you breathe.
So if you increase the tidal volume or you increase the rates, it increases the minute volume
and that leads to hypokapnea inasmuch as you're going to get a decrease in the PaCO2.
Now this certainly should not be overdone.
Not all patients admitted with raised intracranial pressure or let's say for instance that traumatic
brain injury should have hyperventilation and it's only used really when other measures
have failed and should also then be used in brief periods.
The problem with hyperventilation is that it can cause cerebral vasoconstriction, the vasoconstriction
and that is actually constriction and that is actually going to lead to a decrease in
the total blood volume with which the brain is perfused.
So in short bursts and really when other measures have failed, so we're really starting to look
at persistent ICPs of more than 25, persistent ICPs of more than 25 millimeters of mercury.
If you have that persistent in your intracranial pressure, this would be an indication to hyperventilate.
And we're not trying to really blow down, blow off the CO2 to values of about 10 to 15.
We're actually looking at values of about 25 to 30 millimeters of mercury as far as the
PaCO2 is concerned through either increase in tidal volume or rates depending on what would
be safest as far as the pulmonary situation that the patient is in.
So certainly we aim for normocabia.
Normocabia in the vast majority of patients with severe or any kind of traumatic brain injury
and only when measures fail and there is a persistent increase in intracranial pressure
can we try this modality of hyperventilation to increase tidal volume or increasing in the
rates of breathing set on the ventilator.
Let's have a look now at hypotonic saline.
That is a second line therapy.
Second line therapy, usually when the mannitol is starting to lose its effectiveness,
you get various types.
And it really, as a bolus, is quite good for acute.
It will give you acute decrease in your intracranial pressure.
So we can give boluses of about, or bolus at least in concentrations of up to 23.4%
the commercial products that you get and then as a continuous infusion for 1.83%
hypertonic saline.
Hypertonic saline.
And not only do you get hypertonic saline, which remember that would be sodium chloride,
but you also get sodium acetate.
Sodium acetate.
And that can be used in patients who have a metabolic acidosis.
A metabolic acidosis.
Because remember, the chloride will be at the same concentration as the sodium.
And the hyperchloremia will increase or worsen your metabolic acidosis.
One thing you've got to be aware of, you are going to enter a hyperosmolar state.
A hyperosmolar state.
And we're talking osmolality is about 320 plus milliosmoles per litre.
And you've got to be concerned about acute kidney injury under these circumstances.
But as long as the patient is well hydrated and has got a good arterial pressure,
or is at least normotensive, this seems to be under control.
So dangerous to use and should be used with caution and clear indication as to what concentration
of hypertonic saline is to be used, as well as have the availability of sodium acetate
instead of sodium chloride in patients with a metabolic acidosis.
But as a second line therapy, when your mannitol has failed, it seems to be quite a good drug to use.
Now we can discuss the use of glucocortico steroids.
Now in patients with brain tumors, in patients with various types of brain tumors,
there is some indication for the use of glucocortico steroids because it does seem to increase
or decrease at least the edema in the area around the tumors, thereby lessening intracranial pressure
or any kind of pressure effects or problems as far as edema is concerned.
And the thought is it would do the same.
But there are actually studies out now that shows there is an increased rate of severe disability and death.
So your morbidity and your mortality are certainly going to increase with the use of glucocortico steroids
and they play absolutely no role. They play absolutely no role.
Let's put that clearly in your mind and let's put red around it so that it's not to be used
in patients with raised intracranial pressure.
