Now that we know something about matrices and can do some simple arithmetic,
let us have our first peek into what a matrix can be used for.
We have already mentioned that they can represent a set of linear equations.
In this video I will set up a system of three equations with three unknowns.
At first we will see what these unknowns are and then we will construct an augmented matrix from the set.
We will perform some operations on the matrix and then get back to the answers, solving for our unknowns.
Here are our three equations. You can see where this is heading.
We call the first unknown x, the second y and the last z.
I have constructed the three equations such that we can see what the values of x, y and z are initially.
I then constructed three linear equations from these as if I didn't know what the values of x, y and z were.
Here I have constructed the augmented matrix from the linear set.
This grey line just represents the fact that something was added to the matrix representing the three unknowns,
and that is the right hand side of the equations, on the other side of the equals sign.
I have alluded to the fact that we are going to do something to this matrix.
These manipulations are called elementary row operations.
But before we delve into what they are, think about this.
In algebra, if I had a single linear equation and I did something to the one side of the equation,
for instance, multiplied out by three, I also have to do it on the other side.
What I actually did was an elementary row operation.
Here is what they are when pertaining to matrices.
Step 1. Locate the leftmost column that does not consist entirely of zeros.
Step 2. Interchange the top row with another row if necessary to bring a non-zero entry to the top of the column found in step 1.
If the entry that is now at the top of the column found in step 1 is A, in other words it is not 1,
multiply the first row by 1 over A in order to introduce a leading 1.
Just a little hint here from step 2. If there is a row that starts with a 1, put that one on top.
It saves you from having to do step 3.
Step 4. Add suitable multiples of the top row to the rows below,
so that all entries below the leading one become zeros.
And step 5. Now cover the top row in the matrix and begin again with step 1 applied to the new sub-matrix.
Now this might make no sense at all.
But as we go through this example, you will see what these steps mean.
These are important and so are their order.
You have to practice quite a few examples to get comfortable with this, but you have to.
Also be mindful, it is easy to introduce errors.
Here we go, our augmented matrix.
Now we don't have to look for a leftmost column that does not consist of all zeros.
None of our rows contains all zeros.
And actually, they all have a leading non-zero in column 1.
I did mention though, that it is easier to bring to the top a row that already has a leading 1 in the first column.
So here we'll interchange rows 1 and 2 and rewrite the matrix.
This way we can skip step 3 here.
See it says of the entry that is now at the top of the column found in step 1 is A.
In other words, not 1.
Multiply the first row by 1 over A in order to introduce a leading 1.
Now we already have a leading 1, so we can skip that step 3.
Now we need to add suitable multiples of the top row to the rows below,
so that all the entries below the leading 1 become zeros.
In other words, how do we change this 4 to a 0 as far as simple addition is concerned?
Well, that is easy.
We add a negative 4, because 4 plus negative 4 is 0.
So what do we do to this 1 to make it into a negative 4?
Yes, we multiply it by negative 4.
But remember from algebra, if we multiply a value into an equation,
it has to be multiplied with all the elements and be done on both sides of the equal sign.
So we multiply the whole of this first row by negative 4 and we get negative 4, negative 8, negative 12 and negative 44.
Now we add this new row to row 2, just as we did in matrix addition.
Each element with each element.
4 plus negative 4 is 0.
3 plus negative 8 is negative 5.
2 plus negative 12 is negative 10.
19 plus negative 44 is negative 25.
We leave row 3 alone for the next step.
We are still busy changing the leading values below the first rows leading 1 to 0s.
See in step 4 it says add suitable multiples of the top row to the rows below so that all entries below the leading 1 become 0s.
Again we can change the leading 2 here to a 0 by adding a negative 2.
What can we do to this leading 1 to make it a negative 2?
We can multiply it by negative 2.
But remember we have to multiply each element with this negative 2.
So row 1 times negative 2 is negative 2, negative 4, negative 6 and negative 22.
We now add each element to the corresponding element in row 3.
2 plus negative 2 is 0.
That's what we wanted.
0 plus negative 4 is negative 4.
1 plus negative 6 is negative 5.
5 plus negative 22 is negative 17.
The next step says that we now have to cover the top row and with the 2 left continue from step 1.
Well we have a leading negative 5 and a leading negative 4.
They need to be changed to 1s.
Step 3 here says multiply by 1 over a.
So for this negative 5 it will be negative 1 over 5.
And negative 1 over 4 for this negative 4.
This is what we get.
0 times negative 1 over 5 is 0.
Negative 5 times negative 1 over 5 is 1.
Negative 10 times negative 1 over 5 is 2.
Negative 25 times negative 1 over 5 is 5.
If we multiply row 3 out by negative 1 over 4 we get 0, 1, 5 over 4 and 17 over 4.
Now the next step says get rid of the non-zeros under the leading 1.
So we have to change this 1 into a 0.
You guessed it, we need to multiply row 2 out by negative 1 and add it to row 3.
Here is what we get multiplying out and here is what we get when we add each corresponding element.
Now back to step 1.
We need to change this negative 3 over 4 into a 1.
How do we do it?
Well we multiply out the row by 1 over a.
So here it will be negative 4 over 3.
What we are left with here is called row echelon form.
I'll make a separate video about this term.
It can be mentioned here that most computer programs that can solve these matrices stop here.
In this form we can construct 3 new matrices.
Using the reverse of what we did before to construct an augmented matrix from a linear set.
And we can use back substitution to get the rest of the values of the unknowns.
Remember we constructed those initial values ourselves.
We now need to see if we can get back to them.
Here is the reverse constructed new linear set using our augmented matrix.
1 1 x plus 2 2 y plus 3 3 z equals 11 11.
0 0 x plus 1 1 y plus 2 2 z equals 5 5.
And 0 0 x plus 0 0 y plus 1 1 z equals 1 1.
See this part z equals 1.
Now we can back substitute.
Here is equation 2.
0 x plus 1 y plus 2.
And instead of z we can put 1.
Because we know z is equal to 1.
We can now solve for y.
And we see that y equals 3.
Now we can use equation 1 and substitute the known values of y and z.
And we solve for x.
And look at this.
Right where we started.
x equals 2.
Y equals 3.
And z equals 1.
