Now you'll hear a lot about the tangent normal coordinate system.
Now it plays on the strengths of what we've just done here, this curvature and all these
things actually go together and you can use them together so let's go for it.
First things first though, I just want you to consider a circle.
Circular motion goes round and round and round.
It is the only kind of movement that, oh that's one horrible circle, anyway.
It's the only movement that you can find in which the magnitude of the position vector
never changes.
As it goes the magnitude, this radius there stays constant all the time so it's the only
type of movement that you can really think of in this initial reference frame where it
is where the magnitude of this position vector never changes and as such its first derivative,
the velocity vector, at any point is always going to be perpendicular to that.
The position vector and the velocity vector are always going to be perpendicular.
For us to look at a body coordinate system, now imagine we've all seen these action cameras
mounted on a helmet, on a motorbike or bicycle and it's as if the helmet of the person is
absolutely still.
That's a body coordinate system and this whole world is moving around.
Now imagine if you are in a particle, a point moving along this trajectory, as far as you are
concerned you have your own coordinate system.
And the whole world is moving around you and that is a coordinate system that is different
from this world view, this Cartesian coordinate system, that's a body coordinate system, a coordinate
system that is going to remain static from the point of view of someone or something on
that body, on that particle that moves along.
So for that we have this tangent normal, tangent normal, binormal, it's actually some people
put a b in and I'll show you what the binormal unit vector is.
That is a coordinate system that is fixed on this moving particle and as far as it's concerned
the whole world is moving around it.
Now we already know this tangent normal vector.
The tangent normal vector is just the norm of the velocity vector.
So at any point that I can, that I have a position vector, at any point that I have a position
vector I take its first derivative and I have the velocity vector.
In other words I have r prime of t that is the first derivative there and if I just express
its magnitude divided by its magnitude r prime of t so I have a unit vector.
If I do that its length becomes 1 and all it now shows me is the direction and that is
the tangent normal vector.
We've seen that, the tangent normal vector.
Now I want to construct, as I have with a Cartesian coordinate system, I have here this, it is perpendicular
to each other so I want to construct the same sort of thing there.
So at this point I want, if that's my t of t there, I want something that is perpendicular
to that at any time and I'm going to call that the principal normal vector.
It is perpendicular to that and at any point I sort of instantaneously want to see that
as this sort of scenario.
If I have a position vector and I take its first derivative in this sort of scenario,
which is happening instantaneously at every kind of point, you can see it as something
like that, I want this kind of scenario so that this is my t and this is my n.
And what do I do?
I take the derivative of that.
So, we're going to have this principal normal unit vector, principal normal unit vector that
is going to be for us t prime of t over its magnitude.
So again, it's going to have a length of one.
So what it basically tells us, it's this, it's a prime there, it's the, it goes together
with this, it's the derivative of that divided by its magnitude just to make it unit vector
again.
But it shows us for this type of scenario, now don't, don't mistake this for this, this particle's
not moving in a circle.
But as it stands right at the spot, view it as instantaneously as looking like something
like this.
And if you were to do this, you can, you can do, we can do a problem or you can do problems
where you can just take the dot product of these two vectors and it's going to end up
being zero.
In other words, they are perpendicular to each other.
Now, you can well imagine in two-dimensional space that this normal, principal normal tangent
vector can point in this direction or it can point in this direction.
And what it tends to do is it always points in the direction in which this is changing.
If the slope is changing in this direction at the moment, okay, so it's concave looking
from this side, it's going to point in that direction.
Over here, suddenly it's going to swap over looking in that direction.
In three-dimensional space, it's actually even more difficult because it can now not
only point in one of two directions, but it can point anywhere in a circle.
And there is something called the oscillating circle and the circle in the plane.
We needn't be too concerned about these things now.
But what the point of it all is that this usually points in the direction in which the curvature
is going at the moment.
Okay?
It's easy enough to see.
And then we have this binormal unit vector B that you just have to know about and that
is just the cross product.
It's just the cross product of these two vectors.
Just the cross product of those two vectors.
So nothing here is too difficult, too sinister.
Now we are going on to another form of the, another derivation so that you have another equation
to play with to determine curvature.
And for that we are going to make use of this tangent normal body coordinate system that
stays with the particle wherever, wherever it goes.
