Now here comes your second curvature equation. Remember the equation there for acceleration
that we have from there. I'm going to do a silly thing, which will look silly. I'm going
to take the cross product of those two vectors. I'm not writing it's a function of t, it's
a function of t, just saving some space. I'm going to take that cross product. And what's
the cross product of this sum of these two components? Well that's going to be the cross
product of the first one, dt squared t prime of t plus, I'm going to have here t cross
product ds dt squared n of t. Oh, so I put the t there. Now what is the cross product?
This is just a scalar. What is the cross product of two of the exact same vectors there? Well
that's just zero. Even though there's a scalar in front of them, the cross product of those
two, it's going to be zero. So we drop this bit. And what is t cross n? t cross n, well
we know that's b. We know that's b. But that's a unit vector, cross a unit vector, that's going
to be another unit vector. And its magnitude, if I suddenly were to say, well let's not do
that. Let's do this. Let's get the magnitude of this. So I'm going to be left with this cross
that, which is b. But I'm taking its magnitude, which is just one. So all I'm left with basically
is ds dt squared. And what else did I forget? Oh, I forgot the kappa there. Oh, that looked
a bit odd. And I'm left with the kappa there. Now, we just have to remember a few things.
What is t? Shall we do that one? What can we change? What can we change? Let's play with
the s dt. Well, the s dt like that. That is just going to be the norm of r prime of t.
Like that. So we can put that in as square there. Let's put that in. We have this, r prime of
t squared. We've got that bit. And let's do something about this side. What can I write
that as? Remember I'm dealing with here with the magnitude. So remember that that was the
r prime of t divided by its magnitude. That was that one. Cross, but I'm dealing all the time
now with magnitudes. Cross that, which was just the r prime of t. That's a, so I'm crossing these.
And that's going to equal kappa. And that's going to equal kappa norm of r prime of t. There.
But here I'm dealing with scalars because I'm taking the magnitude. So it would be the same
velocity vector as doing this. And lo and behold, out jumps my second equation for kappa, which
is going to be the velocity vector there. Cross product with the second derivative of the
position vector there. Divided by the first derivative there of the position vector cubed.
Oh, sorry about that. Just getting kappa on its own there. So that's a very simple equation
by someone who just sat, played a bit. I suspect. I'm sure there was some deeper thought than
that though. Going on, just taking that cross product there and just replacing these with
values that we know what they are. And we're just taking magnitudes so we can view these more
algebraically. And if I have a position vector, all I need now is a position vector. If I take
its first derivative and I take its second derivative, that's all I need. That's all
I need. If I do a cross product between those two vectors and I divide it by, and I take its
magnitude, and I divide it by the magnitude of the first derivative cubed, I have curvature
again. So there's my second equation for curvature, and it's actually quite beautiful.
