Now, here comes the third one.
Imagine I have a function x, y equals x or in other words the f of x equals x and I'm
parametrizing this so I can get position vectors.
So I let x equals t and therefore the f of x equals the f of t.
Now I can write a position vector from these parametrized functions.
I have the r of t and that is going to equal t, the f of t and in two dimensions that would
just be zero there.
What is the, that's what I have the t, f of t and zero.
If I take its first derivative, I just take the first derivative of each component that
is derivatives of vectors so I'm going to be left of one, f prime of t and zero and if
I take its second derivative I have that.
Now remember we've just seen or we saw before kappa is going to be this r prime of t cross
r double prime of t divided by r prime of t cubed.
So first of all, first things first, let's get the cross product of these two.
Now there's different ways to do it.
The way that I like to do it is that we just do, that we just take the determinant of this
three by three matrix.
I'm going to have i minus j.
I just remind myself that there's going to be a negative there.
And it's one, f of t and zero and zero, f prime of t, f double prime of t, zero.
And I have to just take its determinant.
And so in the i direction I'm going to get the determinant of these four, that's zero.
And the negative j I'm going to get this times this minus this times this which is also zero.
And in the k direction I'm going to just get f double prime of t minus zero.
So I actually have f double prime of t in the k hat direction.
But I'm not interested in that, I'm interested in that.
I'm interested in that f double prime of t.
I'm not interested really in the direction.
And if I had to take the magnitude of this, it's going to be the square root, let's just
do that, the magnitude of r prime of t.
Well that's going to be the square root of one squared plus this squared, f prime of t
squared plus zero squared.
So that's actually that to the power a half.
I can let that, is that to the power a half.
But it's all to the power a third.
So lo and behold, for kappa we have f double prime of t divided by this.
So it's one plus the f prime of t squared but all of this to the power three over two.
No more chalk left.
So there we have another equation.
So it depends on what you were given in your problem.
We saw the first, we know the first derivative, the first equation for kappa.
We showed a second equation for kappa which is actually there.
And if you just construct things like this in two dimensions,
there is another way for you to use curvature.
