The next definition I want to look at is row echelon 4.
That means the following.
I want the matrix in row 1 column 1, I want a 1.
And then it can be any numbers.
See, well, let's put numbers.
This is an example.
2, 0, 4, 1.
Underneath this leading 1, I want all 0s.
I'm going to do 4 rows.
I want leading 1s in all my rows.
But because this 1 has to be a 0 underneath that 1, my leading 1 should be there.
Then after that, I can have any.
Those need to be 0s.
They can be anything.
I said underneath each leading 1, there can only be 0s.
That means this first leading 1 will be there.
And I can have 8, 4.
Under each leading 1 can only be 0s.
The first 1 has got to be a 1.
And that could have been anything.
Now, this is called row echelon form.
We've got a nice diagonal here of 1s.
And underneath them are just 0s.
And these numbers following can be anything.
That is row echelon form of this augmented matrix.
Of this augmented matrix.
And I've got 4 equations.
1, 2, 3, 4 unknowns.
So I should be able to solve this.
I just plucked these out of the air.
There's other numbers.
Because I don't know if this matrix will lead to any solution.
But anyway, this is called through gas elimination.
Through gas elimination, that's using my 3 elementary row operations.
I got to this matrix, which is called row echelon form.
For reduced row echelon form.
For reduced row echelon form, I need something else.
It goes one step further.
It carries on.
I continue.
I don't stop.
I will have to do some examples.
I don't think my video list at this time has enough examples.
We'll do some examples.
It also means that on top of each leading one, there can only be 0s.
So on top of that one, we can only be 0s.
On top of this one, we can only be 0s.
On top of this one, we can only be 0s.
And then we'll get to some answers.
For instance.
And now I can just read it off.
Remember this was an augmented matrix.
So I can immediately say that this, if this was x1, x2, x3, x4.
So I can say 1x1 equals 2, x, and this was x4, x3 equals negative 3, x2 equals 5, and x1 equals 4.
I can just read off the answer.
So I don't have to do that substitution, back substitution, by rewriting all of these as a new linear system.
And I start solving from the bottom up here as much as I now know what x4, x4, x4, x4 was 2.
And I substitute back if I had just a row echelon form.
Now I have reduced row echelon form.
I can read my answers off directly.
The more examples you do, the more sense this will make.
And if you carry on, and this is just done by continuing with your three elementary row operations,
and this is called Gauss-Jordan elimination.
Gauss-Jordan elimination.
Wilhelm-Jordan.
Okay.
And that is reduced row echelon form.
The next video, I want to spend quite some time on what a homogenous linear set is, and we'll have a look at that.
So now let's have a look at what a homogenous linear set is.
That is where all my equations equal 0.
So nx1 plus bx2 plus cx3 equals 0.
A, b, c, d, e, f equals 0.
g, h, i equals 0.
x1 plus, x1 plus, x2 plus, x2 plus, x2 plus.
Forgive me for doing it this way.
And x3.
They all equal 0.
That is a homogenous and homogenous linear set.
All the equations equal 0.
Now, all homogenous systems are consistent.
Consistent means they have a solution.
They will never be, and a homogenous set is never inconsistent.
It will never have no solution.
Because there's one immediate solution that jumps to mind.
And I'll show you that by drawing a graph of these three.
Potential graphs of these three.
Is that they all cross in the center of a 3D coordinate system.
It's a bit skewed, but you get the point.
They all cross in the center.
So they will immediately all have at least one solution.
And that is called the trivial solution set.
Trivial solution.
And that is where the whole set x1 equals x2 equals x3 equals 0.
If they all equal 0, 0, 0, no matter what A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, R, whatever those values are.
If x1, x2, and x3 all equal 0, then all the right-hand sides would be 0.
So there immediately is one solution.
So it can never be inconsistent.
And all homogenous linear sets are consistent.
There is this trivial set.
Okay?
There is this trivial solution.
The other option is, remember we said there are only three options.
There are never, with linear systems, anything but one of these three.
There's either nothing in an inconsistent set.
We already said that all homogenous systems are consistent.
So what was the other option?
It was either one single solution or infinitely many solutions.
Or infinitely many solutions.
So those are the two options for, they're always consistent.
And a consistent system can only have two of these three.
Because if it had one, it would be inconsistent.
So it's either going to have the trivial solution,
meaning there's just one single solution set.
One single solution set where all the elements in the solution equals 0.
Okay?
Or they can have infinitely many solutions.
So you might ask yourself, when am I going to get this infinitely many solutions?
Well, first of all, you could think that all the lines, you know,
are just lying on top of each other.
They are just, these equations are all just multiples of each other.
And they all represent, all the equations disrepresent this one line,
all lying on top of each other.
But there is another, another linear, linear system that would, that would give you this,
and that is, n is larger than m.
Now remember what n is?
n is the number of equations.
Usually the textbooks, when writing that way around,
they'll say m smaller than n.
Or n is larger than n.
There are more unknowns, there are more unknowns than there are equations.
If you have a modulus linear set all equals 0,
and if you have more unknowns than, than you have equations,
then you're going to immediately have infinitely many solutions.
It might not make much sense now, but just remember that you might get asked a question
about a modulus linear set, and remember that if you have more unknowns than equations,
you are going to have an infinite number of solutions.
Now remember, why do we write m and n?
We've seen it before, we have a matrix A, and it is a 3 by 3 matrix.
What does that mean?
There are 3, well, let's make a difference so we can see the difference.
Say, for instance, it is a 3 by 4 matrix.
The first number is m, the second number is n.
So, m by n.
n refers to how many rows there are going to be.
a, b is going to be 3 rows.
Okay, and how many unknowns is going to be 4 unknowns.
So, a, b, c, d, and if it's an augmented matrix, that's going to equal E.
f, g, h, i, j, k, l, n, n.
And this m and n has got nothing to do with that, it's just a placeholder.
Oh, okay.
So, this is the augmented matrix.
So, what I'm describing here actually does not include this.
It's only a, b, c, d, f, g, h, i, k, l, and n, which is a 3 rows by 4 columns.
And the 4 columns refer to n, that is the number of unknowns.
So, this will be x1, x2, x3, x4.
And the 3 rows, they came from 3 equations.
So, my unknowns are more than my equations.
I've got 4 unknowns, 3 equations.
And if this was all 0, if this was a homogenous linear set,
then I would have infinitely many solutions.
I would have infinitely many solutions.
So, that is something you have to remember.
Okay, there's one more thing on my board that I wanted to say.
That this infinitely many solutions, this n is more than n,
only works for homogenous linear systems.
If you have an inhomogenous system,
in other words, these actually have values, 1, 0, 4, whatever.
It's an inhomogenous system.
Okay, the same will not apply to this.
Either it is going to be inconsistent.
Listen carefully.
It's either going to be inconsistent and have no solutions.
This is for inhomogenous.
Inhomogenous.
N is rather than n.
It's either going to be inconsistent with no solutions,
or it's going to have infinitely many.
Okay.
Or it's going to have infinitely many.
If it is homogenous, homogenous with n rule less than n,
if it is homogenous,
it is always going to have infinitely many solutions.
Infinitely many solutions.
If it is inhomogenous,
it is either going to have,
it's not only infinitely many,
it's either going to be inconsistent,
or have infinitely many solutions.
One of the two.
So, remember these, do not get confused between them.
So, it's only for these situations.
Now, where we have more,
where we have more unknowns than equations.
If it's homogenous,
all equal to zero,
you're going to have infinitely many solutions.
If it's inhomogenous,
they're not all equal to zero.
They're equal to some number.
It's either going to be inconsistent,
or it is going to have infinitely many solutions.
So, this is the first lot of equations.
The first lot of definitions.
We'll go on to more definitions
in the next videos.
Thank you.
Thank you.
