Let's look at our next set of definitions. What is a column matrix, also known as a column vector?
Now later on we will bring vectors into this and there's such a nice tie in between manipulating vectors and matrix equations or linear algebra.
But let me just give you an example of a column matrix. That is where I will have a matrix and this consists of one column.
Remember, some people write things like this. You can use different types of brackets for matrix.
Anyway, it consists of one column. A row matrix or a row vector would just consist of, it doesn't matter how many elements there are, there's just one row in that matrix or one column in that matrix.
So certainly that is quite easy. What is a square matrix? A square matrix is where M equals N.
In other words, M equals N. There's just as many rows as there are columns.
So I'm going to have A, B, C, D. So I'll have to have I, J, K, L, N, N, O, P.
I will have to have four rows and four columns or two and two or five by five or twenty by twenty.
And we call this matrix N. We just say N there inasmuch as we don't say N by N. It's N by N. N by N matrix.
Okay, so rows equals columns. And that is a square matrix. What is the main diagonal? Only a square matrix can have a main diagonal.
And this is the main diagonal. So it's going to be A, F, K, and P. That is the main diagonal of a square matrix.
I cannot have a square matrix. I cannot have a main diagonal if I have, if I don't have a square, if I don't have a square matrix.
Lastly, I just want to look at the identity matrix. First of all, only, only square matrices, identity matrices can only be square.
So let's start with an A 2 by 2 matrix. We will call that I2. I stands for identity matrix. And that is going to be this matrix.
1, 1, 0, 0, 0. So on my main diagonal, I have all 1s and all the rest of entries are 0.
So let's look at I3, the 3 by 3 identity matrix. So on my main diagonal, I will have 1 and all my other entries will be 0.
That is my main diagonal. All 1s, everything else is 0. And you might have seen this elsewhere in this video series or know about this before.
But what do we use the identity matrix for? Oh, you will see it. Some way in this video series will come up.
It is like multiplying, normal algebra multiplying by 1.
So let's just look at a quite quick example. Let's have 3, 2, 4, 1.
And let's multiply that by the identity matrix. So this matrix is 2 by 2. It's a square matrix of 2.
So I better multiply it with a square matrix that is also 2 by 2.
If I multiply those, it's a row 1 by column 1. So let's do that.
For the first entry, now this is 2 by 2.
And this is 2 by 2. So those two are the same.
So I can multiply those two matrices. So my result matrix better be 2 by 2.
So I'll have to have an answer there, there, there.
There, there, there, there, there, there, there, there.
So for this one, we're going to take this row 1, column 1.
So I'm going to take row 1, column 1.
So it's 1 times 3 plus 0 times 4.
So that will just be a 3.
Now row 1, column 2.
So I'm still row 1, column 2.
1 times 2 is 2 plus 0 is 2.
Now I've got to row 2, column 1.
Row 2, column 1.
0 times 3 plus 1 times 4 is 4.
And now I'm going to have row 2, column 2.
So row 2, column 2.
0 times 2 is 2 plus 1 times 1 is 1.
And look at that.
It's 3, 2, 4, 1.
3, 2, 4, 1.
So multiplying that by an identity matrix just leaves you with the original matrix.
And I could have put that on either side.
It doesn't matter.
If this was matrix I2 then, and this was my matrix I, I could have put it with A2 times A equals A, or A times I2.
So it equals A, I2.
It doesn't matter which way I'm going to find.
Multiply a matrix.
It's going to be the same size.
It's only going to work for square matrices.
Multiplying out, you'll get left to the same.
And that is where an identity matrix is like multiplying a normal number with one.
