Now for one of the most interesting concepts in matrix equations and that is the inverse of a matrix.
In algebra any real number except zero can be divided by itself to give one.
Here we have the number a and were divided by itself and that equals one.
We can rewrite this equation like this.
a times a to the power negative one equals one.
Or a times one over a equals one.
Or a times the inverse of a equals one.
We already know what the matrix equivalent of one is and that is the identity matrix.
Just like in algebra if we have a matrix a there can be another matrix called the inverse of a
that when multiplied by a results in the identity matrix i.
The similarities with algebra stop there.
A matrix must be square to have an inverse.
Think about it.
The result matrix is an identity matrix and they must be square.
Furthermore not all square matrices have an inverse.
Such a matrix is said to be singular.
We will start by getting the inverse of a 2x2 matrix.
These are the easiest.
From 3x3 and up things get a lot more complicated.
Here is a 2x2 matrix named A and the elements are A, B, C and D.
The first step in determining the inverse of matrix A is to calculate its determinant.
For 2x2 matrix this is written like this.
A times D minus B times C.
To calculate the inverse of matrix A we use this formula.
1 over the determinant of A times the rearrangement of the elements as we can see here.
Switch the element in row 1 column 1 in other words A and the element in row 2 column 2 in other words D.
Then multiply the elements in row 1 column 2 and row 2 column 1 in other words the B and the C with negative 1.
Look at this formula more closely.
You can well imagine a set of elements in a matrix where the determinant might be 0.
While dividing by 0 is not defined and such a matrix will not have an inverse.
As mentioned before it is said to be singular.
Here is our first example.
We have our matrix called A of size 2x2 and of these elements 3, 1, 4 and 2.
Let's calculate the determinant.
Remember it is AD minus BC.
So 3 times 2 minus 1 times 4.
That is 6 minus 4 which is 2.
Now for the inverse.
That will be 1 over the determinant in other words 1 over 2 or a half.
And the elements is rearranged here.
This is simply a scalar times a matrix.
Which means every element in the matrix is multiplied with a scalar.
That leaves us with the inverse of matrix A with the elements 1, negative 1 half, negative 2 and 3 over 2.
