Okay, now we're just going to look at the law of matrix exponents.
First of all, what we're dealing with, we've just looked at the inverse of a matrix.
And the inverse of a matrix we can write as A to the power of negative 1.
That's the inverse of a matrix, and later we'll see how to do that.
We've already done that for a 2 by 2 matrix, but the proper way of writing it is this.
The inverse of a matrix is 1 over the determinant of A times the adjoint of A.
Later we'll see what the adjoint is, and later on we'll also see that this is not the only equation you can use to get to the inverse.
You can also use elementary row operations in combining a matrix with an identity matrix, and I'll show you how to do that.
And then there's also Kramer's method, so we'll get to the other ones.
But certainly we've seen one of these examples where we had a square matrix, 2 by 2 only,
and we said to get the inverse of this matrix, we were going to get 1 over the determinant.
And the determinant is AD minus BC, AD minus BC, and then we were going to multiply it by putting the DV there and the A there,
and putting negative V there and negative C there.
Now that is called the adjoint, but there is a certain way to get to the adjoint.
If you have a 3 by 3 matrix, certainly this easy step of doing this is not going to work.
Okay, so we're dealing with the inverse of a matrix.
If we like matrices, all these A's, A's are full matrices, okay, of any size here.
If we take A to the power 0, then we mean the identity matrix.
So if A was a 2 by 2 matrix, then we're going to do 1s on the diagonal, 1s on the diagonal, 1s on the diagonal, and also a 2 by 2 matrix.
If I have matrix A and matrix A, and I want to say matrix A to the power R and matrix A to the power S,
it's the same as an algebra, it will be A to the power R plus S, I'm going to add those two.
In this form, I'm going to multiply those two.
Just to let you know, say my matrix is ABCD, what does it mean if I say A equals that, what does it mean if I say I want A squared?
Well, A squared is this, I'm going to write it twice, ABCD multiplied by ABCD, and that is a 2 by 2 and a 2 by 2 matrix,
so my result matrix will also be 2 by 2, so that's what we mean by that square.
If I want a matrix to whatever power, I want the inverse of that, it would be the same as first getting the inverse,
and then taking that new inverse and multiplying it by itself in number of times.
And if I want the inverse of a scalar times the matrix, I might as well just get the inverse of that matrix first
and multiply it by 1 over, by 1 over k.
So these are some of the laws of matrix exponents.
Now there are two more complicated issues as far as the laws of matrix exponents are concerned,
and this is this first one.
If I have the product of two matrices and I want to take the product's inverse,
I might as well take the inverse of both of these individually but in reverse order
and then multiply those two, those two by each other.
Okay, the last one is, don't get confused, we're talking about linear algebra.
What is this x squared doing there, you might ask, but don't get confused.
This is not one of our linear equations in our matrix.
This is our matrix, and in this case it's a square matrix of size 2 by 2,
and I want to know what would be the f of a.
That means I'm putting a in place of every x.
So f of a is going to equal a, that a, and then in place of x I'm going to put a,
so that will be a squared plus b, and then again instead of x I'm just going to put 1a plus c.
So I'm going to have this matrix multiplied by itself there,
and that product multiplied by this scalar.
I'm going to add to that a scalar times this matrix,
and lastly I'll just add another scalar.
So this does not form part of the linear set of equations.
I'm just using a matrix equation, a linear set, and that's exciting to think about it,
I'm using a linear set of equations inside of a polynomial there.
