Okay, now let's look at the concept of the elementary matrix.
It might be a bit confusing and you don't exactly know where it fits in
and you get some weird questions on it in a paper.
An elementary matrix is a matrix that results from performing
a single one of one of the three elementary row operations
on the identity matrix.
So I've got to start with the identity matrix.
So here's I3.
Three by three identity matrix.
Now what are the three elementary row operations?
So I can have one elementary matrix, for instance.
I can just exchange rows.
So I could have one, zero, zero, one, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, zero, one,
statistics, exchange those rows.
I can have another example where I can just multiply one of the rows
out by a non-zero number.
So another identity, another elementary matrix might be this,
multiply row three out by three.
So I would get one, zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, three.
That would be my elementary matrix, a second example of one.
But I can only perform one elementary row operation.
But I remember our third elementary row operation,
I can add or subtract a multiple of one row to another row.
So let's do that.
Let's take three times, three times row three.
So I'm going to have this one times three.
What do I get?
Zero is zero, three.
And I'm going to add that to row one.
So I'm going to have one plus zero is one.
Zero plus zero is zero.
Zero plus three is three.
And that's all I can have.
So I'll have one, zero, one, zero, and zero, zero, one.
Okay, so I can only perform one elementary row operation.
Okay, I could have multiplied this out by one
and just added this one exactly to that one
and I would have had one, zero, one.
Okay, but an elementary row operation
is multiplied out by a non-zero number.
It could have been one.
And adding or subtracting it with another row.
So here are three examples of elementary row operations.
Now look at this.
Before we explain where this has any kind of usefulness,
any kind of usefulness,
let's take I3 and do an elementary row operation
on it to get an elementary matrix.
Let's do this one times three plus the top one, times three.
So that's going to leave me zero, zero, three.
I'm going to add that to the top one.
This is going to leave me with one, zero, three, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, one.
And let's take E and we multiply it by A.
E multiplied by A.
So I'm going to have one, zero, three, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, one.
And I'm going to multiply that by one, two, two, negative one, and three.
Let's do a better job of that one.
By two, negative one, and three, and one, four, four.
I'm going to multiply that out by that one.
What are we going to get?
So I, it was multiplied by three, the third round, and add to one.
Let's just do that here, directly to this matrix.
Multiplied by three is going to give me three, twelve, twelve, and I'm going to add that to one.
And I'm going to get a new matrix.
Let me just do this by the side.
So three plus one is three.
Twelve plus zero is twelve.
Twelve plus two is fourteen.
And I'm still going to have two, negative one, three.
And one, four, four.
So whatever I did to this elementary matrix, I've just done to that one.
But now I'm taking this elementary matrix, what I've done to this identity matrix, to make it into an elementary,
I've just done that to that matrix.
So let's multiply E by that original A.
So this is three by three.
This is three by three, so my result is also going to be a three by three.
We've seen that.
So in A, we'd better have just a three by three matrix.
So we're going to have one, two, three values, one, two, that's terrible, three values,
and one, two, three values.
We'd better get three by three matrix.
So position, row one, column one, it's going to be row one, column one.
So it's going to be one plus zero plus three equals, well, am I doing it right?
One, have I got the right thing now?
Am I doing the right thing?
Let me just quickly see.
I thought I might have made a mistake somewhere.
So I'm adding this row to that.
Three plus one is four.
I was wondering where that came in.
Zero plus, twelve plus zero is twelve.
And that's four.
Okay, that's where the four comes.
Where does this four come in?
See how easy it is to make a mistake in linear algebra, at least elementary linear algebra.
So that was a four.
So row one, column two, row one.
Row one, column two.
So I'm going to have zero, zero, and twelve.
Four, twelve, and you'll very quickly see that if I do the second row, the rest are just going to fall in place.
So it's going to be zero, two, so that'll just be two.
And that'll be a negative one, and that'll be a three, and that'll be a one, four, four.
Do it for yourself, you'll see.
So, having multiplied this elementary matrix with that original matrix, I'm going to get the same resultant matrix as if I have done the same elementary row operation on that initial matrix.
On that initial matrix.
Okay.
In the next video, I'll show you what the relevance of this.
To the elementary matrix, as promised, I'll show you where it fits in the world of linear algebra.
And if you look at this playlist, the videos with the number seven in them, seven ABC, it is about the inverse of a matrix.
So you've seen one method of getting the inverse of a matrix, but there are many other ways.
And that follows a more holistic picture of what an inverse is, using the method that you already know, the methods, two other methods that come, and also be able to see where inverse matrices fit into the world of linear algebra.
Now, we are back to elementary matrices, and I just want to show you where it fits in.
And it fits in with one of the other methods of getting to the inverse of a matrix.
As I said, I don't want to spoil it for you, so I'm not going to explain the whole thing here.
But what is going to happen, if I have a matrix, square matrix, ABC, D, F, G, H, I, those are elements in my matrix, and I want the inverse of this matrix.
This is matrix A, and I want the inverse of a matrix.
So the way elementary matrices come in is the following fact.
To get this, I'm going to write this matrix A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and I'm going to fit to that the three, because this is three by three, I'm going to fit to that I3.
So one, zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, zero, one.
Now, I'm going to fit this to this, and now it becomes a three by one, two, three, four, five, six matrix.
And I'm going to perform elementary row operations on this matrix, such that I am left with, I am left with a row echelon form.
So I'm going to be left with one, zero, zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, one.
So on this side, and then I'm going to have J, K, L, M, M, O, P, Q, R.
So I'm going to do it, I'm going to perform elementary row operations on this whole big matrix as if it was just one, until I get to this, until I get to this form where I have the leading ones underneath them, on top of them.
So in actual fact, I'm left with an identity matrix on the left-hand side.
And then this, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, will be the inverse of that matrix A.
Okay, so what I'm actually doing here is every time I do, if I do an elementary row operation on any one of these three rows,
it is as if I'm making an elementary matrix of this, and I'm multiplying it out by that matrix.
And I said that would be the same as if I had done an elementary row operation just on that matrix itself.
Okay, that is where elementary matrices fit into the world of linear algebra.
But I don't want to spoil this method for you.
Watch the series nine videos in this playlist, and you'll learn all about the inverse of a matrix methods,
the method we saw before, this method that I've alluded to, and some others,
so that you can see how to get the inverse and exactly where the inverse fits in.
