Let's do three more definitions, a diagonal, a triangular, and a symmetric matrix.
First of all, a diagonal matrix, let's denote it as D.
Now this is going to be a matrix where you have values on your main diagonal,
and all other entries are 0.
That means D1, D2, D3, that can also be D, that can also be a 0,
but as long as everything off of the main diagonal is 0.
If we take the inverse of an invertible diagonal matrix,
it is only invertible if all the main diagonal elements are non-zero.
So you certainly can have a 0 on the main diagonal, but then that matrix will not be invertible.
If they're all non-zero on the main diagonal, certainly you can invert that matrix.
The exponent of a diagonal matrix, it's very easy.
If I did this, well, first of all, let's take the inverse,
which will be the same as an exponent.
That will just be to the power negative 1, to the power negative 1, to the power negative 1 there.
It will be exactly that.
But if we had V and we wanted K,
that is going to be D1 to the power K,
D2 to the power K, D3 to the power K,
and then the 0s off everywhere else, off of the main diagonal.
So certainly that makes it very easy.
Remember, you can only have this if all these are non-zero.
If that was 0 negative, 0 to the power negative 1 would be 1 over 0, which you can't do.
So there won't be an inverse for that matrix there.
A triangular matrix, you'd get two types.
You'd get the upper triangular matrix, and you'd get a lower triangular matrix.
Then, again, we'll have for upper triangular matrix,
we're going to have that, we're going to have a main diagonal, ABC,
and we'll have values ABC, let's put D, E, F,
and then everything below that main diagonal,
everything below that main diagonal is 0.
That doesn't mean there can't be 0s there,
or there can't be 0s in there,
but certainly off the main diagonal, everything is 0.
That is an upper, there are values in that upper triangle.
Okay, a lower triangular matrix,
is this also going to have a main diagonal,
but then we're going to have only values
on and below the main diagonal,
and all these others, all these others will be 0.
So upper and lower.
Now, there are certain things,
the transpose of an upper,
the transpose of an upper triangular matrix
is going to be lower triangular,
and the transpose of a lower triangular matrix
will be upper triangular.
If we multiply two upper triangular matrices
with each other,
the answer will be upper triangular.
To multiply two lower ones by each other,
the answer will be a lower triangular matrix,
so that won't change the fact the values will be different but they'll still be upper triangular or lower triangular
and you can only invert it once again if all the values of the main diagonal are non-zero
so the same as a pi zero, only take the inverse if all the values on the main diagonal are non-zero
and then the inverse of the upper triangular matrix will be upper triangular
and the inverse of a lower triangular matrix will be lower triangular
the last thing quickly is a symmetric matrix that is where a matrix and its transpose are exactly the same
and the way that you are going to do this, if you have a main diagonal on ABC
we're going to have on opposite sides, on all the opposite sides these will be the same
so if ABC, if that was D, then this one would have had to be D
that one was C, then this one would have had to be C
and if this one is, not C, W, U, C
it made it E, that one was an E, this one was an E, that one was an F, this one was an F
so it's just a mirror image along the main diagonal
so D, D, E, E, F, F
so if I took the transpose of that, I'm going to be left with that exact same
we're going to be left with that same matrix
and if A equals A transpose and B equals B transpose
in other words, they are both symmetric
then A plus B, A plus B will equal A plus B transpose
OK, so A plus B or A minus B, A plus B or A minus B is also going to be symmetric
if those two were symmetric to start off with
and if I have K A, well then also equal K A transpose
even if I multiply a scalar in that if A was symmetric
so it means if I take the transpose of that matrix
I'm left with exactly the same
so obviously it has to be, it has to be square matrix
and it is symmetric in this circumstance
I'm, so there's a couple that are mine
so nothing!
There are basically 게ers marks
and lastly, a sign of we can show you
the passage of this order
so...
we will see the same thing
as the mismo茭
so I'm going to come back see
this good service
so you can get some instructions
and it will be my friends
