In the next two videos we're going to tackle a problem regarding center of mass.
I'll do it in two videos as I mentioned.
Now let's look at the problem.
A cart with a mass of 0.340 gram moving on a frictionless linear air track at an initial speed of 1.2 meters per second
undergoes an elastic collision with an initially stationary cart of unknown mass.
After the collision the first cart continues on its original direction at 0.66 meters per second.
And we are asked three questions.
What is the mass of the second cart?
What is its speed after impact?
And what is the speed of the two cart center of mass?
Let's look at what we were given.
We were given the mass.
And we've converted that to kilograms.
And we'll call that mass 1.
It travels at that initial velocity.
So velocity 1 initial.
That's 1.2 meters per second.
We're given its final velocity after the collision.
And then we're given velocity 2 actually initially.
Because it is said that it is initially stationary.
So velocity 2 initial is 0 meters per second.
Let's look at the equations that we might consider here.
First we are told that it is an elastic collision.
And if we just look at the two cart system.
There's certainly no net external force on that two cart system.
And it's also just in one axis.
The x axis.
There's no movement in the y direction or in the z direction.
So if there's no net external force.
We can consider that the initial linear momentum should equal the final linear momentum.
And we know that momentum equals mass times velocity.
It's also elastic.
So the kinetic energy is going to be conserved as well.
So there's conservation of linear momentum and conservation of kinetic energy.
And we know we can get kinetic energy by this equation.
Half times mass times velocity squared.
Note that this is not.
There's no vectors involved here.
Kinetic energy is not a vector.
Whereas linear momentum is because velocity there is a vector.
Now let's remind ourselves also of the equations for then.
The conservation of linear momentum.
We said the initial linear momentum should equal the final linear momentum.
So there we have it.
Mass one times velocity one initial.
Remember that is the equation for linear momentum.
The linear momentum initially of the second cart is zero.
Because the velocity is zero.
And that's going to equal on the right hand side.
The sum total of the linear momentum of the two carts.
And I've marked these red because those are the two unknowns.
We don't have mass two and we don't have velocity two final.
Now in our first part we asked what is the mass of the second cart.
So let's isolate velocity two final.
Because if we then substitute this into another equation.
We get rid of one of our unknowns.
So the one that you want to get rid of first.
Because we are asked to get mass two.
We want to keep mass two in our equation.
So we want to get rid of velocity two final.
Let's get that separately.
So just with algebra.
I've just taken mass one of city one final to the left hand side.
And divided both sides by mass two.
And that's simple algebra.
If we look at the second part.
The initial kinetic energy should equal the final kinetic energy.
This is what we have.
Half times mass one velocity one initial squared.
Again plus zero because the initial velocity is zero.
And then the right hand side we have mass one and mass two.
And the square then of the final velocities.
I can multiply throughout by two.
Just to get rid of the half.
To make it easier.
Now there we have velocity two squared.
And we know we want to get mass two.
That is our first part of our question A.
We want to get mass two.
So let mass two on its own.
And I've marked and let again velocity two final.
But now we have an equation for velocity two final.
So we can substitute it in there.
And we're going to get mass two on its own.
Here I just got mass two on its own.
Just by algebraically changing this equation here.
Put this term to the left hand side.
And divided both sides by velocity two final squared.
So if I substitute this value in here.
Let's see what we get.
There we go.
So I've got my numerator the same.
The same.
And then the square of this equation here.
And the denominator.
This is just rewriting it.
Flipping the denominator enumerator over.
As I multiply on the other side.
Instead of dividing.
And if I simplify.
You can pause the video here to see how we get here.
Just to simplify that.
If I then substitute all the values.
You're going to get a mass of about 99 gram.
You can do that on your calculator.
And see if you get the same answer.
And I'll go on to the second video.
If you check in the fourth link.
If you look at the full Celsofallen route.
And see if you see how you can change that Solo.
With just one section.
And see if you want to give me thatぞ.
And I love to hit Or stupid text.
And see that in the second video.
Thank you for having me watching this video.
But also now we show you four secами.
And I'll see you at the next video.
And I'll see you in the next video.
And I'll see after moving the second video.
