Here's part 2 of our problem. Exactly the same. These were our givens. And in part B we asked what is the speed after impact.
Now from the previous video we had an equation where we had velocity to final all on its own.
We've already calculated mass 2, so we're simply going to use this equation, fill in all the known variables and the mass 2 that we just calculated.
And we'll get to a final velocity of about 1.9 meters per second for the second cart.
Much more interesting is part C of this question. What is the speed of the two cart center of mass?
Now we're dealing with linear motion here. And we're dealing with constant acceleration.
So we can use our equations for linear motion with constant acceleration.
And the one that we are interested in, I'll just put it in generic form here, is that distance equals initial distance times initial velocity times t plus a half times acceleration times time squared.
Now we know that for both cart 1 and cart 2 the acceleration is zero.
I mean there is a slight initial acceleration and deceleration as during the collision.
But afterwards the speeds are given before and after initially and final the speeds are given as constant.
So we're looking at zero acceleration.
To make life easier for ourselves, we're also going to set s0, the initial velocity, the initial distance, the initial x value is zero.
So we're looking at it at the collision point.
So if we do that, let's look at what would be x1.
Now by x1 I mean this s, s1.
If I use this equation and I just look at cart number 1 after the collision, I'm going to get s0 as zero because we started, we put our Cartesian coordinate system with its origin right where the collision takes place.
Its initial velocity is now not going to be the initial velocity where it started 1.2 meters per second but after the collision it's going to be 0.66 meters per second.
So that will be its initial velocity times t plus a half.
Now a is zero because afterwards it just continues at 0.66 meters per second.
There's no acceleration in that period.
So that will be plus zero.
So we have this equation x1.
So what would, it's simple, what would the position be at any time t?
So three seconds afterwards it would be 0.66 times 3, that would be then its x position.
If we look at Cart number 2, again we start at s0 at, that's where we are free to place our coordinate system wherever we want in this one dimensional problem.
So we put that as zero.
Its velocity then is 1.9, which is part b of our problem, times t.
Again there's no acceleration afterwards, so this term becomes zero.
Now because we are asked a question that is about the center of mass, we are going to use the equation for center of mass.
So that will be the x position at any times t afterwards for Cart 1 and that will be the x position of Cart 2 at any time t.
Remember the equation for center of mass, mass 1 times position 1 plus mass 2 times position 2 divided by mass 1 plus mass 2.
I do now have equations for x1, and I do know the mass of Cart 1 and 2.
1 was given, 2 we calculated in the problem.
So if I substitute that, and through algebra, I have just simplified that, and now comes the easy part.
Once you've thought about this part of the problem, this is easy.
Remember the velocity would be the first derivative of position dx of the center of mass over dt.
There's our equation for x center of mass, and very simply that will leave us at about 0.93 meters per second.
So using calculus, but just setting up this part of the problem makes part c here, which is very interesting, quite simple.
