In this short video I want to look at using calculus to determine the center of mass.
Here we have a triangular plate and we're told that it has a density of 3 grams per square centimeter.
Now we're used to seeing density expressed as mass per cubic meter for instance,
but if this is a uniform plate and it has a width for instance that is constant throughout,
we can express density as mass per square unit area.
And in this instance we're given 3.
Also, this triangular piece of metal is cut such that its oblique edge here forms part of a straight line which is y equals 2x.
So that means it has these 3 coordinates at the 3 corners, at the 3 angles, 0, 0, 1, 0 and 1, 2.
Now what we've done here is just taken a thin strip, an imaginary thin strip, through this metal plate.
And let's look at its coordinates.
First of all, it's going to be centered on the x-axis here at a point x, 0, so the y value would be 0.
If we look at its top, it's going to be centered right on this line y equals 2x.
So if this x value is x, and we place it into our equation there, that means the y value is going to be 2x.
So the coordinate at the top of this very thin strip of ours is going to be x, 2x.
It's the x and y value.
Now there's a concept, and I'll highlight it here, of the x and y coordinate of the center of mass.
And that's why we have the squiggly line on top, the center of mass, the coordinates of the center of mass of this thin strip.
Now remember, this is a thin strip that is of uniform density.
So through symmetry, we can look, and it's just a normal rectangle.
So through symmetry, we can see that the coordinate of the x center of mass is just going to be x.
And for the y coordinate, the y coordinate of the center of mass is also going to be x.
Why? Because its length is from the top to the bottom.
So it's from 2x to 0.
And halfway between 2x and 0 is this x.
So for this thin little strip of ours, the center of mass has a coordinate of x, x.
Now how can we use all this information and use calculus to determine the center of mass of this triangular plate?
First of all, let's start here.
It says that the moment around the x-axis, and remember moment is going to be mass times distance,
is the integral of the y coordinate with respect to mass.
Remember that, commit that to memory.
The moment about the y-axis is going to be the integral of the x coordinate of the center of mass with respect to mass.
And mass is going to be the integral just of that mass of ours.
Now we've discussed this already, that is the x and y coordinate of the center of mass of our imaginary thin strip.
And we've already calculated that this is going to be x, x.
And what do we do now?
Well, we have an equation for the x value of the center of mass, and that is going to be m, y over m.
So that's the moment arm, the moment around the y-axis, divided by m.
And for the y value, y coordinate of the center of mass is going to be the moment about the x-axis, divided by m.
Certainly, these lines you have to commit to memory.
These are equations that you should remember so that you can use calculus to determine the center of mass.
Now, a few steps.
Let's look at the length of our imaginary strip.
And we've mentioned this before.
It'll be from the top to the bottom.
So that's 2x minus 0.
So the length of our whole strip is going to be our y value there, 2x.
That's how long that is.
That's just the y value.
And it's the y value because it intersects with our line here, y equals 2x.
The width we've chosen to be dx.
That's the width of our thin little strip.
So the area, quite simple.
That'll be length times width.
So that's 2x dx.
There's our 2x.
There's our dx.
What would the mass be?
Well, mass is density times area.
And remember, our density was 3 grams per square centimeter.
So that times the area is going to be 6x dx.
That's 2x dx times the 3.
That's 6x dx.
Now, what did we say?
The moment about the x-axis is the y coordinate.
What was the y coordinate of the center of mass?
Well, it was the x.
And then, dm, we've just had there, the small or differential area of mass, differential mass, I should say.
That's 6x dx.
So what do we have?
The integral, and going from 0, this is on the x-axis, so we're going to integrate over that whole interval.
So from 0 to 1 of x, 6x dx.
Let's just write that a bit neater.
So that would be 6x squared dx.
Now, look carefully where I got this.
It's just from the moment I'm about the x-axis.
It's the integral of the y coordinate of the center of mass, which was just x.
And there's my first x.
dm, and there's dm, 6x dx.
And that's very easy to integrate.
And we'll get a value of 2.
The same we can do about the moment about the y-axis.
Remember, that is the x coordinate of the center of mass, which was this x.
Again, with respect to mass, which was 6x dx.
And if you quickly look through that, you'd see that's a very simple integral as well, with the same answer.
And I don't think it'll always be the same if this was some form of curve.
Your answers would certainly be different.
It doesn't necessarily have to be y equals 2x.
We could have had a polynomial here.
Now, mass, we just said it's the integral there with respect to mass.
And remember, that was 6x dx, as we got there.
And still we're going on the interval from 0 to 1.
So that's easy enough to do that.
We get an integral, and we get an answer of 3.
Now we have everything, if we remember these two equations,
for the x value of our center of mass and the y value for our center of mass.
So that for the x value, it's going to be the moment about the y-axis divided by mass,
and the moment about the x-axis divided by mass.
So that'll be 2 thirds and 2 thirds.
So 2 thirds along here, 2 thirds along there.
Somewhere in this region will be the center of mass.
Now, again, these two were the same.
That's just because we were dealing with a straight line here.
If you were given a semicircle or some parabola,
as far as this side is concerned,
your values are certainly might be different.
And this is how we use calculus to determine the center of mass.
And this is how we useаша's rule.
We will take a Phillips-axis to the center of mass.
