Now I'm quite excited about this bit and that is intermediate reference frames.
It makes part of the start of so many dynamics courses, classical mechanics courses
and it's something that you have to understand and it's actually, it's beautiful mathematics
and it's a wonderful thing to look at and to derive and understand for the first time.
Really exciting stuff. So what we're dealing with, you're going to have these kind of problems.
You're going to have a Cartesian coordinate system which some people would call the world view.
It's going to be some static spot. In many classes you'll see the classroom being used as the xy coordinate system
and then a frisbee rotating, going through the air and a bug walking on the frisbee
or some person walking on some alien spaceship while the spaceship is turning around and flying through the air.
What we're essentially dealing with is some others as well.
You know, merry-go-round that goes around on an arm that also goes around.
So one of those playground things or something that turns on an arm that also turns so all of them have angular velocity.
What it boils down to is that you have an inertial reference frame that's standing still
and another moving reference frame.
On this moving reference frame which might be purely translating.
So it's just moving in a straight line.
It might be going in a curved path.
It might be rotating.
Rotating is the famous one.
That's the one we're dealing with.
And on that body we draw a new coordinate system.
A new...
Now we're just dealing on the blackboard here.
So it's two dimensional space.
So on the blackboard, two dimensional space.
There's another body coordinate system.
And there is its little x and y axis.
And it is rotating.
But imagine, you know, these GoPros or drift cameras, all these action cameras.
If they mount it on the helmet, you see this quite still and the whole world is moving about you.
And it looks quite odd.
The same thing there.
If this was rotating about this point, about this point which I've labelled I here.
And if you sat and just looked in that direction and this thing is spinning,
it will look as if the whole world is going around and all you're seeing is straight ahead.
So there's a difference between this coordinate system and that.
If you're on this one, any point there, a static point there is going to look completely still.
Of course, if something moves on there, you're going to see it move.
This person here is not only going to see that movement, but this whole movement as well.
So there's movement on top of other movement.
And that's what this is all about.
So this is a body coordinate system on a rigid body.
That's one referral.
Other books refer to it as an intermediate reference frame, an intermediate frame.
So here's our one reference frame.
We know if we work in Python, we're going to call this one reference frame.
And we're going to call this quite a different reference frame.
And what we want to know is the following.
This is the origin of this reference frame.
And there's this moving point P that moves also in a circle.
And it has a little path that it traces.
We're interested in what happens over time.
So it's always parametrized.
And if something is parametrized, you know, we can express it as a vector.
So it's going to move in a little path.
This thing is rotating and moving in its own little path.
So I have this coordinate system, this coordinate system.
But I want to express this movement as if I'm the person sitting here.
I'm the person sitting there and I've got to work out these things.
Now, first, one of the questions that people ask all the time, is this point fixed?
Is this the center of mass?
No, it's something that's happening instantaneously.
We're taking a snapshot in time.
Remember, that's what derivatives is all about.
It is the limit as delta t goes to zero.
So in that split second, that is our zero point there, our origin of our coordinate system.
And at that very point, time and place, that point is there.
So how can we describe that point?
So I'm going to use this notation.
This is my point O, my world view for W.
So W for my world view.
This is my intermediate frame's point O, which I'm calling my I for intermediate frame.
And this is my point P.
So I can say that in that split instant, this vector OP is the point P in the world view.
So the position vector of point P in the world view.
Point P with respect to the world view is the sum of these two vectors.
This vector plus that vector.
And what are they?
That is this position vector from O to I.
So point I as seen in the world view.
Point I as seen in the world view.
Plus this little vector point P in the intermediate view.
So plus point P in the intermediate view.
So that's how we're going to set things up.
What I'm interested in is velocity.
So the first derivative of that and then the second derivative of that acceleration.
You've all seen that.
You can memorize those equations or you can understand where they come from.
And that understanding, it is beautiful.
Two things that we've got to understand though to do this.
Because we're going to take derivatives.
First and second derivative of one reference frame within another reference frame.
And of course this reference frame is not standing still.
So when you take its derivative something special is going to happen.
Just imagine constant circular motion.
Because as I say this little reference frame at any one time it is moving.
So this I hat, small lower case I hat, it's going to move.
Now just imagine in that split second I can see that little bit of movement.
Little bit of a rotation as being part of uniform circular motion there.
With some angular velocity there, omega.
And remember if that is omega.
It's just spinning in this anti-clockwise direction.
The vector is pointing out at you.
So this is just omega k.
If this is my position vector and it sweeps around and around at an angular velocity.
Its derivative, the velocity vector is always going to be perpendicular.
It's always going to be perpendicular.
So the velocity vector is perpendicular to the position vector.
And because I'm seeing things in split seconds of time.
It is just that split second no matter what the real path is.
Remember we looked at curvature before.
We looked at, so it's always part of that.
It has a radius of curvature.
So it's always on part of a circle.
So imagine this.
So I'm going to call this.
Before I forget.
This is upper case capital I hat.
Upper or capital J hat.
Those are my unit vectors in those two directions.
And lower case or smaller I smaller j.
That is in my intermediate frame.
Those are my unit vectors.
So they have distance of one.
Or I should say magnitude of one.
And they have a direction.
So I've blown them up here.
There's I hat.
And there's J hat.
And at any time.
They are going at an angular velocity.
They are turning at an angular velocity of omega.
Because we're seeing this in that instant.
We have this in the back of our minds.
Remember.
If I take the derivative of I hat now.
D dt of I.
It is going to be perpendicular in that direction.
Which is what?
The J hat direction.
And if I take the first derivative here.
If it's just turning these two.
I just turning.
See them as part of two vectors.
I can draw in another vector there.
It will have that as its velocity vector.
So its velocity vector.
This is at 90 degrees.
That's at pi over two radians.
Its going to point in the negative I hat direction.
So if I take the derivative.
D dt of I hat.
What is that?
Its going to have a magnitude.
Omega.
And its going to point in the J hat direction.
And if I take d dt of J hat.
Its going to be negative.
A magnitude.
And a direction.
That is fundamental.
If I take the derivative.
Of this rotating frame.
Because this is going to rotate over time.
Or be on a path.
And we're talking just.
A magnitude of one.
So its derivative.
Its also just going to be.
A magnitude of one.
Or a magnitude of one in that direction.
Magnitude of one in that direction.
But its moving at an angular velocity.
So its one times omega J.
Negative one times omega I hat.
That is so fundamental.
Just to have this in the back of your mind.
Because we start taking derivatives of this.
With respect to the world view.
This is going to be very important for us to do.
I'm going to clear the blackboard.
I'm going to keep this on though.
Because this is fundamentally important.
I'm going to take the first derivative of this.
Get to an equation.
The second derivative of that.
Get to acceleration.
And its beautiful.
Good.
There we go.
Got to take its first derivative.
Because I want to know what velocity is.
And I remember that.
Let's just write out something.
What is r.
Of the intermediate frame.
With respect to the world view.
Now these are parametrized curves.
Parametrized functions.
Vector functions.
So imagine.
I have some magnitude.
In the I hat direction.
And some magnitude.
In the J hat direction.
And I add them.
And that is my vector.
Now imagine.
I'm just going to suggest that.
We have here.
The X of point I.
In the I hat direction.
And we're going to have.
Y of point I.
In the J hat direction.
So remember.
Point I.
The origin of our.
Intermediate frame.
And this is.
In parametrized form.
So X is a function of T.
Y is a function of T.
Of that point I.
In the.
As far as the world view.
Was concerned.
As far as this origin.
Was concerned.
And if I look at.
The position vector.
Of point P.
In the I world.
So I'm sitting in my.
Intermediate world.
And I see point P.
Moving.
In that direction.
That's going to be.
Another function.
I'm going to call it.
X sub P.
Of T.
I should just.
You know.
Put the.
Function of that.
That was in the.
Little I hat.
Direction.
And Y of P.
Of T.
There.
In the J hat.
Direction.
So those were my.
Two.
If I just see them.
Totally separately.
If I just looked at.
Point I.
Point I.
Is moving.
Remember.
In the world view.
It is moving.
I can.
Parametrize it.
So.
It is a point.
That is moving.
On a curve.
As a function of.
X and T.
And a function of.
Y of T.
And just to make it.
Different.
I.
If I am sitting.
On that.
Rotating.
Intermediate.
Frame.
I see.
Point P.
Moving.
Quite differently.
I see it.
As another function.
Of an.
X of T.
Another function.
Of Y of T.
I am going to give it.
Subscript P.
To differentiate it.
From that.
But it is also.
With respect to.
Small I.
Small J hat.
Two completely.
Different things.
Now.
If I wanted to know.
What the velocity.
From the world view.
That is the first derivative.
With respect to time.
I am expressing these things.
With respect to time.
So I am putting the dot there.
Properly.
I should probably.
If.
It is not with respect to time.
Say.
Prime.
But let's put the dot there.
Of.
Of.
I.
With respect to the world.
Plus.
The first derivative.
Of P.
In the intermediate frame.
In the intermediate frame.
So let's do that.
Let's take the first derivative.
Of this one.
And then.
The second.
The first derivative.
Of this one.
Okay.
So.
Velocity.
Of point P.
In the world view.
What is.
The derivative.
Of this.
With respect to time.
Or its first derivative.
Please.
You are going to see me.
Put a dot.
Should actually be.
R prime.
In.
R prime.
There.
Because it is not always.
With respect to time.
But.
For this.
Example.
I am going to put a dot there.
As my first derivative.
With respect to time.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
kes.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
D.
will be 0 and the first derivative of that one will also be 0. I'll show you now what
I mean by that. So that is going to be that, that's the first derivative, but now we have
to take the first derivative of this with respect to the world view. So I can't just
say x prime of i hat and y prime of p of j hat, because this is two vectors, that's
a unit vector. This is another vector and I have to do, or a function of t and a vector.
So this is a product rule, a product rule. So I have to take the first derivative of this
times this plus this times the first derivative of that. Look at it. So I can say x prime of
p in the i hat direction plus x of p d dt of i hat. That is not a constant. This thing
is moving in the world view. So I'm taking the first derivative with respect to the world
view here. This thing is not constant. That one is constant. This one is not constant.
So you've got to use the product rule here. Plus y of p in the j hat direction plus y of
p just normally d dt of j hat. You've got to remember to do that. Now, this is very simple.
I mean, this is just the velocity. So the velocity of p in the world view, what is this? This is
just the velocity of i in the world view, sorry, of i in the world view. i in the world view,
its first derivative. This is that. And if I look at these two, x, these two, just these
two terms, I hope you can see that that is just velocity of p in the intermediate world.
Because it's i hat and j hat. And its first derivative and first derivative, that is just
velocity. First derivative of position. But now I'm left with these two terms. So I'm
left with this plus x of p. What is d dt in the i world? It's omega j. Omega j hat. And
I'm going to have negative y sub p omega i hat. Because d dt of j hat, remember we said
d dt of j hat is negative omega i hat. Okay. Now, this was simple. This was simple. What
is this? Now, you know it's omega cross r, don't you? But how do you get from here to omega
just dot r? I'm just going to show you. If omega equals omega k hat, and r, now remember
this is which r? We'll talk about this omega, I hope I don't forget, but we've got to talk
about this r first. This is r of p in the i world. What is that? That's x of point p in
p in the i hat, and y of p in the j hat. Okay. So if I say omega cross r of p in the i world,
that is the same as taking the determinant of the following, that's the determinant of
the following matrix, i, j, k. I always put a little negative there to remind myself that
there's positive, negative, positive, if you know your matrix. Zero, zero, omega, x of
p, y of p, and zero. So if I take the determinant along the first row, so first I close this and
close that, so it's zero minus this, so it's going to be negative y p omega i hat, and then
along this it's zero minus these two, but there's a negative sign there, so it's positive
x of p omega j hat, and for k it's just going to be zero and zero, so there's nothing there.
And look at those two. Look at this lot and this lot. Exactly the same thing. So this is
actually just nothing other than omega cross r of p in the i hat direction. And there is
our equation for velocity. Half point p as seen in the world view. What you've got to be
careful though is you have now, there's the proper long way to write it out, or I can just
replace this with x of p omega j hat and negative y of p omega i hat. You have expressed this
with capital i hats and lower case i hats. Okay, you've got both in them. Eventually you want the
answer all in capital i hats and capital j hats. So we have to go a step further and replace these
with capital i hats with capital i hats and capital j hats. And that we remember we had the cosine
matrix where we could express one coordinate system within another coordinate system, a rotated frame
within a frame. So we still got to do that step as well. So we are combining something in the capital
i hat and j hat world view with something in the lower case. Okay, the only other thing we have to
remember is omega. What is that omega? Is it in the world view or in the intermediate view?
Well it depends. If you have something that is rotating at omega sub 1 and on top of that you have something else
rotating on top of that rotating thing at omega 2, that omega 2 its total is omega 1 plus omega 2. So it's all the
omegas combined. And remember it's just this. So this could just have well been omega sub 1 plus omega sub 2.
I hope you can see in the corner there in the k hat direction. So it's all your omegas combined.
Those problems where you have this arm swinging around and America around hanging there and it is also turning.
So it is angular velocity. This whole thing has angular velocity around the world view. Then you just add all of those
omegas. So just be circumspect about this omega but certainly this is small. This is lowercase i hat j hat
lowercase i hat j hat capital i hat j hat. So we still have to work on this before we are done eventually.
Now for the acceleration but we really have to keep our wits about us. So what you see there is my V of point P in the world view.
I've written it out in component form. I just want to remind you it's nothing other than seeing the velocity of the
intermediate reference frames point of origin with respect to the world view plus the point P with respect to the
I view plus omega cross R. All the omegas added the cross R of P in the I view. Now depending on what textbook you have
if it wasn't seen as world view I, P sometimes it was seen as O, A, B. Then it's the velocity of point B
is the velocity of point A plus V rel, V relative. That is that little point moving relative to this moving frame
and omega cross R. So sometimes you see it in all different written in all different ways. Doesn't matter which way
it was written as long as you understand where this is coming from. So let's go with a component view
and let's take the first derivative. So we're looking at acceleration of point P in the world view.
So that will be the second derivative then of our position vector there of point P in the world view.
Now we have to take the derivative in the world view of all of those components. Remember even if I did the
product rule here it was going to be x double dot i hat plus x dot d dt of i hat but i hat is standing still
it is a constant in direction and magnitude in the world view so the d dt of i hat is zero so those terms
would just fall away so even if you did the product rule there all you were going to be left with was
x double dot of i in the i hat direction and y double dot or double prime of i in the j hat direction.
Now you can see there I'm going to have a lot of terms there because here I've got to apply the product rule
and here I've got to apply the product rule twice because I've got three terms x of p, omega and j.
Remember how to do the product rule if you have the product of three functions. I'll show you now in case you forgot
but let's do this one. So the product rule for those two would be x double dot of p in the i hat direction
plus what was d dt plus x of p prime what is d dt of i hat remember that's omega j hat
omega j hat up there and we're also going to have then the same here we can have y double dot of p j hat
plus y single dot of p omega i hat but remember that is a negative negative omega i hat and now I've got three terms there
so what do I do first derivative that one that one first that one first derivative that one that one that one first derivative that one
so I've got three terms slow it down for you let's have a look so it's going to be x dot of p
so first derivative of that omega j hat now it's going to be x of p now the first derivative
what's the first derivative with respect to time of angular velocity it's angular acceleration which is alpha
alpha j hat and now the derivative of that that's going to be negative x of p
and that is negative omega i hat there's already a omega so it's going to be
omega squared i hat and negative omega square i hat and let's do the same for those
so I've got to get three components because there's three there so it's going to be
negative i p omega omega i hat negative y of p alpha i hat and negative y of p omega squared j hat
I hope I didn't make a mistake there scream out that I'm going to hear you if you see a mistake there
so it's x sub p x sub p x sub p y sub p y sub p y sub p
then the first one gets the derivative then the second one gets the derivative and then the third one gets the derivative
and the derivative of the d dt of j hat is negative omega i hat and there's already omega in there so it becomes omega squared
and here it's going to be this one's first derivative then there's the second derivative and the derivative of i hat d dt of i hat is omega j hat
so that becomes an omega squared so this very first one is quite simple
that is going to be a acceleration of point i in the world view
okay so that one is simple so we can cross these two out there's nothing spectacular there
and i see something very nice here as well that would be a rel a sub rel in some textbooks those two
so it's double prime there double prime there so that's going to be acceleration of point p in the i sometimes written as a rel relative
so the acceleration of point p as if you're just watching from that rotating frame
but now we've got some other things to deal with i tell you what we do i see an omega squared there and i see an omega squared there
so let's take them out as negative omega squared and what am i left with i'm left with something very cute
x of p in the i hat direction and y of p in the j hat direction what was that what was that that was nothing other than
that was nothing other than r r of p in the i world the position vector of point p in the intermediate frame
that's what i have there where where did i where where were they now here we go
i've taken the omega square out there and i've taken the omega square out there and i'm just left with negative
negative i took out negative omega square x of p in small i hat and y of p in the small j hat direction
that was nothing then the position vector of p in the intermediate frame
now i see i also have an alpha there i have an alpha there and where's my other alpha there's my other alpha there
remember what is alpha alpha is going to be alpha in the k hat direction
again acceleration in this direction vector pointing at you and um what is what is there with alpha
if we look at alpha there and we look at alpha there it's this point x of p in the j hat direction
and we have a y of p there so what if we were to say what was r of point p in the i direction
well that was x of point p in the i hat direction and y of p in the j hat direction
and as before what would happen if we take alpha cross r of p in the i direction
that would be the same as taking the determinant along the first row of this 0 0 alpha and x of p y of p and 0
if i did that the derivative the determinant of this across this row what was i going to get
i was going to get i was going to get exactly this this one and this one remember how we did omega cross r
now we're going to have alpha cross r in exactly the same thing so here we could add alpha cross r of p in the intermediate frame
so we've got that one done so my two alphas are gone and all i'm left with is two of these things look there's a x dot omega j
and x dot omega j and a negative y dot omega j and a negative y dot omega j so what i'm actually left with here
is two times x dot omega j and i'm left with negative two times y dot of p i hat that's what i'm left with
and i bet you now if you were to go and you were to take two omega twice omega and you crossed it with r
but it's not actually r it's actually v of p in the i direction if you were to do that you would
get exactly that why because you would have written i hat negative j hat k hat zero zero two omega and what was this
this was the r of p in the i direction hat what am i doing that have been x dot of p in the i direction
and y dot p in the i direction and zero and if you got the determinant of that along the first you would
we're going to end up with exactly this so what do we add with in the end another plus two times omega
cross r dot or let's put it as v of p in the i direction again remember you add all the omegas
so here is my equation for acceleration of p in the world view there we go
as you see it in the textbooks as i say sometimes here you'll just see a sub a a sub rel relative
negative omega of r of p in the i direction so again i've got stuff in capital i and j and stuff in lowercase i and j
and i still have to change that lowercase i and j's to uppercase i and j's by method that we'll look at
but we actually know already and so there is your long equation for doing that and it's simply taking the
derivatives of the components and remembering that those little i hats and j hats they are not constant
so you have to apply the product to quite simple to get to
