Starting to learn learning algebra can be quite daunting, inasmuch as to understand
or explain one concept you need some information, prime knowledge, but to get this prime knowledge
you need something of the knowledge that you're trying to impart.
And that's why you'll notice if you buy a few textbooks of learning algebra, and I think
certainly I have quite a few, so I'll try and get my head around this concept, you'll
see that the order in which things are done are quite different.
As I say, it's very difficult, you really need knowledge of something to explain something,
but this knowledge needs this knowledge which you're trying to explain.
So things get a bit messed up in getting the correct order in which you teach something.
The next few videos are going to be on the determinant, and I might not do that all in sequence,
I might add some months later, so I'll regularly check back.
Before we discuss the determinant, why do we want to know the determinant?
Well, if you take a course in advanced calculus, you'll see that the determinant actually has
a lot of geometrical space, volume, and area of a parallelogram, a lulliped, and all sorts
of others.
But here in linear algebra, the reason why we want the determinant is basically one thing.
We want to solve a set of linear equations with a certain number of unknowns.
And remember, what we could do, we could get the matrix, and say our matrix there are all
coefficients, a, b, c, d, e, f, j, h, i. We can multiply that by x1, x2, x3, our column vector
of unknowns.
And we can get, on this side, b1, b2, b3, b3.
And what I mean by this is, I have an equation which says, a times x1 plus b times x2 plus c times
x3 equals b1.
x3 equals b1.
Okay?
So it was my first row multiplied by my column.
Now, we're going to have dx1 plus ex2 plus fx3 equals b2.
And we're going to have gx1 plus hx2 plus ix3 equals b3.
So this is my linear set, my linear set of equations.
So I've taken all the variables and made a matrix of the variables, and I'll call this
a, and I have my column vector, and if you take calculus, you know, advanced calculus,
you know why this is a column vector, of my unknowns, because these variables a, b, c,
I know.
It is 4x1 plus 2x2 plus 0x3 equals 5.
Whatever.
Okay?
And then on this side, I get all my answers.
So this I'm going to call x, and this I'm going to call b.
And to solve this, I have ax equals b.
And if I multiply both sides by a inverse, I'm going to have a inverse, a x equals a inverse
b.
A inverse, the inverse of the matrix, times the matrix, this gives you the identity matrix
i, which in practical purposes was it's just 1, so we can leave it out.
In other words, x, this column vector of r, can be solved if I can multiply the e plus
of a by b.
Okay?
Remember the rules.
I don't have the previous ones that we've discussed.
If I want to multiply matrices, it is n times n, and then it's got to be n times n for me to have,
or that can just be n times p, for instance.
Okay?
The first matrix is going to equal rows and columns.
The columns of the first one must equal the rows of this.
So how many columns do I have here?
One, two, three.
So I have three columns here, and I have one, two, three rows there.
So I can multiply these two with each other, and the result matrix will then be an n times
a p.
So I know, since this was a three by three, and this was a three rows and one column,
so our answer is going to be a three times one, a three times one, and indeed we have
three rows and one column.
So there's nothing wrong there.
So if I can get the inverse of a matrix, and I can multiply it by this row of answers
on the right hand side of my equation, I can get this column vector here.
Answers.
And that's what I'm looking for.
I'm looking for x1, x2, x3.
I'm looking for those values.
And there are different ways to get this inverse.
But this is the sole reason for now why we are looking for the inverse.
One way to get the inverse, remember, was just if I had, if I had a two by two matrix,
the square matrix was one over the determinant, times that funny vector.
It says ABCD.
So this is D, this is A, this is negative B, this is negative C.
Okay, so that was my equation to get the inverse of a two by two matrix, one over the determinant.
Okay, and that's why we get to talk about the determinant, because we need this determinant
for us to get to this inverse.
Now we're going to deal next with a three by three matrix.
How do we do, get the determinant, and what do we do on this side to get the inverse?
So it's methods of getting the inverse.
To get the inverse, by this method, we need the determinant.
And that's why we're going to discuss the determinant.
Okay, so there are two ways for a three by three and larger matrix, and larger matrix to get the inverse.
The one is a method, which we'll discuss later.
And that is where, if I have a matrix ABC, that is now this matrix, not the augmented matrix with the answers.
Let me see, D, F, G, H, I.
Okay, what I'm going to add to this matrix is an identity matrix.
Now this is only for square matrices, okay?
So we are going to be left with one, zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, zero, one.
Okay, so I have this new three rows by six column matrix, starting with my matrix of variables of three by three.
And I'm going to do elementary row operations on this, so that I'm left with what I'm aiming for is to have one, zero, zero, zero, zero, one, zero, zero, one on this side, and whatever.
J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R on this side.
Okay, on this side.
If I could do elementary row operations to end up with this situation, this J to R is going to be my inverse.
That's magical, okay?
It's not really magical, there's a mathematical reason behind it.
But it looks like magic, doesn't it?
If I could just do elementary row operations, which we've done before, and we don't go to reduced row echelon form or reduced row echelon form, I just want to get to this.
Okay?
So I'm going to do, until I get this scenario, this is going to be my inverse, but we'll do some examples of that.
The other way to get A inverse, the other way to get A inverse, and as you can see here for obvious reasons, we deal with square matrices.
So I want as many unknowns, I want as many equations for unknowns, so that I am left with a square matrix.
Now the next way we're going to do it is by getting the determinant, and then getting what we call the matrix of curve factors, and the matrix of minors, and then the adjoint of the matrix.
So it's three terms that I mentioned now that you won't know.
We'll go through each step as to how to do it, and then I think I'll add the videos specifically on some more information just about the determinant.
But once again, we are getting the inverse because we want to solve this linear set, set of linear equations.
And for one of the methods at least, we need the determinant, we need the determinant, and for the other we don't, and that's the one that I used.
I increased the matrix size by adding an identity matrix to it, and I do the matrix of operations.
So again, we will discuss that one later. First we're going to go into the determinant, matrix of factors, matrix of minors, and the adjoint of the matrix.
I'll tell you what those are in the next video.
