Okay, so now we need to get rid of all, we need to make zeros above so I can do that
one first or I can do this one. Let's do that one. Well, I suppose you should do this one
first. But let's do this one. So to get rid of that two, I can multiply this out by negative
two and add it to that line. So negative two times zero is zero. That'll be a negative
two, that'll be a zero. Negative two, so that'll be times negative two is two. And that'll
be a negative two. And that'll be a two. Let's add that to the top row. Okay, one plus zero
is one. Two plus negative two is zero. Negative three plus zero is negative three. One and two
is three. What am I doing? I'm just, I'm just, what am I doing? What am I doing? I'm just
adding. Okay, so three. So one plus two is three. And zero plus negative two is negative
two. And zero plus two is two. Okay, so I've done that row. Let's do a combo. Let's do two
steps in a row. I now also need to get rid of one, let's see, one negative three, three
negative two, two. Now I also need to get rid of, if I rewrite this row, I need to get
rid of this negative three. Okay, let's not do it. Let's do it all in good order. One, zero,
negative one. What was that? Negative one. Where am I now? Let's see. Negative one, one negative
one. One negative one. And zero, zero, one. Negative four over five. Three over five. And negative
negative two over five. Okay. And I've run out of a bit of space, but I want to leave
that. Now the last one I need to get rid of is that three. So what I can do is multiply
this last row out by three and just add it to that. So if I multiply this row out by three,
I'm just going to get zero, zero, zero, three, and that's going to be negative twelve over
five, that's going to be nine over five, and then negative six over five. Let's add that
to the top row. So one plus zero is one. Zero plus zero is zero. Minus three plus three is zero.
Three minus negative twelve over five. And I got then as negative four over five. Negative
two plus nine over five I got as three over five. And two minus six over five I got as negative
two over five as negative two over five. Okay. And then still we have zero. We have zero, zero,
one, negative eight, eight. And we say sorry. Zero, one, zero, negative one, one, negative one. And zero, zero,
zero, one, negative four over five. Three over five. Negative two over five. Okay. And there
we go. So I have now changed my left-hand side into an identity matrix and I'm left with this. I'm
left with this on this side. And suddenly this is my inverse of my original. So I got negative
four over five. Let's see if I'm correct. Where are we? Where are we? Where are we? Where
are we? That one is wrong. This first row is wrong. What am I up to? What am I up to? This should
be three over five. Three over five. Negative one over five. Four over five. How did we get
there? I just multiplied this row by three. Let's do that again just to check on ourselves.
Zero, zero, three. Negative twelve over five. Nine over five. Negative six over five. And I'm
going to add that to the top. One plus zero is one. Zero plus zero is zero. Negative three
plus three is zero. Okay. Three minus twelve over five is three over five. Negative two plus
nine over five is negative one over five. Two plus negative six over five is four over five.
And now here I have my A inverse. So what we'll do, I'm going to rewrite this. Just check on
that algebra and you'll see just the one plus zero is one. Zero plus zero is zero. Negative
three plus three is zero. Just check and you'll see there's no mistake there. I hope. And this
is now suddenly my identity matrix. Now we're going to take it further to see whether we can get
to these answers. Okay. So there's my A inverse. I've just rewritten it on this side. A inverse.
Let's write B. And B is negative five, negative five, four and six. And I'm claiming this will
give me x. I'm claiming that will give me x. And let's do it. It's a three by three matrix
times three by one. So I'm going to be left with a three by one matrix. Three rows, one
column. Indeed, I'm on the right check. So that's going to be three over five times negative
five plus negative one over five times four times four over five plus four over five times
six. Let me just write it out. So three over five times negative five plus you're going to
get negative one over five times four. And plus we're going to get four over five times six. And if
you do that, this is going to be negative three. This is going to be minus four over five, minus four
over five, minus four over five, and that is going to be twenty-four over five plus twenty-four over five.
four over five. Let's do that with the calculator together. So we're going to get negative three plus
we're going to get negative one over five, negative one over five times four times four. And we're going to add to that
four over five. And we're going to multiply that by six. And we get an answer one. Guess what? We get an answer one.
And indeed that's what we wanted. So here we're going to get one. Let's do that. So we get one. Now second row, this column, negative five, that's going to be five plus four is nine minus six is three.
Ah, guess what? Three. And we're going to get negative five times that. That's going to be positive four plus four is twelve over five minus twelve over five.
five. Again, I'm going to do that with you, with the calculator. Do it yourself quickly. Do it yourself quickly. Let's just see. And what do we have to get?
What do we have to get? Well, we have to get four now. So negative four over five times negative five. Negative times negative is positive. The fives will cancel. So that's four. Plus I've got three over five. Three over five times four. Plus I've got negative two over five times six. And lo and behold, that's four.
That's four. And isn't that a thing of beauty. A inverse times b equals x. And that's exactly what I wanted. One. x1 was one. x2 was three. And x3 was four. So that is the way using the addition of, or just adding, extending the matrix with an identity matrix, doing the elementary row operations, getting A inverse and so beautiful.
So a long way to go, but I can solve my set of linear equations.
