Okay, we've talked about the two methods, one using the identity matrix, added on to our matrix A and the other one using the determinant.
Now, a little surprise for you, there is a third method, which I haven't told you about, and it is fantastic.
As if everything in linear algebra is called Kramer's method, and that states the following.
x1 will equal the determinant of some matrix A1, and I'll show you how to get that, divided by the determinant of A.
Likewise, x2 is going to be the determinant of A2, divided by the determinant of A.
And x3 is going to equal the determinant of some matrix called A3, divided by the determinant of A.
Fantastic. You don't have to do all those things just to get the x1, x3, you need the determinants.
And I told you, to get the determinants, we had to go through the matrix of curve vectors and the matrix of minors,
and then from that we had our equation for the determinant.
So what is this matrix A1 and A2 and A3?
A1 means you take your matrix that we had before, our matrix A, and that was 1, 2, negative 3, 2, 2, negative 1, 1, negative 1, and 2.
And you're going to construct our matrix A1, A2, and A3.
A1 means you take the first column and you supplement it with matrix B, which is negative 5, 4, 6.
So this one is going to become negative 5, 4, and 6, and the other columns stay the same.
2, 2, negative 1, negative 3, negative 1, and 2.
And the matrix A2 likewise.
Now the second column will be replaced.
So this will be 1, 2, 1.
Now the second one gets replaced by the negative 5, 4, and 6.
And the third one remains negative 3, negative 1, and 2.
Okay.
Now we need to get the determinant of this.
For the denominator, the denominator, the denominator, the denominator.
And for the numerator, here's A1, here's A2, and then you can construct A3 as well.
Where you just take the matrix B and you substitute the columns 3 and there.
Now, in the next video I'll show you how to get that determinant without us having to go through the whole process of getting the full matrix of minors, the full matrix of curve factors.
So you need to do that if you want to do that method to get to the inverse, sure enough.
But here we skip all of that because we're just directly going to leave off the values x1, x2, x3, our column vector x in A x equals B.
Now the way to do the shortcut, and you'll see on the videos that are following this way, I just look at the determinant and the properties of the determinant.
We still go, mainly we still go through the matrix of minors, matrix of curve factors.
But we just do it in a few steps combined.
Okay.
And what you will remember is when I got the determinant from that matrix of curve factors, I only used one column or one row.
And it was easy enough for me to do, if one of them had one or more zeros, but I think in our example, of course in our example, it didn't have.
So I had to choose any row or column.
What you have to do, let's take the determinant of matrix A.
Write in your matrix of curve factors where you multiply by positive 1, negative 1, positive 1, negative 1 and do that.
So remember that would be positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive.
Okay.
Just write that in.
Okay.
Because what we're going to do, choose a row or a column.
Now we have no zeros here, so we'll have to go, let's go for row one.
We're going to go for row one.
And all we're going to do is we're going to take, remember, let me write that.
Say for instance, we said that the determinant of A was going to be A11, then we'll have to choose C11.
Plus, now in our instance, we're going to take, remain with the first row, and we're going to go for the second column.
So we need to choose C12, plus we're going to do A13, so we have to do C13.
And we can do all of that in one group.
What is A11?
A11 is one.
Times, what was C11?
Well, it was the matrix first of minus, which was the determinant of what remains if you take away a row one column one.
Because we're looking for position of row one column one.
So there was two times two is four.
Minus one is three.
That's three.
Plus.
Now, A12, which is the two, multiplied by C12.
But remember, C12 came from M12, which was closing row one column two.
So we have two times one is two.
Two minus, and two minus, minus three, which is five.
Which is five, but, but, remember, they had to be multiplied by this minus one to get the matrix of cofactors.
So this becomes a negative.
So this becomes a negative.
This last one will be a positive because it's minus a positive, negative, positive.
So positive, and A13 is negative three times whatever remains if I close row one column three.
So that's negative two, negative two, that's negative four.
Negative four.
So I'm going to be left with the determinant of A.
Of matrix A is going to be three minus ten plus twelve.
Twelve minus ten is two, two plus three is five.
And voila, remember it was five.
And then I did it all in one go without having to go through the hole.
But what you must remember is because you have the cofactor there,
you must remember whether that's a positive or negative, a positive or negative.
Okay.
It is already done for you in with the C.
If you don't want to do it all in your head, you'll see if you do a few of these, you can do it all in your head.
Okay.
Just remember when you have a positive and when you have a negative.
When you have a positive, when you have a negative.
Because it is because you make those, that matrix of cofactors.
Let's get the A in those.
Ah.
A1's determinant.
So let's for this determinant, let's choose, let us choose row two.
Just because I want row two.
So row two, remember now, again, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive.
Okay, so we're going to start off with a negative.
And we have four.
Four times.
Now whatever gets left when we close off row two, column one, row two, column one.
So I'm left with, two times two is four, four minus three, four minus three is one.
Next one is a positive, a two.
And now I'm left with negative ten, negative ten, positive, six times three is eighteen, eighteen minus ten is eight.
Then again I have a negative, and then minus one, because this value is minus one.
And what gets left if I close this and close that?
It's five minus twelve is minus seven.
Minus seven.
Okay?
So that gets minus four plus sixteen minus seven.
So it's minus seven minus four minus eleven.
So I get left with five.
That's my determinant.
And look now.
X one is the determinant of a one divided by the determinant of a.
And that is five over five.
And that equals one.
Voila, it's one.
This is called Kramer's method.
Just using the determinants, and you'll see if you get the determinant of a two, if you get the determinant of a two, and you divide that by five, you're going to get four.
Okay?
So I'm telling you now this is going to be, this is going to be twenty.
Okay?
Do the others, and you'll see you can solve for x one, you can solve for x two, you can solve for x three.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
