In the previous video, looking at the properties of the determinant, there was one issue that I hinted to the fact that there is something, but there isn't a clear answer.
I can't say that the determinant of matrix A plus B is going to equal the determinant of A plus the determinant of B.
I hope you can see in the corner there. I can't say that. But there is certain circumstances in which something very similar can apply.
And that is if I have two matrices and they have identical elements, so 104, 104 as first row, second row, 021, 021. But this third row differs.
So if they only differ by one row or one column, it can be any row, any column, but only one.
And I take the third matrix, C, such that those identical rows or columns are still identical, but then the one that differs, and in this instance, it will be row 3, row 3, but it might as well be column 2, column 2 that's different, is the addition of these two matrices.
So 1, the elements, so 1 plus 2 is 3, 4 plus 0 is 4, and 1 plus 1 is 2.
Now we can say that the determinant of A plus the determinant of B equals the determinant of C.
That we can say. Now let's quickly have a look at it.
Now what I'm going to do here is, just by way of exercise, I'm going to do the determinants in different ways for all of them.
So in this one, let's use the easy way I'm going to choose, I am going to choose this row, this first column because it has a 0 in, and remember, let's do it the long way.
So I can have A11, I'm choosing A at row 2, column 1, and A at row 3, column 1, that's going to equal a 1, that is going to equal 0, and row 3 is going to equal a 1.
So my matrix of minus for 1, matrix of minus for 1, 2, not 1, 2, 2, 1, 2, 1, the matrix of minus for 3, 1, row 3, 1, 2, 3, column 1.
So if I close a row, for 1, 1, close for 1, close column 1, I'm left with 2, minus 4 is negative 2.
For this one, and that one, I'm still going to do it, but I'll show you obviously, and you'll know that this line is not going to matter.
But anyway, I'm closing a row 2, column 1, so I'm left with 0, minus 16.
And for row 3, column 1, I'm left with 0, minus 8, that is negative 8.
Now my matrix of cofactors for 1, 1, cofactors for 2, 1, cofactors for 3, 1, remember what happens here.
Positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative, positive.
So this first one is positive, so this is going to stay negative 2.
This one is negative, so this is going to become like 16.
And this one is positive, so this is going to remain minus 8.
And my equation now for the determinant of A, for the determinant of A,
is going to equal 1 times negative 2, that's negative 2.
0 times 16, and that's why I like to choose a row, all column 0,
because I could have just dropped this whole thing, it's going to be 0.
And 1 times negative 8, that equals negative 10.
So the determinant of A equals negative 10.
It was negative 10, we just get more chalk, nothing left there.
Okay, I'm going to erase this, just to have some space.
Unfortunately, the card was full, I don't know exactly where to stop,
but I calculate the determinant of matrix 8 as a negative 10,
by doing the elements, the matrix of minus, the matrix of cofactors,
and multiplying the element times the cofactor,
the element times the cofactor, the element times the cofactor,
adding all of those.
Now, I just want to show you, let's very stupidly, in the second one,
choose, that was a 4, let's choose column 3.
That would be very stupid, because column 2 has 2 zeros,
so that would be very easy to do.
So first of all, remember, just put your positive, negative, positive,
so that will be a negative, and that will be a positive.
So I'm suggesting that the determinant of 8 is going to equal positive 4,
close that row, close that column, so 0 minus 4,
so that's negative 4, and we're going to have a negative 1,
close that row, that column 0 minus 0 is 0,
and I have a positive 1,
and close that row, that column, so I'm going to have just 2.
So the determinant of 8 is going to be negative 16 plus 2,
and that's going to equal negative 14.
For inter's sake, let's do that.
Let's choose this one, that's going to be the easiest.
This is a positive.
So that's going to be 0, that's going to be 0,
so I'm just closing this row and this column,
so that's going to equal a positive 2 times 1 minus 8 is negative 7,
that equals negative 14.
I'm still left with a determinant of negative 14.
So by this equation, by this property of the determinants,
I'm suggesting that the determinant of C equals negative 10,
negative 14 is negative 24.
Let's see if that is true.
Now this time, let's be clever at it,
and we're going to choose, let's choose,
I chose this row, it contained a 0.
We have a positive, negative, positive, negative, positive, negative.
That's what I'm going to have.
So the determinant of C is going to equal a 0,
it doesn't matter, and we have 2.
So that column is on the left of 2,
minus 12, 2 minus 12 is negative 10,
and then I'm left with a negative 1.
So I'm closing that row, that column I have 4.
4.
So this is going to equal negative 20,
negative 4, and that equals,
lo and behold, negative 24.
So that is one property.
The determinant of A plus the determinant of B equals C.
If, and only if, A and B have got the same elements
except for one row and or one column.
This is the single difference.
And the third one has got the same rows or columns
except being the one row or column with the difference,
and that difference has to be the addition of the difference row.
So it's 1 plus 2 is 3.
4 plus 0 is 4.
1 plus 1 is 2.
Otherwise, the others are the same.
It can be any row, any column,
but only one row or one column with the difference.
Very quickly, I just want to mention this.
It's very important.
If I have a matrix, a square matrix, N times N,
as many rows as columns,
and I claim that A is invertible,
what does that mean for us?
What does it mean when I say A is invertible?
I'm suggesting then, or I'm saying,
by that statement that the determinant of A doesn't equal 0.
If the determinant of A was 0,
the matrix is not invertible.
If I have a matrix times a column vector x,
remember when I tried to solve systems,
a set of linear equation,
I say it has only the trivial solution.
And what is the trivial solution?
Each of these values, x1, x2, x3,
in this column vector equals 0.
So if A x equals 0,
A is a square matrix,
and it is invertible,
it only has the trivial solution if A x equals 0.
The reduced row echelon form of A is I n.
So any invertible square matrix
has a reduced row echelon form
as the identity matrix of that size n,
which is the n size of the rows or columns.
A can be expressed as a product of elementary matrices.
Now what,
can we remember what an elementary matrix is?
An elementary matrix is just a matrix,
an identity matrix.
So you start with an identity matrix,
and you apply one elementary row operation to it.
So if I had 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1,
and I multiplied row 1 by 3,
3, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1
would be an elementary matrix.
Or if I added row 1 to row 2
to make a new row 2,
that would be another elementary matrix.
So any invertible square matrix
can be expressed as a product of elementary matrices.
So there will be some unique elementary matrices.
If you get the product of those,
you will get that matrix.
A x plus b has exactly one solution
for every n times 1 matrix b.
So this is our matrix of solutions,
also a column,
and it has to have the same number of rows
as the square matrix as rows and columns.
And I'm suggesting this has exactly one solution
for every column vector b,
for every column matrix b there.
And it is also consistent.
And remember what consistency is?
If I have two equations,
linear equations,
so they are straight lines,
one runs there,
and the other one runs there.
There, when they cross,
that is the solution,
x, y solution to that.
That means that system is consistent.
In other words,
it guarantees that there will be an answer.
So if a is invertible,
that means a x plus b is also consistent.
There will be an answer,
and indeed,
for every unique n times 1 matrix b,
there will be exactly one solution.
more than 15 to 20 to 18 times 1,
and cap to 18 times an accident,
and that means that there will be an idea
to gonna change one separate and point
19 times only 3 times 2 times 1.
And
this isprint on a Ki-6,
which is definitely an idea
of the mission of changingcloud in Done.
That means a school effort
that makes it wild
within the last 1 months,
системate music.
Here we go,
the clean board as the next e-alı
one from the energy
keep it true.
That means a lot of useful
for the cold and coconuts,
it's interesting.
