In many courses you'll find in the exams a lot of questions about the determinant.
And you won't just be asked to calculate the determinant but you'll be asked the various properties of the determinant.
You'll be given problems where you'll have
Is the determinant of AB equal to the determinant of A inverse times B?
Are they equal to each other?
So I want to just make a quick series just for us just to summarize the properties of the determinant.
Some of them will be new, some of them will have appeared so far in the other videos.
So first of all, the determinant of an n by n triangular matrix.
So that's upper triangular, lower triangular or diagonal.
What is the determinant of that?
Now remember, if we just look at the main, at the main diagonal.
Doesn't matter now if this is upper triangular, lower triangular or diagonal with everything else a zero.
Is this going to be the product of the values in the main diagonal?
So you take the main diagonal and you say A11 times A22 times A33.
So you just multiply the elements in the main diagonal.
That gives you the determinant of any triangular matrix.
Whether it be upper, lower matrix or diagonal.
The determinant of a square matrix where at least one row or one column contains all zeros.
The determinant of that matrix is immediately zero.
The determinant of the transpose of a square matrix.
It's also easy.
The determinant of A transpose equals the determinant of A.
So you can throw away that transpose.
You can throw away that transpose and just get the determinant of A.
The determinant of a square matrix where one row or one column is proportional to another row or column.
So one row proportional to another row.
One column proportional to another column.
That's zero.
In other words, if I have the matrix one, two, one.
And I have two, four, two.
And I have three, four, two.
This second row is proportional to that first row.
Because one times two is two.
Two times two is four.
Two times one is two.
So just multiply that first row out by two to get this row.
That determinant of that matrix is zero.
So first of all, always look at your matrix and just see if one column is proportional to the other.
Or if one row is proportional to another row.
The determinant of that matrix is always zero.
What is the determinant of this matrix?
Matrix scalar times that matrix.
And it's an n by n, a square matrix of size n.
That is going to be the determinant.
That is going to be k to the power n times the determinant of the original A.
So you take the scalar, and you take it to the power, the size of the matrix, and then multiply that by the determinant of the original matrix A to get the determinant of this, to get the determinant of that matrix.
What about the determinant of the inverse of matrix A?
That's easy.
That's one over the determinant of A.
One over the determinant of A.
So the determinant of this equals one over the determinant of A.
And lastly, the determinant of any matrix to the power P, to the power P.
That is going to be the determinant of matrix A.
Get that, and take that to the power P.
Which, if you think about it, is exactly what we did here.
We took the determinant of this of A, and we raised it to the power, the negative one, which is one over the determinant of A.
So this is just one example.
This is one example of that.
We continue.
We have a square matrix, matrix A, defined as a square matrix.
So if B is now a new matrix, and we get that matrix B by just taking K, some scale-up, times a single row or a single column of A.
That means if I had a matrix A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and I just multiplied that one row up by a scale-up.
Not a scale-up times the matrix.
The whole, we had that in the previous video.
Just one of the rows or one of the columns by K.
And that is going to be K times, K times the determinant of A.
Remember, before we had K to the power N, and that is when we multiplied K as a scale-up up into the whole matrix.
Yeah, it's just one of the rows or one of the columns.
We're going to get K times the determinant of A.
If matrix B is now, results now from interchanging a single row or a single column of A is interchanged.
I have this matrix notice interchange one of the rows or one of the columns.
Then the determinant of B is going to be negative the determinant of the original A.
Because remember, I got B from A by just doing something to A.
And if B is the multiple of one row or column of A that is added to another row or column of B.
So multiple of one row or column added to another, so we know that's one of the elementary row operations.
Then the determinant of B is simply going to be the determinant of A.
Nothing will change.
So let's look at this.
The determinant of this 3 by 3 matrix.
Square as we define A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I is 4.
What is the determinant of this whole thing?
First of all noticed A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I.
We took G, H, I and we put it on top.
So that was one interchange of a row.
So the determinant just for doing that is already going to be negative this.
So we are already putting that at negative 4.
Now we take a multiple of another row, this row, A, B, C, this original row, A, B, C.
And we multiply it by 2.
So it's a multiple of one row.
And we add it to another row.
We add it to G, H, I.
What do we do?
Absolutely nothing.
That determinant is now going to stay at negative 4.
Because that row operation did not change our determinant.
Now we multiplied a single row out by a scalar K.
So that scalar was 3.
So I better multiply my determinant by 3 as well.
Minus 3, minus 4 times 3.
Now I'm at minus 12.
And here I've done exactly the same.
But this time I've multiplied it by 2.
So whatever this matrix was as it stood here now with these ones.
And then just D, E, F.
I changed that by multiplying this last one out by 2.
So I've got to multiply this now by 2 as well.
That leaves me with negative 24.
So what you do is rewrite the matrices as this.
And just add the steps.
And every time you have the step, you refer back to the previous one, which was this A.
The previous one that you started with and then did something.
After the previous one is A, this becomes B.
So go through all the steps.
Actually write down all these changes, all the matrices as you go.
And then you'll notice very quickly what I've done here.
So that means the determinant of this one is negative 24.
It ends in 4.
But if you habe is going to rise, many different probabilities on what we've done here.
That means therollment of this one isität.
The first was the first one that we need to do when we work right now.
By 부드럽だけ was already started.
This is the first one to collect and take time.
So this one is an edition of this one.
