Now for probably one of the most important statements on this line.
A can be expressed as a product of elementary matrices, which isn't really true because
A can be expressed as a product of the inverse of elementary matrices, should actually be
the correct statement.
And those three lines, they must become part of your life, you have to memorize them and
never ever be confused by them.
So I've got an elementary matrix, remember what an elementary matrix is, that is where
I take an identity matrix and I perform one of the three elementary row operations on it.
So if I take EK, whatever the K bit is, multiplied by 3, E2, E1, multiplied by A should give me
identity, or as I said, now matrix A can be expressed as, now look, it's in reverse order.
So I have this E1 inverse, E2 inverse, E3 inverse, to be EK inverse, or I can write the inverse
of a matrix by multiplying this, the product of those elementary matrices.
Now how do I get those, say for instance I get asked to express A as the product of elementary
matrices.
Or I can be asked what are all the elementary matrices that I have to get the product of
to be able to multiply with A to get identity.
So you can ask, you ask, you know, any variety of questions to answer those three, those three
equations there.
Which, as I say, just memorize them.
But how do I do that?
So I've got this 2 by 2 matrix, and we'll make it 2 by 2, but you can make it 3 by 3, or
any size.
Okay, but we need space and time, so we'll do a 2 by 2 matrix.
The determinant there is not 0, so 3 times 2, 3 times 9 minus 12, so negative 3.
So it is invertible, we're not dealing with this, it's not part of a linear set at the moment,
but in the reduced row echelon form, do it, you're always going to get identity.
But how do I get these, this list of elementary matrices?
And that's where one of the forms of getting, or getting the inverse, one of the methods of
getting the inverse to this, I'm going to pack on the equivalent size elementary matrix.
Now I'm going to do elementary row operations on that, so that I change this into an identity
matrix 1, 0, 0, 1, and then from that, on that side, will then give me my, will give
me my inverse, and that's exactly what I'm doing, what I'm doing here.
So the first thing I can do is I can multiply the first, divide the first row out by 3, or
multiply by a third.
So let's say, multiply by a third.
So what I am saying is, the first elementary matrix that I'm setting up is, the elementary
matrix, and I'm multiplying the third row out by, first row out by a third, that will become
a third, that will become a third, 0, 0, 1.
And guess what?
There is my first, there is my first matrix there, which becomes this one.
Because as I multiply them out, till the end I'm going to get the inverse.
So this becomes this e to the, the kth elementary matrix.
Okay.
So now what do I get?
I get a 1, I get 2 over 3, I get 1 over 3, and I get 0.
Now, I need to convert this into a leading one.
In other words, this has got to be a 0.
How can I do that?
I can multiply, now this is where you should actually always multiply by positives, not
as I do shortcuts with negatives.
Don't do that.
Don't do as I say, don't do as I do.
Okay.
So I'm going to multiply this first row by 6.
Multiply it out by 6, the first row.
So I'm going to get 6.
12 divided by 3 is 4.
6 divided by 3 is 2, and that's going to be a 0.
And I'm going to subtract that from the second row.
Subtract that from the second row.
So I'm going to get 6 minus 6 is 0.
3 minus 4 is negative 1.
0 minus 2 is negative 2.
1 minus 0 is 1.
This is my second matrix.
But what did I do?
I started with the identity matrix again, and I multiplied row 1 by 6, and subtracted
that from row 2.
So multiplying this one by 6 would give me 6 and 0.
And I subtracted that from, so I was left with 1, 0.
But I subtracted that from 0.
Minus 6 is negative 6.
1 minus 0 is 0.
There is my second elementary matrix in this row here.
Because in the end, as I said, I'm going to be left with the inverse.
I'm going to be left with the inverse of A.
So now I've created my second elementary matrix.
And this elementary matrix is multiplying this row, first row out by 6.
That gives me 6 and 0.
And I subtract that from this row.
So 0 minus 6 is negative 6.
And 1 minus 0.
What did I do there?
Did I make a mistake?
So 6 and I subtracting 0 minus 6.
1 minus 0 is 1.
So careful here, so careful not to make mistakes.
0 minus 6, 1 minus 0.
Okay, that's 1.
Now I need to multiply out this bottom row by, or I need to multiply it out by negative 1.
I need to multiply that out by negative 1.
So I'm going to be left with 1, 2 thirds, and third, and 0.
I'm going to be left with 0, 1, 2, negative 1.
So I've again started this by 1, 0, 0, 1.
Now I've multiplied this out by negative 1.
So there's 1, 0, 0, negative 1.
That's the next elementary matrix in my, in my, in my row there.
Now I've got to make this into a 0.
And how can I do this?
Well, I can multiply this row out by, I can multiply that row out by 2 thirds.
And then, and then take this row minus this new row that I've made.
So let's multiply this out by 2 thirds.
So I'm going to get 0, 2 thirds.
And we're going to get 4 thirds.
And then we're going to get negative 2 thirds.
And I'm subtracting that from this row.
So 1 minus 0 is 1, 2 thirds minus 2 thirds is 0.
1 third minus 4 thirds is negative, negative 3 over 3, which is negative 1.
And 0 minus this is negative 2 over 3.
And then I'm left with 0, 1, 2, negative 1.
Now that is, I am left now with identity matrix on this side.
And this is an inverse.
But what did I do?
I started with 1, 0, 0, 1.
I multiplied the second row by 2 thirds, which would have left me 0 and 2 thirds.
And I'm subtracting that from this one.
1 minus 0 is 1.
0 minus 2 thirds is negative 2 thirds.
And 0 and 1.
And there's my last matrix.
So this one becomes E1.
This one becomes E2.
This one becomes E3.
And this one, K was a 4.
That one becomes K4.
So if I multiply these now.
That one times that one times that one times what one.
I'm going to get A inverse.
Which is exactly what I did here.
Or I could now take this one times this one times this one times this one times the original A.
And I could get the inverse.
I could get the inverse of all three of those.
And then multiply them.
This one times this one times this one times this one.
The inverse of them.
And I will get back to A.
So this is how I construct on the side these elementary matrices.
So whatever question I can ask there.
I can then solve.
You know solve the problem.
Because I have now got them.
But these three statements you have got to know by heart.
You write them down when you do an exam.
Before you start write them down.
You've memorized them.
You've written them down.
Now construct it by this method.
And construct them.
But if you start with A matrix.
And you're turning it into the inverse.
You're getting the inverse.
This is what you're doing.
So the first step is getting this E which would have been 4, 3, 2, and 1.
Number them as such.
And do your multiplications according to these three equations up top.
I will step up.
And do your multiplications depending on the left hand.
Next step.
You're upgrading them to the newRunchain elements on how to ะก.
