Okay, let's carry on with the next statement, but before I do, I just noticed one mistake I made here.
Remember that the 0 minus negative 2 thirds is positive, obviously, it's positive 2 thirds.
So the key, if you've caught that, so the inverse would be negative 1, 2 thirds, 2, and negative 1.
Okay, now, next statement, if AX equals B is inconsistent, what does consistent mean?
It means there is a solution.
Inconsistent matrices means there is no solution.
So AX equals B, it is consistent for every n by 1 matrix.
So here we have, oh, we took it away.
Okay, remember it was AX equals B, and this was a column vector, B1, B2, B3, so then P3.
And this was our list of unknowns, X1, X2, X3, or X, Y, Z.
And then this was our matrix of coefficients, A11 to A33.
Down there, down there, down there, down there.
Okay, so for any n times 1, this will be 3 times 1.
So if there is that matrix, there is that matrix, and this was an invertible matrix,
in other words, the determinant was not 0, then there will be an answer.
It will be consistent.
And furthermore, it will have exactly one solution.
It will have exactly one solution.
So listen to what I'm saying.
If A is invertible, in other words, the determinant is not equal to 0,
then there will be a unique solution.
There will be exactly one solution.
And that's what we set up here, isn't it?
If it was all 0, if we had the modulus system all 0, there was a unique solution.
And in this case, the trivial solution, 0, 0, 0.
But if it's not 0, 0, 0, all of this, even if it was 0, 0, 1, it doesn't matter.
0, 0, A in some problems, there will be exactly one solution.
Because the determinant is not equal to 0.
So in this instance here, where it's not all 0s, and if the determinant was 0, so I'm not talking about any of these,
and the determinant was 0, then they'd be one of two solutions.
Either they'd be infinitely many, or they'd be none whatsoever.
And there are ways that we have to discover that.
So, listen again.
If I have an inhomogeneous system, in other words, this is not all equal to 0,
not all equal to 0, and this is invertible, in other words, the determinant is not 0,
then there will be one unique solution.
If the determinant was 0, so I'm not talking about any of these,
there's one of two situations.
Either there will be infinitely many solutions, or there will be none at all.
And until you do plane geometry, then I can discuss,
then we can probably discuss when they will be,
or that will be a nice graphical way in your mind when we do plane equations.
Because remember, if I write this out, I'm going to have three equations and three unknowns,
but actually, in disguise, those are equations of a plane, okay, of planes,
and when planes intersect, is where you're going to get these solutions.
If they all intersect in one certain spot, all three, three-dimensional planes,
that'll be my unique solution.
And then there are two other situations when the determinant does equal 0,
that there's either no solution, so some of these planes are parallel to each other,
or there's infinitely many solutions, and as much as they all meet in a line,
in a line, don't get confused, don't worry about what I've said now.
When you watch plane geometry, it'll make absolute sense.
So all of these certain statements are equivalent.
If it is invertible, it means the determinant does not equal 0.
If it is homogenous, then there will only be the trivial solution.
If it's inhomogenous, in other words, there are solutions for B1, B2, B3,
they're not all 0, then you will have exactly one unique solution.
If it wasn't homogenous, it would be the trivial, otherwise it would be something else.
And it is consistent.
So if there is a solution, it always is consistent, because consistent means it is.
Okay.
And then it can be expressed as a product of the inverse of elementary matrices.
So remember this, remember the order.
Okay.
And this is how you construct it.
So first of all, I'm going for number 3, I'm changing it into the inverse.
In other words, the first row operation that I do on it,
do that very same operation on, every time you start with an identity matrix,
do that exact same row operation as you did today.
And on that, so that will be your first one, E, in this instance,
it's a 2 by 2 matrix, so this will be 4.
Okay.
And then this one will be 3, 2, and 1.
And then you can plug it in, get each one of those inverses,
or then plug it in in that form, or in that form.
If I had multiplied all of these out,
if I had taken this one, times,
oh, E, K, we said, was the first one, remember?
If I took this one, times this one, times this one, times this one,
I would have gotten an inverse.
If I got the inverse of each of these,
and I multiplied them the inverse of this,
times the inverse of this, times the inverse of this,
times the inverse of this,
I would have gotten back to A.
And if I multiplied this by this by this by this by that,
I would be back at identity matrix.
So, all in all, not too difficult.
