Welcome to this course that I'm going to call Physics 1.
And I call it Physics 1 because for me this is the first course on learning to think like a real physicist.
You might be at university, you might be at college, you might have learned some physics, you learned equations of motion,
you learned some thermodynamics, you learned some optics, you might even have learned something about the atom.
But those were essentially teaching you equations and where to use them.
It did not teach you how to get to those equations.
And even if you derived some of them, you never really understood how physicists got to that
and how to use that yourself to develop new avenues of physics.
And that's really what you need if you go into quantum mechanics, if you go into high energy physics.
So I'm going to call this Physics 1 and you're going to learn how to think like a real physicist.
And how do you think like a real physicist? How do you learn anything new? You learn the language.
I am a surgeon that took the learning of a new language, the language of medicine.
I can use terms that no one else out there knows. I learned a new language.
And the language of physics is pure and simple as mathematics. You've got to know mathematics.
And that's the essence probably of what is wrong today. In teaching physics and mathematics they seem as something separate.
They should be combined. You should learn a bit of mathematics applied in physics.
You should learn some physics and understand the mathematics behind it.
And that's what I'll try to do in this course.
So you might be at school. You might be interested in becoming a physicist.
And you just want to get ahead. And that's fantastic these days.
You can do that. You can read books on the internet and I'll mention something about that later.
You might be tied into some school, some college or university course.
There's a prescribed textbook and you have to go chapter one, chapter two, etc.
But once again you can jump outside of that.
You can look at a variety of other sources and learn something new, something exciting, something extra
that might help you in the curriculum that you're tied into.
Then I write there Elon Musk.
Now there was a very interesting article on him on Bloomberg television not so long ago.
Just an interview with him, his life story.
And what he mentioned there, now Elon Musk does have a degree in physics.
But they asked him how did he learn rocket science.
And he just simply said, well I read some books.
And it's not about the reading of the books.
He said he read a lot of books as a child.
It was about the fact that there's an abundance of resources out there today.
You can go buy a new textbook or one that is not prescribed by your course that you're taking.
And you can work through that.
There's nothing that prevents you from that.
And then there's the beauty of the internet.
There are uncountable number of courses that you can follow online and learn so much more
than your course is telling you to do.
So it's the beauty of doing things and learning things yourself.
So what are we going to do?
We're going to start in lecture one.
And we're going to define some things.
We're going to define, and by defining I don't just mean the definition.
We're going to try and understand what's behind these things.
What is a law of nature?
We're going to start obviously with motion.
So it will be Newton's laws.
What is a conserved quantity?
And what is a symmetry principle?
So really that's quite a bit different from a normal standard physics course.
So these things for lecture one.
And?
Surазывatoil question.
I hope you've helped most collectively have a way to break off the subject.
Stick on.
Take Билан ONLINE and 있거든요 to drugs and28 two different ones.
It's just something a lot ofeurytical pride and pregnancy isisty.
We're all struggling.
We're all talking.
Att 측ansas.
Love you.
I hope you've been trying to decide that you've seen a lot of your life.
So I don't want to think.
And break out of your job.
Обработ.
börtsur singing, I don't want to name a animal model or medicine, you're not going
to find all of your life, what you need.
So well.
I hope you've helped me find a difference goals for your life.
And I think we've got a line.
