We continue our look into the esophagus and in this lecture we're going to look at the anatomy.
Now the esophagus is a tubal structure and it's approximately five centimeters long.
Most commonly you will deal with a certain centimeter based on an upper GI endoscopy report.
That's the closest you're going to come to knowing at what level things are,
the practical experience you're going to have regarding some form of a lesion at a certain centimeter.
Now this is done from the incisors and if you look closely at an upper GI endoscope you'll see that it's got markings on it
and the tip as you look on the monitor go down to the level of some lesion and you read off the markings on the G-scope at the teeth,
at the front, at the incisors and from that you could say a lesion is at 25 centimeters for instance.
Now the esophagus starts then at 15 centimeters from the teeth.
There are three parts to the esophagus, the cervical, the thoracic and the abdominal part.
Let's have a look at the cervical part.
Now it starts at the bottom of the pharynx.
Pharynx goes into the esophagus.
Anterior surface anatomy, that would be about the sixth cervical vertebra.
It is the narrowest part of the whole gut.
So you're going to see people come in with foreign bodies stuck in the esophagus.
Most notably it's going to be at the upper part of the esophagus, the narrowest part of the whole GI tract.
It is narrow because we find the inferior constrictors of the pharynx and specifically the bottom part of the inferior constrictor
which is thickened and forms the cricopharyngeous muscle.
Now these muscles are layered in certain directions and right there you might find a little weak spot between the muscle fibers
and the mucosa might actually pop out there forming a little diverticulum and this is called a zinc diverticulum.
Food can accumulate in there causing infection but most dangerous for us would be if a patient has an upper GI endoscope.
Endoscope can slip down there and cause rupture of that diverticulum.
The thoracic part of the esophagus starts at the thoracic inlet and passes then behind the left main stem bronchus
and this is the second narrowing you'll see.
So if you send a patient for an upper GI series, a contrast swallow, you're going to see the second narrowing there
and that is as it passes behind the left main stem bronchus.
Surface anatomy, that would be about the level of the sixth thoracic vertebra or at the sternomaneubral joint.
Where the manubrium and the body of the sternum join, that's the angle of Louis.
Now the upper part curves to the right, the lower part to the left and that pertains to how we approach it surgically
through the right side of the chest and through the left side of the chest.
What is of more practical importance due though is this facial layer behind the esophagus called the alar fascia or alar fascia.
It extends right from the base of the skull right down between the esophagus and the vertebra right throughout the chest.
And that's a very easy place for infections to spread.
So a tiny rupture in the esophagus or other forms of infection can rapidly spread from the base of the skull right down to the abdomen,
cause severe infection, even fasciitis, necrotizing fasciitis, mediastinitis, very serious form of sepsis.
And it spreads within a couple of hours because of this whole connected facial plane through which the organisms can just spread at will.
Now the abdominal part starts at dihatus in the diaphragm itself, very short, only about two centimeters if the anatomy is normal.
The high intra-abdominal pressures pushes on it from the outside together with not really a sphincter mechanism,
but we call it a sphincter mechanism and that forms the lower esophageal sphincter which you need to be intact,
which has to have a nice tone, only relax as the esophagus pushes food down,
but prevent any regurgitation of food from the stomach back into the esophagus.
Now the wall, the esophagus doesn't have all three layers of the gut, it really has no true serosa.
It does have an outer longitudinal muscle layer, an inner circular muscle layer, a submucosa which is very mobile together with the mucosa.
If there's any kind of rupturing and an esophagus has to be sutured, you've really got to see that you get mucosa to mucosa approximation.
It pulls back up into the tube because it really is so mobile.
It has to be mobile as you think it takes boluses of food down.
The arterial supply, very rich anastomatic network.
If we look at it from the top, branches from the inferior thyroid arteries and branches from the subclavian and common carotid arteries.
In the thoracic area, bronchial arteries, branches directly from the aorta and in the bottom of the esophagus ascending branches from the left thoracic and inferior phrenic arteries.
Now you can see in this lecture, the column on the right, it's up to two bars.
So it's not the most important information for use in the exam, this anatomy, but fairly important and it's nice to know these things.
The venous drainage, I'll just remind you of the azegast system on the right, hemi-azegast system on the left.
We needn't go in there.
What we do need to know is there's a rich venous plexus specifically or especially I should say in the distal esophagus
and that forms an alternate pathway for blood to bypass the portal system back into the systemic venous system.
If you have portal hypertension, portal blood cannot flow through the liver.
They take the shortcut through this plexus at the bottom end of the esophagus and that forms varices which can obviously bleed.
The lymphatic drainage, again very rich mucosal and submucosal network.
Again a rich network of lymph nodes and that's obviously a problem when it pertains to neoplasms.
Malignant neoplasms where tumors can spread quite far and quite extensively.
Proximal 25 cm of the esophagus drains to the trachobronchial, so it's around the trachea and bronchus.
Paratracheal, the cervical and even internal jugular nodes.
The distal is going to go to the subcarinal lymph nodes below the carina.
The posterior metastinal nodes, diaphragmatic nodes, celiac nodes, left gastric nodes right down into the stomach.
So a very rich network there.
In the next video we're going to look at the physiology of the esophagus.
of the esophagus.
