Good afternoon, everybody.
I'll be presenting today a topic of esophagus.
I'll be discussing a few things about esophagus today.
That will include embryology, histology, and anatomy,
and some physiology of the esophagus.
Starting from this diagram, which shows early digestive system
and blood supply to an embryo.
If you see at the middle, you'll see that this is the primordial gut.
With the blood supply in the dorsal surface.
And there is a small bud here, which I'll be referring to very soon.
So embryology of the esophagus.
During the fourth week of the foregut development,
a small diverticulum appears in the ventric surface adjacent to the pharyngeal gut.
That is the small diverticulum I showed in the previous slide.
This is the tracheobronchial diverticulum.
Subsequently, it elongates and gradually separates from the dorsal foregut.
It's affected by an esophagal tracheal septum.
And that separates the esophagus from the trachea.
The remaining part of the foregut rapidly elongates in the craniocaudal growth
of the embryonic body, forming the digestive system.
That's the esophagus.
So if you see in this diagram, this is the foregut.
And it's getting separated from the respiratory tract by a tracheoesophagus septum.
Okay, starting from this, this is from the front.
And this is the respiratory tract forming the trachea and the bilateral bronchi.
And this is the pharynx and this is the esophagus.
Okay, why did I mention that?
Because any abnormality can lead to some congenital problem.
This includes esophagal atresia.
Esophagal atresia leads to polyhydramnids because the embryo cannot swallow that immunotic fluid.
And we have the tracheoesophagal fistula, esophagal stenosis and congenital hiatal hernia.
Congenital hiatal hernia can happen in two different types.
If the esophagus is too short, the whole stomach and the junction between the esophagus
and the stomach will be pulled up.
Or it can be just sliding that the cardiac side, cardiac junction only will be pulled up.
I didn't get pictures of that because this presentation is about esophagus anatomy.
Okay, these are some type of congenital tracheoesophagal fistula.
If you see here, it's completely the fistula with the upper part and the lower part is completely blunt.
Coming down here, you see two types.
Two fistulas are there between the upper and the lower part.
And here they have one single fistula and there is a continuation of the full esophagus.
And in this one, there is atresia of the upper part and the lower part is completely separated without fistula.
And this one is a place of the trachea and this is very little condition where there is no respiratory tract.
Okay, histology of the esophagus.
The esophagus also has four layers as any other GI tract but it differs in the sense that it doesn't have cirrhosa.
So it has the fibrous, if we see the esophagus from outside inward, we find that fibrous cord, muscular cord, then submucosa and mucosa.
The muscular cord has two different types of muscles.
That's external longitudinal muscle and inner circular muscles.
And the submucosa, it contains a lot of allureal tissue and fatty tissue which provides mobility to the esophagus.
Then it also contains blood vessels, nerve, lymphatics and mucous glands.
The mucosa is folded into folds in longitudinal folds which makes it easy for the foot to pass through when it expands.
Okay, so, and it consists of different types, three layers which is muscularis mucosa, connective tissue and then you have the epithelium which is stratified squamous epithelium.
And it becomes junction columnar epithelium at the lower one to two centimeters just near the cardiographies of the stomach.
Now coming to the gross anatomy of the esophagus.
Starting, what is esophagus?
It is a flattened muscular tube around 18 to 26 centimeters from the upper sphincter to the lower esophageal sphincter.
It connects the pharynx to the stomach.
It commences at the lower border of the caricoid cartilage at level of C6.
It descends in front of the spine through a posterior mediastinum, passes through the diaphragm and entering the abdomen.
It terminates at the cardiac orifice of the stomach, opposite to the 11th thoracic vertebra.
Okay, the direction of the esophagus.
During the descendant of the esophagus, it turns to the left twice.
That's at the root of the neck, starting from here.
At the root of the neck, it turns to the left once.
Then it goes back to the midline again.
Sorry, from here to here is the root of the neck.
Then it goes back to the midline again.
Then again, once it sparses the diaphragm, it turns to the left again.
So it has two lateral curves, both going to the left twice.
Coming to the sphincters of esophagus.
It has two sphincters, that's upper sphincter and lower sphincter.
The upper sphincter is at level of C6, formed by the inferior pharyngeal constrictor, merged
with the curricopharyngeous muscle.
That is the upper sphincter.
Then the lower sphincter is only the circular muscles at level of T6, which has a high tone.
Okay, coming to constructions of the esophagus, which are important for while doing the endoscopies.
In esophagus, you have around three constructions.
The first construction is at 15 cm.
Then the second is 25 cm.
And the third one is at 40 cm.
The first constrictor is the same like the upper esophagal sphincter.
Then the second one is formed when the aortic arch passes in front of the esophagus and the main left bronchus.
This is the second sphincter and this is here the third sphincter when the esophagus passes into the abdomen.
Okay, how do we do this?
And the last one is when the esophagus passes the diaphragm.
Seeing the same thing from the side, this picture shows the constrictor from the side.
If you see at this side where the esophagus starts, this is the upper sphincter.
And this is the aorta passes in front of the esophagus and this is the main left stem of the bronchus.
This is the first part where the esophagus passes into the abdomen.
Okay, how esophagus is divided?
It's divided into three parts.
One is cervical part, one is thoracic part, and the last one is abdominal part.
So I'll discuss all the parts separately.
I'll just give brief things about each part.
So starting with the cervical esophagus, it extends from the pharyngeoesophagal junction
at the lower border of the first thoracic vertebra, and it's around five to six centimeters.
At this level, the esophagus, this is the relation which I'm going to mention.
It's bordered anteriorly by the trachea and recurrent laryngeal nerves,
and posteriorly by vertebral column, pre-vertebral muscle, and pre-vertebral layer of deep cervical fascia.
And the latter is the common carotid arteries and the posterior portion of the thyroid gland.
Then coming to thoracic esophagus, it extends from the lower border of the first thoracic vertebra
to the diaphragmatic hiatus.
It passes posterior to the trachea, the tracheal bifurcation, and the main left stem bronchus.
And it lies posterior and to the right of the aortic arch at the level of T4.
And from level of T8 until the diaphragmatic hiatus, the esophagus lies anteriorly to the aorta.
I'll come to some diagram very soon.
The abdominal esophagus, it's the shortest part which extends from the diaphragmatic hiatus
to the cardiac orifice of the stomach.
It is cone-shaped, about one centimeter long.
The base of the esophagus transitions smoothly into the cardiac orifice.
The abdominal esophagus lies on the posterior surface of the left lobe of the liver.
That's known as the esophagal groove, which is directly related to left crust of the diaphragm
and left inferior phrenic artery.
Okay, the relation of the vagus nerve to the abdominal esophagus is as follows.
Left vagus nerve lies in the anterior wall of the esophagus, while the right lies posterior to the esophagus.
That's due to embryonic rotation of the stomach.
Okay, this picture shows that this is from the front and this is from the back.
This is the esophagus and it's crossed by the aorta at this level.
And this is the trachea and the left main bronchus.
And if you see the same thing from the back, you see how the aorta crosses, starting from here,
crosses the esophagus and this is the second constrictor I talked about.
Then it passes backward, downward, going to posterior surface of the esophagus.
So from the level of T8 downward, the aorta lies posterior to the esophagus.
Okay, and if you see here, you have the right and left choral diaphragm,
where both of them, they form the orifice of the esophagal orifice while entering the abdomen.
So coming to blood supply, the blood supply of esophagus is very copious blood supply.
So it is segmented blood supply.
It's supplied by inferior thyroid artery, which supplies the upper esophagus sphincter
and cervical esophagus.
Then you have the esophagal arteries and branches of bronchial arteries supplies the thoracic esophagus.
And left gastric artery and branches of left phrenic or splenic artery supply the lower esophagal sphincter
and distal segment of esophagus.
And due to this copious blood supply, it's very rare to have esophagal infarction or leak
while doing anastomosis in the esophagus.
So this diagram shows that blood supply of esophagus.
You have the carotids and the inferior thyroid artery from this side.
And if you see these black lines, the bronchial, tracheobronchial arteries and esophagal arteries.
And from this side, this is the, what you call it, celiac trunk giving splenic artery and left gastric artery.
Just to remember, you can remember the other way.
You have the cervical, thoracic and abdominal esophagus.
Each part of esophagus shares two organs, its blood supply.
Like the cervical esophagus shares the thyroid gland and the trachea.
And thoracic esophagus shares the trachea and bronchi.
And abdominal esophagus shares the stomach and spleen.
Okay, venous drainage.
It's again segmental.
It forms dense submucosal plexus.
The venous blood drains into the superior veneciva.
The veins of the proximal and distal esophagus drain into the ozygous system.
Collateral of the left gastric vein, branch of portal vein, receives venous drain from the mid-esophagus.
The submucosal connection between the portal and systemic venous system in the distal esophagus form the esophagal varices,
which can be a cause of bleeding, GI bleed.
So this diagram shows the venous drainage of the esophagus.
We show the superior veneciva and ozygous system.
This is the hemozygous vein and this is the portal system with the gastric veins.
Nerve supply.
It has a parasympathetic and sympathetic nerve supply.
The parasympathetic nerve supply is from the vagus nerve and provides motor innervation of the esophagus
and secretor motor innervation to the gland.
So the motor and secretor motor are from the vagus.
The systemic blood supply, you can remember the sympathetic, sorry,
the sympathetic blood supply is all going to the smooth muscles.
So it's from T1 to T10.
It regulates blood vessels, constrictions, esophagus sphincter, contraction and relaxation and muscular wall
and increases glandular and peristaltic activity.
So if you see, all of them are related to smooth muscles like blood vessels, esophagus constrictor and the muscles of the esophagus.
I don't know how clear it is, but this is the lymphatic drainage of the esophagus.
So we have three parts.
Can you see it or?
It's quite, looks good.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
It, uh, I can divide into upper third, middle third and lower third of the esophagus.
The upper third go to supraclavicular lymph nodes.
And middle third goes to superior mediastinal nodes and posterior mediastinal nodes.
And the lower thirds goes to the celiac nodes.
So all the three together, all the parts together goes at the end to thoracic lymphatic duct.
Okay.
And drain into lymphatic, sorry, right lymphatic duct.
Okay.
Going to short physiology of esophagus.
Obviously everybody knows that esophagus transmits the foods from the mouth to pharynx into the stomach.
So it's primary conducts food from pharynx into the stomach.
And it movements organized specifically in this, uh, of this function.
Normally it has two types of pristalsis.
That's primary pristalsis and, uh, secondary pristalsis.
The primary pristalsis, uh, constitute of pristaltic wave that begins at the pharynx and
spread into the esophagus during pharyngeal stage of swelling.
It passes the way, uh, all the way from the pharynx into the stomach.
It is around eight to ten seconds.
So you remember that, uh, the swelling has three phases, which is oral phase, pharyngeal phase,
and, sorry, esophagal, oral phase, uh, pharyngeal phase, and esophagal phase.
So that is started at the pharyngeal stage.
Then secondary pristalsis results from the extension of the esophagus by retained foot,
and it continues until the foot has emptied into the stomach.
Okay, the upper esophagal sphincter, which I mentioned, uh, previously,
is normally closed with excessive tone and does not allow any entry of air into the esophagus
during inspiration.
The mean resting pressure of the upper sphincter is around 40 mmHg.
During swelling, it relaxes for seconds and allows foot to descend down.
Then the tone increases up to 100 mmHg, which pushes the bolus of the foot downward into the esophagus.
And the primary pristalsis starts that time.
Okay, what happens after that?
The foot, when it descends down, within the thorax, interaluminant pressure is around,
it's minus 5 to 5, minus 5 during, uh, during expiration, and 5 during expiration.
When the bolus passes down, the pressure reaches around 25 mmHg with the pristalsis width.
What happens at the lower sphincter normally remains, uh, remains tonically constricted with pressure of around 30 mmHg,
and contrast to the mid portion of the esophagus, which is usually relaxed.
When the pristalsis width passes downward, there is a receptive relaxation of lower esophagus sphincter ahead of the pristalsis width,
which allows easy propulsion of the foot into the stomach.
Lower pressure can cause acid reflux disease.
I'm sorry.
I just listed out some very common disorders of esophagus, but I'm not going to talk about them.
I'm sure you, you will be having some idea about them.
Maybe Zinkel's diverticulum is, uh, worth mentioning, which is, uh, there is a part of the, uh, pharyngeal, uh,
it's pharyngeal diverticulum at the upper part of the esophagus.
It's not supported by muscle posteriorly.
So it's a false diverticulum where the mucos of the pharynx just goes form at the diverticulum,
and, uh, just behind the esophagus.
Okay.
Okay.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
