Now, this is where we left off. We had this example. We had x prime equals a times x.
x prime equals a times x. Now, we need to solve for x. Let's just make sure. What is
that saying to us? That it's going to be x prime y prime equals, well, this is going
to be this 1 times x plus 3 times y and 5 times x plus 3 times y. That's what we're saying
to ourselves. So, we have this linear set. x prime equals x plus 3y and y prime equals
5x plus 3y. That's what we're trying to solve. Now, we need to get x. Now, remember
this is from the algebra. I can multiply both sides by a inverse. So, that's going to leave
me a inverse times a times x and I've solved for x. The only problem is, well, I can definitely
get the inverse of a. But what is x prime? I'm not given x prime. I'm not given x prime
explicitly. I'm given it in terms of x's and y's. I've been given it in terms of x's and y's.
So, I've got to think of another way to solve this problem here. Okay. So, let's just remind
ourselves of something. These were the two solutions that we saw in the previous example. But look
at it, it's e to the power something times t, e to the power something times t. And I have
these. Let's just call this x sub i, which i would be 1, 2, many of the words. Yes, it's
2, so I would have just had k1, k sub 1 and k sub 2, k sub 1, k sub 2, k sub 1, k sub 2,
k sub 1, k sub 2. e to the power something specific times t. Or if I just write it generally, I have
this x equals this vector k, column vector, times e to the power lambda t. So, what would
x prime be? Well, this is going to be, I'll bring the lambda forward, lambda k, e to the
power lambda t. That would be x prime. But remember, we said that, we said that x prime equals
a times x. A times x. So, what is x prime? Well, there we have x prime, it's k, sorry, lambda
times k, e to the power lambda t. And that equals a times x. And there's that, that's a times x
x is there. That's k e to the power lambda t. I can take lambda t out from both sides. And
this is what I'm left with. I'm left with lambda k equals ak. I can just bring this to the other
side. Let's just have that. We have ak minus lambda k equals 0. Watch out now. Lambda there,
that's just a scalar. That's not a vector in there. That's a scalar. So, that is a scalar
times a vector. This is a vector times a vector. Let me say, scalar times a matrix and a matrix
times a matrix. I've got to change this before I can take k out. Okay, it's very easy to do.
I'm going to have a minus lambda i k equals 0. So, I've multiplied the scalar by the unit matrix. And
if I do that, it just remains what it is. Now, it is a matrix minus a matrix. I can't have a matrix minus
a scalar. Okay, so I've had to have put that in. Now, the only time, remember, when you can have a matrix
a matrix times the matrix equals 0 is that the determinant of this one, the determinant of this
a minus lambda i has got to equal 0. a minus lambda i has got to equal 0. So, what do we have a here?
So, a is this 1, 3, 5, 3 minus lambda times pi. So, remember, what is lambda and then i is going to be
1, 0, 0, 1. If I multiply that, that's lambda, 0, 0, lambda. So, minus lambda, 0, 0, lambda. So, I'm left with
1 minus lambda, 3, 5, 3 minus lambda. And what I need to do now is to get the determinant of that.
Now, let's wipe the board quickly. Right, let's get the determinant of this. And the determinant of that is going to be
1 minus lambda. And 3 minus lambda. And we're going to subtract from that 15. And that's going to equal 0.
And that's going to equal 0. In other words, 3. We have minus 3 lambda. We have another minus lambda. And we have a lambda squared.
negative 15. That's going to equal 0. So, we have a lambda squared minus 4 times lambda. And we have negative 12. It seems negative 12 is going to equal 0.
negative 12. And that means lambda. And that means lambda. Let's have a lambda minus 6. And a lambda plus 2. It's going to equal 0.
Is that right? So, we'll have a lambda sub 1 equals 2. And a lambda sub 2 equals 6. And those are called
the characteristic values or the eigenvalues of the linear set that we're dealing with here. Good.
Good.
Good.
