So let's have Newton's third law.
Newton's third law basically says that the force on particle 2 due to particle 1
equals negative the force on particle 1 due to particle 2.
I have the sun, I have a planet.
The sun is a gravitational force on the planet.
The planet equally has a gravitational force equal in opposite direction.
Well, again, it's a law of nature within the realms of classical mechanics
in which Newton's first law, in other words, this law of equilibrium,
there is this inertial reference frame that exists.
In the inertial reference frame there is something called equilibrium.
Equilibrium says in the absence of a cause there will be no effect.
In other words, stationary motion, constant velocity.
Okay, so within the realms of this classical mechanics
there's certainly never been an experiment to show the deviation from that
so we take it as a law of nature.
But it gives us a beautiful opportunity to delve a bit deeper.
There's something beautiful that comes out of here.
We said force equals m dv dt.
First derivative of velocity.
This is a scalar.
I can put it in there.
In other words, force equals dmv dt.
We know what mass times velocity is.
Mass times velocity is linear momentum.
So force is the rate of change of linear momentum.
Now let's have this as the momentum of particle 1, particle 2 and particle 1.
In other words, we're going to have that the d dt of the momentum of particle 1 is going to be negative the d dt of d2.
I can bring that to the other side.
And remember, if I have the d dx of f plus the d dx of g and both of them are functions of that,
I can write the d dx of f plus g.
So if I bring this to this side, I have the d dt of p1 plus p2 is going to equal zero.
So what does that tell us about p1 and p2?
Well, p1 plus p2, these two momentums have got to equal a constant
because the derivative only of a constant will give you zero.
And what does this tell me?
There is something in here.
There is something that is conserved there.
There is a conserved quantity.
I say that linear momentum is conserved.
Linear momentum is conserved.
So just by doing, going from the law of nature, doing a bit of simple calculus, I have discovered a conserved quantity.
There is conservation of linear momentum.
Now you can rightly ask yourself, which came first, the chicken or the egg?
Is it because there is a law of nature that there is conservation of linear momentum?
Is it because there is a third law of nature that there is conservation of linear momentum?
Or does nature conserve linear momentum?
And from that, because I can work in reverse, does that give me a law of nature?
Is there something inherent within nature that conserves certain things?
Certain things in nature are conserved.
And from that follows the law of nature?
Or is it this way around?
Now certainly before relativity came along, physicists believed things in this direction.
Then came Emmy Noether, proven later by Wigner.
But certainly after the time of Einstein, we think, as physicists, we think in reverse now.
There is conserved quantities in nature.
And from that we can derive the laws of nature.
So we now have laws, we now have the concept of conserved properties.
And as always, nature will always let this happen.
It is a property of nature to have certain conserved quantities.
But there is something that goes beyond this.
And that is something that we will discuss.
This conservation of linear momentum comes from a symmetry principle.
Symmetry principle.
Now what is symmetry?
Now once again, school, university, I shoot a cannonball up.
The cannonball has this parabola motion.
I only have to work out half of it.
Because this side is symmetric from today.
Not what symmetry is about.
There isn't a simple definition I can give you of symmetry.
Once you have seen enough of examples of symmetry principle,
it will become part of you.
You will understand symmetry principles.
You can come up with a lot of symmetry principles.
From a symmetry principle, it has been well shown,
wherever there is a symmetry principle,
there is a conserved quantity.
From a symmetry principle which you set yourself,
if you find one or if you set one by thought experiment,
by whatever, if you can find a symmetry principle from that,
a conserved quantity exists.
And from that conserved quantity, I can work out, I can derive a law of nature.
So it goes in this direction.
And only as a physicist, once you can start talking in terms of symmetry principles,
and later on in advanced physics, the breaking of symmetry,
it's the bedrock of most of what we understand.
From a symmetry principle, and we'll do some examples
so we can start understanding what a symmetry principle is,
you're going to get a conserved quantity,
and once you look at a conserved quantity,
you can find a law of nature.
And that's beautiful.
That is how you think as a physicist.
Not from starting from this side.
Not from starting from this side.
Not from starting from starting from this side.
Not from starting from starting from this back.
Not cutting from this side.
Not all from starting from starting from starting from this side.
Not starting from this side.
Not changing from starting from starting from starting from this side.
Not intentionally from starting from starting from here.
Notrying from starting from starting from starting from starting from this side.
