We continue our look into the esophagus and in this video we're going to concentrate on some
physiology. Now the main function of the esophagus obviously to move food and drink down into the
stomach. Now swallowing is voluntary and once that's initiated the rest of the process down
the esophagus is reflexive. The tongue forms a piston which moves the food and drink let's just
call it the bolus back into the throat and actually closes it with the help of the upper part of the
with the soft palate. So the upper part of the esophagus is closed and any propulsion by contraction
then only has one direction to go and that is down. There's a complex set of movement as well
including the epiglottis which closes the larynx so that food and drink is not aspirated. Now the
cricopharyngeus muscle opens and food actually gets sucked into the chest if you think about it
there's this high pressure in the upper esophagus and the thoracic esophagus has almost a negative
pressure due to the negative pressure in the thorax. There's primary peristaltic waves and they reach
local pressures of about 30 to 100 millimeters of mercury and they move at a speed of about two to
four centimeters per second so about an inch per second moving the food bolus down. Now this might
not necessarily be down food and liquid will move towards the stomach even if the patient's lying down
or standing on his head. Now secondary waves are not normal you see those in the dilated esophagus
and as food accumulates proximal to some obstruction that will cause local contractions there known as
secondary waves and those certainly not normal to see. Tertiary waves appear in less than 5% of cases
after normal swelling and they form between the primary waves. The other functions of the esophagus
most notably glandular structures there are glands in the esophagus producing mucus. Now all of this
physiology is under the control of nervous system both sympathetic and parasympathetic. We see that the
sympathetic pathways are via perivertebral sympathetic chain with nerves from the cervical and thoracic ganglia
and then the parasympathetic supply via the vagus nerve. Now how do we investigate the physiology? The three most
common examinations that we are going to see is obviously contrast swallow where barium gives very
fine and nice definition. One should only be concerned as far as barium is concerned about
perforation or suspected perforation in the esophagus. We do not want barium to leak into the
medestinal tissues that causes severe inflammation and worsening of any sepsis. In those cases we use
water soluble contrast media. They don't give as good a definition and the problem with the water
soluble contrast of course is pneumonitis when aspirated into the lung. So we sit with both
problems you have to decide which of the mediums to give. Manometry where a tube is passed down into
the esophagus and measures pressures at various instances to look at the contractions themselves
and the pressure in the low esophageal swing to area. Now that swing to remember has to relax as the
food bolus comes down. There's a normal tone of about 20 millimeters of mercury there. It relaxes as
the food bolus primary waves come down allowing food transient access into the stomach. Now pH
matri that is where we measure the pH via probe can be left in for a period just to look specifically
at reflux disease where a lower pH is measured in the esophagus as gastric content which is acidic refluxes up
into the esophagus.
