Now as promised the epidemiology of acute appendicitis. Now in some units it is the
most common acute surgical condition. Certainly here with us it's number two
but still very very common. Up to one in a thousand people even more can suffer
from acute appendicitis. There is a male predominance leaving a male with a
lifetime risk of about eight point six percent and a female with a lifetime risk
of about six point seven percent. There is definitely a high incidence in younger
patients teens and twenties. That's where we see acute appendicitis. Now that
doesn't mean that's the only people who get acute appendicitis. We still we
definitely see it throughout the age groups. In the babies toddlers very young
we think they're relatively protected in as much as they have a broader base of
the appendix. If you postulate that obstruction might play a part in the
pathogenesis of acute appendicitis they'll have better drainage. In the
older age group we might see that acute appendicitis is underreported but
certainly there's other conditions become more predominant. That's not to say
though that any age group cannot get appendicitis. Always maintain that in your
differential diagnosis. As far as the geographical areas are concerned certainly
less common and underdeveloped areas. We think that diet may play a part in that
diet. A diet with a higher fiber content might be slightly protective. Now even in
this day and age you can still die from acute appendicitis. It can be as low as two
per million patients. Even lower than that but there's certainly high incidence of
mortality in underdeveloped areas. These patients have a delay in presentation. It takes longer for
them to get to health care. When they get to health care there might be delays in diagnosis.
Delays on getting on the theater bed. Resources as far as antimicrobial drugs are concerned so
definitely higher mortality rate there. Also higher at the extremes of age. There's
definitely a physiological reserve issues at the extremes of age and if we think about the older
patient obviously comorbid conditions. In the very young and the very old there might also be delays due to
problems with diagnosis. So the message is always think of acute appendicitis and abdominal pain no matter
what patient you see.
