And so we get to the clinical picture of acute appendicitis. It is very important
to take a thorough history and do a proper clinical examination. Appendicitis can mimic
many other diseases and other diseases can mimic appendicitis. There are many special
investigations available. But clinical history, clinical examination still plays the most
important part in making the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. So what are the symptoms? Well the
hallmark of acute appendicitis is of course abdominal pain. Why do these patients have pain?
Well it's inflammatory and infective. Now we used to think that the inflammation starts off with by
obstruction of the lumen of the appendix. That a faecolith, that's a hard, harddish piece of stool,
obstructs the lumen. You have some swelling, edema, hyperemia. Eventually the blood flow gets
obstructed and you get gangrene around the small vessels which can go throughout the lumen and
eventually cause perforation. We do know though that less than half of specimens investigated
do not have a faecolith, do not seem to have obstruction. So clearly something else
also plays a part. Some other thoughts might be that all of this is initiated by viral infection,
that there's some loss of integrity of the mucosal surface with invasion of bacteria and that sets
off the acute appendicitis. So we're not 100% clear as to how this happens. In the end though we do have
a bacterial infection. So with this inflammation, with the infection we have pain. Most people will
start with a non-specific peri-umbilical pain. Once again we're not 100% sure how this works.
It is common to read that it is a visceral pain. Remember the appendix is in the mid-gut, embryological
mid-gut. This visceral nerve supply, in other words a type of nerve supply that cannot differentiate
area very well so that you get this peri-umbilical type of pain. There's some research though that
suggests that it might just be pyloric spasm and that pyloric spasm is very common in any kind of
bowel disease that you might get it early on in colon cancer, that you might get it in diverticular disease
and for instance diverticulitis. And that it is the pyloric spasm that causes the initial
non-specific peri-umbilical pain. So there are different ways to look at this as well.
Eventually though as this inflammation and infection spreads it is going to start affecting
the peritoneum, the parietal peritoneum. And this has somatic nerve supply. In other words you
will be able to localize that pain. Now for most of us our appendix is in our right lower quadrant
so we're going to localize this pain down in the right quadrant. But not every one is the same.
Some people might have malrotation, maybe not full malrotation. People have their appendices in
different locations. For instance it's very common to have a retrocecal appendix but it might be buried
so deep in the retroperitoneal space that infection has to really be overt before you start getting
very lateral pain as it touches the the peritoneum in the right flank. And some patients have an appendix
down way down into the pelvis and that can cause its own problems. And we'll discuss this very shortly.
In any event the parietal peritoneum with its somatic nerve supply will cause the pain to be localized in
a certain spot. And we can use this localization of the pain to help us in the making of the diagnosis
of acute appendicitis. Many patients will have constipation in as much as there's a local
inflammatory process. It causes a slight paralysis of the bowel in that area and with that it leads
to a bit of constipation. Patients with a pelvic appendix, in other words the tip of the appendix
lying down into the pelvis, might touch the rectum, might irritate the rectum and they might present
with a bit of diarrhea and that might be confusing. It might also touch the bladder with a bit of urinary
symptoms. Dysuria, frequent urea. Loss of appetite though is very common. Most patients will have a loss of
appetite. Nausea and vomiting, not so much. Maybe half or slightly less than half of patients might actually be
nauseous and vomit. So the classic symptoms is this pain periumbilical, vague pain, spreads to the right
iliac fossa with loss of appetite. Not all patients present like this though. If you look at the literature
critically, maybe only half of patients present in this classical form. So keep your ears peeled,
listen to the patient, ask more and more questions specifically about other organ systems as well.
Try and elicit symptoms that might suggest other organ systems have been the cause of the pain.
Let's move on to the signs. Remember a thorough and systematic clinical examination head to toe.
If you start off with the vital signs, most patients will have a tachycardia. It might not be
by definition over 100 but certainly an elevated heart rate. Very common to have a low grade pyrexia.
Patients with a higher temperature might be suggestive of something else, maybe a viral infection or
that the appendicitis has become severely complicated. Those patients also present with a much higher
fever. Hypotension, bad sign. Usually a sign that septicemia and septic shock has actually set in.
So you don't want to wait until that becomes an overt sign. Because of the loss of appetite,
people also don't take in enough fluids. You will find signs of dry mucosal surfaces, signs of dehydration.
You have to look out for lymphadenopathy as well in the differential diagnosis. We have something
called mesenteric adenitis. We'll discuss it briefly. It may be preceded by a bit of upper airway
infection. Patients might have a bit of cervical lymphadenopathy, specifically in children,
might help you to make the diagnosis of mesenteric adenitis versus acute appendicitis. The whole point
here is to do a thorough examination. Start with your vital signs, do your general examination,
systematic examination of all the systems and then go to the abdomen.
So what do we do with the abdomen? Inspect, auscultate, percuss and examine by touch.
With the inspection you shouldn't find much. Not really overt signs of appendicitis that you can see
by just inspecting the abdomen. Listening for bowel sounds really is not that specific and way too much
was written in the literature previously about the different sounds and absence of sounds as far as
bowel function is concerned by listening for bowel sounds. Not something that really truly helps you.
Percussion. Percussion is a very good way to elicit signs of peritoneal irritation. It's actually
more tolerable for the patient just to be percussed as opposed to having deep palpation causing a lot of
discomfort and pain. So just percussing the abdomen, start far away from the point of maximal pain, work
your way towards it and if the patient has percussion tenderness over McBurney's point, well that really
leans towards a diagnosis of acute appendicitis. With examination we're going to start our palpation again
far away from the point of maximal pain and work our way towards that. Do not
cause the patient avert discomfort by repeatedly looking for signs of peritonism.
Now remember though it's not only peritonism that we're looking for, we're also looking for
other problems. Are they enlarged organs? Something you have to watch out for. Is there a mass in the
area of the appendix? Remember an appendix mass and even an appendix abscess should be treated
differently from normal appendicitis. So we're looking for masses and we're looking for enlarged
organs. Remember at this time we're not 100% sure that we are examining a patient with acute appendicitis.
So be thorough in your examination there. Now I use the term peritonism. I use it in a definition
that might suggest that there is inflammation and infection of the parietal peritonium.
And I can elicit signs to suggest that that is so. So what can I do when I do examine over the point
of maximal pain? The patient will involuntary guard, in other words they will tense up the abdominal wall
muscles and they don't have much control over that. It is a protective mechanism and it is a sign that
there is peritoneal inflammation or infection or peritonism. There's also rebound tenderness where
you actually do a bit of depalpation and suddenly let go. Really not necessary to do. Very uncomfortable,
very painful and certainly don't do it twice and don't call all your colleagues to come and have a
look at it. It's really not a humane thing to do to a human being. For that matter a very quick note on
analgesia. Remember analgesia is not going to hide the presence of acute appendicitis from you. Again if it's
going to take a long time before the patient can be evaluated do not withhold analgesia. It will not make
appendicitis hide away from you. Okay you've got to make as far as the peritonism or signs of peritonitis
is concerned elicit try and elicit it all over the abdomen. You need to know whether this is a local
process meaning when you do open procedure open surgical procedure that you can make your incision
there or if it's diffuse this appendix is perforated there is pus throughout the abdomen you would need
to do a full laparotomy. I will leave laparoscopy out until a bit later. So you need to know whether
this process is local or diffuse. And then we get to the touchy subject of rectal or vaginal examination
and where in the past it might have been on the forefront and it was felt that your examination was
not complete unless you you performed these examinations really we're leaning away from that.
There's not a lot that you can really add in your decision-making ability when you do
a rectal and vaginal examination. Now that being said on the other hand if there were things in
your systematic examination of the patient or in the history indeed that might make you believe that
there's another diagnosis here that makes rectal or vaginal examination mandatory of course you've
got to go ahead and do it. But there are many laboratory and special investigations that really
are a lot more helpful than subjecting a patient to a rectal or vaginal examination. So in the next
video we're going to move on to our laboratory and other special investigations.
