In this lecture we're going to discuss the diagnosis of acute appendicitis.
Now clinical evaluation remains the mainstay of the diagnosis. Once the decision has been made
that a patient has acute appendicitis there's very little use for continuing the investigation
to improve your clinical diagnosis. Clinical diagnosis is extremely accurate and there are
very few tests that can really compete with it. It's only for cases that you are unsure that you
can continue the investigations to help you make the diagnosis. So once the clinical diagnosis has
been made the only role really for further investigations are investigating your patient
for anesthetic risks. Looking at comorbid disease investigation. The patient might be a diabetic.
The patient might have lung or heart conditions and you need to evaluate these before you decide
on treatment. And lastly just the extent of the disease. A patient can present with an early
appendicitis but the patient may also present with a late appendicitis with complicated appendicitis.
The formation of abscesses and these might be treated differently. In these cases you want
to continue your investigation. So here's a non-exhaustive list of all these special investigations that
you can consider. If we just look at the laboratory side we have our full blood count. We have a CRP,
C-reactive protein. We have procalcitonin, urea, creatinine and electrolytes and glucose. We have liver
function tests, lipase, urinalysis, mcns, that's microscopy, culture and sensitivity of urine and blood and
pregnancy tests, either urine or blood based. On the imaging side we have chest and abdominal x-ray,
we have ultrasound, computer tomography, magnetic resonance imaging and even a contrast enema. Let's discuss some of these.
Now if we look at the laboratory and investigations remember that these are all markers of infection but
that's not specific to the appendix. You can have infection in the colon, in any parts of the abdominal
cavity or even elsewhere and they will all have these markers that we're going to discuss now abnormal or
raised. Let's look at the white cell count. So a patient with appendicitis and a patient with
diverticulitis will both have a raised white cell count. You must remember that these are not specific
just to the appendix. They cannot make the diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Of course remember I said it's
a clinical diagnosis and you're going to use these tests to support the work up as far as the comorbid
disease and the extent etc is concerned. So yes you will have a white cell count in the majority of
cases. A very early appendicitis or patient that might be immunocompromised might not always have
a raised white cell count but definitely this would be the norm. A raised white cell count most
specifically neutrophils because this is a bacterial infection or if you have access to these kind of
reports they might mention a left shift in the white cell count. The C-reactive protein might be raised.
Again there are cases in which it's normal. A normal white cell count, a normal CRP does not exclude the
diagnosis of acute appendicitis. Also to mention in the CRP is it's best to have serial CRP values. A rise,
a trend of rising of the CRP might be more important just than an absolute count. If we look at
procalcitonin is also a marker of infection but really the reports do not suggest that it should
be used in acute early appendicitis in as much as it only starts rising when we have complicated
appendicitis. Once there's a rupture in a bit of peritoneal soiling and advanced cases of acute
appendicitis that the PCT starts to rise. So not really useful in early settings. You have to look for
raised glucose counts, specifically in diabetics. Glucose levels that become difficult to control
is usually a sign of sepsis in the diabetic. So ritaliac phosphine with the symptoms and signs
that we've discussed and problems for the patient to manage the glucose levels is an indication of
infection. Once again I will reiterate none of these are specific for appendicitis but they do aid you in
that diagnosis of a bacterial infection being present. Now in very severe cases now we're talking
septicemia, septic shock, other laboratory investigations that would help you is just the
lowering of HP. If you have avert sepsis your HP will drop and your platelet count will drop but now
we're really talking advanced cases of sepsis so not of real use in early appendicitis.
Now it's important just to look at your renal function if there's one of the areas for anesthetic
help for the anesthetist and for investigation of comorbid disease, usually the kidneys.
You want to know whether your patient is dehydrated and has electrolyte abnormalities. Remember these
patients present with a bit vomiting and they will lose electrolytes. Urea is up might be an indication just
of dehydration once the creatine starts going up of course we're talking acute kidney injury and this
is usually in more advanced cases. Now we have to consider alternate diagnosis. So if your clinical
investigations were not specific, your clinical impression was not specific for acute appendicitis,
you did not confirm the diagnosis, you might want to look for an alternate diagnosis. So urine
MCNS and just urinalysis with the dipsticks is very important. Females with cystitis or more severe
kidney infections, bilonephritis might present exactly the same way as an acute appendicitis can.
So what do you want to see on the dipsticks? Well you'd at least want to see nitrates. Remember
that white cells, proteins in the urine are indications of other diseases. Urinary tract infections, simple
and complicated urinary tract infections should have nitrates. Make sure that your dipsticks actually
test for that. Many a time have I seen a report that says dipsticks normal. But when you go pick up the
dipstick you see well it's one of the cheap variety and it doesn't actually have nitrates on it. So
remember to have a look at what dipsticks was used before you just interpret a normal urine dipsticks
report in the in the nursing notes for instance. MCNS, Microscopy, Culture and Sensitivity, if you're
really concerned it can be spun down. Various investigations are possible that can give you
very rapid results on these if you really do suspect urinary tract infections. Pregnancy tests,
either urine based or much better serum based patients with ectopic pregnancies.
Right hand side can really look like an acute appendicitis and you want to rule this out. You
might also want to know this even in a case of acute appendicitis if a patient is pregnant because it
might alter your management. Pancreatitis every now and again can be misdiagnosed. We like lipase levels
it's much more specific to pancreatitis as opposed to the amylase levels and it also rises a bit sooner
and stays positive a bit longer. That would be as opposed to the amylase levels. Love function is also
very important. We really want to know whether the cholecystitis are not acute. The cholecystitis are
going to have raised or abnormal liver function tests but any abnormality there might be due towards
looking towards the biliary tree and the liver for an alternate diagnosis.
Imaging. Let's start with plain films and chest x-ray. You really should consider chest x-ray if a
patient has overt symptoms and signs of peritoneal irritation. An erect chest x-ray looking for air
under the diaphragm. Appendices do rupture but it usually does not go with massive amount of free air.
Now we're entertaining alternate diagnosis. Is there a perforated ulcer? Is there a perforated
diverticular disease? If we look at the abdominal x-ray, usually not sensitive or specific for
acute appendicitis. In very rare instances, perhaps less than five percent of cases, you might see a
faecolith. But what you will often see though is just a bit of localized ileus. A bit of air fluid levels
in the right ileus as you have a paralytic ileus in that area of inflammation. That might help you a bit.
Ultrasound. Of course it's very safe to do but we have a problem in it as much as we're dealing with
an area where there's a lot of gaps which might make it be difficult for the for the sonographer
and also it has only has a sensitivity of about 80% which really is not any better than clinical
evaluation. Now remember what sensitivity is? That is your true positive rate in all cases with
appendicitis. So if you took a hundred patients who really do have acute appendicitis, it'll only pick up
80% of them. So that's just as good as clinical evaluation and really doesn't add much. What it does
help you with really is female patients, one on the pregnancy side but two just on the tubo ovarian side
can really have a good look at the at the tubo ovarian area. CT scan has become very prevalent. It really
has very good sensitivity. It's going to show you any complicated disease which really might change
your mind and management. If it shows an inflammatory mass we know we're going to continue just with
antibiotics. If it shows abscess formation it might be drainable percutaneously which saves the patient
the general anesthetic and surgery. Very sensitive to pick up. It's going to pick up most cases of acute
appendicitis. Also very good for alternative diagnosis. Really investigates the whole abdomen and can give
a lot of information. The problem is it is a form of radiation and it is something that we really
want to curtail. Obviously cost and availability is also a problem. So what are they going to see
in ultrasound and on the CT scan? Well you see a thick walled structure which you really shouldn't see
on the ultrasound and on the CT scan should be really less than millimeters without any surrounding
signs of inflammation in the CT scan. That would be some fat stranding, localized ileus, localized
bowel wall thickening. On the ultrasound it's this non-compressible little worm of more than six
millimeters in diameter and with compression over that area with the probe of the ultrasound they can
elicit the pain very specific to acute appendicitis. MRI very expensive, not universally available and really
which probably only has a role in the investigation of a pregnant patient. In as much as sensitively
you can probably approach that of CT scan but there is no ionizing radiation. Contrast enema really has
gone on the back burner. Fill the colon with contrast and if the appendix doesn't fill that used to be seen as
in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis due to the blockage by fecal. But really in the modern setting should
not have to be entertained. Now a variety of scoring systems I just want to finish off with. The Alvarado
score, modified Alvarado score perhaps are the two most important. I do not want to go into specifics of these
because what they really do is just summarize all your findings because it scores certain points for
what you found during history and examination and some basic blood investigations. Now there's a variety
out on these there's a lot of reports on this in the literature some that show benefits some that don't
show benefit and these can be looked up and they can be pasted on the wall in an acute care setting and you
can read off of those. It really has not become a universally accepted way of diagnosing a patient. It really
is just a summary of what you found and you can make a logical clinic decision on what is what
