Good. Quick mathematics bonus.
I have two vectors. Let me call them vector A and vector B.
Let's start with them just being in two-space.
So, for instance, let this vector be 3, negative 2, for instance,
and this vector equals 1, 2.
So, if I draw this in a coordinate plane, I have 1, 2, 3, 1, 2.
So, very roughly, this is my vector A, my vector A,
and my other vector is 1 across 1, 2 up.
There's my second vector.
There is my second vector, vector B.
What is the cross product between these two vectors?
So, I want to know what is vector A cross product vector B.
There's various ways to do this.
First of all, I can very easily get the direction.
I point my fingers in the A direction.
I let them go to B.
My right hand points in the direction of the resultant vector.
Let's call that vector C.
So, I already know that the direction is going to be out the board.
Now, so the direction is, if this, if I add a third, and I've got to add a third dimension.
And that comes straight at you.
So, let's make that the Z axis.
It's going to come straight out at you.
Okay.
I can also, I can also, well let's do one way.
The one way is to set up a matrix.
So, a matrix is just rows.
So, I'm going to have this matrix I, negative J, K.
Now, I put that negative there just to remind myself.
You needn't do that.
So, I've got I, negative J, and I've got K.
Okay, and I now write my 3, and negative 2, and there's nothing.
Now, we know these are the unit vectors in that direction.
So, a length of 1 in the direction of the X axis.
If this was X, and this is Y, and Z points at you.
And then the Z, it's in this flat plane.
So, there's no component in the Z direction for that first vector.
For the second vector, it's 1, 2, and 0.
So, there is my 3 by 3 matrix.
I've got 3 rows and 3 columns.
And all I do now, I get the determinant along row 1.
If you don't know what the determinant is, the determinant gives you,
if you go along row 1 of the 3 by 3 matrix, the answer to this cross product.
So, how do you get the determinant along row 1?
If you don't know, if you can't remember.
So, I'm going to get 3 answers.
I'm going to have an i, a j, and a k component.
And I put that negative there just to remind myself that there must be a negative here.
So, to get this first one, it is for i, a long row 1.
So, I'm going to use the i, the negative j, and the k.
So, for this one, I'm going to close this row and the column that contains the i.
What am I left with?
Negative 2 and 0, and this and this.
So, what do I do?
I multiply those two, and I multiply these two, and I subtract that from each other.
So, it's negative 2 times 0, minus 0 times 2.
That's 0 minus 0.
Okay.
So, if I have d, e, f, and g, it's dg multiplied minus ef.
Multiply those two, multiply those two, and it's dg minus ef.
So, for the j, I close the row that contains j, the column that contains j.
So, j has completely hidden from me.
So, it's 3 times 0, minus 0 times 1.
That's also 0.
And then, lastly, I'm going to close the row and the column with k.
That's 6 minus negative 2.
That is 8.
And that's a positive 8.
So, if there was a number, if this was two vectors in three space, and this was not 0, 0,
I would have had numbers here.
I just have to remember to make this a negative.
So, my answer is going to be 8 positive 8k.
So, a cross b, the one vector times the other vector.
If I wanted to know what the linear, the angular momentum was, that's r, cross p.
Okay, I would do the cross product exactly if I knew the units for this, x, y units for this, x, y units for that.
I would set up this matrix.
If it was in three space, I would have values for x, y, and z.
I would have values for p and x, y, and z.
And I would plug them in there.
And I would take the determinant along row one.
I would get this kind of answer, which now is equal to 0, 0, 8.
That would be the cross product of these two vectors.
