Now I'm just moving on to this kind of presentation. Some of these equations might be a bit long for the blackboard.
So let's have a go. Now we've seen some eigenvalues and they were distinct and different from each other.
We had a polynomial, we solved it, and we had lambda sub 1 and lambda sub 2.
But what if they repeat? They're both real but they repeat. Look at that.
Lambda squared plus 6 times lambda plus 9 equals 0. That will result in lambda sub 1 equals lambda sub 2 equals negative 3.
If it was a third order polynomial with a 3 by 3 matrix size for matrix A, I might have gotten yet another value for lambda sub 3 there.
Anyway, we're dealing here with real repeated eigenvalues.
Now depending on the order of the polynomial, we'll have this, lambda minus lambda sub 1 to the power m.
Here we have it squared. Now there are two possibilities here.
From this eigenvalue, eigenvector, I might get many eigenvalues for lambda sub 1.
From this eigenvalue lambda sub 1, I should say, I can get many eigenvectors.
I can actually get m and that should be less than n.
n is the size of the matrix A, remember.
And if I can get many eigenvectors or more than one eigenvector for that repeat eigenvalue lambda sub 1,
then I'll have a solution set that looks like that.
Now I must say at the end there, that should have read c sub m and k sub m.
But you get the point. You'll just carry on.
There will be different constants and different eigenvectors as far as k sub 1, k sub 2, etc.
The other possibility is a bit more difficult.
If I only get a single eigenvector for the eigenvalue lambda sub 1, then something else is going to happen.
In this case, we'll have this set of solutions.
It will be x sub 1, x sub 2 until we get to x sub m, whatever the value of m was going to be.
And look how it's constructed there with x sub m.
We'll have the eigenvector k sub m1 times t to the power m minus 1 over m minus 1 factorial times e to the power lambda sub 1t.
And we carry on, carry on, carry on with that till the end.
We'll have 1 over 1 there as far as the t to the power m minus m over 0 factorial, which is this 1 over 1 right at the end.
So if you look back at x sub 1 and x sub 2 at the top there, and you put in 1 and then 2 into this x sub m equation, you'll get those two values.
You'll get those values for x sub 1 and x sub 2.
Now we usually don't write the eigenvectors as k sub 2, 1, k sub 2, 2, etc.
It's written as it is in the bottom two equations, the x sub 2 equals k and then p, or if it was an x sub 3, it will be k, p, and q.
And look at the deteriorating values of the powers of t.
So that was x sub 3, so we're going to start with t squared.
And then with the p, there's only a t to the power 1.
And then with the q, there's t to the power 0.
And you'll notice at the bottom as well, it'll be 2 factorial, which is 2, then 1 factorial, which is 1, and 0 factorial, which is just 1.
So that's how we construct it if we can only get one vector for that repeat eigenvalue, y sub 1.
Difficult to understand, but once you've done an example, just look back at this video, it'll make a lot of sense.
Let's just see what happens now.
If I have m equals 2, so I have x sub 2 there, that is going to be the k, the t, and then the p as well.
But remember, I can always write x prime, the matrix x prime, as A times x.
So let's just expand both sides, the x prime and the Ax, x sub 2 prime from the top.
The first term kt e to the power lambda sub 1t, you'll have to use the power rule, and you can see the result there.
And if I take my x sub 2 and I multiply it by the matrix A, I'm going to get a kt e to the power lambda sub 1t and a p e to the power lambda sub 1t.
So now I've got these two equations, and I can equate them to each other.
Bring everything to the left-hand side, so it's going to equal the zero vector on the right-hand side, column vector.
And I can also group terms, as you'll see in the last line.
So all I've done is I've written stuff in a certain order that makes sense,
and you can pause the video and think back to linear algebra as to why it makes sense in this order.
And look at this.
If you look at that first line, think about it.
It can only equal the zero vector if ak minus lambda sub 1k and the ap minus lambda sub 1p minus k both equal zero.
They've got to equal zero for this to equal zero on the right-hand side.
The zero vector, I should say, on the right-hand side.
And the only way that that can be is I can take k out as a common factor.
Remember, I've got to put the identity matrix i in there.
Otherwise, it's a matrix minus a scalar.
So it's a minus lambda sub 1i times k plus zero.
And for the second factor in the parentheses there, I just bring the k over to the other side, take pi as a common factor.
And if I had more values to work with, if my value for m was larger, say, x sub 3,
I would have had the q and the p there.
And so it would just carry on.
And with this information, we can do some examples.
Thanks, y'all.
Thanks, and that's The
