Good, let's get to an example. Now the letters are a bit small, the numbers are a bit small,
so you'll perhaps have to view this in a higher resolution in YouTube. We have X' there with this
3 by 3 matrix A, and we see it there multiplied by X. So there's our matrix A, and I also have put
in there the matrix A minus lambda I. This is how we would usually do it, and we would get the
determinant of that, and we'd set that equal to zero. And you'll have to know how to do 3 by 3
matrix determination. Here I've used the first row, and just remember that you have to change the signs
as you move along, so the 1 minus lambda will be positive. The negative 2 in row 1 column 2 should
be minus negative 2, and then a positive in front of the last 2. So you'll have to know how to do the
determinant, and there are videos on my channel as well about linear algebra. What you would get to
is the second to last line. After all, that's a very simple algebra. We'll have the negative outside,
which we can just divide both sides by negative 1, so that'll disappear. So we have lambda plus 1
squared, and lambda minus 5. So we have a repeated eigenvalue. Lambda sub 1 equals lambda sub 2,
and that's negative 2, and then we have lambda sub 3 equals 5. So whichever way you want to look at it,
we have this repeated eigenvalue, and it'll be one of two possibilities. We're either going to get a
single eigenvector for this, or more than one eigenvector, and I showed you in the previous video
what is going to happen under those two circumstances. So let's have a look. We'll have lambda sub 1,
which is then also lambda sub 2, and we'll first get this k sub 1 eigenvector, which might also have
a k sub 2. We don't know. And we'll just call it k sub 1, k sub 2, k sub 3. It's a column vector,
an eigenvector. So I'm going to have a minus lambda, which is now negative 1i, multiplied by k.
And what I've done here is just a shorthand way of doing this. Remember that the way that I do my
matrix multiplication, I'm going to write the one matrix slightly to the upper right of the
other one, and the left lower one would be the first one in the multiplication. The right top one
will be the second one, so that the sizes of the matrices coincide, so that I can actually do this
matrix multiplication. And what are you going to do then? Well, you're going to get a three by one
matrix, and that three by one matrix has got to equal the zero vector, column vector, and that means
you're going to have three unknowns and three equations, and you can solve a linear system like
that, just with Gaussian, Gauss-Jordan elimination. And that's all I have there. So I've skipped all
those steps. They would have just gotten me a matrix of coefficients, which you'd see there,
2 negative 2, 2, negative 2, 2, negative 2, 2, negative 2, 2, negative 2, and we have the zero column
vector on the right-hand side, and I can just do Gauss-Jordan elimination. Once again, you'll have to watch
videos on how to do linear algebra, and that's what you'll get to. You'll get these, the rho, 1, negative
1, 1, which means 1 times k sub 1, plus a negative 1 k sub 2, plus a 1 k sub 3 equals 0, and then a k sub 1,
if I just simplify that, k sub 1 equals k sub 2 minus, oh, that should read k sub 3.
k sub 1 equals k sub 2 minus k sub 3. And if I look back very quickly, if I let k sub 2 equal 1 and k sub 3
equal 0, that'll leave me with a k sub 1 of 1. If I let k sub 2 equal 1 and k sub 3 equal 1, I'm free to do
that because the other two rows, which is 0s, was going to leave me a k sub 1 of 0, and those are
linearly independent of each other. They're not constant multiples of each other, so there's at
least one, or there is more than one, eigenvector for this lambda sub 1 equals lambda sub 2 equals
negative 1 eigenvalue, this repeated eigenvalue. In other words, I have two eigenvectors, eigenvectors
there, and my set of solutions in the end is simply just going to be a c sub 1 times that first
eigenvector times e to the power, now my lambda sub 1 was negative 1, so it's going to be e to the power
negative t, and c sub 2 times that k sub 2 times e to the power negative t. So nothing untoward
there. If we look on the right hand side though, the flow on this is just a bit awkward, so you
have the k sub 1 and the k sub 2 up at the left top, then we move across to the right, let's
have lambda sub 3 which is now 5, that's not a repeated eigenvector. So I'm going to have
a minus 5i, and I'm going to multiply that by k sub 3, and that's going to equal the 0
vector, not just 0. Once again, I'm going to end up with 3 equations and 3 unknowns, homogeneous
in as much as it equals the 0 column vector, and I can just write that as a matrix of coefficients
together with this, this augmented matrix with the curve, with the homogeneous part on the
right hand side. Gauss-Jordan elimination again, and that's what I get, 1, 0, negative
1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, and 0, 0, 0, 0. So now we flow back to the left hand side, apologies
for that. So that means 1 times k sub 1 plus 0 k sub 2 minus k sub 3 equals 0. In other words,
k sub 1 equals k sub 3, and then k sub 2 must equal negative k sub 3. If I just take the
k sub 3 over to the other side, I get that from the second row. So this is not repeated,
I don't have to come up with repeats, I can just choose something very simple, and I only
need to choose one eigenvector for this. So if I let k sub 1 equal 1, that means k sub 3
has got to equal 1, and k sub 2 has got to equal a negative 1. So there's my eigenvector
for the eigenvalue 5. So if I swing over to the right bottom again, I see that my k sub
3 is that 1, negative 1, 1, so my x sub 3 is going to be 1, negative 1, 1, e to the power
5t. So I can now write my final set of solutions, my c sub 1, and there's my k sub 1 eigenvector,
my c sub 2 and my k sub 2 eigenvector, and my c sub 3 and my k sub 3 eigenvector, and you
see the lambdas there, negative 1 for the first one, negative 1 for the second one, and 5 for
the last one. So this was an example where we had repeated real eigenvalues, and it turned
out that there was more than one eigenvector, so I needn't make use of that complicated equation
where we're going to use t to the power m minus 1 over m minus 1 factorial. I needn't use that
because I've got more than one eigenvector here, and I can simply use this form of the solution set.
