Now let's try and set up the Hamiltonian, or Hamilton's equation.
Now we know the Granger's equation, del L, del Q equals the first time derivative of the partial derivative of L with respect to velocity.
Now, once again, just some basic calculus, if I have f, and f is a function of x, y, and t, df dt is partial derivative of f with respect to x times x dot,
partial derivative of f with respect to y, x double dot, plus the partial derivative of f with respect to t.
So if I have L, and I remember, and if I take L to be a function of q, q dot, and t, in other words, x, y, and z, or x, y, and t,
the L dt is going to be del L, del Q, q dot, del L, del Q dot, q double dot, plus del L, del t.
Del L, del T.
Okay, now, I know what del L, del Q is, though.
I can just replace that.
So I'm going to have the L dt is going to equal that, the d dt of del L, del Q dot, q dot, plus del L, del Q dot, q double dot, plus del L, del T.
So, that is where we stand.
Now, if we look carefully, though, if we look carefully, though, if we look carefully at these two, I can rewrite that.
Look at that.
The L dt equals the d dt of the L del Q dot, q dot, plus del L, del T.
Because if I take the first derivative of this product of two functions, q dot, q dot, I'm going to get the d dt of this, times that, plus this, times the d dt of q dot, which is q double dot.
So if I take the first derivative of this product, I end up with those two.
So I have to simplify things.
Now, let's try and simplify things even more.
I'm going to get all the d dt's on one side.
So let's bring this over to this side, minus del dt.
That is going to equal the d dt of, if I take this to that side, and I then have the d dt of something, minus the d dt of something, I can put that with each other again.
So del L del Q dot, q dot, minus L.
That is what I'm going to have.
Now, I want to say, we want to say one thing.
Let's set this negative del L del T to zero.
The only way I can put that to zero is if this L is a constant.
We know that.
If L is a constant, or at least not a constant, it can be a constant with something else, but it has no dependence on T.
So if L is a function with no dependence on T, so it's only L of q and q dot with no dependence on T.
There's got to be no dependence on T whatsoever.
If that is true, in other words, I have no hidden degrees of freedom.
I am setting that as a prerequisite for setting up the simultaneous.
The Lagrangian should have no dependence on time.
If that is zero, the only way that that can be is if this is a constant, because the d dt of a constant would be equal to zero.
In other words, del L, del q dot, q dot, minus L, there's going to be some constant, and we call that the Hamiltonian.
It's equal to some constant.
It is equal to some constant.
Now, let's think about this, or let me clear some space,
and then we'll carry on from this to get the two equations for the Hamiltonian of a system.
Good.
Some space on the board.
Let's carry on.
I said this was equal to a constant.
It's only because del L, del L, del t was equal, it was a negative, it doesn't matter, was equal to zero.
So no dependence on T.
I just want to remind you what the Lagrangian was.
Because it was T minus V, in other words, it was a half, M, q dot squared, minus V of Q.
So it was that.
So if I took, that was L, if I took del L, del q dot, q dot was there,
that would have just been M, q dot.
And that's M, V, M, V, and that is momentum, momentum P.
Okay, so this part I know is P, momentum, q dot, minus L equals this Hamilton's functional values, our Hamiltonian.
Now just think about what we are saying here.
So we are saying momentum times velocity, momentum is mass times velocity, times another velocity, minus, that is T minus V, equals H.
So this is M, V squared, what is that?
Well, that's twice half M, V squared, isn't it?
Two times a half is just one, minus T, plus V, equals H.
This is two times T, two times the kinetic energy, minus T, plus V, equals H.
And what does that leave for H?
H equals T plus V, the total energy.
So the Hamiltonian of our system is the total energy, total energy, if there are no hidden degrees of freedom as far as time is concerned.
If there is no, if the del L del t equals zero, if and only if that is true, then I have that the Hamiltonian equals T plus V.
In other words, it's going to be a half M, Q dot squared, minus, or plus V of Q.
And so they are very simple terms, we have the Hamiltonian of our system.
