As I said, we're going to expand on this a bit. I just want to show you, if we have
a number e to the power, this complex number alpha plus i beta or beta it, remember that
would be e to the power alpha t plus i beta t. So that's that, which is the same as e to
the power alpha t times e to the power i times beta t. And I can rewrite that. Remember we
can always rewrite this as e to the power alpha t and then we have the cosine of beta
t plus i times the sine of beta t. We can always write that as such. Now remember in our previous
example we had this eigenvector, we had 1 and 1 over negative 1, remember? I can rewrite
this, remember this is 1 plus 0i there, so I can rewrite this as, let's have, I can't
remember if that was exactly what we had there, but I can write it as 1 and 1 plus 0 and then
negative 2 and then negative 2 and I can have the i there or the i in front. That will be
exactly the same, it's 1 plus nothing, it's just a 1 and 1 negative 2i, that's exactly the
same there. And this, for this complex eigenvector we call b1. So b1 is the real part of k1 and this
we call b2 and that is the imaginary part of k1. And remember because I said that k sub 2 equals
the complex conjugate of k sub 1 and lambda sub 2 equals the complex conjugate of lambda sub
1, I'm always going to have this same form of the general solution set. And what we're
going to have is this, there's always going to be an x1 and x2 for 2 by 2, 2 by 2 matrix,
it's e to the power alpha t then b sub 1, remember that's the real part of k1 and b sub 2 is the
imaginary part of k1, so b sub 1 cosine of beta t minus b sub 2 sine of beta t and x sub 2 is
going to be e times e to the power alpha t, now beta 2 cosine beta t plus, there's a negative,
there's a positive, there's b1, there's b2, positive beta sub 1, a b sub 1 sine of beta t,
don't get the b's and beta's mixed up. So you're always going to have that and then your final
set of solutions, these are not linear, these are not linearly dependent, there's going to be c times x sub 1 plus c sub 2 x sub 2, c times c sub 1 x sub 1 plus c sub 2 x sub 2.
Now what's the first step?
