Good, now we saw what to do with the undetermined coefficients and we know that it doesn't always
work. We need a better method and we're going to look at the variation of parameters. Remember
we're still dealing with this non-homogeneous set of differential equations and now we can
use variational parameters. We've done it before where we just had a single differential equation
but now we have this system of equations, differential equations and we have to solve them using parts
of those techniques. A few things change though. Now we need some preliminary work. What we
are trying to get at is this particular solution. We know how to get the complementary solution
set where we would just set f of t equal to zero. We know how to solve x prime equals
a x. We know how to solve that. So before we can get to an equation then for that particular
part, we need some preliminary work. And we actually need to determine this, what's called
the fundamental matrix. Now in order to do that, let's just start with a solution set. Let's
say that x equals c sub 1 x sub 1. But c sub 2 x sub 2 and we go on to c sub n x sub n. Note
but for x sub 1 s sub 1
, you have that remember thatäs just x sub 1 x sub 2 and we go down to c sub n and
we go down to x sub n and that would be . x sub 1 1 1 so that was . So that wasрев x sub 1 can be written as this faded column matrix and then we are going to go on to x sub n of the Lorenz
1, 1. So that was x sub 1
can be written as this column matrix. And then we're going to
go on to x sub n. We'll have x sub 1, x sub 2
all the way to x sub n. But these are n, n,
n. That's what we have. And I can multiply c sub 1
into that as well. So I'll have c sub
1, x sub 1, 1 plus c sub 2
etc. etc. until c sub n, x sub 1
n. And then all the way down to c sub n
x sub n 1 plus
all the way to c sub n, x sub n
n. So I could have written it like that.
There are n number of rows
and just one column. So this is an n by 1.
n by 1 matrix with set of solutions. I can rewrite this in another form.
All of these will make sense. I can rewrite this as x sub. Now it's going to be 1, 1.
x sub. Now we're going to have
and eventually we're going to have x sub and n. So we're going to have x sub .
x sub 2 1 and all the way down to x sub n 1 and this will be x sub 2 2 all the way down to x sub
n 2 and x sub 2 n and all the way down to x sub n n. I can write this like this times this
common matrix that I'll call c and c will be c sub 1, c sub 2 all the way down to c sub n.
If I did this, now remember this is an n by n matrix, n by n matrix and this is an n by
1 matrix. So if I multiply it in this order from here to there, remember I started off
by saying, suppose that this is the set of solutions. So this does satisfy the initial
problem item, taking that for granted that this is a solution. If I do it this way, I
can't have c times this, I have to have this times c, n times n times n times 1, that's
going to be giving me an n times 1 matrix, which is just this matrix that I had here. If
I call this thing, this matrix c, and that is why we do this, it's the uppercase phi, phi
of t we call it that matrix, and we call that column matrix column c. And this is what we
call the fundamental matrix, and that is where it is. If indeed, it's just made up by these
individual column matrices that we found that we have. And remember that was a k, whatever
it was, let's make it i, and I have k1i, k2i, etc, etc, time kni, and then e to the power, whatever
that eigenvector was, and the eigenvector that goes with that. So if I can multiply each
out by those, with that x sub i, with that c sub i was all of those. And so that is where
these all come from. And I can write them like this, which you'll also recognize as the
Wronskian. So one good thing about this, we know that the determinant, if these were
constant multiples of each other, the Wronskian, the determinant of this, was not equal to zero,
that means, luckily for us, this, we can get the inverse of that matrix. Okay, so this is
the fundamental matrix, is this all these columns, all these column vectors, column matrices, written
as one large n by n matrix, and if I multiply that by these c's, I get exactly this, or this,
all the same thing. But this is what I'm interested in, because this fundamental matrix, remember
they'll all be functions of t, where we have it, e to the power lambda sub i t, all functions
of t. I can just take, now that is a constant, so if I were to do that, I'll have uppercase
phi prime of t times a constant. Okay, that constant, this is the constant, so I can do that. But
if I remember that x prime equals ax, x prime equals ax, so I'm going to have something like
this. These two are now related to each other, so phi prime of t times c equals a, and what
is x, well, x is just that, phi of t, c. So the c's can go, and I have the fact that
the prime of this fundamental matrix is just my original matrix, A, and the problem that
I might have times phi of t. And that we're going to use, this is just the first part of
our preliminary work. First part of our preliminary work, we're using this fundamental matrix and
the fact that its first derivative equals A times itself, and we're going to use that
to set up an equation to get the particular solution of a non-homogeneous problem.
