So back to our preliminary work. We know this now. We also know that x prime or let's just say we're going to have a equals phi t times c.
That's what we had on the board before. We have this. Now let's carry on with this. We have this now. Now we're going to have x prime. Instead of the complementary set or having it like this, it's got to equal xc plus xp.
Now xc, the complementary set of solutions we know how to do, we need to get p. Now xp, instead of this c, we're going to do something else.
We're going to say phi of t and we're going to multiply it by this column vector u of t, such that the u of t is going to equal this u1, u2, u3, up until un, this column vector.
So we're going to suggest that through the variation of parameters that instead of c for the constants for the complementary set, we're going to have this other column vector u of t,
that if we multiply those two with each other, that if we multiply those two with each other, we're going to get x sub p.
This is just what we suppose.
Now this is a matrix and this is a matrix.
So it's a product of two matrices.
So if I get the first derivative of this, I better use the product rule as far as that's concerned.
So if I get x prime, x prime of p, I've got to get, and I'm doing it in a certain way, you'll see why.
So I'm going to have phi of t, u prime of t, plus, I'm going to have phi prime of t, u of t.
I'm going to have that.
I'm going to have that.
Those are the symbols I wanted to use.
But I also remember that x prime equals a times x plus the f of t, and that equals a times, now the x prime is this, phi of t, u of t.
So I have that plus the f of t.
In other words, I have two statements for, this might as well be the p there and the p there.
So I have two statements for x of p, two equations, so I can equate these two to each other.
But I also know something else.
I have x prime of t here, phi prime of t there, and I have phi prime of t here.
So I'm just going to rewrite that phi prime of t as such.
So I'm going to have phi of t, u prime of t, plus, now instead of that, I'm going to have this, I'm going to have this, a.
I'm going to have a phi of t, a phi of t for that one, and then a u of t, and that is going to be equal a phi of t, u of t, plus f of t.
And lo and behold, lo and behold, both sides of the equation, I have these two expressions, so they can go, and I have the fact that I have phi prime of t, u of t, and, is that right, is that what I wanted to do?
So let's not prime, and where that little prime came from, apologies for that, is equal f of t, equals the f of t.
Now, fortunately for us, this fundamental matrix, remember, I started off by saying, let's suppose we do have a solution set, and the round skin, or the determinant of that, could not be zero, therefore, it is a non-singular matrix.
So, I have more than just the whole zero solution set, so, that means I can get the inverse of this, and if I multiply the inverse out by both sides, the inverse of this matrix times itself, well, nothing remains, so I have the u prime of t, situation says i, but anyway.
Okay, and then the inverse, and then the inverse, negative 1 of t, f of t, on both sides, and very eloquently, if I take the derivative, the integral of this side, I'm going to be left with the u of t, equals the integral of the inverse of the fundamental matrix, times the f of t dt.
And there I have the u of t, and there I have the u of t, and there I have the u of t, but I remember what my x of p was, was this, my x of p was that, so, the x of p, there we have it, is going to be phi of t, times the integral of the inverse, phi of f of t dt.
And there we have an equation, and there we have an equation, beautiful, for the particular solution, and all I have to remember, is that, x equals x, the complementary set, plus, that set, in other words, x is going to be,
x of c, and that is actually there, that is phi of t, times c, and then I'm going to have plus, plus this, phi of t, times the integral of the inverse, of t, f of t dt, I'm sure you can't see that anymore.
So, I have this whole solution, just for x, and that is the variation of parameters, just developing this, very beautiful, equation for the particular solution set,
it's the fundamental matrix, times the integral of the inverse, of the fundamental matrix, times the f of t, which, in an original problem, would be, x of prime equals,
because I have it, x plus the f of t, which makes it, f of t does not equal to zero matrix, column matrix, that means, it's non-homogeneous,
so just times it, f of t dt, and all you have to know, is how to get the, how to multiply these matrices with each other,
and there was a specific reason, why we did the product rule, that way around, so that we could develop, this equation for the u of t,
and if we do multiply these out, that it is, it is allowed, it is a matrix multiplication, that is allowed, by the size of the matrices,
you multiply it by the fundamental set, and you get the x of p, just to remember then, to add it to the complementary set,
which we know now how to do, and that is a method, that works, for us, many more instances,
or much more useful, I should say, than the undetermined coefficients.
you
