Now we've derived a method of using
variation of parameters for a set of
differential equations. Let's work
through an example though that will make
things abundantly clear and we can use
the beauty of that equation to solve
this problem. Here's my square matrix A,
x and it's not homogeneous. I have this
column vector f of t, column matrix f of t.
I still need to remember that my set of
solutions is going to be this x of c, x sub c, x sub t, my
complementary and my particular solution.
First of all I've got to do my
complementary set of solutions. We're going
to set f of t equal to zero, in other words
make this a homogeneous equation and we're
going to still use the method of getting
eigenvalues and eigenvectors. So I'm going
to get this new matrix A minus lambda i. So
what is that going to be? Negative 3,
negative lambda. 1, 2, and negative 4 minus
lambda. And I wanted to set the
determinant of that equal to zero.
In other words I'm going to have negative
3 minus lambda and negative 4 minus lambda.
And so those two minus these two and I set
that equal to zero. Now I warn you these
are long problems. It will take you quite a
few minutes to do and I'll see if we need
to break the video down. Anyway so that's going
to be a 12. That's going to be a plus. That's
going to be 7 lambda plus lambda squared
minus 2 equals zero. And that looks to me
as if that's 10. So it's lambda squared
7, 5 times 2. So it looks like lambda sub
1 equals negative 2. And lambda sub 2 is
going to equal negative 5. Those seem to be the
2. Yeah I think let's the board is definitely
not going to be big enough. So let's just
do that. Let's do a minus a minus a
lambda sub 1 lambda sub 1i. And what is that
going to be? Well let's put that in negative
2 for instance. So that's going to be a negative
1 negative 3 minus negative 2. And where are we?
there. And then a 1. And here we have a 2 and
negative 4 minus negative 2 leaves me with a
negative 2 there. So we have that. And I have
to multiply this by k sub 1. So we're going to
have a negative 1 and 1 and 2 and negative 2. And I
multiply this by a case of 1 and a case of 2. In other
words, you can clearly see the k sub 1 is going to be
equal to k sub 2. In other words, k sub 1 is going to
equal this matrix 1, 1. 1, 1. Negative k sub 1 is
2. This multiplication is negative k sub 1 plus k sub 2.
And that is going to equal the 0 vector here. Or 2 times
k sub 1 minus 2 times k sub 2. Exactly the same thing.
So that is going to be my k sub 1. Let's do a minus
lambda sub 2i. I'm just skipping through these things
easily. You should know how to do them by now. So that is
going to be the negative 5. So 3. That's going to equal
2. That's going to equal 1. That's going to equal 2. And of
course, that's going to equal 1. And I have to multiply this by a
k sub 2. And we'll call that k sub 3 and k sub 4. If I do this
multiplication, I see that 2 times k sub 1 plus k sub 2. And that's
going to equal 0. And the same for this. It's going to be
exactly the same. Max sub 1 and sub 2, sorry there. 3 and 4 we
made them. 3 and 4. You can do this in whichever way
suit your working. So in other words, I see I'm going to have that k sub 4 equals
negative 2 times k sub 3. If I let k sub 1 equal 1, I'm going to
have the fact that k sub 2 is going to equal, k sub 2 will equal,
if I put a 1 in there, was that correct? 2 and 1, 2 and 1 equals negative.
So if I put a k sub 3 of 1 in there, I'm going to get negative 2.
So there we go. So I have k sub 1 and I have k sub 2.
And I therefore have my complementary set. And that is going to simply equal
x is then going to be c sub 1. And we have k sub 1.
k sub 1. So that's complementary set. k sub 1 e to the power lambda sub 1 t.
Plus we can have a c sub 2 k sub 2 e to the power lambda sub 2 t.
Get more chalk. In other words, my complementary set is going to equal.
Now we've got to develop this fundamental matrix from this. So this is the only new part.
So let's have c sub 1 and then we're going to have k sub 1 as 1 1 times that.
Which is, well let me write that out. It's 1 1 e to the power negative 2 t.
Plus c sub 2. What was that? 1 negative 2 e to the power negative 5 t.
And another way I could write this is the following. That's c sub 1.
And it's e to the power negative 2 e to the power negative 2 t plus c sub 2.
And we're going to have e to the power negative 5 t and negative 2 e to the power negative 5 t.
In other words, I can write my fundamental set. In other words, I can write my fundamental set.
Remember that's x sub 1 and that's x sub 2. In other words, my fund, my, my, my x sub c here is going to be e to the power negative 2 t.
Uh, e to the power negative 5 t. Uh, e to the power negative 5 t. Uh, negative 2 e to the power negative 5 t.
Times c. And my, my, my column vector c is c sub 1 and c sub 2. If I do this multiplication,
then I get back to this, which is the same as that, which is where we get that from. In other words,
my fundamental set in t equals e to the power negative 2 t, e to the power negative 2 t, uh, e to the power negative 5 t,
minus 2 e to the power negative 5 t. There is my fundamental set. So I developed that. I get that from
my fundamental matrix, I should say, from x sub 1 and x sub 2. And remember x sub 1 and x sub 2 is this
k sub 1 times e to the power lambda sub 1 t. And x sub 2 is k sub 2 times e to the power lambda sub 2 t.
So that's easy. Now I have this. I think I'll stop the video here. We'll clean the board.
We'll clean the board and we'll get the particular solution from this.
Now that we have our fundamental matrix, let's get the inverse of the inverse of the fundamental matrix.
So how do I do that? Well, it's 1 over the determinant. So 1 over this times that.
So here I have negative 2 e to the power negative 7 t minus this is e to the power negative 7 t.
And what do I do? I swap these two around. So that becomes negative 2 e to the power negative 5 t.
This becomes e to the power negative 2 t. And I put two negatives there. So that's negative e to the power
negative 5 t and negative e to the power negative 2 t. What is this? This becomes negative 3.
So if I do that, that's negative 3 e to the power negative 7 t. So I have that the inverse of my fundamental matrix is going to equal what? This.
So that's two thirds. So that's two thirds. Two thirds e to the power. So negative 5 plus 7. That's 2. So that's 2 t.
Here I'm going to have a third. Here I'm going to have a third e to the power negative 7, 5. That's 2 t as well.
And is that correct? And is that correct? Yeah. And then here we're going to have another third e to the power 7 and 2. That's 5 t.
And there is my inverse. Now I have to multiply this by the f of t. So let's just give ourselves some space here.
Let's just give us some space here. So I've got to multiply that by the f of t. What was the f of t? That was 3 t and e to the power negative t.
So I've got to do this. So I've got to do this. 2 by 2 by 2 by 1. So I'm going to be left with a 2 by 1 matrix.
So this is where the mistakes come in. So this times that plus this times that.
3 by 1 by 1 times that. So that's going to be 2 t.
E to the power 2 t.
E to the power 2 t plus.
This times that. That is a third.
And e to the power t.
Third. And that's e to the power t.
So it's that one times that one and that one times that one.
And then these two.
3 and that. 3 cancels out.
It's e to the power 5 t.
That one and that one.
Plus this one and this one.
So that's going to be negative a third.
E to the power 5.
Negative 4. That's 4 t.
So that is my 2 by 1 matrix.
That is my 2 by 1 matrix.
And now what I have to do is to integrate that.
I have to get the integral of that.
Okay.
And here's the other mu.
Well, let's leave that.
5 t.
So I have to get the integral of this.
The integral of this.
D t.
So how do I do that?
Well, it is really not a problem.
You just do
this row
and this row
and you're going to get
two answers.
You're going to get a
2 by 1 matrix as well.
Now here
we'll have to use
the product rule.
That'll be easy.
Product rule
and that one will be easy.
Let's do that.
Let's just get some chalk.
Let's go for that.
So 2t
I think what I'll do here
Yeah, let's run through that.
2t
So what are you going to do
with the product rule?
And remember
the whole equation here is
we also just have to
multiply it by this
and that is going to be
x of p.
Remember that was our
equation for x of p.
This is the multiplication
of the inverse
of the fundamental matrix
times the f of t
which was there.
Okay, so what are we going to do?
Let's just do some side work here.
Let's make u equal to 2t
that means v prime
is e to the power
2t
which means u prime is 2
and that means v was going to be
a half e to the power 2t.
So I'm going to have uv
so that's that
so that's t e to the power 2t
minus the integral of
u prime
times that
2 times a half
nothing is left
that's e to the power 2t dt
so here we're going to have left
t e to the power 2t
minus it looks like a half
minus a half
e to the power 2t
so all I did
was just integrated this
on its own
so what am I left
over there?
Let's write that
and then I still have to remember
to integrate that as well
and the integral of this
is just going to be
plus a third
plus a third
e to the power t
so what do we have left here?
so x sub p
equals the fundamental matrix
times I've got the first bit
as
I've got the first bit there
it's t
e to the power 2t
minus a half
minus a half
e to the power 2t
and plus a third
e to the power t
e to the power t
so that's the first bit I have
and now I just need the second bit
let's do that one
so now we just integrate this
so integral with the matrix here
a 2 by 1 matrix
just do the 1
there's your 1 answer
1 row
and then do the second row
nothing other than this
here again
we'll have to use the product tool
let's just remind ourselves
so I'm going to select
u being t
there's various ways
to do the product tool
this is my way
and this is e to the power 5t
which means u prime
is going to equal this 1
that means v was a fifth
e to the power 5t
and then for the product tool
we have uv
so that's going to be a fifth
t
e to the power 5t
minus the integral of u prime v
I can bring the 5
a fifth out
e to the power 5t
and then I must just remember
to
just to add the integral of that one
which is going to be negative
so that's dt
negative
that is going to be 12
e to the power 4t
1 over 12
e to the power 4t
so I've done this product tool
and that one
now we still just have to do
this integration
so that's going to end up being
a fifth
t
e to the power 5
e to the power 5t
now the integral of this
now the integral of this is going to be
negative 1 over 25
negative 1 over 25
e to the power 5t
what's that one?
and minus
1 over 12
e to the power 4t
so I have my 2 by 1 matrix there
so it's actually quite easy to integrate this
now I just have to do this multiplication
this one
times that one
so this is a 2 by 2 matrix
this is a 2 by 1 matrix
so remember
multiplication
do not commute
so I've got to do it in this order
so I've got to multiply this matrix
by that
and this is going to make for a very long video
so I'm going to stop there
and that is just going to give you the x of p
x of p is then going to be that
but remember
we still need
the fundamental matrix
times c
plus then
this
answer there
to have the full answer
remember this was how we got it
this was our
our homogeneous
complementary set of solutions
and now we just have to do this multiplication
to do that
remember
so this was just a multiplication of the inverse of the fundamental matrix times the f of t
times the f of t
and I integrate that just row by row
so that I can get two rows of answers
nothing more difficult than that
