There are many ways to start off a chapter on a diseased organ system in surgery.
What I'd like to do here is just put in front of you the patient that you are going to see with acute appendicitis.
Now most experienced surgeons would tell you the appendix does not read the textbook.
By that we mean there is a set of classical symptoms and signs but many patients don't present this way.
First of all though let's look at the classical patient.
First of all he or she will tell you that they had some periombalical discomfort in the middle of their abdomen
and that developed into a bit of a pain and that pain spread to the right iliac fossa.
So pain is most important in these patients.
They'll have a bit of loss of appetite which we call anorexia.
They'll be nauseated, bit of constipation and later fever might even develop but nothing more than about 38.5 degrees.
On clinical examination they'll be most tender over McBurnie's point which is in the right iliac fossa.
Now bar any other further work up you need specifically for anesthetics you might as well book the operating room and take out this appendix.
Why though do most patients present in this fashion?
Well it's got to do with some applied anatomy.
You'll see the vermiform appendix there.
Blind ending, cylindrical, sits at the base of the cecum.
Where the three tenia coli come together.
Remember those are the longitudinal muscle layers of the colon.
It has a diameter of about 6 mm and can be anything from 2 cm up to more than 20 cm.
It's a true diverticulum of the colon and that means it contains all the layers of the colon as opposed to diverticulosis where those diverticuli contain only mucosa.
Most commonly it sits anywhere on the inferior border of the terminal ilium but can sit anterior or posterior to the terminal ilium.
It can sit in the right pericolic gutter all the way up to the gall blood and liver.
It can sit in a retrocecal or retrocolic position or even point down into the pelvis.
Now it's innervated by visceral nerves.
Now remember this part of the bowel is the embryological midgut.
So any kind of pain stimulation here due to the inflammation you're only going to feel in the middle of your abdomen around the umbilicus.
Now as the pain and inflammation spreads it's going to touch the overlying parietal peritoneum.
In other words that which covers the inside of the abdominal wall.
And then you'll be able to localize that pain.
And that is where you'll get pain in different areas depending on where the appendix is situated.
Also think about local inflammation in this area.
It's going to cause a bit of localized ileus.
Now this localized ileus is going to give you the nausea, the constipation and feeling a bit off.
But what if it points down into the pelvis?
Well it can actually touch the rectum.
And in these cases you can get irritation of the rectum and contraction of the rectum.
And that will lead to the patients with diarrhea.
So that is not part of the classical picture.
So really depending on where the appendix is situated you can get a different clinical picture.
It is not part of the catheter海 steroids to leave.
It is not part of the individual also trying to install anything these guys that it provides.
I have so much knowledge.
Also look there for someinctions.
If the whole thing is lovely, if you'd like them to leave otherCollain units no matter.
