In the next section we're going to look some more at the anatomy of the appendix and also the physiology.
Now in the previous section we looked at the size and the shape of the appendix.
We noted that it was at the base of the cecum where the tinea coli come together.
And that is about 6 mm in diameter, anything from about 2 to over 20 cm.
We also looked at the position to which end the tip points and how that would affect the clinical picture.
And we also looked at the nerve supply.
We do note that the appendix has a visceral nerve supply which enters the spinal column at about the level of T10.
That's around the umbilicus.
So initially patients would experience mid-abdominal pain around the umbilicus when the appendix is infected.
And once the somatic nerves become affected, those that come from the intercostal nerves
and also from the spinal cord itself and supplies the skin, the muscle and the parietal peritoneum,
once that gets inflamed as well, you localize the pain to that spot as you would touch on the skin.
Now looking at the arterial supply, the appendix is supplied by the appendiceal artery.
Now from the aorta, you get the superior mesenteric artery, which terminates in the ileocolic branch.
From there, there is usually some form of colic artery or arteries.
And then from that, the appendiceal artery.
In most cases, this is an end artery.
In other words, only one artery supplies the appendix.
And the clinical importance of this is the fact that through inflammation or infection, there is some occlusion of this artery through thrombosis.
Necrosis will ensue with gangrene and eventually perforation of that appendix.
Now, some people do have accessory arteries from any way of this branching system of the ileocolic part of the superior mesenteric artery.
You can have accessory arteries that might supply, for instance, the proximal fourth of the appendix
with another main artery supplying the distal three quarters.
It was certainly found in research done in some parts of Africa where there seems to be some form of resistance against the appendicitis.
Where it was found that there is a high incidence of accessory arteries supplying, more than one artery supplying the appendix.
And that means through this system of another artery or another artery's blood can continue to flow to the appendix, thereby keeping the infection at bay
or at least avoiding the gangrene and perforation that might follow from that.
As far as the venous drainage is concerned, venous drainage is to the portal system, via the portal vein and into the liver.
And this is where both malignant cells, but more importantly and more commonly, infection can spread.
Now, in older days, before modern anesthetic and before modern surgery and before antibiotics,
there was a much higher incidence of portal sepsis from specifically appendicitis
and even the formation of liver abscesses as organisms spread via the venous drainage system through the portal system into the liver.
Of course, we don't see that too often anymore.
With the lymphatics, they follow the arterial supply.
Important that is also how infection might spread systemically.
And also how cancer cells might metastasize.
Another problem is this rich supply of lymphatics and lymph nodes in the mesentery around the terminal ileum.
Now, any kind of systemic infection, whether that be a simple, uncomplicated upper airway infection,
might lead to some systemic inflammatory response.
And the lymph nodes surrounding the terminal ileum and area of the penix might become hypertrophied,
might become swollen and painful, and this might present the exact same way as acute appendicitis.
Usually, though, these patients have a history of previous infection or recent infection,
upper airway infection most of the time.
They might have either a temperature much higher than 38.5 or a normal temperature.
Their anorexia is not as pronounced as a patient with appendicitis
and their white cell count might be normal, especially the neutrophil count.
Now, as far as the physiology of the appendix is concerned,
it does contain T and B lymphocytes in the mucosa and submucosa,
and we do think it forms part of the gut-associated lymphoid tissue system
where it presents, in fact, organisms via dendritic cells to the lymphoid system,
to the T cells to produce antibodies and thereby set in motion the whole inflammatory response
or indeed keeping infection at bay as far as the distal gut is concerned.
