Let's just move on. That button up there will just give you a new page so you can just clear the whole screen.
Let's just do y equals x to the power 2. So we know that's a parabola.
Let's add a new expression and we call that y equals x to the power 3.
And we see what that does. Remember if you wanted to play around with it, let's just add a new expression.
I can say y equals ax and then shift caret for my power. Let's make it to the power 3.
Again, if I click on the slider, I can see what happens if I let a increase in size, if I let it decrease in size, if I make it become negative.
Again, I can click on these. Let's make it go from, make it only go from 0 to 1.
So we have this large step size. So if we slide across the slider, it doesn't do much.
See 0, y equals 0, just a straight line there. And as it gets larger and larger, just see what happens to it.
So you can type in any polynomial function you want here. Let's let's have y equals x to the power 3.
I move to the right just to get away from the power by just hitting the right cursor key.
Let's make it plus x to the power 2. And now you can see what happens plus x. See what happens there.
Now we can zoom in a bit just to see what the differences are between all of these functions.
And the reason why we're doing these videos, I want to remind you, is we want to get used to what these would look like.
In the end, if you play around with these often enough and long enough, you'll notice if you look at an equation,
for instance there, you should in your mind know immediately what or not exactly, but what form, what shape the curve is going to take.
Because what's going to happen in biology, you're going to be able to plot certain points.
And when you look at it, it will remind you of a certain function if you connect all these dots.
If you connect all these dots, it will remind you of a certain function.
And you can relay that to a mathematical function.
And it's, it's good if you have good knowledge of what these various ones, these various graphs look like.
And what, what mathematical functions they represent, it certainly would help you.
I'm going to carry on in this video. Otherwise we'll make a lot of videos just, just looking at various graphs.
So let's just carry on. Let's have y equals eight times the sine of bx plus c inside there.
So let's have a look at that. So let's just put a equals one.
Let's have b equals one. And let's just have c equals zero.
You can just click there, backspace zero. So that's our familiar sine curve.
Let's just start with that. We can see, well, just very quickly, playing with c means we're just shifting it on the x axis.
See what happens if you drag that up and down. Let's leave, leave that at zero.
Let's see what effect a will have. A just changes the amplitude.
And the amplitude is from this baseline to the maximum deflection, either upper there or down there.
That will represent, see it's, it's almost at a level of five here, almost at a level of five, because it's 4.84 there.
So just playing around with this, that changes our amplitude.
Let's try and leave it at about two there. What does the b do?
Oh, if I increase b, I can see I'm shortening the wavelength.
Now remember the wavelength would be from there. We go up, down until we do that same upper.
So up till there. That would be the length on the x axis of one wavelength.
So we see if we increase, say increase b, we're going to shorten the wavelength and we're going to make the wavelength longer.
If I go back up here and I change my x axis variables to, to pi, that's better there.
And if I play with b now, I can see that it is pi. The wavelength is pi. The wavelength is pi values on the x axis long.
And I can just play with it. There we have half pi with a b of four, etc.
So you can very quickly see also, if you go negative, you can see what happens when you do go in the negative direction.
And if we just add another expression here, y equals just this very simply, let's just make the cosine of x.
That is what we will have there. I just want to clear all of this to show you one more.
Let's call it not y, but the f of x. And we call that the sine of x.
If I add a new expression and I say I want the d over dx of, and I put in brackets, the f of x.
What it's going to give me is immediately, I've already defined the f of x in equation one.
So it's going to give me the first derivative of the sine of x, which is the cosine of x, which you can see clearly here in blue, that is the cosine of x.
So you can do certain things to a function that you've already, a function that you've already assigned there, the f of x.
You can have a new function in the g of x and the h of x and you can do certain things to them.
That's not the point of these first videos, though.
I want to make you familiar with these different types of functions and the graphs and what functions they represent.
Another common one we're always going to deal with is exponential growth e to the power x.
And many times, say, for instance, with bacterial growth, you'll see if you plot values of x versus y.
So x might represent time and y might represent y might represent the number of organisms there are.
You'll see there's x, what we call exponential growth.
So anytime you see something like this, if you plot, plot, plot, plot, and your graph looks something like this, remember this function.
Other functions that you might deal with that's also in the same fashion is not only Euler's number e, but also, for instance, 2 to the power x.
You'll note that that has a similar kind of growth pattern.
So these are the functions that we really have to be familiar with.
And what we can do is we can put in an A there.
We can put in a B there.
And we should be able, I see it doesn't want that for that to happen right now.
Let's just make it try a new function or let's just clear this function.
Let's clear this function as well.
Let's start a new one.
Y equals A x to the power.
Let's make it A times A to the power B x.
And now we can really play around.
If we make A two, one, two, that's what we had before, exactly what we had before.
Now we can see what happens if we increase B and if we decrease B.
And we might have an organism that doesn't grow that fast and it's out here as far as its exponential growth is concerned.
It's way out here.
And immediately we would know that that means we're getting, we're getting smaller and smaller and smaller values of B to get this graph to lie there.
That will just be Y equals A and A is two at the moment.
And we'll see what negative does.
So if you play around with these and I do encourage you, you'll very quickly become familiar with what these graphs might represent.
