Now very quickly the last powerful function I want to show you is let's add a table here.
So let's just start with a function. We're going to call it y equals mx plus c. And we can play
around with all of those and it's the set y equals c equal to zero. So it's a straight line. And let's
not call it y. Let's call it the f of x. So I've just gone in there. I shouldn't do that. f of x.
f of x equals that. So let's say for instance I do some experiment and I get the following values
and I start entering them there. And let's say I did five. Yeah, let's have five for instance values
that I looked at. So I'm just going down on my arrow then adding twos and then I just keep hitting enter
it will auto increment. It will guess at what the best auto increment is. And say for instance here
I did my experiment and I get 0.9. I can plot it there. The next one I got 2.2. Then I got
2.8. And then I had a let's say a 4.5. You can see you can see what I'm trying to do. And then let's
say I had a 5.6. So that was all the values there. Now let's have a look at this. I can just click
there in an empty spot next to it. And let's have the f of click there and just write the f of x.
Just doesn't want to do it for me. The f of x. And what it will do now is it will use this f of x
as it stands now. It stands at m1x plus 0. It stands there. And it shows me these points now here
in I can see they are in orange. And I can see if I use this mathematical model mx plus c which now
stands at x plus 0. If I use that that will be on this line and I can see for instance there's a point
and there's a point. How far apart my model is because I've used this function now as a model to
predict what future values. If I did another experiment and I use some concentration. So for
instance of 6. My answer would have been 6. So I can also now predict if I used concentration of 0.
I was going to get some reaction of 0 on the y axis. I can predict what is going to what is going to
happen from this model. I can also add to this. Let's add another one here. And we're going to call
it y minus the f of x. So I just call it y minus the f of x. And that plots these at the bottom
versus the x axis. So this is x and that. So I can see how there I was almost on the dot. There it
was a bit over, a bit under, a bit over, a bit under. Depending if I say fx minus y. I should probably
have said fx minus y to make more sense. But that would be the difference between. And what I can now
do is start playing with this. And if I just tweak my model a little bit. If I just tweak my model a
little bit. I can get those closer to this to the y equals zero line. And that would represent for me
the smallest difference. The smallest difference between these. And later on, much later on, we're going to
see how we can construct a graph by using this, this distance between this point and the y axis. If I
square that distance and I add all of them up, I'm trying to minimize those lengths. And that will give
me the best fit for my model. My model might be, might be better if I use 1.02. I might get,
I might get a better, I might get a better value. I might get a better predictive
function representing the findings that I get from my experiment.
