So yesterday we spoke about the complications of gallstones.
Now, one of the most common complications that we would see in the Q-Care Surgery Unit
here at Grytiskir Hospital is of course acute cholecystitis.
That is where the stone usually gets lodged, where the gallbladder goes over into the cystic
duct.
It is unlike biliary colic in that that stone really stays there and inflammation starts
sitting in.
The stone is stuck there, you start getting edema of the wall of the gallbladder itself
and with that engorgement you get a little bit of venous congestion as well.
You get infiltration of your immune cells and you get patchy necrosis even as the blood struggles
to flow properly through that area.
So that's acute inflammation.
About 50 to 75% of cases will actually have bacterial overgrowth, remember that.
And then most of the time we'll see gram-negative bacilli although we do see some streptococcus
fecalus at times in certain circumstances.
So that's the definition really.
It's just that gallstone getting stuck there is the most common cause of it of course.
We call it properly, and you must do too, calculus cholecystitis, acute calculus cholecystitis.
Because of course you get the rare acalculus and that's not what we're talking about.
And so it's a gallstone cholecystitis, acute biliary cholecystitis, acute gallstone cholecystitis.
Now who are the people that you should look out for?
So imagine you are confronted with this question in the exam, you might be given a clinical scenario
or you might just be asked to talk about acute cholecystitis.
Depending on what system your medical education is all about.
So if you were just to talk freely about acute cholecystitis.
First of all, what patient should you look out for?
Well there's definitely with us at least a preponderance to the female population.
They're usually in the middle ages slightly younger, although we see all age ranges I must say of acute cholecystitis from early 20s right until our elderly population.
So we really see it in a whole spectrum of ages.
Some of the patients are slightly overweight, I'm not going to put this down as a disease of obesity really.
We see patients with absolutely normal weight and see patients with slight overweight.
So it's not very clear why some people will then develop gallstones and then cholecystitis.
Remember the vast majority of people with gallstones, as we discussed yesterday, they get an ultrasound and we pick up these gallstones.
But those are totally asymptomatic or we pick up many asymptomatic gallstones these days for ultrasounds for other reasons.
And so why some of them would go on to develop biliary colic and then acute cholecystitis we don't know.
So from biliary colic obviously you do get the cholecystitis and the incidence is about I would say 2% more per year.
So if you have a slightly younger patient with gallstones, the chances of getting acute cholecystitis are much higher
because still probably a long time to live.
And the older population, you know, with that sort of incidence per year, perhaps not.
So that's the patient population that we're really looking out for.
So what do these patients present with?
Well they've got pain in their right upper quadrant, some in their epigastrium, some towards the back, some towards the shoulder.
So just watch out. It's not always specific. And remember the elderly, the diabetics, immunocompromised patients,
they might not have a lot of symptoms at all. But let's stick to the normal.
You're going to have right upper quadrant pain, epigastric pain.
And that pain persists for a couple of, not just a couple of hours, like the biliary colic and then disappears.
It really lasts for hours and then into days even before they really come to us.
So they've got this pain. They're nauseous with it or nauseated with it.
And they feel like vomiting as well. So really feel ill when you take their temperature.
Of course the temperature is elevated. The majority of the time they have a bit of a tachycardia.
They're a bit dehydrated because they really don't feel like eating.
And the first thing we would do for them is a symptomatic relief and putting up an intravenous line.
You've got to check the electrolytes and then tailor your intravenous fluids.
And you've got to let them take fluids orally. But an intravenous line and some analgesia.
They really need some good proper analgesia.
The blood test that we do, we would do a full blood count.
And you are going to see a raised white cell count. And the majority of that's going to be neutrophils.
And you might see a bit of raised urea on your urean electrolytes as the patients are slightly dehydrated.
And then on the liver function tests, you might see nothing.
We see a lot of patients with normal liver functions.
But some of them will have their cellular enzymes raised.
Some of them will have their alkaline phosphatase raised.
And the bilirubin must be normal.
Once the bilirubin goes up, we're talking extrapatic biliary obstruction.
So that should really be normal.
And we confirm the diagnosis in our hands at least just with an ultrasound.
Now when you examine these patients, you can elicit a Murphy sign.
Remember they'll be tender in their right upper quadrant.
So you put your hand underneath the ribcage on the right hand side and ask them to slowly breathe in.
As you breathe in, your diaphragm moves down, the liver moves down, pushes the gallbladder down.
And it pushes that gallbladder, that tendon gallbladder into your hand.
And that causes pain. And they stop.
Now on the ultrasound, you get an ultrasonic Murphy sign because the probe can see where the gallbladder is
and press exactly on that. So that's a very good one.
So on the ultrasound, we're going to see stones, the acoustic shadow of those stones.
We're going to see thickening of the wall of the gallbladder.
We might even see some pericolecystic fluid.
So that's how we make our diagnosis.
Now in some areas, they also do a HIDAS scan.
That's from nuclear medicine.
Remember that a normal cystic duct will then show up.
The cystic duct is not obstructed by the stone or cholecystitis.
The whole gallbladder will fill up nicely on the HIDAS scan.
If not, then you know there's an obstruction and you can also diagnose acute cholecystitis.
Remember, patients who haven't eaten for a while, we might get some false results
and the patients who haven't eaten in a while.
So an intensive care unit, that doesn't really work.
So how do we treat these patients?
Then, once confirmed, remember they've got their IV line, they've got their analgesia,
we add antibiotics for them.
Now, the mainstay of therapy is the surgeon.
They've got to go for a cholecystectomy.
The vast majority of them, if all else is fine, no recent heart attack or anything else wrong.
I mean, if at all possible, we do a cholecystectomy.
And we try to do a cholecystectomy as soon as possible.
Now, within about three days to a week, that's a very bad surgical period.
Remember, the inflammation is at its worst and your complication rate is definitely going to be slightly higher.
Although there are people who are reporting that the incidence of complications are not higher.
In our circumstances, these patients come in late and our theatres are overbooked.
So it's very difficult to do a cholecystectomy, a laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the acute stage.
So we usually treat them with antibiotics.
And until they get better, send them home and bring them back for an elective procedure six weeks later.
But the ideal would be a patient comes in early and they have their cholecystectomy immediately.
Now, for those patients who are too late, we treat them with antibiotics and they don't get better.
For them, we put in a percutaneous cholecystostomy tube.
It's sort of a new thing.
We don't exactly know what the place of it is, how long to keep it in, what to do with it afterwards.
And so we are busy with a research project in my research unit, just looking at what happens to these patients with their percutaneous drains.
We also put the percutaneous drains in the gallbladder, of course, for the patients who are so ill and they have other comorbidities and they cannot go to theatre.
So in a nutshell, that is acute calculus cholecystitis.
Our Для rise of diabetes cholecystitis.
The
