So this episode of Let's Talk Surgery comes to you from a very sweaty me inside of a car.
So why inside of a car? Because the wind's blowing outside and it's very, very noisy.
Why sweaty and inside the car? First of all, don't worry that I'm sweating inside the car.
I'm a surgeon in academic practice, so I'm poor and this is not a very good car.
And number two is there's a waterproof cover on this side.
So every time after I run, you know, I put it on so I don't damage the car.
Now I combine really my passions of making educational resources and jogging right here.
After work, almost every day, if at all possible, I come to run.
My favourite place is in Newlands Forest, which is, if you don't know, in Cape Town at the back of Table Mountain.
Fantastic forest, fantastic place to run in.
And if you're ever here, make the effort, come here or join me on your own.
So I always encourage people, if you're in health care, if you're a student, it doesn't matter.
You know, your own fitness, your own health is very important.
So I always encourage that.
And I really take that to the extreme.
And I probably don't know, but too much.
Anyway, so that's the context.
And, you know, I try not to make these things inside of a lecture hall.
Maybe if you are like me, I hate, you know, listening to someone inside of a lecture hall.
And I hate being on the stage, lecturing.
I don't think really that's that.
That is how we learn stuff.
So here on Let's Talk Surgery, it's very informal.
So, as I said, today you're going to come, I come to you from inside my car after a very fantastic run.
That was five minutes below my target time.
And which my target time is one hour eight minutes, by the way.
So this was one hour three minutes.
So actually quite a good run.
So in today's episode, part one of acute appendicitis.
And I really want to bring in a bit of the anatomy here.
And students ask me, why the anatomy?
Why do we have to review the anatomy?
Well, the anatomy has a lot to do, obviously, with the actual surgery.
If you don't know the anatomy, you're going to struggle a bit.
And many of us have had the experience of struggling to find the appendix at times.
Even experienced people.
And perhaps more importantly, are the symptoms and signs of acute appendicitis.
So we know where the vermiform appendix is.
If I can remind you, remember it's at the base of the cecum, about two centimeters below the iliocecum valve.
And that's where the three tenea coli come together at the base here of, near the base of the cecum.
And that thing goes down into the appendix.
This appendix is anywhere from two centimeters to more than 20 centimeters long.
And you know that it can lie in a variety of anatomical places.
I'll put a link down below to a picture that shows you where this appendix can lie.
And the appendix, of course, is part of the mid-gut.
So in the embryo, it forms in the distal part of the mid-gut.
Doing rotation, it goes posterior into the right-hand side.
And can sit in this retroperitoneal area.
Which, if it goes into, you know, into the retrocecal space, it can really alter the symptoms.
So the anatomical position of it can really alter the system, the symptoms and signs.
As part of, remember, it being, as part of the mid-gut, remember it gets a visceral nerve supply.
That means when it becomes inflamed and then infected, the pain is going to center around the mid-abdomen.
Because the visceral neural sensation is not very specific as to where it is.
If that inflammation and infection spreads to the parietal peritoneum, you get somatic nervous system involvement.
And that's where you get the pain spread to localize to the right-hand side.
Now we know that that doesn't always happen because of this variety of anatomical positions.
Always remember that if you have a retrocecal appendix, it might not touch the anterior lateral surface of the parietal peritoneum.
And then you're not going to get this movement of pain towards the right-hand side.
Also because of this anatomical variation, you know, you might get either diarrhea or constipation.
And if it really lies just behind or below the distal ileum, then you might have a bit of paralytic ileus in that area.
And these patients might have a bit of constipation.
Of course, if it goes down towards the rectum, it might irritate the rectum.
And these patients can have diarrhea.
Because this is gastrointestinal disease, most of the people will have some gastrointestinal symptoms,
such as loss of appetite and nausea and even vomiting.
And we see that in the history of many of the patients.
So together with pain and this anatomy of the appendix, you're going to get a variety of symptoms and signs.
And in the right ileic fossa, remember McBurnie's point, if you draw a line from the umbilicus,
down towards the anterior superior ileic spine, it's about two-thirds of the way down.
That is where we find the base of the appendix.
Remember in little children, there's a relative, if you just do the relation between the opening of the appendix
and then the lumen of the appendix, that ratio is a bit more than an adult's.
So it doesn't really obstruct.
And remember, we think that obstruction is the cause of appendicitis in the majority of cases.
Remember the appendix lumen, that's a blind ending lumen.
If there's any kind of obstruction, you're going to get a proliferation of bacteria.
We're going to get engorgement of the lymphatic vessels, of the blood vessels, venous engorgement.
You're going to get inflammation.
We're going to get neutrophils going into the area, breaking of the surface, invasion of bacteria.
And this just becomes a vicious cycle.
And that is the definition of appendicitis, remember.
Now, we see it, we are an adult unit, so we would only see patients, say, from the age of about 14
that come to our ward.
If they're younger than that, they do go to the pediatric surgical unit.
And we see them until the extremes of age, you know, at the end, 80s and 90s, we see them.
The vast majority of them are in early adulthood, though.
Perhaps we have, that's when the lymphatic nodules are at their maximum.
And perhaps that is when we see most of the obstructions, although that's not the only cause.
Fecoliths, of course, can obstruct.
And in many instances when we operate, we find a fecalith, a very hard piece of stool,
but that's not always, unfortunately, not always the case.
And people get appendicitis without us knowing.
So pay attention to this, to the anatomy.
That will really help you think about the symptoms and signs.
And then, of course, when it comes to the surgery,
know where McBernie's point is if you are going to do open surgery,
of course, most of the times these days we do laparoscopic surgery.
It helps us both with diagnosis and, of course, with the surgery.
So keep in mind this anatomy.
In the next video, I want to talk to you about how we try and confirm the diagnosis.
We can't always do that there isn't a specific test.
But we'll carry on this discussion of acute appendicitis.
See you next time.
