Hello there, my name is Dr. Jean Klopper and I have a problem.
Every now and again I like to have some fun with the Wolfram language.
And I saw a tweet the other day that said that the other seven planets
can fit in between the Earth and the Moon.
And I think most of us have some idea of the diameters of all the planets
and know that the Moon is, you know, just a little bit under 400,000 kilometers from Earth.
And I think, yeah, maybe they should fit in between all of those.
Of course, that was a tweet that had some information.
So yes, they do fit in.
But do they really?
So let's use the Wolfram language and explore this exciting little fun question.
So what planets fit in the space between the Earth and the Moon?
The first function I want to talk about is just the Entity function
and that allows us to get information on all sorts of data from the Wolfram server.
So I'm using the Entity function there.
The Entity that I'm interested in is Planet
and I'm specifying one of the planets Earth
and I'm assigning that to a computer variable Earth.
So if we run that, we see our Entity there, the Planet Earth.
Now this Entity has all sorts of properties.
So if we just ask for the properties of this Entity of ours
and we're going to get a list of a whole bunch of them.
There we go, age, we have alternate names, altitude, distance from Earth.
That'd be funny.
Discovery year, etc.
Look at all these different, you know, all the different information
we can get from this Entity of ours.
It's all the properties.
So let's look at two of the properties.
The first one is Rotation Period.
And now what you can do, we can do Rotation Period and Orbital Period.
There's Orbital Period.
If you hover over one of these, it actually tells you the property name.
So for Orbital Period, you'll have to type in Orbit Period.
So there's a tiny little tooltip that appears there.
It's probably very small and probably too small for you to see.
But there we go, Earth and then Rotation Period.
So if we execute that, we see it takes the Earth 23.934472 hours
to rotate about its axis.
And what about the orbit period?
And if we look at that, it takes 365.25636 days.
So certainly a lot of information about the planets
that's right at your fingertips.
So what about the diameter of all the planets?
So what I'm going to use here is just the Wolfram Alpha.
And I'm just going to write a normal sentence there,
diameter of the planets.
And remember, if you're using a Wolfram desktop or Mathematica,
there you go, Wolfram Alpha query.
So you can just start that line of code with two equal symbols
and you'll get access to Wolfram Alpha.
So let's run that.
And it's downloaded a lot of information
about the diameter of the planets.
You'll see median, highest there.
For Jupiter, of course, the smallest, the lowest diameter.
That would be for Mercury.
And Mercury is smaller, for instance, than Ganymede.
So there we go.
And I like these ratios here.
And later we might just use the graphics function
and the disk function,
and use these ratios just to plot all of these out.
So a lot of information there for you to read about the diameters of the planets.
A bunch of them there.
So let's just save all the planets as a list.
And I'm going to use the entity list function here, as you can see there.
And I'm just specifying planet now, before we used entity and then planet,
and then specified one of the planets.
We're going to just get a list of all the planets back.
But what I want to do is just delete Earth.
So I'm going to pass that as a parameter to the delete function.
And of course, Earth is planet number three.
So we're just going to delete that.
And we assign that to the computer variable planets.
So now we have Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune,
which allows us, you know, each of these entities to get at the properties of all of these.
So I'm going to use the table function here, pass all the planets,
and then I'm going to iterate over this variable i.
And what I want is the diameter.
That would be the property.
And we go from one to seven, because we now have seven planets there.
And assign that to the computer variable diameters.
And now we get a value and its unit.
So each of these are quantities with their units.
And we get, there is tiny little Mercury's diameter,
Venus, almost the size of the Earth,
quite a bit smaller, Jupiter very big, Saturn very big,
and then these gas giants at the end, Uranus and Neptune.
So we can very simply create a little bar chart of all of these.
I've given it a plot label.
And then the chart legend, so we can see what the relative diameter of these planets are.
And you can see a little Mercury, Mars there.
And of course, everyone's familiar with this.
But then what about this Earth-Moon distance?
So once again, I'm going to use Wolfram Alpha.
And we just write Earth-Moon distance and see what information Wolfram Alpha comes up with.
So there we go, the Earth-Moon distance.
And this is quite exciting.
We get all sorts of information.
First of all, we get the current results.
At the time of recording here, the Earth-Moon distance is relatively small.
And we can see the periodicity there.
At the moment, it's only 358,494 kilometers.
And some beautiful information there.
And all sorts of other information.
What we're interested in, though, is just the average distance from Earth.
And we can see it right there.
Average distance from Earth, 385,000 kilometers.
And we're going to save that value together with its unit.
So we're going to use the quantity function.
And we're going to assign that to the computer variable Earth-Moon distance.
So let's do that.
And there we have 385,000 kilometers.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going to create another bar chart.
And we're just going to put that distance right at the end of our bar chart.
And lo and behold, as we would expect, that's a much bigger distance than the diameter of the planets.
And right at the end, I've called EMD Earth-Moon distance.
So let's total all these diameters.
So the diameters, remember, are only of these seven planets.
And, of course, we can check whether that would fit in there.
Is the total of the diameters less than the Earth-Moon distance?
And you can see there, 380,200 there.
So it's just about going to fit in there.
So that's true.
But that's the average distance, remember.
So right at the moment where we're sitting at the time of this recording,
we were saying we're sitting at 358,000 kilometers,
certainly the planets are not going to fit in in that distance between the Earth and the Moon.
So it's definitely going to fit into the average distance between the two.
So let's just show this table of the image of all the planets
because I'm still after generating this simple little graphic.
So if we asked for one of the properties as the image property of these planets,
I'm just using the table function to iterate all seven of them,
you get a nice small little picture of each of the seven planets.
And there we go.
We have Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
And what I want to do now is just, as we saw before,
when we looked at information about the diameters of the planets from Wolfram Alpha,
I'm just going to look at the maximum, which is, of course, is just Jupiter.
And what I want to do now, I'm just going to prepend that,
just because of the little function that I want to create,
I'm just going to prepend my list of diameters with the value zero kilometers.
And you'll see shortly why I do that.
So now I have zero kilometers as my first one,
and then Mercury and Venus and Mars, etc.
So what I want to do now is just to create, for the function that I'm after,
I'm just going to divide every planet's diameter by Jupiter's diameter.
So we'll have a fraction of the largest, and Jupiter will then be one.
But because that will generate too small little disks for me,
when I use the graphics function, I'm just multiplying each of those by 10.
And that's going to give me a nice little size.
Now, I'm just going to create a little function,
because I want to plot on the x-axis every little planet,
or a disk representing every planet, with its relative diameter,
relative to all the other ones, in a nice little row along the x-axis.
And that means I've got to put the center of each of the disks
at a very specific point on all of the, on the x-axis.
So I'm just creating a little function, and what this function is going to do,
it is just going to go to the one that we have at the moment,
multiply it by 2, and add to that the next one.
And that's why I want to start at zero,
because if I want to put the center of the disk for Mercury
at the right point on the x-axis,
I have to make Mercury number two,
because we're going to start at zero,
zero times two, zero, plus then the first one.
So that's going to line them all up for me very nicely.
And then I'm going to call the graphics function,
and so I'm going to use a gray disk for Mercury,
and then an orange disk for, for Venus,
and a red disk for, for Mars, etc.
And then I'm putting them in these very specific x, y values.
Of course, I want them all on the x-axis,
so all the y's are going to be zero.
And the x-position is going to come from my little function
that I created there,
and then the relative diameter for Mercury,
that is going to be number two.
Remember, Mercury will now be in position two,
because we prepended that with zero.
So let's have a look at this little function.
And there it is, very neat,
and you can see the relative diameters there,
and the colors to sort of indicate which planet it is.
And yes, those seven planets are going to fit
right in between the average distance
between the Earth and the Moon.
So really easy to use the Wolfram language
just to, to play around with that, with that thought.
You know, what planets fit in between the Earth and the Moon.
And yes, people, which path we have multiplied
and the Earth is going to merit.
Look at that...
...and do thisomeränincense.
And if you have something about it,
since you've reached early,
this Earth is going to be perfect as you breathe.
And if you have something about that,
you know it looks good much for the Earth,
passions, for the Earth.
