Statistics for Healthcare, Life Sciences, Social Sciences, Using the R Language for
Statistical Computing brought to you by the School for Data Science and Computational
Thinking at Stellenbosch University.
Welcome to this course on Statistics using R. My name is Dr. Jean Klapper and I'm a
Research Fellow at the School for Data Science and Computational Thinking.
I'm the creator and instructor for many online courses, the largest of which has more than
a hundred thousand participants from all over the world.
I also have authored a textbook on statistics.
One thing is for sure, I am passionate about learning from data and about showing others
the beauty of extracting knowledge from data.
I hope that this passion shines through during this course.
I really want you to be passionate about it too.
My week is a short time in which to learn any subject.
In deciding what to put into this course, I want you to be cognizant of the audience.
We are all domain experts in our fields, or at least learning to become experts, and for
most of us there is so much data from which we can extract knowledge.
I want to leave you at the end of this week with a full understanding of the power of statistical
analysis using R.
This means that this is not an easy course.
Learning any new topic takes time and effort and practice.
As far as a computer language, a computer language is much like a spoken language.
You don't just pick up a new language and become fluent in it in one week.
This course aims to be both a reference work packed with information and also a personal
guided journey.
I have created video lectures, multiple PDF documents, practice exercises, solution sets,
and we are going to have live online sessions.
I really want to support you during the start of your journey.
There is no way that I want to leave you with some superficial, useless start.
So I need you to stick with it.
Remember there is no pressure during this week, no expectation to understand everything.
We are not aiming to have a deep conversation or of the meaning of life in Latin after this
week.
The aim is rather for you to have a full understanding of the potential of statistics and R.
I want to guide you towards a future where you can join the massive community of domain
experts employing the power of data analysis and R.
Computer languages such as R have democratized the use of data analysis.
The ability to analyze data is no longer the exclusive domain of statisticians.
It has instead become increasingly important for experts in other fields to analyze their
own data.
It is also an essential skill to be able to interpret the published literature.
It is in no one's interest to read only the introduction and conclusion sections of a published
paper.
All experts must be able to critically appraise the results of research, becoming active members
of the research community.
The community of R users is enormous and answers to R-related questions are everywhere.
Any quick search of Google will show pages and pages of links to tutorials, videos, discussion
boards and so many other resources that will answer all your questions.
You will pretty much never get stuck when you need an answer about R.
Computer language needs a program into which you type your code.
In this course we are going to make use of RStudio.
RStudio is the standard development environment for R code just as Microsoft Word or Google Docs
are for documents.
More specifically we will use RStudio Cloud.
You can sign up for a free account and use RStudio without having to install any software
in your computer.
It is completely possible for you to do so if you want to though and if you have questions
about this we will discuss it during the live sessions.
On RStudio Cloud you will find copies of the working material for this course.
There are code files, exercise files and solution files.
The course is structured around video lectures for reference and in case you do not want to
watch the video lectures there is also a set of PDF documents that you can read.
During the course you will need to watch the required video lectures and or read the documentation.
That is each morning or the evening before.
You can then attempt the set of exercise files pertaining to each lecture.
At a specific time in the afternoon we will have a live session where we work through the
exercises and discuss the related topics.
There are 15 chapters in this course and I want to tell you a little about each of them.
Chapter 1 is a short introduction and highlights the topics covered in this course.
Episode 2 introduces the R language and RStudio itself.
RStudio allows us to create the standalone R scripts that only contain code but more importantly
and very much more useful is the ability to generate R Markdown files.
Now an R Markdown file starts life as an empty page just as in the mentioned Microsoft Word
or Google Docs.
You can write normal sentences, format text, titles and subtitles and add images, videos and
do pretty much everything you would do in a Word document.
You can also write R code though.
This makes R Markdown files very powerful research documents that we can share with our collaborators
or the rest of the world for that matter.
I introduce R by starting with some simple arithmetic before introducing mathematical functions,
computer variables, collections, random values and I introduce you to enough code just
to get you going.
In Chapter 3 I talk about study types.
Pretty much most of the papers that you find in journals employ one or more combination of
study types.
It is important to know about study types as you embark on your own research.
I also talk about randomisation and the research question.
Chapter 4 I introduce some basic statistical terms and definitions.
These are important to know.
In Chapter 5 that's all about data manipulation in R. I show you how to import data into R and
explain how each value in your data set, how they are indexed and how to select specific
parts of your data for analysis.
Chapter 6 expands on Chapter 5 but instead of using base R I showcase the relatively new
paradigm in R called tidy principles.
It has pretty much become the standard approach to data analysis in R.
Chapter 7 is all about summarising your data.
I talk about all things mean, median, mode, variance, standard deviation and quantiles.
In Chapter 8 I build on these measures of central tendency and measures of dispersion
by showing you how to do comparative summary statistics where we start to compare values
between different groups.
Chapter 9 contains one of my favourite topics, data visualisation, where summary statistics
start to extract the knowledge hidden in data.
Data visualisation brings data to life.
By visualising data we extract even more of the knowledge that it hides.
It is also a great way to communicate your results with others.
Chapter 10 starts our real journey.
I explain the topics of sampling and sampling distributions along the way introducing the
famous t-distribution.
In Chapter 11 we do some parametric comparison of means.
This includes students t-test and analysis of variance.
Chapter 12 is about linear models including correlation, linear regression and logistic regression.
These techniques are some of the most often used tools in statistics.
In Chapter 13 we compare the means of numerical variables between two or more groups.
These tests and the ones from Chapter 12, they require some assumptions to be met.
In this chapter I show you how to test for these assumptions.
If they are not met we cannot use these common tests.
Chapter 14 solves our problem by introducing non-parametric tests.
These include the Man-Witton-U test and the Kruskal-Wallis test.
The final chapter is about tests for non-numerical variables.
This includes the Chi-squared test for independence and Fisher's exact test.
Now remember to read the description down below that will give you an update of which chapters
are covered on which days during the course.
Before you start on this journey, let's go inside so that I can show you how to prepare for the course.
00.
