Acute care surgery, the emergency in surgery. So I've named this talk the emergency in surgery and
that's really a loaded expression because I want to talk to you about much more than just acute
care surgery because acute care surgery is not a standalone new entity. It's really part of a
rapidly changing landscape in general surgery. Now there's going to be a talk tomorrow on the birth
of acute care surgery. So today I thought I'm going to take the opportunity to take a much
broader look from a higher altitude look down at this changing landscape. Now this talk is a mention
of topics and issues affecting our surgical community and I think topics that are worthy
of your considerations. Really an honor for me to be talking at this conference and I hope you enjoy
this talk. So this talk is in part of a plenary session on what is new and hot, taking surgery to
the limits. And certainly acute care surgery is new or relatively new depending on what part of the
world you are. And no one is quite sure where it fits in, at least we're not, and whether it should
exist at all. So please take note, this talk is really based on our local Grodeskir perspective.
I'm seeing the world through slightly biased eyes, there's nothing I can do about that, that's where I
work. And we have a long way to go locally and certainly the road has been bumpy, it's not been a
totally smooth ride and we are addressing some of the issues that I will mention. But here we are
at ESSA talking to you about acute care surgery, so at least some success. In a nutshell, so you
understand my bias, is that locally we do combine acute care surgery and general surgery. Now I've
mentioned the one talk tomorrow but there's also a second talk by myself and I really invite you to
come and listen to it where I'm going to take a close-up look at our unit, specifically at Grodeskir
Hospital. Now remember, it's not as established as colorectal surgery, vascular surgery, HPB,
certainly it's not as far as human resources are concerned. We don't have guys who have now, and
women who have now retired and we're just following in their footsteps. We certainly don't have the
resources as far as finances go for research, etc. And until recently we really didn't have any data.
But we're starting from scratch, it was a blank slate, so it's exciting to be part of something like
this. And these are modern times and we have technology and at least locally we've centered
on the use of interactive Python and its scientific stack and we can really make use of medium to large
data to plan for the care of our patients and equally importantly the education of our new
generation of surgeons. So again in this talk I really want to just stand back, tell you a few
things, leave you with some thoughts and considerations for the future. So let's start off by looking at what's
happening in the rest of the world. I think many countries and institutions have asked themselves,
are asking themselves, will ask themselves, you know, do we need acute care surgery? And if we do,
what form should it take? And I think acute care surgery was really born through a slow realization of
its necessity and its necessity because of this changing landscape in general surgery. And in some
way I think we are reliving the birth of trauma surgery. Think back to the 80s, you know, the question was
asked who is best to take care of this injury to the liver? Is it the hepatic surgeon or is it this new
person in trauma surgery that wants to take care of the liver? And today we know what a success
trauma surgery has been. To isolate these patients, to isolate them under the care of certain individuals
has really been a phenomenal success. So the development of acute care surgery units is really a solution to
a problem and I want to concentrate on some of these problems. Number one, I'm going to talk about it
many times as this drive to subspecialization and secondly perhaps a decrease in operative trauma
surgery. So this drive to subspecialization really have come about different parts of the world due
to duty hour restrictions, specifically in the first world. The loss of operative experience to fellows
and other things that I'll mention a bit later, the finance lifestyle's dedication to a small field
and a sense of achievement. Now internationally acute care surgery is not new. There are multiple papers
that came out well before 2010 and if you search PubMed you'll find lots of entries, lots of returns on
the search for acute care surgery. There's talks on YouTube, talks by people like John Marr at conferences.
He's from I think the Northern California chapter of the American College of Surgeons talking about the
need and the necessity for acute care surgery and its development and its growth. So many papers
are and if you search on PubMed let's take a look at one or two of them and what they do is they do
highlight the fact that acute care surgery is the solution to a bigger problem facing general
surgery and problems to which we perhaps are not immune. So let's look at the UK first of all.
We have the trainee working group consensus statement on the future of emergency surgery
training in the UK from the World Journal of Emergency Surgery. Now the World Journal of Emergency
Surgery is published by the World Society of Emergency Surgery. In case you didn't know there is
such a society and this is from a working group at the Association of Surgeons and Training Conference
in 2015. It came out in June this year I think and although it's from a trainee's perspective as to
what they feel a training for surgery should be like in the future there are many issues that they do
address and I think some of them are worthwhile for us to have a look at. First of all is this drive
towards subspecialist training? Now remember the UK has a population density of 413 people per square
kilometer and that compares to the US or 35 and if we crunch the numbers for South Africa it works
out to about 43. So quite a bit different. They really work for all of these people. In essence you
can put a colorectal vascular HPV and a surgeon in there. Now this is tongue-in-cheek Middleburg
Metropolis Hospital and to some extent I think we've got to ask ourselves are we mimicking those
realities around our academic institutions and the big cities that these institutions are and you know
should we care about what happens in Middleburg at all? Secondly they've got much better data than
us so they can clearly show that 50 percent of their admissions really are not elective but there
are emergencies and the question is who should take care of these patients? They're an older population
with more comorbidities and our hypothesis is really that they will do better if they are isolated
and you know as we've had the successes in trauma. Also they've since at least I think 2009 they
mentioned they've had more specialist posts being created specifically to deal with this
realization that there are emergencies and their question really is with this you know abundance
in resources and this population density that they have and they can do something about it their
question is should acute care surgery be a sub-specialist training in its own right? So that's a step well
beyond us. We move to the opposite corner of the world where you see acute care surgery can New Zealand
afford to wait? That's from the New Zealand Medical Journal and they're really two sentences from this
paper that I think captures the essence and I want to read them to you. It says recognizing that it is
increasingly difficult to span the knowledge and skill mix necessary to manage all aspects of acute
care in general surgery as well as a sub-speciality practice. The concept of acute surgery has been
born. So really in the UK where they've got the serialization of all these emergencies, they've got
the population density, they've got the numbers to throw at it and in New Zealand perhaps they don't have
that and they're asking is it a step too far to ask for sub-specialists you know to also take care of
acute care in general surgery. In the second sentence, allowing the current trend towards
inadequate numbers and training of surgeons to deliver acute care to continue is really unacceptable.
So mimicking many other papers and all in the mix, they mention that there's this increase in
sub-specialization leaving sub-specialists inexperienced in acute care. There's a decrease in
number of surgeons to do after-hour calls. Certainly a few sub-specialists in various fields, there are no
after-hour calls and people are not willing to do them and perhaps don't feel comfortable in doing
them. And there's this aging population of truly general surgeons. Also they mention this loss of
operative work and trauma that I want to get back to because that gets us back to the US where
there has been this explosion in interventional work, critical care, the improved standards of
living because remember many trauma units internationally rely on interpersonal violence for all their
work and academic standards etc. So certainly we sit with a set of trauma surgeons who are perhaps not
operating as much as they would like. There's also this drive in the US to sub-specialization. Remember
they have vast country for its population size so as with us they cannot put a sub-specialist in
Middleburg Metropolis Hospital. Every kind of sub-specialist. So there's a lot of publication
and published research from the US. Number one is drive to resident sub-specialization. I mentioned
I would get to this. Here we go. It's lifestyle as different as better perhaps if you sub-specialize
remuneration depending on how things are funded. There's a sense of achievement, academic progress and
prestige. And in reality I mean if you concentrate on one thing we know you do you better you better at
that field and that's the proper thing to do. We're not suggesting any way that that's wrong.
Perhaps more worrying or perhaps the one that we should pay attention to is the service that asks
residents why they would choose a sub-speciality. And number one is this lack of confidence after
training because of this lack of duty hour restrictions and this loss of operative case
experience perhaps to fellows. So we're sitting with residents or registrars as we call them that
perhaps don't feel that they are ready to
to be surgeons. So in the United States there's been very solutions to the problems. There are
proper tracks in acute care surgery and the different models, models that combine acute
care surgery and trauma and models that combine acute care surgery with critical care which I think is
very important we have to look at. Our patients are very sick, are much older and they have more
co-morbidities. And we've got to consider whether we should do that at all. Then there's this the
outcomes you know it's it's all fair and well to suggest that we do that we do all of this but we've
got to get look critically at if we if we were to embark on acute care surgery are we going to have
better outcomes. So let's let's look at us and not the US specifically. Now really I don't want to
stand here and just share with you or give you my opinion. I simply want to mention a few points
for consideration for the future of of surgical care and and education. So we are somewhat behind
the times and we need to look at what problems we have in common with the international community
and we also need to look at how to go about solving them if they exist and and where the solutions are
required at all and if we decide that there are problems and we need to consider you know we need
to consider a few things. First things first let's realize that not all institutions of Africa are
the same you know we don't have many training facilities and we serve different communities
we're in different provinces. For instance at Grodeskir Hospital we serve the population as both as a
primary secondary and tertiary level hospital so we have patients entering a very high cost point
which from a financial point of view is certainly not ideal. But even though we are all different
all our training institutions are different we do share some common goals that we we do need to
prepare the next generation and we do need to consider the the popular surgical population's
care needs on on on a national level and I think to do this and and take acute care surgery or
surgery as a whole forward we need it all starts with data now both South Africa and statistics might
start with an S but we certainly know Scandinavian country our data data acquisition really I don't think
good enough and if we really want to know what the needs of our population are and the needs of our
trainees are we need to know about human resources we need to know about the services that we are
rendering what the prevalence of diseases are what the outcomes are all sorts of key performance
indicators. Now one of our brilliant young registrars she is doing a doctoral thesis on just getting this
data through the country both in public and private she's giving a talk on on the early start of
gathering that data on Sunday and I really suggest that you go and have a listen to to her work I think
that's phenomenally important. Now some examples of the data I think we should concentrate on is
is the private sector the funders really need to share the data openly with us we we really need to know as
educators you know who does what way and how and how you know does the general surgeon do that does not
have special special training does he or she do suspicious kind of work does the
subspecialist do work outside of the subspeciality who does the acute care work and what's the
difference between the rural and an urban urban environments and we need that same kind of data
from the public sector and I think you'll hear from her talk on on on Sunday that that's really
difficult to get and we need to critically look at how what our registrars are doing isn't that an
unpleasant example a person who phoned me a couple of years ago we've before I got to Cape Town I was in
private practice in Johannesburg for many years and critically looking at their rotations as a senior
registrar they had only done you know five minor cases as a primary surgeon and vascular surgery
two mastectomies as a primary surgeon no thyroidectomies as a primary surgeon three
hemicolectomies and what do you advise this person and person where should they go they were interested
in HPB you know do they go to HPB and what if they then went to Middleburg and what if they went to
Middleburg straight away you know what kind of population how do they serve the population
so we need to know what is what people are up to and what they do we've perhaps also got a look at
the age at which surgeons enter the workforce you know it takes many years to be an intern to do
community service to be a medical officer waiting for a registrar post to be a registrar then to be
a junior consultant be a fellow at the end of the day we've got a fairly old surgeon able to treat
but a handful of patients because he or she is so sub-specialized we've got to approach the subject of
foreign trainees it's a wonderful project that we that we do have but we've we've got to balance
that out with with the needs of this country so let's look at some of the data now this is data
from the World Bank you can download these data sets they are massive thousands and thousands of
entries and rows and columns of data and you've got to use something like interactive python and
scientific stack to to to work with that data and here's some of the results so we're looking at
physicians per thousand patients per thousand people and you look where South Africa language
right at the bottom we started off with a country in the 60s like Brazil and look where Brazil has
gone more than doubled and and we still stuck right at the bottom and if we look at United States New
Zealand America papers from those countries that I've mentioned look where look where they are and
and and that's that for me is really a scary a scary graph and this is our patient
population our populations really exploded in 1995 we're less than 40 million and now we we're heading
towards 60 million you know we've got to take care of these people if you look at these big data
sets looking at a number of beds per thousand population the entry for South Africa is blank
purely because in the public sector we've got no clue and this is the kind of data our doctoral
candidate is looking at so we've locally we've got this growing population and physician shortage and
um you know we've we've got a plan for the future here and uh up till now I think we've coped uh but
I I I wonder whether we've got properly at all because um you know in in the public sector I think
there's a restriction on public health resources so if you restrict the resources then you know
you don't need a lot of doctors because there's not a lot of work for them to do and in the private
sector there's a bit of magic with numbers and that's a bit of a tongue-in-cheek thing and I'll get to
that in the end so here's our health expenditure per capita you see United States well above everyone
everyone else at least in this graph and uh you see um you see New Zealand and and United Kingdom
there in the middle and we're languishing right here at the bottom as well so we're not spending a lot
of money per person here at all if we uh look at the health expenditure as a whole in the country
as a percentage of GDP again we're languishing behind countries like the US UK and and New Zealand
again languishing at the bottom at the bottom at least of the countries that I've mentioned there
just to to be sure on the private side there's a lot more spend um but remember this is for smaller
subset of patients in the country and the larger subset of patients this country is is public it
depends upon the public health expenditure which is extremely low of course here with the private
side you see UK they're down at the bottom because they have private health care sector is quite small
now on the private side specifically here we have the consumer price index CPI what we would call
the inflation rate over the last uh or since 1990 at least and if we look what the funders pay you for
a cholecystectomy just a normal cholecystectomy we see way back there 1990s how much you got there
about 400 grand odd and you see the CPI you see inflation rate there and what the funders pay you
seem to have kept up quite well with the inflation rate but there's something hidden there because this
is actually the CPI x and the CPI x is different from the inflation rate because it takes out some
of the things that you have to pay for every month and one of the biggest or the biggest thing it takes
out is your biggest expenditure and that of course is what you pay for your house so this is from
EBSA bank uh it starts over there in 1960 what an average house cost and now we up to 1.4 million so
1.4 million really doesn't buy you a very big house um but certainly that's the increase in house prices as
opposed to the CPI x which hasn't increased uh dramatically like this but that's one of your
monthly expenses so here's a very tongue-in-cheek look at the numbers needed to treat so that's the
number of cholecystectomies you have to do before your expenses and before your taxes and we see in
the 1990s you had to take about about 200 gallbladders to pay for that very average house now you have to
take out almost 600 to pay for that average house so certainly this talk for me is a call to action
because if we follow our argument this argument through to conclusion really in South Africa we're
going to end up with no one to take care of the population everyone will be sub-specialized
centered around the major major centers um we'll have money only to treat trivial disease and for
you in the private sector you'll have to work yourself to death to buy your very average house
what i'm saying is that we really need data and we need advocacy around that data we need to balance
to balance our personal needs we as surgeons each of us have our own goals and and but there are needs
of the population as well we need to consider and needs of our trainees that we have to consider
so i'm looking forward to seeing you tomorrow um where we take a closer look at what we do at
groteski after the talk about the birth of acute care surgery i'll talk about the groteski acute
care surgery unit and on sunday please remember the data gathering efforts of our doctoral candidate thank you
