In this section we're going to look at hernias. As per usual we'll start with an
introduction. We'll have a quick look at the embryology. Now there are various
hernias and each of these areas has its own embryological development so we
can't go into any depth as far as that's concerned and the same would go for the
anatomy. Remember this is not a course in actual surgery so we don't expect you
to understand the full extent of the anatomy of these various regions but it
helps to have an idea of this anatomy to aid you in the management of these
patients. We'll have a quick look at the physiology. The clinical picture that is
how do these patients present you. We'll have a look at the various hernias and
then the complications specifically following a repair. Now not all bulges
and lumps are hernias and we actually also have to look at the differential
diagnosis. Now what is a hernia? Hernia is a normal defect with abnormal content or an
abnormal defect in the wall. So you can have normal areas specifically internal to
the abdominal cavity. Think of the phenomenon of Winslow. That's a normal
opening but if there's abnormal content there, if bowel moves into there, it is a
hernia. And then any abnormal defect. An abnormal defect is going to have some
contents by definition that is a hernia as well. Now there is a wide variety of
hernias and we'll discuss many of these. It's a very common diagnosis in surgery and
especially in acute care surgery. You've got to know how to handle a patient with a
complicated hernia. Now many of these complicated cases are diagnosed only very
late. There's already dead necrotic tissue and because of the seriousness of the
effects of the content, because the content can be hollow viscera, it means that
these complications can be very devastating. Now the vast majority occur in
men and we're talking about groin hernias here. So really men presenting with
this problem but a woman can also present with a groin hernia and then any
other kind of hernia as well. So do we repair all of these or do we not?
They certainly, the existence of a hernia has always been an indication for repair
but specifically for the groin hernias, many researchers are now looking into not
operating on these specifically. If they have the type of anatomy, so a neck that is
broad enough, wide enough not to allow incarceration and strangulation and when they
are asymptomatic. There's certainly instances where these can be managed
expectantly. Certainly though the vast majority of cases once a hernia is
diagnosed we will repair it.
