We continue our look into hernias and in this lecture we're going to have a
brief look at selected anatomy topics. As I've mentioned it's only when you
perform the surgery yourself when you become a resident or register on surgery
and you need to be intimately familiar with anatomy that we need to delve into
any form of depth. As far as the anatomy is concerned here we're just going to
look at the anterior abdominal wall and the inguinal feminal canals just to give
you an overview of what the anatomy is here and to help you when you are
confronted with these common problems. So here a very schematic indication of the
anterior abdominal wall. You see I've bumped the ratings there up to this mark
2 so certainly important to know something about this anatomy. So on the
left-hand side there the anterior abdominal wall right down the middle we see the
linear alba that is the center line. If you look at the top right that is the
rectus sheath of covering the two rectus muscles as those fibers intersect in the
middle we get the linear alba. Now the lateral borders they are slightly curved on
the side of the rectus sheath and that is where it attaches to the oblique muscles
of the lateral abdominal wall on the side and that's referred to as the linear
semilunaris. So if a little hernia can pop out there that's called a spaghelian
hernia and then any hernia in the midline is over the linear alba is a ventral
hernia or otherwise known as an epigastric hernia. Most common form of this
probably emboliical hernias and incisional hernias. Now at the posterior surface the
rectus sheath doesn't go all the way down to the pubic bone. It actually stops just
below the level of the umbilicus and it actually forms a tendinous line there
called the linear semicircularis. On the right bottom try to demonstrate there's
schematically a hernia so you see the two rectus sheaths are moved away from each
other certainly there's a gap in the epineurotic covering of the muscle and we
have the formation of a defect with a hernia. Now this very schematic picture as
well is that of the right inguinal canal. We see the right on the left hand side the
anterior superior isleic spine and on the opposite side the pubic tubercle so you
can orient yourself as far as as this schematic drawing is concerned. So what do
we have here? We have the two rings that form either side of the inguinal canal. On
the left hand side we have the deep ring which is formed by a defect in the
transversalis fascia and the superficial ring more towards the medial side and that
is an opening in the oblique aponeurosis and in between these two the
inguinal canal. Now different people use different names for these. Some people
refer to the roof then as the aponeurosis of the external oblique so that is the
anterior side of this canal. The inferior border is formed by the inguinal
ligament itself at the back we have the fascia transversalis and at the top or the
back is also also named the floor sometimes and then at the top the lower
aspect of the internal oblique and transverse abdominal fascia there it forms
actually a little ridge there the muscle itself and that is the the superior edge
of this canal. Now the canal carries blood vessels and also of course in the male
the vas deferens the spermatic cord in other words. Now below the inguinal
ligament behind the inguinal ligament is a neurovascular bundle and right on the
medial side of it is a small opening which is called the feminal canal and a
hernia can form there with bowel content going through that. See that it is
medial to this neurovascular bundle and we have the femoral vein then the femoral
artery and laterally the femoral nerve. So a very schematic indication of the
inguinal canal. So that's the important anatomy of these two areas that commonly
form hernias and it's certainly worthwhile to have some some form of an idea as to
what the anatomy looks like in these areas.
