We continue our look into hernias and in this lecture the clinical picture.
So what does the patient look like when they present to you?
Now on the right hand side you see three bars maximum colored in red.
This is important information, important information in this lecture that you should know.
Now let's just look at hernias.
Most people with hernias are initially asymptomatic.
They don't even know that they have an hernia.
And that hernia, this can be external hernia whether it's inguinal, femoral, anterior abdominal, lumbar.
Any kind of external hernia might just be asymptomatic initially.
The patient does not notice it.
Internal hernias of course, in the initial stage they can be completely asymptomatic
and they can't be diagnosed by external examination at all.
So commonly these patients are asymptomatic to start off with.
Now when it comes to symptoms and then signs that you elicit, just try and think about what the structures are that are there.
And from those you can build these symptoms and signs list if you're asked this in an exam or when you are confronted by a patient.
There's obviously the ring defect itself, which is the muscle, the fascia, the skin, the fat, anything surrounding or forming the structure of the hernia.
And then the content of the hernia, this might just be extraperitoneal fat, it might be omentum or it might be hollow viscera.
Those are the important ones.
So each section of the, each part of this, the ring, the structure, the form of the ring and the content can have their own symptoms and signs.
So what would be the first symptom?
Well, just a dull ache.
Especially when there isn't a big bulge yet and the patient can't feel it, there's just this dull ache in that area.
And that's common specifically for an inguinal hernia in men that it just starts off with a dull ache.
Now, there can also just be overt pain and this pain can be intermittent, specifically if the content moves in and out, in and out, as we have a reducible hernia initially.
So that intermittent pain that comes and goes might also come after a strenuous day of work or being in an upright position where the hernia is actually, let's call it out,
and then spontaneously reduces when the patient comes home.
He hasn't noticed the hernia, so he just has this intermittent pain.
Now, this pain can become chronic as the tissues in this area stretch, which is also the cause for the dull ache, by the way.
But as it stretches and the hernia is there all the time or it protrudes all the time, this pain can become chronic.
When it's a sudden acute worsening of the pain or onset of the pain, we're quite concerned because it might mean that there is strangulation.
Now, let's just get these terms right, correct right now.
Now, we have incarcerated hernias and strangulated hernias.
Any hernia that cannot be reduced is incarcerated.
Irreducible equals incarcerated, although some people use the term slightly differently, but they mean the same thing.
Strangulated means there's blood supply, arterial supply issues with necrosis and if it's bowel perforation,
but if it's just extraperitoneal fetal or momentum, it means it's necrotic.
That is strangulation.
Now, listen to me.
I always almost got confused as well.
So, incarcerated means you cannot reduce it.
It's irreducible.
Strangulated means the tissue is dead.
So, let's look at the content.
If the content is hollow viscous, we're looking at symptoms of bowel obstruction.
Now, there's the symptoms and signs, the colicky pain, the distension of the abdomen, the increased bowel sounds,
the tympanic nature and percussion, and the symptom of obstipation.
So, the symptoms, the colicky pain and obstipation, and that is obstructed bowel.
Now, you needn't have obstructed bowel to have dead bowel inside of a hernia.
Remember, there's also the Richter's hernia, and we'll discuss this a bit later.
Now, if there's dead tissue and there's systemic, you can have systemic symptoms and signs of this.
A patient can have fever and a tachycardia, eventually dehydration and hypotension.
Now, the dehydration can come from vomiting and the bowel obstruction,
but just dead tissue with sepsis in that area can lead to septic shock and hypotension.
So, any patient who presents with any of these, fever, tachycardia, dehydration, hypotension,
examine the various areas for hernias, anti-abdominal wall, inguinal, femoral, lumbar areas,
any area that can form a hernia must be inspected when you see a patient in septic shock.
Now, as far as the clinical examination is concerned, most commonly there is a bulge.
Now, this bulge is initially intermittent.
The patient stands up, he coughs, he sneezes.
There's a bulge.
If he lies down, while I say he, he or she, it reduces, it disappears spontaneously.
So, that is a self-reducible hernia.
Eventually, though, these progress, and you have to manually reduce this bulge.
But these are all classical of a hernia.
Remember, if I said, if you cannot reduce it, if it's irreducible, it is incarcerated.
So, how do you examine these patients?
Well, don't start off by them lying down.
Put them in the position where they notice this bulge.
They know what to do to elicit that bulge.
They have to cough, stand, walk around a bit.
Anything that they know of, let them do it so that you can inspect this bulge.
You can ask them to cough.
You can ask them to Valsalva.
Now, in a recumbent position, it is noted that you can put your finger inside and try and feel the ring.
Very uncomfortable if you're doing this for inguinal hernias.
It's not really necessary.
It's very uncomfortable for the patient.
But we all know about the cough impulse.
That is where your finger is actually over the defect.
You ask the patient to cough, and that transient increase in intra-abdominal pressure gives you a pressure wave,
which you can then feel on your fingertip.
As I said, don't hurt the patient.
This is painful stuff.
But you need to examine the patient.
You need to know what you're dealing with.
If you have a lump that has suddenly become tender, red, and swollen,
you've got to be very concerned that there is strangulation.
And urgent care is probably advised.
Now, what special investigations can you do?
Well, we'll start off with an erect chest X-ray.
The reason for that, we're looking for free air.
Now, is that always going to be the case with a strangulated hernia?
No, most definitely not.
But what you have to look out for is the very serious condition where you have strangulated dead bowel that has ruptured.
But because of that release, it actually reduces spontaneously, and you have this free eruption inside the abdomen
with very little signs over the external area of this hernia.
So, an erect chest X-ray looking for free air is always prudent.
Then, an abdominal X-ray, if the patient has overt bowel obstruction,
you'll see the common signs of bowel obstruction.
If you're not sure, if it's a rather asymptomatic hernia, you might feel something.
Ultrasound can give you an idea of the integrity of the musculature.
But a CT scan is probably better, specifically for these hidden internal hernias that we'll discuss.
It gives you nice delineation of the anatomy and can also help you plan any kind of repair in case of complicated cases.
We also have incidental findings of hernias on a CT scan patient.
It is admitted acute abdominal pain, and there is this internal hernia that no one knows about.
And the diagnosis is made incidentally of some form of internal hernia on CT scan.
So, certainly one of the forms in which patients present is with their CT scan under their arms.
Now, full blood count in UNE, urea, creatinine, and electrolytes we see there,
and a full blood count or complete blood count.
We certainly need to know if the white cell count is raised, whether that's neutrophils.
That will be indicative of dead infected tissue, something we don't want to see.
And for the sake of resuscitating these patients with bowel obstruction and chronic vomiting and dehydration,
that obstipation, remember there's a lot of fluid that accumulates there.
So, these patients have various physiological abnormalities, and we need to correct these,
and we also need to know about these before we rush to theater.
Incidentally, a high potassium, it's a bad sign because it might be that we are dealing with dead bowel,
and that potassium gets released into the bloodstream.
And then also, the higher urea, a sign of dehydration, pre-renal dehydration or renal failure,
although those are not correct terms to use these days.
Blood gas analysis, very important.
From that, we can get the lactate.
If the lactate is up, it's almost a sure sign that we are dealing with necrotic tissue,
as well as the pH, any kind of metabolic acidosis initially compensated for by a respiratory alkalosis,
but you'll certainly see that on your blood gas, also indicative of necrotic tissue.
So, that is the clinical picture of the patient.
Certainly, a lot to think about.
Always think hernia.
And any patient with symptoms and signs that you cannot explain, think of hernia,
and don't forget to inspect hernia sites in your patients.
Now, some of these areas are obviously private,
and it's not always comfortable for the patient to have these areas inspected,
but undress the patient and have a look at these areas.
There is nothing worse than admitting a patient with abdominal pain throughout the night
only to discover this huge bulge in the morning when the patient is properly exposed during morning ward rounds.
That should never, ever happen.
Inspect the hernia sites, all of them, and every single patient that you see with these kind of symptoms.
Also, do remember the patient that has internal hernias,
and that means you have to have a high index of suspicion,
make use of special investigations,
although some of these are unfortunately only found during surgery.
This would be it for this lecture.
After the following lectures,
we're certainly going to start looking at the various hernias themselves,
but before that, we'll just have a quick rundown of the problem list.
