Let's carry on with our look into hernias and now we're going to start discussing the various hernias.
Here specifically we are going to start with the ventral hernias.
Now with these I'm going to group any midline hernia.
So these can be epigastric, although epigastric actually refers to anywhere from the zephoid process to the pubic bones.
Umbilical hernias, obviously pertaining to the ring of the umbilicus, but they can also be paraumbilical in the region of the umbilicus.
And incisional hernias.
Now incisional, we just have to be careful here.
Any incision, lateral incisions like a lance incision for an appendix can also lead to an incisional hernia.
But here we're basically referring to midline incisional hernias.
Although in the back of your mind just add any lateral incisions as causes of hernias as well.
So what causes a hernia?
Well, they can develop spontaneously.
Here we're thinking of in utero development of an umbilical hernia, although these can also develop later in life.
Trauma to the abdominal wall causing rupture of the muscle, although the significance of this type of trauma probably lies in the underlying damage to organs and traumatic presentation of that.
But certainly trauma can lead to this.
Most common here are the incisional hernias.
So there will be a prior incision.
Now these incisions should not lead to hernia formation.
But if they do, you have to think of tension.
Any kind of tension on a wound edge can lead to hernia formation.
Poor technique.
Poor blood supply.
Although probably part of technique.
Defective material.
Although we shouldn't always try and blame the material for these hernias.
A hematoma.
A hematoma.
Specifically infected hematomas.
Seromas.
Any kind of chronic condition.
And here we're thinking about obesity.
We're thinking about not so chronic, but at least let's call it chronic.
Pregnancy, malnutrition, malnutrition, use of steroids, chemotherapeutic agents, ascites, patients who undergo peritoneal dialysis.
Any kind of chronic debilitating process can lead to midline or be the cause of at least incisional hernias.
We must not also forget nerve damage.
If you have thoracic nerve 11 and 12 damage, it can cause a little bit of a muscle bulge.
Now these are not really hernias, but they're also little bulges in the muscle.
You can see them on imaging.
And if they're unsightly or they cause problems, just paralysis of the muscle there, you can fix them surgically.
Clinically, what are we going to find?
We're going to find a midline bulge or just off midline bulge.
Remember, even with an incision, it might not always be just underneath the scar that you find the bulge.
It might also dissect underneath the skin and present a bit away from a scar.
Any kind of midline incision or incisional hernia can develop off of the midline or away from the scar.
And any of the symptoms and signs that we discussed before can be the presenting picture of a patient with a ventral hernia.
We need to discuss or decide when we should repair these patients.
As I mentioned before, the mere presence of a hernia is actually an indication for repair.
But we've got to be very careful in these patients with ventral hernias.
The underlying cause for the hernia, the debilitating process, the comorbidities involved here, might make us not operate on these patients.
We might choose conservative management, such as the wearing of some form of a truss.
We might need to look at the comorbidities first, improve them, the chronic cough, the ascites, the obesity.
We need to look at these before we decide to take the patient to theatre.
Two reasons here mainly.
They are an anesthetic risk, these patients, the underlying debilitating conditions.
And there's a high rate of recurrence if you do not remove some of these.
Specifically for ventral hernias, we've also got to consider the overlying skin.
The skin can become very thin and atrophic.
It can also become slightly infected.
And when we cover these wounds and when we have to close the skin, we might have skin covering problems.
Specifically pertaining to large ventral hernias is also the loss of intra-abdominal domain.
As the intra-abdominal organs move into the hernia sac itself, there is loss of space inside the abdomen.
It actually contracts.
And when you want to close these, when you want to repair it, it might be very difficult to reduce these hernias to get the organs back into the abdominal cavity.
And it might very well just be too small.
You have to assess this prior to surgical repair or decision on surgical repair.
It might be physically impossible.
Now, again, this is not a discussion of surgical technique in these lectures.
But let's just have in our mind at least some form of an idea as to how we do fix this.
So, a very schematic representation of a tissue repair here.
We can see the two rectus abdominal muscles at the top with the aponeurotic sheath around them.
And they certainly know interconnecting fibers in the midline.
In other words, this is a hernia.
So, what are we going to do?
Right at the edge of the muscle, if you were to view this from in front,
those are longitudinal slits over the edges of the muscle.
And that aponeurosis actually splits open as you make these two longitudinal incisions from the top to the bottom, above and beyond the hernia.
The muscle actually bulges out.
That's perfect.
That's what you want to see.
Now, we can create a new posterior sheath by just taking the medial sides of these two openings and suturing them together,
as we can see in the schematic drawing there,
and then taking the two outside bits and suturing them together.
Now, we have rectus muscle in contact with each other,
and we have a posterior and an anterior sheath.
And this is a very good kind of tissue repair.
Do not simply just try and suture these two areas en masse.
You've got to create a posterior and an anterior sheath.
If you were just to repair this en masse, you have diseased tissue in touch with diseased tissue.
That's never a good idea, and also you'll probably have tension on your repair, which will lead to recurrence.
We can also insert mesh, and we have here a schematic drawing of an inlay mesh.
By inlay, you can see there at the bottom, we're trying to maneuver this piece of mesh to lie underneath the muscle.
The best place to have it is underneath the muscle and not on top of the muscle.
So you've got to create these little pockets underneath the muscle through which you can place that mesh with a good size overlap.
There is a knot underneath that.
The schematic is trying to tell you they do not put mesh into direct contact with bowel.
It can be a very bad decision.
You can get infections, and you can get fistulization specifically with polypropylene meshes and PTFE meshes with infection.
Not a good idea.
We're trying to get some covering, whether it's a spyrotonium or part of the sheath,
as the schematic tries to indicate, that covers the mesh and separates it from the bowel.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
