We continue our look into hernias, to the various specific types of hernias, and now we're going to discuss groin hernias.
Now I start off here with one of the many, many classifications, and in the classification we'll deal with the different types.
So here's the NIAS classification. It has type 1, type 2, type 3, and type 4.
You'll note type 4 are all the recurrent hernias.
Let's start with them. The recurrent ones. We have direct, indirect, femoral, and combined.
Now a direct hernia is a destruction of the floor, the posterior aspect of the inguinal canal.
So that defect in the muscle there, or the aponeurosis, leads to a bulge right through the floor.
So it doesn't go via the internal opening down the canal, but directly bulges into the canal.
That is a direct hernia.
An indirect hernia actually goes with the blood supply to the testis with the spermatic cord.
So it goes with the internal ring through the canal towards the external ring.
So that's through the ring system.
A femoral hernia goes through the femoral canal.
That's inferior to the inguinal ligament, medial to the neurovascular bundle towards the leg.
And then there can be a combination, usually a combination of direct and indirect.
If it's very large, we can refer to this as a pantaloon hernia.
So let's go up to type 1.
That's an indirect hernia, but the ring is still normal.
A normal ring.
A type 2, we have indirect, but with an abnormal ring, the ring has been enlarged.
The floor, though, is intact.
A 3A will be a direct hernia.
As I said, that is a direct defect in the floor, the posterior aspect of the inguinal canal.
3B would be a worsening of the type 2.
There's the indirect inguinal with an abnormal ring and destruction of the floor.
So this is a combined type of hernia.
The 3C would be femoral.
So that's a good classification, and it tells you about the various types of hernias.
A term that you should remember is that of a sliding hernia.
And a sliding hernia refers to the fact that a part of the wall of the hernia is formed by a retroperitoneal organ.
We're thinking here of parts of the colon, and we're thinking about parts of the bladder.
If that forms part of the wall of the hernia, that is referred to as a sliding hernia.
Another term to add to the terms direct, indirect, femoral that we've come across now.
Now, there is not always a correct distinction clinically between direct and indirect hernias.
These can be very difficult to make.
It's not also that important to make because we do diagnose accurately during surgery,
and we tailor our surgery towards what we find during the surgery.
So it's not always important to be so precise between a hernia being direct or indirect.
Of more concern is the repair itself.
First of all, the indications for repair.
We've mentioned this before.
The mere presence of a groin hernia was always an indication for repair.
There's a lot of research going on that shows, though, that some hernias can be managed expectantly.
Hernia surgery does have complications.
You've got to weigh up the risk of those complications versus the natural progression of a hernia.
Now, a hernia doesn't heal itself.
It can never heal.
It will only progress.
But not all hernias progress to a stage where it definitely will cause complications.
So if there's a larger ring so that you're not concerned about strangulation and it's rather asymptomatic,
then you can follow up a groin hernia or at least an inguinal hernia, femoral hernias.
Perhaps it should just be repaired.
You've got to assess the patient for fitness for anesthesia.
Many of these patients will have underlying conditions, chronic cough from emphysema or asthma.
There will be obesity and it's a very good idea to ask the patient to lose weight before you fix these hernias.
It will help in the surgery.
It will help in lowering the complication rate and the recurrence rate.
You've got to consider the type of anesthesia.
Now, you can give general anesthetic that's falling out of favor in as much as if you use regional or local,
the patient can go home sooner.
And you can also ask the patient to cough during the procedure to look at the anatomy and to assess your repair.
So certainly regional anesthetics and local anesthetics have become the norm.
And it also allows for day cases to be done, patient needn't stay over in hospital.
You've also got to make the decision between an open and a laparoscopic repair.
Certainly there's literature to show that as far as a primary repair,
that means the first time that you repair groin hernia is concerned,
laparoscopic is not necessarily better than open.
Certainly they're equal as far as recurrences is concerned.
And it's not necessary that the laparoscopic repair will have less pain
or that the patient will be back at work sooner,
although there is definitely a tendency towards that.
We are looking at the laparoscopic approach as the primary repair in cases of bilateral hernias
and in cases of recurrent hernias.
Their laparoscopic surgery seems to do better.
When you do an open repair, you've got to decide between an old-fashioned tissue repair or a mesh repair.
There are many, many, many variations of these.
The tissue repairs, Shouldice, Bassini, McVeigh.
When you become a surgical registrar, we'll ask you to know the specifics about these.
Mesh repairs are in fashion.
They are more than in fashion.
They have been shown to have lower recurrence rates.
What they lead to is tension-free repairs.
Many of these tissue repairs have a lot of tension on those suture lines
and that is what leads to recurrence.
Mesh repairs don't.
They are tension-free repairs.
Of course, you pay the price for placing a mesh.
There are risks of placing a mesh, most notably pain.
Some of these patients have an enormous amount of intractable pain afterwards
and infection of a mesh.
Mesh sepsis is definitely a difficult problem to deal with.
That's why some surgeons look at prophylactic antibiotics.
Now, certainly, there's no proof that prophylactic antibiotics make any difference.
Nevertheless, most surgeons, or many surgeons at least,
use a first-generation cephalosporin, such as kephazolin, as prophylaxis before placing a mesh.
You've got to operate meticulously and be very sure of your aseptic technique when placing a mesh.
Also, try not to damage any tissue or leave any kind of necrotic tissue behind.
Of course, if there was incarceration with strangulation,
then the placement of a mesh might not be a good idea.
Now, as far as the open surgery still is concerned,
you can go directly onto the hernia,
or you can actually stay away from the hernia itself
and do an extraperitoneal approach by making your ascension slightly higher
and going into the retroperitoneal space, for instance, a Nihus repair.
In the laparoscopic repairs,
there are differences between an extraperitoneal and a transperitoneal approach.
Certainly, the extraperitoneal approach seems to do a bit better.
Difficult to do and difficult to learn, though,
and a smaller space to work as you have to create this extraperitoneal space.
Transperitoneal, though, more complications perhaps as you land up in the intra-abdominal space.
And you have to then work from posterior to get into the area of the inguinal canal.
Now, complications, I'm going to discuss elsewhere,
but there are specific complications that we have to be aware of
when we fix inguinal and femoral hernias.
Now, one of these would be nerve damage.
Now, once again, if you become a surgical registrar or resident,
we're going to ask you to know all of these nerves intimately,
what they supply, where they go, and how to protect them.
But nerve damage can certainly occur.
Now, if the nerve is transected, talking iliofeminal, ilioinguinal nerves, etc.,
you can just get numbness in the area of its supply,
which is usually not a problem for the patient.
What is the problem is when they become entrapped,
entrapped in a suture, entrapped in mesh,
or they're just otherwise damaged.
This can lead to intractable pain, which is very difficult to treat.
It can be infiltrated with local and acidic at first.
If that helps, we know we can destroy the nerve with injection by alcohol, etc.
You might have to go and sever that nerve, or you might have to go and release it,
or even remove the mesh.
So that's certainly a big problem, nerve damage and the pain that ensues.
It can also be immense damage to the spermatic cord and blood supply to the testis.
It usually leads to atrophy of the testis.
It doesn't really become acutely necrotic.
Some will show that they have to be removed, or the one side has to be removed.
It's more common for it just to become atrophic.
Now, there's usually no problems with testosterone production,
unless, of course, there's bilateral necrosis,
and no problems with fertility either.
Internal iliac artery damage is very serious and has been well documented.
After an inguinal hernia or femoral hernia repair,
specifically the femoral hernia repair,
feel the foot pulses that should be part of normal operative procedure.
Someone should feel the foot pulses afterwards and document it in the patient file.
Recurrence, part of the repair of any hernia,
but specifically groin hernias and femoral hernias,
these can lead to recurrence.
High incidence of recurrence,
more so with the tissue repairs,
and then more so with the open repairs,
specifically when we come to an already re-repair,
second repair, third repair,
or bilateral hernias,
where we go for the laparoscopic approach.
And then the use of synthetic material,
synthetic meshes,
has made life a bit easier,
as far as a lower incidence of recurrence is concerned.
One last word on fixing of a femoral hernia,
we do the extraperitoneal approach,
for instance the nias approach,
slightly higher incision,
getting into the extraperitoneal space,
in other words,
trying not to enter the peritoneal cavity at all.
It's easy to expose the neurovascular bundle going into the leg,
and then the opening of the femoral canal,
over which a large piece of mesh can be placed,
with or without closing of that opening.
When you have an incarcerated hernia,
those things can be a bit difficult.
Might have to make a counter incision over the bulge in the thigh,
just to try and reduce that.
Very last word on necrotic tissue,
we're talking necrotic bowel.
Now, in many cases,
bowel can be resected and anastomosed through the direct incision,
but sometimes it might be necessary to open the abdomen formally,
to go and chase a piece of suspect bowel,
that might have spontaneously returned to the abdominal cavity,
during relaxation of the anesthetic,
or during manipulation as you start to operate these.
So always be aware,
the patient with an irreducible hernia,
and those patients that are operated on an emergency basis,
make very certain of what the content was,
and before you close up that patient,
be very sure of what that bowel looks like.
Same can also be said probably for omentum,
a bit of extraperitoneal fat.
These can also be necrotic and lead to problems.
Of course,
not exactly the same as hollow organ injuries,
as far as the bacterial load of these hollow visceral organs are concerned.
