We continue our look into hernias and the various types of hernias. Now we've
looked at the ventral hernias and the groin hernias. Let's look at ones that
are a bit rarer. First up, the Spigelian hernia. Now these form at the lateral edge
of the rectus muscles, usually within about five or six centimeters above a
line drawn between the two anterior superior iliac spines. That's where you'll
find most of them. They can cause little intermittent bulges. We see those in
athletes and power lifters. As they massively increase their intra-abdominal
pressure, you can notice these bulges. It might be very difficult to diagnose and
patients might only present with an area of chronic intermittent pain or a bit of
discomfort. It's usually written off as due to some other cause, other problems,
other intra-abdominal problems. And it's only through imaging or at laparotomy
or laparoscopy that these are diagnosed. They're easy to fix and a variety of
methods are available from tissue repairs to the insertion of a prosthetic material.
Lumber hernias. These can occur spontaneously. They can occur after injury and also after any
any kind of posterior incisions, for instance, work on the kidneys.
Now there are natural triangles, two Petit and Grinfeld. First one between the iliac crest,
the latissimus dorsi and the external oblique muscle. And the second one between the 12th rib,
the internal oblique and the sacrospinallus muscle. So two natural defects there. Now these can
also present with intermittent lumps, pain. It's very rare though for these to become incarcerated
and strangulated. Repair is as for any anterior ventral hernia. Three types of pelvic floor
hernias that you should know about. The obturator, the perineal and the sciatic hernias. Now the obturator,
it goes through the obturator membrane, which is very indistensible. It allows the obturator
neurovascular bundle. And usually seen in emaciated older females, they present with
bowel obstruction, necrotic bowel, acute abdominal pain with peritonism. And these are diagnosed
usually on imaging or at laparotomy. Perineal hernia. These usually form after major pelvic surgeries.
And then lastly, the sciatic hernia. That is a defect in the piriformis muscle,
which allows for movement of the sciatic nerve. And you get sciatic nerve entrapment
in this area together with the hernia also diagnosed on imaging. Internal hernias, you've got to be aware
of these. They can be abnormal in as much as adhesions and torsion of these areas of the bowel
post previous surgery might lead to these false little openings and areas into which bowel can slip
and cause obstruction. Now, natural openings are also possible. We think, for instance,
of the piriformis of Winslow and a hernia through this area is called a hernia of Blandin. Also,
the anterior and superior, anterior and posterior, periodeenal areas and various other parts of the
abdominal cavity into which bowel can herniate. These you cannot diagnose by external palpation.
They're diagnosed at laparotomy where the patient's operated for complications of these or on imaging.
Peristomal hernias. That's in relation to a stoma.
Bowel stoma. You can get obstructive symptoms of the stoma itself. You can get evisceration of bowel
if it opens up next to the stoma. Certainly a bulge, a hernia sac containing bowel next to the stoma.
You can also get prolapse of the stoma bowel itself. Now best is to avoid these through meticulous
technique during the formation of these stomas. If they do occur though, you can repair them directly.
You can recite the stoma or you can even use mesh to support the underlying muscle wall.
Erector hernia. We've mentioned this before. That is where only a bit of the side wall of the hernia
is inside of a small hernia neck. Now the smaller the hernia neck, the easier it is for
bowel to get caught or strangulated, incarcerated or strangulated inside, won't present with bowel
obstruction or needn't present with bowel obstruction since the lumen of the vast majority of the lumen
is still intact. These can usually be seen in these small ventral hernias.
Littra's hernia, also mentioned before, that is a hernia which has a mechel diverticulum as its content.
So not only is there decisions to be made on the repair, but also on the resection and anastomosis
of the bowel in the area of the mechel diverticulum.
