Now that we know a little bit about the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian, let's move on to something else.
Now, that was a setup of the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian.
You know how it's derived, what its meaning is, but we haven't obviously gone into any kind of depth
or used some real-world example that you can use it in, but a bit of patience will get there.
First of all, let's move on to a new topic called the degrees of freedom.
It's a very important topic and it's something that you have to consider before you set up any equations of motion, equation of dynamics.
So what we're really dealing with here is dynamics, and it's Newtonian dynamics.
In other words, it's the time evolution of position.
Now, we stated before in the first section, you need position and you need initial velocity.
If a force thing acts on it, if there is a potential field, if there's a force that acts on it, you know the time evolution of the system.
But before you set up any of these, by setup I mean you've seen, you know what the problem is, and on paper now,
or in your mind, you've got to set up the equations to try and predict the future of this particle.
We need to discuss, you need to have in mind what degrees of freedom they are.
Now, it's simple if we start just in the, one particle that can move on, let's call it the x-axis.
It can just move back and forth on the x-axis.
It has, obviously it has one degree of freedom.
But let's put that particle now, let's put it in a three-dimensional space.
Let's have it like this.
We'll put it in three-dimensional space.
It can now move in the x, the x, the y, and the z direction.
Let's write that, let's write that.
So it's x, y, and z direction.
It does not matter what coordinate system I use for normal three-dimensional space.
I can also use polar coordinates in which I'll have, in which I'll have just a radius.
A radius, and an angle theta, and phi.
Also, just to describe where this, where this particle is in three-dimensional space,
or whether I use the x, y plane, there are three, three directions in which it can move,
and that gives us, that gives us three degrees of freedom.
So if I just have it on the x-axis, that was one degree of freedom,
and now I put it in three space, that will be three degrees of freedom.
But what now if I put two particles?
What if I had two-particle system?
If I had a two-particle system,
usually denoted as capital N,
I have a two-particle system.
How many degrees of freedom am I dealing with now?
I have two particles, and they can each move in any one of these three.
Or the motion or velocity, motion and velocity can be described in any one of these three.
The three-part coordinate system.
And now I would have three N degrees of freedom.
So if my N was two, I now have six degrees of freedom.
And so we can go, anything I have, the number of particles I have, I should write that, three N.
That's it.
So whatever my N is, if it's in a three space, or if it was just one space, it would just be N.
But if it's in three space, I have three times N degrees of freedom N.
So that's easy to understand.
Each particle will be described on its own.
They're both free to move.
They don't interact with each other.
They're not tied to each other in any way.
So if I set up a problem like this, I'm dealing with three N and N being the number of particles degrees of freedom.
The next thing, though, that we have to consider is just to put constraints.
A very important concept in Trisic.
I put constraints.
And this will be the first example of how to put constraints up.
So imagine now I have my two particles, but I put a constraint on them in that they must have a constant.
A constant distance between them.
A constant distance between them.
A constant distance is being the norm of this vector.
And then vector R is just the vector between the two of them.
And that must always be constant.
So they can move anywhere in space as long as they maintain a certain difference, a distance from each other.
Now how would you describe the norm?
We can put two lines on each side.
I'm just saying it's the magnitude of that radius vector has to be constant.
So if that has to be a constant, how do we describe this?
Well, it's easy to do.
Remember from that, if we're dealing with a three particle system that could just be, let's call them particle one and particle two.
So as far as, let's just do the x, y, and z axis is concerned.
So the x position of particle two minus x position of particle one squared plus y2 minus y1 squared plus z2 minus z1 squared.
And take the square root of that.
So that has to be a constant.
This has to equal a constant.
So particle one can have any position vector.
Position vector for particle one being x1, y1, and z1.
And for particle two, it can be x2, y2, and z2.
But there's a constraint on the system inasmuch as if I take this equation, it has to be a constant.
Now, how do we do that?
It's really simple if you think about this.
If I give you three numbers, the numbers 10, 12, and 14, what's the mean of those?
Well, I add them up.
I divide them by two.
So then I get a mean, on average, is 12.
If I want to maintain that 12, that 12 cannot change, I can change two of these.
I can change this to an 8, and I can change this to a 16, but it constrains the other one.
If it constrains the other one, it has to now be 12 to maintain my constant of an average of 12.
I'm just choosing and changing these two to give that one 12.
You can change any two of them, and that then forces the last one to be a certain value so that you can maintain an average of 12.
Now, the same thing is happening here.
I can change any of the two of them.
So, x2 and x1 can change, and y2 and y1 can change, but that will constrain z2 minus z1 to a certain value.
So if I square it, and I sum it all up, and I take the square root to remain a constant.
Or I can change these two, then this one has to be constrained.
Or change these two, and then this one will be constrained.
What I'm saying is I lose one degree of freedom.
So, if I have a two particle system, if I have a two particle system, n equals 2, and they have to have this constant radius magnitude of a radius vector,
let's say a constant distance from each other, I lose one degree of freedom.
And now I have five degrees of freedom here.
Five degrees of freedom.
If they were both able to move into this space, they'd have six degrees, they'd be six degrees of freedom.
But I've lost one because I need to maintain this.
I need to maintain, I need to maintain this.
Now, the last type of constraint that we usually have to deal with is a rigid body, which contains many particles.
Many particles.
It's almost n going towards infinity.
I don't think it's ever stated like that, but just consider that there are many.
And the distance between each of them, if you think about it, in a rigid metal body, those atoms can't move.
Well, they vibrate, but they can't move positions.
So, rij is now a constant.
And by ij, I mean 1 is less than or equal to i, and j isn't equal to n.
Okay, so or, so particle, the distance from particle one to particle two, one to three, one to four, one to five.
And then two to one, which we've done, two to three, two to four.
All of those combinations.
And remember, this is a combination problem.
It's a combination problem.
So out of all my n particles, how many pairs can I form?
If I have n particles, how many pairs can I form?
This is the combination problem.
So what is that?
It's n times n minus one divided by two.
And if you multiply that out, that's actually n squared minus n over two.
Okay, so that's a square problem there.
So the larger n becomes, that becomes a problem.
Because remember, we went from one to a two particle system, and we lost one degree of freedom.
But we can't keep on losing, because on this side we'll have three n minus how many I'm losing at this time.
Minus how many I'm losing at this time.
And because this is linear, and this is squared, very quickly I'll run into a negative number.
I can't have negative degrees of freedom.
So there's a problem there.
And you have to note that many of those combinations are redundant.
You lose them.
You don't have to have those combinations in the specific distance that remains a constant between them.
So you actually lose a lot.
So what you have, if you have, if you have a rigid body, if you have this rigid body, there are two things.
It's center of mass, so it's center of mass there, will have, in three space, in three space, we'll have a coordinate system.
So there's already three degrees of freedom.
And what you do, the other thing that you do, you make a body specific coordinate system.
So inside of this body, we'll have a body centered coordinate system.
And these two, because this block can also move, it can rotate around the center of mass, or any way,
in that there'll be an angle between each of these two coordinate systems, between the space that you set up's x coordinate axis,
and the angle between that and the x coordinate system here, and between y, y, and z, z.
So that adds another three, each one of those can have an angle between the two of them.
So you add another three degrees of freedom.
So you're always going to end up with six degrees of freedom.
So in a rigid body, in a rigid body, you always have six degrees of freedom.
In other words, there are six parts to its orientation, or its position vector, or its velocity vector in space.
There will always be six parts to it.
And that, in short, is degrees of freedom, which is very important.
You always have to consider these before you start setting up any solution to a physical problem.
That's a big problem.
That's a big problem.
That's a big problem.
