We continue our look into hernias by looking at the complications.
Now you see the bars in red there, still very important as all the videos before.
Let's look at the complications of a hernia itself.
We said that a hernia can be asymptomatic, the patient might not even be aware of it
or there might just be a slight little self-reducing lump that does not bother the patient at all
and as we mentioned we can treat these expectantly.
The first complication is that of discomfort and pain
and that can certainly make the patient's life difficult, so much so that they request formal repair.
Cosmetic issues might also be considered a complication.
A patient might not be satisfied with an unsightly bulge, specifically going to the beach or when doing sport
and a cosmetic reason might be viewed as an indication for surgery.
Then there might be loss of freedom of movement.
We can see this as a complication as well.
It might be a patient who enjoys sporting activities, enjoys jogging
and wearing a corset or some form of strap to contain this hernia might make it very difficult
to enjoy sport or to enjoy life and this can also be seen as an indication for surgical repair.
Now, incarceration, we've mentioned many times now, it means that there is content in the hernia sac which is irreducible.
Now, don't confuse this with a hernia that needs a manual reduction.
Incarceration, even if it's difficult to reduce and eventually reduces, that is not true incarceration.
Incarceration means that adhesions has formed between the content and the sac
or there might be such engorgement through venous and lymphatic drainage curtailment
that it is impossible to reduce the content.
That is an incarcerated hernia.
Now, if that content that is incarcerated contains bowel
and it contains the full lumen of the bowel, it may become obstructed.
It can also become obstructed and then be reduced.
So these things do not equate to each other.
You've got to view them as separate entities.
So certainly if there's bowel in there, it can be obstructed.
Remember the Richter's hernia, though, where it's just a part of the bowel wall,
just a knuckle of the bowel wall that is stuck in the hernia.
Then comes strangulation.
Now in strangulation, there is blood supply and eventual arterial blood supply insufficiency.
And that means there is ischemia, necrosis, perforation and sepsis.
Now it needn't just be hollow viscera that become strangulated.
The exoperitoneal fat with a ventral hernia or a mentum with an inguinal hernia or groin hernia
can also become strangulated.
Now we're not dealing with a bacteremia in as much as there's no bacteria in exoperitoneal fat normally
or in a mentum normally.
So we're not dealing with this overt sepsis and a chance of septic shock.
But certainly when it comes to bowel, this is a very serious complication indeed.
Now let's move on to complications of surgery itself.
Well, first and foremost, there's recurrence.
Recurrence can happen immediately after the surgery due to a variety of reasons,
or it can appear late.
We've gone through a few discussions on a recurrence before.
Next up is wound sepsis.
In the early postoperative phase, a wound can become a bit red or it can become overtly infected.
Specifically those emergency procedures that had a resection of bowel and that had dead bowel.
You can even form areas of necrotizing fasciitis.
Now wound can also simply disrupt as any surgical wound.
And we can also deal with graft sepsis.
Remember the graft is a dead inanimate object.
It does not contain an immune system.
And organisms can hide themselves very well in a graft and around a graft.
And graft sepsis is certainly a big problem.
Now we needn't always take these grafts out.
We have mentioned we can we can trial some antibiotics, rest.
We can dress the wound and the sepsis around the graft might clear up.
If it does not though, we might end up having to remove the graft.
Then there's injury to structures surrounding the area of surgery.
We can injure a hollow viscus and we can do that while we are doing an open procedure.
If there is bowel incarcerated in a hernia that can be injured.
It can also be injured during laparoscopic repair.
Placement of the ports might injure the bowel.
So certainly any patient who does not do well post-operative liver with a hernia repair.
Something has gone wrong and these complications should be considered.
We can also for the same reasons injure a solid organ.
We can damage nerves.
As we said the nerves surrounding the inguinal canal can be damaged.
Blood vessels can be damaged.
We talked about the iliac vessels to the thigh and to the leg.
Which can be damaged during inguinal hernia repairs.
And more commonly though we talk about seromas and hematomas.
We lift tissue planes up to repair hernias and we leave dead spaces.
And certainly seromas and hematomas can complicate the surgery.
And it might be important for us to leave a drain in when we have lifted large flaps.
And to keep them in closed system suction drains.
Specifically if we have foreign material inside.
For instance the prosthetic mesh repairs.
To keep a drain in for an extended period or at least until it is dry.
Now remember drains themselves are not innocuous.
They can also lead to sepsis.
So certainly don't leave them if they are not required.
