So let's continue. There's just a few terms that we do change in differential equations, usually the slope.
And because we're just plotting points, every point we just put a subscript in,
we're just going to call capital A sub n, and delta x we usually just call h.
So you'll see most textbooks just have the difference when we do this.
So delta x, remember, that is just going to be x sub n plus 1 minus x sub n.
So I'm going from one specific point, x sub 1, to x sub 2, if my first n is 1.
In other words, and remember this equals h, so any point, x in plus 1, is just going to equal x sub n plus h.
That is very simple. So I'm going to have a little delta x every time, and that I call my step size.
This is called step size.
And you can well imagine, as I said, the smaller you make that step size,
the closer your solution, your approximate solution, is going to be to the real solution.
Now remember also, I said that delta, well, let's just look at delta y, that's delta,
that is y sub n plus 1 minus y sub n.
So I'm just going from a previous y value to the next y value.
In other words, if I just were to look at the fact, remember this is now this,
which is delta y divided by delta x, but my delta x is h.
Remember, my delta x is now, I'm just calling it h, this is the way we write it.
In other words, delta y, by that equation up there, is going to be h times a sub n.
And because this is that, and I just bring this to the other side,
y sub n plus 1 equals y sub n plus h a sub n.
So I have two equations.
Two equations.
There's the one that you have to know, and there's the other one that you have to know.
And it's really from school mathematics that you can get these two equations.
As simple as that.
Remembering that this a sub n, which is the slope,
remember you can get that at every single point,
because we said y prime equals the f of x comma y.
And we're going to have a y sub 0 equals a certain value,
and a x sub 0 equals a certain value,
or y sub 1, x sub 1, depending on where you want to start.
So what we are suggesting is just the following.
I have a curve.
And at every point, I'm going to start with a certain point,
I'm given that certain point.
x sub 0 and y sub 0, so initial value problems.
So I know of all my set of solutions, all these graphs that can possibly form.
Because remember, in the end, we had this massive solution,
set of solutions where we had constants in them, c sub 1, c sub 2, etc.
But all of those, we put an initial value in,
and so we know which one we're dealing with.
So right at that initial point, we know, by a short little line element,
what the slope there is, because I can plug in my x sub 0 and y sub 0 in there.
And from that, I'm going to move across a certain value h,
which will take me from x sub n all the way to x sub n plus 1.
So I know what my new x value is going to be.
If this n started at 0, it will be x sub 0.
This will be x sub 0 plus 1, or x sub 1.
I know how to get x sub 1.
I take the previous one, and I just add to that the step size.
And I also know what this y value is.
I know exactly what this y value is.
And this is going to go up like that, up like that, until I get here.
And I know what my next, I know what this one is, y sub n.
And I can now calculate what y sub n plus 1 is going to be by exactly this equation.
I'm going to take my previous y sub n, which will be my initial one, y sub 0 that I'm given.
And I add to that the step size times the slope at the previous point.
Now, this is a convex curve at this point.
It's convex down.
We don't say down, we just say it's convex.
And you can well imagine that this approximate value is always going to be slightly less than the real value.
Slightly less.
So there's going to be this error.
So I'm always going to underestimate.
But you can well imagine if it's a concave curve, and I had my little line element there, which gives me my slope.
I'm always going to overestimate.
And depending on where I go, I'm always going to overestimate or underestimate, depending on whether it is concave or convex.
Okay, that's concave down, convex.
Now the other thing that you can well imagine, the smaller I make my step size, which is going to be a lot more work, because I've got to work out many more points.
But the smaller my step size is, the smaller my error is going to be.
And I'm going to stay with the curve quite a bit better.
And you can also imagine that there's some other ways.
I can also not only use the slope here, but use the slope here, and the slope there, and average them somehow.
Or use multiple points and approximate the slope there.
And I'm going to get a better average slope at this point.
And that's all other forms of numerical methods.
It's called higher order numerical methods.
In as much as order, meaning I use more points to average a slope.
So it's not just that slope Euler.
This is the first one.
I get more.
And you must have heard these terms.
Famous mathematicians Runger and Kata.
And usually Runger cut to four.
Fourth order one is the one that most computer systems use to draw this nice little curve for you.
If you give it a differential equation, and it's the one most commonly used.
So we're going to average four points and we're going to weight those.
So not give the slope at each point the same value and just divide it by.
I've got the slope at four points and divide by four to get the average.
I'm going to give them different values.
The first one, for instance, I'll give a weight of one.
The second one, two.
The third one, two.
The fourth one, one.
And I'll divide them by six.
So I'm going to give this weighted average of what the slope here should be.
And that approximates this curve or stays with this curve a lot better usually.
And gives me a better approximation.
So this is an analytical method.
I'm now going to develop all these points which is going to approximate the solution.
As I say, the first way of increasing the accuracy is just dropping this H, the size of the step size.
You can imagine the larger I make, the bigger this error of mine is going to be.
With the overall underestimating.
And the smaller I do, but the more work I'm going to do.
Because what will I have to do in the end?
I will have to draw, I will have to draw this table where I have N.
And I have X sub N and Y sub N and A sub N.
And just to make it easy, A sub H sub N.
I'm going to start with zero.
And I'm given a value there, X sub 0 and Y sub 0.
And according to that I can work out A sub N because A sub N is just that.
I'm given this differential equation so I can plug in values of X and Y.
So I get that.
I multiply it by my step size.
So I'll always have my step size here.
1 or half or quarter or whatever.
Multiply it by that.
So when I get to the new one.
To this I'm just going to add X sub 0 plus H.
It's going to be my X sub 1.
And this one I work out by this equation.
So I'm going to use the previous Y sub N.
And I'm going to use the previous H times that.
So I'm going to use that previous one.
And that gives me the new value here.
And according to those two I'm going to work out that one and that one.
And I move to the next line.
And here's going to be my table with my X, Y values, X, Y values, X, Y values.
And I'm going to plot them, plot them, plot them.
And that approximates very easily my solution.
