In this lecture I want to discuss acute cholangitis. I want to mention a few
highlights. We'll talk about the pathogenesis, how acute cholangitis develops, the organisms
involved under microbiology, what the clinical pictures, what you should look out for when you
see patients, the special investigations that you can do either laboratory wise or on the
imaging side. I want to talk about the management of this very dangerous condition and we'll
look at some specific types of cholangitis, the parasitic infections, AIDS cholangiopathy
and then lastly recurrent pyogenic cholangitis. Let's start. The highlights. What is cholangitis?
It's a potentially life-threatening obstruction and infection of the biliary tree. Lots of
alternate terms. Some people talk about ascending cholangitis. Some talk about suprative cholangitis.
It's all about the infection and growth of organisms in an obstructed biliary tree. What
do we look out for? It's Charcot's triad. What is that? It is these three symptoms and signs
of right upper quadrant pain, a patient with fever who actually has chills, that refers to
the bacteremia that we have here and of course jaundice. Those three combined is called Charcot's
triad. Now, 80% of cases of ascending cholangitis is from choledocholothiasis. That means gallstones
in the biliary tree. The rest, the patients that we see have either benign or malignant biliary
strictures, can develop as a complication of pancreatitis and also of biliary parasites and we'll look at that.
What is the priority in the management of these patients? It's fluid and electrolyte resuscitation,
broad-spectrum antibiotic cover, correction of your coagulopathy because most of these patients
will go for some form of procedure and the mainstay of therapy is biliary drainage. Got to drain that
pressurized infected biliary tree. Good. Let's start with acute ascending cholangitis. I'm going to
mention the pathogenesis, the causes, the microbiology, the clinical features, the
investigations and the management. So, I've said it before, it's a partial or complete
obstruction of the biliary tree which then overwhelms the normal defense mechanisms. Human beings don't
develop cholangitis. You have an intact sphincter of oddy that keeps organisms out of the biliary tree.
You have enterograde flow of bile that washes the system out. Bile salts help in the prevention of
infection. Immunoglobulin A produced by the cell walls. In the liver you have the kupfer cells which
take part in normal defense of the biliary tree. So, these get overwhelmed because of various
circumstances. You get multiplication of organisms. The pressure inside the biliary tree increases.
Very good blood supply. Those organisms get into the bloodstream. You have a bacteremia
and the patient goes into septic shock. Various thoughts is where these organisms actually come from.
They might be from the duodenum itself, from the portal venous system, some would suggest,
periodactyl lymphatics, secretions from the liver itself, an infected gallbladder. There's a variety of
ways for organisms to get into this obstructed biliary tree. Irrespective of where they come from,
with the raised intraluminal pressure, it does lead to systemic bacterial seeding and, as I mentioned,
leads to bacteremia, septic shock. Again, just with the causes, as I said, 80% plus are gallstones,
secondary stones, those that mean gallstones that come from the gallbladder, primary stones,
stones that develop inside the biliary tree themselves. You can also mention some complicated
forms of stone complications such as Meritzi syndrome. We can also put there. Then we see
bile duct strictures lower down. You get benign and malignant ones, benign post-operative. A patient
might have had an injury during a cholecystectomy. Acute and chronic pancreatitis can lead to damage and
stricture formation of the distal common bile duct. Primary sclerosing cholangitis, where there's fibrosis in the
biliary tree, autoimmune cholangitis, cholidoical cysts, biliary atresias, and on the malignant side,
cholangiocarcinoma, pancreatic cancers in the head of the pancreas, and pillory and duodenal cancers,
gallbladder cancers, and even a large volume of metastatic lymph nodes in the portohypetus. All those
malignancies can cause and will cause obstruction of the biliary tree. Instrumentation further down the
line. Any patient who's had cannulization of their biliary tree via ERCP, placement with a stent,
obstruction of that stent, any exogenous material that goes into or procedures done on that biliary
tree can cause cholangitis. Infections, parasitic, well described in certain parts of the world.
On the other side we do get the AIDS cholangiopathy, I'll talk about that. The oriental or recurrent
pyogenic cholangitis and various fungal infections, so a myriad of causes. Most commonly though you are
going to see stones and malignancies. 80% of people will have organisms on a blood culture. It's very
important to do a blood culture before starting broad spectrum antibiotics as the patient is admitted
and diagnosed. Most of these organisms are enteric in nature, so we're talking gram negatives.
Once a patient has had instrumentation, for instance in the ERCP, or they've had surgery though,
most of these infections become polymicrobial and you can see all sorts, gram negatives,
even gram positives and anaerobes, importantly the anaerobes. So what are we talking about? E. coli,
Clipsella, Enterobacter species, also some Enterococci, and as I said patients with instrumentation,
got a look at the anaerobes, Bacteroides and Clostridia.
In Asia we really have to think about parasites and secondary bacterial infection, not so common in
the rest of the world. Immunocompromised patients, specifically Africa, South America, areas such as
this where we see hepatitis C and HIV with cryptosporidium or cytomegalovirus or even candida infections.
So a wide variety of organisms to consider when deciding on antimicrobial therapy.
So what does the patient present with? I've mentioned Charcot's triad.
Now only 20 to 50 percent of people will actually have that very nicely defined picture.
There's also Reynolds Pentard, Pentard referring to 5, and that's just the addition to Charcot's triad of
hypertension and an altered mental state. Now there's nothing special about this Reynolds Pentard.
What is described here is a patient who's in septic shock. The process has gone on too far,
might have taken time for the patient to present, or there was an initial misdiagnosis in hospital,
time has passed, patient will eventually develop septic shock and that is what Reynolds Pentard refers to.
Jaundice also, not everyone with cholangitis has jaundice. Seen in 60 to 70 percent of cases,
certainly in the majority, but don't be fooled that if there's no jaundice this cannot be cholangitis.
It is still possible to be cholangitic without jaundice. The vast majority of patients will be there.
What am I trying to say is have a high index of suspicion, especially in the elderly,
they're not going to have all the symptoms and signs. Those with known anatomic abnormalities,
they've had a lap coli before, they're known to have an injury, they've had instrumentation before.
If they present with pain and fever, with or without jaundice, always a high index of suspicion that
this might be cholangitis and it might be worth your while to institute antibacterial
therapy and get your investigations done and your management.
What are you going to see on the blood tests that you do? Well, of course you're going to send
away full blood count. With that you're going to see either normal white cell count with a bit of
a left shift that's earlier, later on full-on leukocytosis and most commonly a neutrophilia.
If you do an ERCP, it will be raised. It might be raised from a variety of causes,
but certainly a raised CRP that keeps on rising is very suspicious. On your liver function test,
you are going to see a cholesthetic picture. What is that? You're going to see a conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia. As I mentioned, not everyone's jaundice, not everyone is going to have a raised
bilirubin levels, but certainly it would be in the vast majority of cases. Together with that,
your ductal enzymes will be up. Those are alkphos, alkaline phosphatase and chemoGT.
Not uncommon though to see the cellular enzymes raised as well, ALT and AST. You have to do blood
cultures before starting antibiotics, but don't let the taking of the blood cultures delay the start of
the broad spectrum antibiotics, but it helps you to de-escalate. It helps you to know what organism
you're dealing with a couple of days down the line. Imaging is important. The patient might have
the clinical picture. We've instituted our management and I'll talk about that, but we have to confirm
the diagnosis in some other form. Now the choice of imaging really depends on the availability and
the patient's condition. Now a transabdominal ultrasound would be the first investigation
most facilities would have available. It's easy, it's non-invasive and it's very good to show biliary
dilatation. Of course further down the tree it might get a bit difficult, hidden behind the gas in the
duodenum. Endoscopic ultrasound as opposed to transabdominal is a newer modality not available
commonly in many centers and expertise for it does not exist everywhere, but it has become part of the
working algorithm of many advanced units dealing with cholangitis. FNA aspirate can be taken and a
variety of procedures can actually be performed with endoscopic ultrasound. It really gives you
excellent sensitivity for common bile duct stones, all variety of ductal malignancies can be diagnosed,
you can get tissue from an endoscopic ultrasound as I said, and it really can also be less invasive
than an ERCP. We move on to a CT scan. Now a CT scan is going to be excellent to show you
other causes other than stones. Not all stones are seen on a CT scan, but certainly malignancies and
pancreatitis is cause of cholangitis can be seen. Remember it is like the transabdominal ultrasound
and purely diagnostic. There is a radiation risk and there is the risk of giving contrast to these
patients who might have a borderline renal function due to their septic state. So just be careful there.
MRCP, beautiful to do, nice delineation of anatomy, very sensitive for detecting the bile duct stones and other
causes of obstruction. Again purely diagnostic, expensive, limited availability, long waiting lists in many
places and of course patients with the large metal implants can't have an MRCP. Then we get to the ERCP,
that is the gold standard and it's preferred for the severely ill patients. You've got to decompress
the bile ducts as soon as possible and the most common way to do it is via an ERCP. Now PTC one should
also put in here as part of the imaging, that is where we're going to get access to the bile ducts,
not as ERCP which is endoscopically via the stomach and duodenum, but transcutaneously where access
is gained through the liver itself. Management. Well we're going to use, we have to diagnose,
we know now about the laboratory investigations, we know about the special investigations, but as far
as the diagnosis, confirming the diagnosis is concerned, we do go for this updated Tokyo guidelines.
You see there A, B and C, that's systemic inflammation, cholestasis and imaging. On the systemic
inflammation called A, temperature more than 38 degrees Celsius or chills, a white cell count less than
4 more than 10, under cholestasis a raised total bilirubin or alkaline phosphatase gamma GT,
ASTLT more than one and a half times normal values. And under C, imaging biliary dilatation
from whatever imaging technique you use, or on the actual imaging techniques the cause scene,
either strictures, stones or stents. Now if you have at least one in all three of A, B, C, that's a
definite diagnosis of acute cholangitis. If you have one in A, so they either have a temperature in
chills or a raised or very low white cell count, and then one from B or C, just one. So you certainly
don't always need that raised bilirubin, it is very suspicious of cholangitis. And that is the updated
Tokyo guidelines for diagnosis. So what do you have to do? You really have to distinguish
initially between mild, which might be self-limiting, and then the severe disease that is
life-threatening. If you do nothing about it, the mortality rate is extremely high. So what do I mean
by this mild self-limiting? If we think about stones, it is quite possible that a stone can pass
spontaneously. Don't rely on that happening though. A case that you see that's now mild will not be mild
again tomorrow. You've got to keep your eye on that patient. Certainly they don't have to be rushed
off for an ERCP, but you might very well find that the next morning the temperature is down,
the bilirubins are improving, their pain is gone, and it might very well be that that stone has passed.
More commonly though, you have to interfere. You have to do something about it. That stone has not passed
spontaneously, and the situation will deteriorate. So what do we do? We initiate fluid resuscitation
and electrolyte correction. Some of these patients do have electrolyte abnormalities,
and it forms part of your fluid resuscitation. So you commence antibiotic cover, broad spectrum,
talk about that, and you do it after taking cultures. Do not delay giving the antibiotics
though, just to get the cultures. But in a well set up system, that should be easy to do.
You've got to also diagnose and correct the coagulopathy. Many of these patients,
most of these patients are going to go for ERCP and you want to know that they don't have
coagulopathy, which they might very well have. You are obstructing the biliary system
and that is in the liver, at least is where you make your clotting factors.
So antibiotics. Your choice is really, it's irrespective of bile penetration. You have such
high pressures that it makes penetration poor, even of well excreted or hepatically excreted antibiotics.
It really is not that important, or bile penetration is really not that important.
So if a patient comes, community acquired, acetylcholingitis, withal stone, or malignancy,
broad spectrum penicillins, most notably we do use amoxicillin with clavulinic acid,
or even suprafloxacin, as far as the quinolins goes, might be good first choices.
Remember I said you have to think of anaerobes in the elderly, those with altered anatomy,
or those who have had prior instrumentation, and for those it is advisable just to add metroninazole.
Now, if this is hospital acquired, and the patient is severely ill, in septic shock, you might want to go
one step up, start a very broad spectrum with carbapenems or fourth generation kiflisporum.
And we usually stop when improving after the drainage. There's no such thing as a course of
antibiotics, and really if they have mild self-limiting and well-responding cases, you might
only use antibiotics for three days. And if they're very severe and they've had their drainage,
you might want to stop after about five to seven days. You want to see that the patient has responded well,
that there's no more signs of sepsis, and you can discontinue the antibiotics. Of course,
once your MCNS results are out, you can de-escalate, specifically in the severely ill that have
gone to the intensive care unit that you have started on the very broad spectrum, carbapenems or
fourth generation kiflisporum you want to de-escalate. And that is why it's so important to get your
blood cultures. I've said it many times now, biliary drainage is the most important aspect of the
management. And it can occur naturally, don't depend on that, by intervention most commonly. So what are the
interventions possible? Endoscopic, ERCP, percutaneous transhepatic, a PTC. Some of the centers have this
EUS and they have built it into the management algorithms and the various techniques that I will
just quickly mention. If nothing else is available, none of this, patients extremely ill, do not forget
good old-fashioned open surgery, common bile duct exploration, decompress that, leave in a T-tube,
and we can always think about definitive therapy later if the stone cannot be extracted under that
first setting. Stone is easy to extract. Extract it during that time. If the patient is too unstable,
can't get to the stone, too difficult, just put in a T-tube and get out. Of course, that has got to be
proximal to the obstruction. No use putting a T-tube distal to that. Good.
So endoscopic biliary drainage. The vast majority of the patients are going to have an ERCP and drainage.
And in most places of the world, at least there's access to, perhaps not at the facility, but
you are able to transfer the patient in stable condition to a center that allows for
this facility. So get a patient to a center with ERCP expertise. The severely ill within the first 24
hours. Really, 24 might be too long. That's really the outside limit. Get them to ERP's facility.
They need cannulization of their biliary tree and drainage of the duct and, if possible,
removal of the obstruction. If a stone is the course, of course. If they're moderately ill,
really within, you know, there's always these admissions on a Saturday or Sunday,
and within 48 hours at least you want that drainage to be done. After it's cannulized,
the biliary system is cannulized, it is decompressed first, and that aspirate is then sent for MCNS.
There's a variety of things to do, and it is at the choice of the endoscopist. They might do
stone extraction right there and then, with or without a sphincterotomy. Now, sphincterotomy
allows for larger stones to be extracted, easier stone extraction. It does lower the recurrence of
cholangitis, but there is this risk of bleeding, perforation, and you increase the risk of pancreatitis.
So it's a decision to be made. It might not be possible to extract the stone or the cause of
the obstruction. You might have to leave a drain or a temporizing stent. It might even be the prudent
thing to do if the patient is so severely ill that there really isn't time for anything more
complicated than just one drainage. That is at the discretion of the endoscopist. So what is the role
of the PTC then? Percutaneous transhepatic. So access is going to be gotten to the biliary tree,
through the skin, through the liver, advanced deeper and deeper until one of the larger
biliary ducts are cannulated. Seldinger technique over that guide wire, through the needle of guide
wire and over the guide wire, a drain. So it's more accessible. Many centers won't have ERCP,
but they will at least have radiology that can help with the PTC. It can be done on the local
anesthesia. It can be done in a very unstable patient that cannot go for general anesthetic,
cannot be transported to the endoscopy unit. The patient might just be too unstable. There's no,
I think, RCT is really to show which one is better. Of course, many units are set up for an ERCP.
It's much more definitive as far as the stone extraction is concerned and getting biopsies at
least. If it's malignant, many more things to be done by ERCP and that is preferred. There's higher
morbidity and mortality to the PTC. We see a lot of pain, bile peritonitis, hemorrhage, hemobilia,
definitely increased length of stay. So we really do reserve it for the unstable patients and the
patients that have a high lesion, a higher lesion, for instance, with cholangiocarcinoma,
with cholangitis that still need decompression because of that worsening cholangitis.
So really just for those patients and the very, very unstable with cholangitis, we consider PTC.
So the ultrasound guided biliary drainage, very specific to advanced centers and
in their algorithms, it's usually used when there's ERCP failure. There's the two techniques
of getting biliary drainage, the so-called rendezvous technique and the cholidochodiodenostomy technique
done over dilatation over a guide wire. So know about these, know that it's available but as I mentioned
really in advanced units. Then the vast majority of cases are from secondary gallstones, that means
gallstones from the gallbladder and it's prudent to do a cholecystectomy after the patient has recovered
fully to prevent further stones going down the cystic duct into the common bile duct.
I want to mention parasitic infections, seen in tropical countries. It's diagnosed by microscopy
of the stool bile or duodenal aspirate where you see the parasites. Serology is really of secondary
value. You might get positive serology because the patient does have the parasites but his jaundice
is not because of parasitic infection of the biliary tree. So it doesn't always help and you're going
to get a lot of negative serology, false negatives and false positives. It is managed medically,
medication and then reinvestigation of the patient and only in cases where your medical management
against the parasites with or without antibiotics fail that you would consider an ERCP.
More importantly, certainly around these parts, it's the AIDS cholangiopathy. It is a form of
sclerosing cholangiitis. In other words, there is fibrosis in the biliary tree as well.
And it results from infection by specific opportunistic organisms, mostly cryptosporidium
and cytomegalovirus. Patients present with right uppercutum pain, fever and chills and nausea,
so they look like cholangiitis, except that most of them are not jaundiced.
You do the liver functions though and you see a cholesthetic picture
with normal or near normal bilirubins. CT4 count is usually quite low, less than 100.
We will do an ultrasound under these sort of circumstances. It will see the duct dilatation,
you can do a CT scan and give you a better delineation of the intraepatic ducts at least.
ERCP will show signs at least of AIDS cholangiopathy. So pictures that are seen are the sclerosing
cholangitis with papillary stenosis, the sclerosing cholangitis alone, that's the fibrosis in the biliary
tree, the papillary stenosis alone or those with the long extraepatic strictures with or without
intraepatic strictures. Different pictures that are seen in ERCP. Antimicrobials are usually
ineffective in these patients. If they have papillary stenosis, sphincterotomy will be of help.
If the strictures are higher up, you can consider balloon dilatation or placing of stents.
If it's higher up, it might be problematic. You might have to do it via PTC.
Now the institution of heart really returns to patients immune function and in countries where
there's a good program with treating these patients, we really see seeing less and less
of the age cholangiopathy. Lastly, recurrent pyogenic cholangitis. It's a primary, also known as
primary hepatic lithiasis, recurrent pyogenic cholangitis, oriental cholangiopatitis.
There's intraepatic stones and recurrent attacks of cholangitis. There is an association with
parasitic infections and what we usually see is pigmented stones with calcium bilirubinate
and the hallmark of this is repeated attacks, repeated attacks and the treatment will basically
be as we've discussed before other than the fact that the fibrosis might develop. As you see at the
bottom, they might eventually develop secundary biliary cirrhosis in 10% and up to 10% might even
develop cholangiocarcinoma. So either ERCP or PTC is still going to drain the system. As I said now,
these stitches do cause the problems and it might even be so bad that we need segmental resections
of the liver. So that is it for acute cholangitis. Most importantly, fluid resuscitate the patient,
start broad spectrum antibiotics after getting blood cultures and get your imaging. You are going to see
the obstructive pattern on your liver functions. Remember the Tokyo guidelines for the diagnosis
an ultrasound which most of us will start with. You will see the dilatation. You might have a CT scan as
well which will give you a better definition and show the other causes as I said. And then the patient
needs drainage. After the drainage, the patient needs eventually, when they are better, a cholycystectomy.
Thanks.
