So let's start having a look at the physiology and a bit of anatomy of the cardiovascular system.
No doubt you've learned a lot about it in medical school, but that might be worthwhile for us just to go through one or two things.
In this chapter, a very brief and schematic look at the anatomy of the heart.
We'll ask the question, what does the cardiovascular system do?
And I might use the term heart and cardiovascular system interchangeably.
How does it function?
What are the mechanisms that regulate pressure?
And what are the mechanisms that regulate each of these mechanisms that regulate the pressure?
Okay, interesting. Let's get going.
The anatomy. Now the heart has four chambers, as you know.
There's a schematic of it. The right atrium, the right ventricle, the left atrium and the left ventricle.
Now that is certainly the way that we are taught in medical school.
It's actually a lot more complex than that.
We know that there are auricles on the right atrium and the left atrium, which we don't pay particular attention to in early classes on anatomy.
But certainly they play a big role.
This is a big role.
I have unfortunately on too many occasions had to put very large bore lines in the right auricle.
And at some cases even putting folies catheters into the right auricle, handing it over to the anethnotist,
so that he could do massive and rapid transfusion through those lines directly into the right side of the heart,
trying to, in a last ditch attempt to save a patient dying of massive hemorrhage.
So certainly there are the auricles there as well.
For our purposes here, right atrium, right ventricle, left atrium, left ventricle.
We can see that there are two inputs and two outputs for these systems.
So blood will return to the right atrium and there will be a certain pressure associated with that,
a mean pressure of about five millimeters of mercury.
We've got these all in millimeters of mercury.
Now that comes from the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava.
It will go into the right ventricle.
The right ventricle contracts during that contraction, called systole.
There will be a lowish pressure, peak pressure of about 20 millimeters of mercury.
When it relaxes, there will be a pressure of about five millimeters of mercury.
It then pushes that blood out.
Now there is very poor oxygen in this blood, rich in carbon dioxide.
Pushes it out the pulmonary arteries.
So those will be the only arteries with oxygen poor blood.
Into the lungs.
And in that pulmonary artery we'll get pressures of about 25 during systole and 8 millimeters of mercury during diastole.
It then goes through this whole capillary network for gas exchange and all sorts of other things.
And then return to the left side of the heart.
Now oxygen rich, CO2 removed.
And that pressure there will be about on the other side of the whole capillary bed.
In the lungs will be at about 8 millimeters of mercury.
Into the left ventricle.
That will contract with peak pressures of about 120 millimeters of mercury that the pressure in the chamber reaches.
And 8.
Quite lowish doing diastole.
And then out into the aorta through the body, through its capillary system.
All the way back and the cycle starts again.
And the cycle starts again.
So we have two capillary bed systems.
The systemic system.
There's the blood pressure 120 over 80 systole, diastole.
And the pulmonary capillary system.
So what happens?
Well the blood goes through arteries.
Major arteries.
The first one the aorta.
Right brachiocephalic.
With the brachiocephalic, with the carotids, with the subclavians, etc.
From the arch of the aorta.
We eventually get into smaller arterioles.
They are smaller.
They contain muscle in the wall that can contract.
Closing down the diameter.
Closing down the diameter of the vessels.
And we know if we have a tube.
If you have a balloon and you squash that balloon.
Now that's air.
The pressure goes up.
You can't really take a liquid and compress it that easily.
Minimal.
But the pressure will definitely rise through this whole system.
Then the capillaries.
Where all the exchange takes place.
So small, so thin.
Under a microscope.
You see these single cells actually move through them.
Single cell lines move through them.
Now we get little venules past that capillary system.
There's a confluence of many of these capillaries into venules.
Eventually into larger and larger veins.
Until we get the inferior vena cava and the superior vena cava at the top.
So this whole system of moving blood around.
But what does the cardiovascular system.
Interesting.
Phenomenally interesting.
The mechanisms that control it.
The struggles that we have in the intensive care unit.
To manage this whole system.
Is so beautiful and so intricate.
Which obviously makes it a quite interesting topic.
Of course in space medicine.
But why do we have all of this?
Well we require it for a few things.
We require it basically for cell function.
Each and every living cell in your body needs gases.
It needs oxygen.
It needs to get rid of carbon dioxide.
It needs nutrients.
Each and every cell.
And it has to get rid of byproducts of metabolism.
And these cells need to be controlled somehow.
To increase their work.
To decrease their work.
Whatever that specific cell is.
And for that.
We also have the blood stream.
The mechanisms that control many of the functions in these cells.
A message needs to be sent to them.
And the cardiovascular system is that highway to get these messages there.
One of at least the highways to get the messages there.
So when we just look at single cells.
Organisms with only a few cells.
They are in touch with the environment.
They can exchange gases and nutrients.
Right across the cell membrane between them and the environment.
As we get to the multicellular system.
It's not that easy.
You cannot just dump the garbage on the outside of your house.
And that's the end of the story.
Someone actually needs to come and collect it and take it away.
You can't just dump it outside.
So in a multicell organism.
To go buy food.
To put your garbage out.
Etc.
You need a whole mechanism of moving things in and out.
So that's why we have a cardiovascular system.
Now how does this whole system function?
Well this is physically.
Quite easy.
It works from a concept of pressure differential.
We just saw the higher pressures there on the left side.
As it moves the blood forward.
As we go from arteries, arterioles to capillaries.
The pressure goes down, down, down.
It's a higher pressure that drives the system.
Now depending on the position of course of the human body.
If you are in a standing position.
There is also pressure differential.
So all that blood needs to be pushed all the way back up against gravity.
So gravity plays an enormous part in this circulation.
And how the body, how the cardiovascular system is put together.
To drive this pressure differential.
When you lie down in a recumbent position things change.
And when you take gravity away things change dramatically.
Pressure plays an enormous part.
And gravity plays as big a part in this pressure differential as anything else.
And therefore in space medicine.
It becomes crucial.
The effect of weightlessness.
Of effectively removing the force of gravity.
By this circular motion around the planet.
Causes problems for us.
As far as the maintenance of this pressure differential is concerned.
So if the function is driven by pressure.
What mechanisms regulate this function which is pressure?
Well here they are.
No particular order.
And also not the full story.
There is volume.
There is the heart rate.
There is stroke volume.
There is viscosity.
And there is vessel radius.
Let's look at the volume.
Now the blood consists of many things.
Everything dissolved in water.
And cells as well.
Many immune cells.
Red blood cells.
Platelets.
Etc.
So how do we regulate the volume.
In a 70 kilogram man.
There is about 5 liters of volume.
Well we can put water into the tank.
We can let water out of the tank.
And we can even produce.
We have a factory to produce water inside the tank.
And we know if we take oxygen.
And we burn a substrate.
Like glucose.
What are we going to get from this?
Well we are going to get CO2 of course.
That we have to expel.
But we also produce water.
So there is certainly.
Definitely.
A water production.
System.
So the intake.
We can regulate the intake by thirst.
If the osmolality goes up.
In other words.
Your blood becomes salty.
There are receptors in your brain.
Which can recognize this.
You can secrete anti-diuretic hormone.
Diuretic meaning excretion of urine.
Anti meaning against that.
So you are going to hold urine back.
You are not going to produce as much urine.
So you can hold volume back.
Fluid back.
Which gives you extra volume.
You will also develop the sensation of thirst.
So which drives you to go get.
Some liquid to drink.
We can also.
Manage it by the.
Renin angiotensin aldosterone system.
Which has a huge effect on the cardiovascular system.
Let's have a quick look at that.
That is always quite interesting.
So if you have a low blood volume.
Or low blood pressure.
Or your kidneys sense that there is a low glomerular.
Glomerul.
Glomerul.
Glomerul.
Glomerul.
Glomerul.
Glomerul.
That's funny.
Filtration rate.
GFR.
You are going to produce renin.
Renin is an enzyme.
And it is produced by the juxtaglomerular cells in the kidney.
Yeah.
I almost got it right this time.
So you produce renin.
There is a polypeptide that circulates in your blood.
Which is made in the liver.
Called angiotensin.
Angiotensin.
Angiotensin.
The name says what it does.
Tenses up the blood vessels.
And it cleaves this angiotensin into something active.
An active polypeptide called angiotensin 1.
Angiotensin 1.
Which needs to be converted to angiotensin 2 by another.
By another enzyme called angiotensin converting enzyme.
And that enzyme was initially worked on to produce medication to lower blood pressure.
So that angiotensin 2 can.
Well this ACE inhibitor of all places made in the lungs.
Or mostly in the lungs.
There is other places too.
Well it can vasoconstrict.
And it vasoconstricts those afferent arterioles.
Before it gets to the capillaries.
So they constrict.
And it rises the pressure in the arterial system.
In the kidneys though.
It is actually the afferent vessels after the glomerulus.
So it rises the pressure in the glomerulus.
So there is more filtration.
So the kidneys still work.
So depending on where the system in the body is.
You get various areas that get vasoconstriction.
But this angiotensin 2 certainly raises your blood pressure.
Your arterial blood pressure.
It also gives you vasoconstriction of different beds.
Vasoconstriction.
But it also gives you the release of aldosterone.
Aldosterone.
Aldosterone.
So this aldosterone comes from the adrenal cortex.
Cells in the adrenal cortex.
And that actually causes reabsorption of salt.
Specifically sodium.
And together with that we get water.
That gets retained or reabsorbed into the body.
From the renal system.
So we increase the volume.
So a fantastic system.
And there is actually micro little.
Renin angiotensin systems throughout different areas of the body.
But certainly the kidneys and then from the lungs.
The ACE inhibitor from the liver.
Your angiotensin.
All play a major part.
So anti-diuretic hormone will have this same kind of effect.
Anti-diuresis.
Won't let water out.
Retaining salt and water.
That comes straight from the brain.
So there is all these mechanisms that can work to increase the volume.
Not as fast.
Not as rapid.
So if someone exsanguinates.
We do put up large pore lines.
And we give them volume.
Under restricted conditions these days.
We don't just believe in filling a human being up with as much fluid as we can.
Until such time as we have control over bleeding.
We do hold back things a bit these days.
Ok.
So very interesting as far as this is concerned.
We can not only control volume.
But we can also control the heart rate.
If the heart beats faster.
More blood gets pushed through.
Actually to some extent also increases the pressure.
And that's mostly under the autonomic nervous system.
There is a sympathetic.
Sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways.
They are going to increase heart rate.
And under restful conditions.
The parasympathetic tone is predominant.
And you have a resting heart rate.
For very fit individuals.
Fit astronauts.
They go up.
Quite a low heart rate for unfit individuals.
A bit faster.
My resting heart rate.
You can use this to boost a bit.
It is about 48 beats per minute.
Because I am an avid cyclist.
And jogger.
So I try to keep massively fit.
So there we go.
We can regulate it through the sympathetic system.
Now this usually works on baroreceptors.
Barro meaning pressure.
And a receptor.
Little cells.
With very specific function.
That can measure pressure.
Or at least in some form measure pressure.
We get those in the aortic bodies.
So in the arch of the aorta.
In the arch of the aorta.
Which gives off the right brachiocephalic.
Which goes up into the carotid.
Right side to the right subclavian.
Gives off the left common carotid.
Left subclavian.
Then goes down as the descending aorta.
In that arch.
We get the baroreceptor.
The aortic body.
But we also get the carotid bodies.
Carotid bodies.
Now they sit almost there.
At the bifurcation of the common carotid.
As it goes into the internal and external carotids.
Thinking back of it.
I have a special connection with the carotid bodies.
I had a carotid body tumor case.
In my final exams.
My final specialist surgery exams.
I had a patient with a carotid body tumor.
In any way they can measure pressure.
If the pressure drops.
It stimulates sympathetic outflow.
And you get an increase in heart rate.
If I were to give you adrenaline.
It will stimulate the sympathetic pathways.
And we will increase the heart rate.
We need not only increase the heart rate though.
We can also increase the contractility of the heart.
The power that it generates.
The contractility.
And that's called.
Well if this increases.
That's a chronotropic effect.
Chronotropic.
And this is inotropic.
You also get dromotropic.
But let's look at the inotropic.
So the regulation of that stroke volume.
I can make that heart contract better.
And if it does.
By stroke volume.
That is how much blood gets pushed out of the ventricles.
By each contraction.
Okay.
And that.
If I just do that.
If I have heart rate.
And I multiply.
So it's so many beats per minute.
And I multiply it by stroke volume.
I get the cardiac output.
So how many liters per minute comes out.
Because this is in per minutes.
This is in milliliters.
So so many milliliters per minute.
Now we see here.
Preload contractility and afterload.
Preload.
I am supplying blood to the heart.
That is the preload.
The more volume there is to give to that.
The better.
Now this comes from the venous system.
Which we already saw.
Was a very low pressure system.
A very low pressure system.
So it can't really.
It can't play a major role.
By contracting like the arterial system.
And we do think in astronauts.
You know that.
That loss.
Under the loss of gravity.
Plays an enormous part.
In the preload side of things.
And we'll get to that a bit later.
So preload plays an enormous part.
Contractility then.
The better it contracts.
And the sympathetic.
Or giving a patient adrenaline.
Noradrenaline.
Or as the North Americans would know.
It's epinephrine.
And nor epinephrine.
I can increase the contractility as well.
And then afterload.
We looked at the arterial blood pressure.
As those arterials contract.
Under the angiotensin II.
We get increased afterload.
So this heart has to pump against a higher pressure.
Okay.
So that all plays a part in stroke volume.
The last two things.
Very quick mention.
I won't say much about this.
We're already at 20 minutes.
It's the viscosity.
And that means.
How much it flows.
There's a difference in viscosity.
Between water and honey.
Okay.
So.
Certainly proteins and fluid.
Can play a role in viscosity.
And that can alter the pressure as well.
And then lastly.
Vessel radius.
Which we've talked about before.
So I can contract the arterials.
And I can increase at least.
The systemic arterial pressure.
So that's an overview.
Of the cardiovascular system.
And the few specifics.
That I mentioned.
That we'll see.
We'll mention again.
As we come to the effects.
Of space travel.
On these various systems.
Brief overview.
You've learned a lot about this.
In medical school.
And should know it.
In quite a bit of detail.
Specifically studying physiology.
From this knowledge.
Here.
We'll move on to the effects.
That space travel has.
On the cardiovascular system.
In the Jinfair system.
Ordinary PODIOT.
So.
rires.
To be aware.
Now to get to.
The exerciseettle.
About the tireless bloody brain.
To use IA.
And this can't help.
To be aware.
More
ders.
To get.
To getि See.
