Let's do this initial value problem where I have the first derivative of y equals negative x over y,
but I have some initial condition. Once I have an initial condition, I'm hoping to select one of the family of solutions
and get an exact solution by getting an exact constant value for my constant c.
It's easy to separate these variables. I'll have y dy equals negative x dx.
I can transform this by taking the integral of both sides, but I'll bring that negative inside,
and that'll leave me with a half y squared equals negative. That'll be a negative there, and then a half x squared plus c.
I can multiply by 2 all the way. That will leave me with y squared equals minus, if I multiply 2 in there,
inside, that'll be x squared plus, let's call that x1, c1, 2 times c1.
Now I've got to take the square root to get to a value of y, but obviously this negative can be an issue for me.
I'm going to distribute the negative in, though. That'll leave me with y squared equals negative 2c1,
but that depends what c1 is. It can be anything, so it might as well be a c minus x squared.
Now if I just rewrite the square, well, I can rewrite this y equals the square root of c minus x squared.
I can certainly have it there, and if I find my ruler, which I don't know where it is on my table,
well, let's do that, the square root.
I recognize this as the equation for a circle, and it'll have a radius depending on what the value of c is.
I do note, though, that I have this initial condition, so I can say negative 3 equals the square root of c minus 16.
c minus 16. I can square both sides, so it's going to be c minus 16,
and that means c equals 25, which is 5 squared.
So I'm going to choose, of all my circles, I'm going to choose this exact one with a radius of 5.
So x squared plus y squared equals 5 squared from here.
But I notice my initial value condition has a 0.4 comma negative 3, which is out here,
because, remember, if I rewrite this, that will be the square root of 5 squared minus x squared,
but it has to be, which is, depending on whether it's plus or minus,
if it's plus minus, it'll be the whole circle,
but my initial value says that my point is out here on the bottom bit.
That leaves me with a negative out there.
That leaves me with y equals negative the square root of 25 minus x squared as my final answer.
I just have to note what my initial condition was.
So I can't put the plus, minus, or just the plus, the square root of that,
because that would have left me up there, and it is not a solution,
and my initial value condition then would not fall in my final solution.
All right.
Thank you.
