Now that we've seen Euler's method, I want to talk about these predictor-corrector methods.
Remember we said if we had this curve, and this was our x0 spot, it would give us a y0 there.
And y prime, remember, was just the f of x sub n, y sub n.
So that's what we were given in our differential equation.
So we know what the slope is here where we started.
We moved across value h so that we got to x sub 1.
And we just plugged in to get this point.
So this point here would have been our x sub 0, y sub 0 point.
And here we have now our x sub 1 and y sub 1 point.
And if this was the true solution here, remember we would have gotten a series of points here now.
And every time we were going to underestimate this problem because this curve here is convex at this time.
So we really need to get a method where we get closer to this point.
And if you just look at it, well, if my slope, which I got by plugging in x0 and y0 here.
If I just had my, could do something to the slope because if I started it up a bit, you know, I could get closer and my error would be less.
And that's what we're going to do.
And that's what we're going to do.
We want to correct this slope to something else.
And the way that we're going to do that is just to predict what happens in the future.
So I'm going to take, in essence, the values that I got from Euler's method.
The values that I got from Euler's method.
And into that I'm going to plug here those two values.
Those two values I'll plug in here, which gives me a new slope.
And this slope would perhaps run here or it would run something like that.
Remember, it's as if I was taking the slope there with that point.
So I've got this slope and this slope.
And if I just average them out.
So I add that value to that value, that value of the slope, that value of the slope.
So in essence, I'm going to take the f of x0 and y0 plus this new x1 and y1, which I got from Euler's method.
And I average them.
I just add them and divide by 2, which would give me this new slope, which would give me a new x1 and y1 value,
which is closer to what the real thing was going to be.
So I'm predicting what the slope would have been.
So I get Euler's method.
I get x1 and y1 values with Euler's method.
And remember, my next, so x sub 1 in this instance would be the previous one plus this h.
And the y of n plus 1 is just going to be the previous one plus this h times the f of the previous ones.
So that's how I got this point.
I now calculate this point.
I have an x and y value.
I plug that in there, which gives me a new slope.
I take the old slope I got from Euler's method.
I add to it this new predicted slope and I divide it by 2.
I just get the average of the 2.
Okay.
And once I have the average of the 2, once I have the average of that 2, I use that to get new points.
Now you can see that new x point is going to be the same as the old one.
But the new y1 is a bit different.
And usually we call this, now becomes that's y n sub 1 star.
And we get that the new n sub 1 is going to be the old n sub 1 plus h times, not that, plus h times.
This x0 and y0, so the old ones, plus the f of these new ones, but this new one is this value, this star value.
And I just divide this by 2.
And I just divide that by 2.
So understand carefully, I've got to first get this, I've first got to get this point by Euler's method.
I then use that point to plug those values into the slope there.
In essence I get a new slope there.
And then average those two slopes, divide it by 2, which I now multiply by this and I add it to the previous one to get the new real y1.
This was just in essence a fake x1 and y1.
Okay, I'm going to develop a new y1.
The real predicted, corrected method.
Okay.
Because I'm using two slopes, this is called an improved Euler's method or it's a second order.
Second order method.
I suppose until we do an example, it remains a bit unclear as to what one has to do.
So what I'm just saying to get the real new y1, I'm going to take the previous y0 plus h times my starting point plus this.
But that star is not this y1, it's the y1 I would have gotten if I just used Euler's method.
Because remember in Euler's method I went from this point to that point.
Okay, so I have my previous slope, my previous point slope, usually given x sub 0 and y sub 0.
And I plug into, and I do this again, get y prime again by plugging in the next x sub 1, the next x.
And then this fake one, this fake one is the one I would have gotten if I just used Euler's method.
That gives me a new value there and I average these two.
That one plus that one divided by two.
And that gives me my new improved y sub 1.
Space, zoom, 8 in.
And our 속 Soho.
How about you?
In the weather, these some is so sweet.
I even told you we deal with a summer season.
There's a more heat, some cool drops.
There's a lot of tropation.
We do that now.
Don't get
