So now that we know a little bit more about degrees of freedom, let's develop some intuition
as far as classical dynamics is concerned.
Now do this thought experiment.
I mean you can beautifully imagine this in your mind, but if you have the facilities,
go do that yourself.
You have a very strong spring and you tie that to the roof and you tie a mass of a known magnitude there.
And you notice if it pulls down, if you hang it, it pulls the spring down
and you can actually measure it without the load and then with the load
and you'll see well it goes down a certain distance.
Now you know exactly what the force on the spring is caused by this mass because we know weight,
which is gravitational force, just the mass times gravitational acceleration, G.
So you know exactly what that force is.
And what you now notice, well, if you double or if you change this downward force by changing this mass,
G stays constant, you're doing it in the same laboratory,
and it's going to pull down a bit further.
And you can plot these.
If I put this force on, the spring pulls out that distance.
If I put another force on, it pulls down a different distance.
And what you eventually notice is the following.
And this is really school physics, but what you notice is there's a direct linear relationship between the force and the distance.
Now let's just call that distance X in as much as we'll plot this.
Not as a Y axis, but as the X axis and the distance that it pulls down.
We should call that distance X.
So the force in this instance is down and it pulls a certain distance down.
So when you do this proportionality, or when you do this experiment and you plot force and the distance that it pulls out X.
Force, X, force, X.
You see, well, there's a direct linear relationship.
And when there's that, we know we can put in a constant of proportionality.
And we'll call that constant of proportionality X.
A K, I should say.
And then from school, we'll also know that that's Hook's law for spring.
We needn't go there.
But with any reason, we can suggest that definitely there's a spring constant.
Because we can also then do the same force, the same distance, and for a different spring we'll get a different K value there.
So we can actually work out what K is for each and every spring by just putting X on this side.
As simple as that.
That's not the point though.
There is this relationship.
Now, I apply an added force.
Well, what I'm getting at, let me just show you directly what we're getting at.
What we are getting at directly is that force can also be written as, force can also be written as mass times acceleration, which is X double dot.
And the dots refer to the fact that here we are dealing with a time derivative.
Or I can also say that the force here is mass times d squared X dt squared.
That's what we're dealing with.
And if we say that that equals KX, that equals KX, we are dealing with what?
We are dealing with a differential equation in as much as we have a variable X.
And we have one of its derivatives here, the second derivative in that.
So what can we write?
Let's just write this as X prime prime, whichever way you want to write this.
So I'm going to have that in X prime prime.
And now, we've just got to be careful with the signs here.
And what we do with that.
We know that this force, that the spring pulls up.
Now, that was the force down.
You can still draw them.
There must also be a force in the opposite direction.
That's what the spring pulls on that mass.
Okay, so that we do reach equilibrium.
If you hang that mass there, it's just going to hang there.
It's at equilibrium.
And therefore, forces must balance.
So we must just be very careful what we do here.
So we know that because it's a restorative force, we usually have something like that.
If we now have that negative in there, we bring it over to the other side.
Plus KX equals zero.
And I can also just divide everything by mass.
And I have X double prime plus K over M.
X equals zero.
And that is a differential equation.
That is a differential equation.
And how are we going to solve this differential equation?
And that's why you can't really do proper physics, proper classical dynamics,
if you don't know linear algebra, and you haven't had a course in differential equations.
Now, fortunately, these are some, these are one of the easiest differential equations to solve.
Inasmuch as, and just remember this, just for a bit of revision, I can write something as dx dt.
I can write this as x prime.
I can also write this as dx.
So that's all the different notations.
So to think about it, I could have written that as d squared of x plus K over M of x equals zero.
And you will notice this is a homogeneous differential equation in second order.
And because it's homogeneous, it's equal to zero.
Remember I can make use of the auxiliary equation.
I can say M squared plus K over M equals zero.
Now that M is not that M, so probably I should call this something else.
And usually we call K over M, we call that omega squared.
And perhaps we'll get to how that is.
This is the angular velocity.
In angular velocity, omega equals 2 pi mu.
That's 2 pi times the frequency.
The frequency is how many times per second.
Now it's very easy to do.
Just as you had the intuitive thought experiment of the mass just hanging there.
And how we got to this differential equation to start off with.
You can also imagine a wheel turning.
And on the periphery of that wheel, constant motion, the periphery of that wheel is a little light.
And if you now view it edge on exactly like this, all you'll see is actually this mass on the spring going up and down.
It's exactly the same motion.
And we can show that this is such.
So usually here we'll have omega squared.
Omega squared will have omega squared.
And we'll show, perhaps I'll show, that the spring constant divided by mass gives you the square of the angular velocity.
And the angular velocity is in radians per second.
How many widths up and down motion can be expressed as radians per second.
This is how many radians per second.
If I drew a line on this disc that's spinning and it goes certain radians, a unit of angles, certain radians per second.
Okay, we can express this as this.
And this is an easy, very easy equation to solve.
In other words, I can have that m squared equals negative omega squared.
And in the next video we'll do, maybe I'll put some values in here and we'll show, I'll still decide, that how to get the solution, how to get the solution to this.
This is obviously going to be negative.
In other words, we are going to deal with, we are going to deal with imaginary numbers here.
And this is a beautiful movie Hansel 문haiспart
This is a beautiful
movie Hansel and I will say, hey man, what the score looks like and you Ц.?
I'll do this too, maybe a square of water right.
It will just be a few things, when itивает.
And this would be a tough movie, that was a hard movie.
And that's where I can't read.
