Good, now we've looked at this model of the erect and the supine patient, but there's
some problems because we send people in space and we notice what we explain now doesn't
really happen.
So what are the problems we're dealing with?
We do notice that the GFR, the blood flow rate through the glomeruli, increased by about
19%.
That creates a bit of a problem for us because the urinary output actually drops.
Now we just said if you lie down, your urinary output by the physiological methods that we
mentioned should actually be going up and it actually decreases by quite a bit.
There's certainly no diuresis and there's certainly no natriuresis.
So where does this come from?
Now there are a few confounding problems.
Remember, some astronauts decide to do what they call fly and dry.
In other words, they will restrict their fluid intake before they go up.
They don't want that introduction of motion sickness, nausea.
There's various reasons why they do that.
The urinary problems, although they can urinate in the spacesuit, remember they'll be in a
position lying down with their hips and the knees flexed by 90 degrees for up to two and
a half hours, even up to four hours before a launch can be aborted.
And so they don't want to urinate in the suit, even though there are the pads and there's
an ability to do that.
They don't want it if they fly dry.
Even those that don't, I'm not going to, I still see, even those that take in normal
amounts of fluid, still see this urinary output decrease.
So that's contrary to what we just said, which should happen physiologically and at least
if we look at what happens in the erect and supine positions.
Another little problem, just by the way, you get a bit distracted, is obviously there's
a problem with the fly and dry as well.
Inasmuch as they will have volume depletion and in an emergency, if they do have to get
up and abort and get out quickly, they will develop orthostatic hypertension as they try
and get out quickly.
And remember, they're carrying a full space suit with all the life support systems, which
can be about 45 kilograms that they're carrying.
So that might be a problem with flying dry.
Anyway, even if they don't, there seems to be still this decrease in urinary output.
There's certainly no diuresis as we would expect there to be.
We would expect there to be, but there's none.
There's no natriuresis to drive this diuretic process.
And we actually, we said, well, the ADH should go down, but we see, well, this ADH actually
goes up, so what's going on here?
And the thirst levels go down.
Now, those two don't go together either.
So say, for instance, you're in the desert and you've lost your way and you don't have
enough water, you are going to become thirsty.
The hyperosmolar nature of your plasma is going to drive the thirst and you're going to try
and hold the urine back to maintain that.
So your ADH is certainly going to go up, but you're going to get thirsty.
Now, you don't get thirsty, but your ADH goes up.
So those two don't go together at all.
And certainly, there is definitely a decreased thirst in microgravity.
And another thing that happens is that the insensible losses go down.
Now, we know when it gets cold in winter times, you actually start urinating more.
Some people actually have to get up at night, urinate in winter time because they don't
have the insensible losses, so they have to excrete it by the urine.
So these two don't go together either.
So how can we explain some of these things?
Now, remember, there is this fluid redistribution.
Certainly, there is what's called the chicken leg or the bird leg and the puffy face syndrome.
In other words, there can be a 10% or more decrease in the thigh volume.
So there's loss of interstitial volume definitely in the legs and volume in the vasculature of
the legs as well.
So the legs actually get thinner.
And anything above the level of the heart, now remember, there's a substantial amount of
volume below, there's more volume below than there is above the cardiac level.
But anyway, you do get that redistribution in the puffy face.
So there is this fluid redistribution, but it certainly doesn't have the effects that
we think it has.
One of the major things that was found was that there is a decrease in the intrathoracic
pressure.
In the microgravity, the chest cavity and the abdominal cavity will expand a bit.
So there's less of a pressure inside these two cavities.
In other words, I mean, there are catheters that will play central venous catheters.
And we notice that even though there's a larger volume that goes in the preload, there's actually
a decrease in central venous pressure.
So you go from 1G and you go into 0G.
With all that blood coming back to the heart, there's actually a decrease in the central venous
pressure.
And that's explained by this.
I think it's explained by this.
There's a decrease in the thoracic pressure as the chest cavity and the abdomen distends.
So there's transvessel and transcardiac pressures increase.
In other words, the pressure inside the vessel, inside the heart, and then the pressure inside
the thoracic cavity.
Because this drops down so much due to the expansion of the chest, and there's more volume
coming in here, there is more of a pressure differential there, which allows for this
vessel distension and atria distension even more, and hence the pressure falls there.
It doesn't increase as we think it does.
Now, we do think that the central blood volume, there's a lot more volume inside the central
blood system, central area now, central blood volume is increased, and that is what drives
down the thirst.
We know this because you can do experiments where the blood, where the can is actually
hyperosmolar and their thirst levels still go down.
When it should go up, remember the guy in the desert, his thirst goes up because of that
hyperosmolarity.
But even if you do that in zero G, that increase in central blood volume will drive down the mechanisms
that induce a feeling of thirst.
Now, the ADH, which should go down, as we said, actually goes up.
Now, there's a bit of a problem here.
Remember, you go from one G to zero G very quickly.
There's no, it doesn't take days to happen.
It's within, and there's a lot of stress effects on that launch and the Gs that take place there.
So, I think it's this increased stress effect that actually increases that ADH, and not necessarily
the natural physiological effects, just of the distribution of volume.
Now, there is initially an increase in this ATL and atriuretic peptide or factor, but it's
overridden initially, at least by this mechanism.
And eventually, within a few days, it starts falling.
So, that drive for a possible diuresis just disappears.
So, we maintain this issue of not diuresing.
So, where does all this blood volume go?
Where does all this plasma volume go?
There's actually up to 70% decrease in plasma volume in astronauts and in microgravity or
zero G.
So, where does all of this water now go?
It's not coming out via the urine.
The insensible losses is definitely down.
So, where does it go?
Well, remember, there is a decrease in thirst and there's definitely a decrease in fluid intake.
But what we do notice is that the total body water stays about the same.
Now, you might say, well, the puffiness there, maybe it's because it's distributed in the
extracellular space.
But certainly, that appears not to be the case either as there are measurements to show that
the extracellular volume also depletes.
So, where does it go is the only place left for it to go is the intracellular capacity that
increases so that water goes to the intracellular space.
So, there is ionic issues with that, specifically potassium.
We know there's not a sodium shift, so there's a bit of potassium shift and we'll look at
this a bit later.
There's a potassium shift and we'll look at that later.
But certainly increased intracellular capacity and we know there's an enormous intracellular
volume capacity that does exist.
Now, the one place where water doesn't accumulate though is the red blood cell and the red blood
cell mass actually goes down.
It goes down.
And there's definitely a decrease in the erythropodin EPO production.
You don't make as much red blood cells, so therefore the red blood cell mass goes down.
But there also seems to be a preferential destruction of younger red blood cells and they are large and
they carry more volume in zero G. So, except for the red blood cells, it definitely increased
in intracellular water accumulation.
So, this picture looks a lot different, counterintuitive from what we would expect from a patient
who's upright and then, and then, surprise, and then astronauts, things look a little bit different.
