So let's go for an example. I have a function there y' equals x times y and I'm giving initial
values that x sub 0 is 1 and y sub 0 is 1. So let's set up what you have to do first set up
Euler's method. So what does it say? I'm going to have a set values of n which is 0, 1, 2.
Let's just go for that. So I have x sub n and y sub n and then f of x sub n and y sub n and
then I suppose we can have h times the f of x sub n and y sub n. That's what we need.
Okay that's exactly what we need. So let's set for this one just to be very easy we set our step size
to be 1 which is enormous but just to make things easier. So x sub 0 I was given 1. y sub 0 is 1.
So I have my first two points. It's easy. The f of x sub 0 and y sub 0 is 1 times 1 is 1.
And h times that h is 1. 1 times 1 that's just 1. Okay so that's going to be my first plot of numbers.
So to get to x sub 1 this is the previous x plus h n. So that's going to give me 2.
y sub 2. Now what is y sub n? Y sub 1. Y sub 1 is the previous y. So it's this right here.
1 plus h times that. That's a 1 there. So that's 2. So this is going to give me the point 2.
If I now plug in that into there 2 times 2 is 4. And 4 times 1 is 4.
So I have my next point which is now going to be this gross underestimation anyway.
So let's go for this. I've got to add h to the previous one. That gives me 3.
To get this one I've got to take to get y sub 2. I take the previous y. So that's going to be 2 plus.
h times the previous that one. That's 4. So that gives me 6.
6 is the next one. 6 times 3 is 18. And 18 times 1 is 18. That's what I would have gotten.
Okay so there are my points. The Euler's value that I'm interested in. I've got the point 1 1 2 2 3 6.
You can see the curve going. Now I'm going to do the improved Euler's method.
So I need for that. I need this. Okay. Because I've got to predict the future.
Okay so for for Euler's wildlife perhaps I shouldn't have done that. Because what we need now
the x sub n's for the improved Euler's method. Let's just make some space. So the improved Euler's
method. I'm still going to have n. I'm still going to have 0 1 2. I'm still going to have x sub n.
They're going to remain exactly the same. 1 2 3. Y sub n is now a bit different. To get y sub n
I need the f of x sub n. I need the f of x sub n and y sub n. Okay. Because
okay that was 1. I know what that was. But I also have to use the predicted one. The f of
x sub n is the f of x sub n. And then this fake y sub n. I need that too. I hope you can see that.
So this one's easy. It's just 1 times 1 is 1. That's the slope there. And I also need the fake
one. A fake one. So this is instead of using the correct one. I need to use this fake one which was
this original Euler's one. So this x sub well I should just say x sub n then. Y sub n. So for 0 that
would have been f of x 0 which is that 1. I'm going to plug that 1 in there. And the f of this fake
one which is 1 there. So that's still 1. So this one's going to go on to 2. But now we need this new
one. What are we going to do there? What do we need for that? Well we need for that the following. Remember
the previous one. That was y. That was 1 plus h which was 1 times these two averaged.
These two averaged. So it is that one
plus that one divided by 2 which is easy in this instance. It just remains that. So 1 plus 1 is 2.
2. So we stayed there with 2. We stayed there with 2. We stayed there with 2. But now
what do we do there? We need 2 times. Again we need that one
which is this real one. It remains this one. And then the y from
Euler's method which was this 2 here. So again it's 2 times 2.
And that would be 4. So
let me see if I'm doing the right thing. So I need that one which is 2 times 2 which is 4 say.
And the Euler one would have been that as well. I think I chose poorly but anyway.
I just want you to get a feel for where this comes from. So the next one is indeed going to be 3.
And what do we need for this one? We need, as I say I chose poorly by letting that equal to 1.
So what do I need? I need the previous one which is 2 plus h which is 1 times. I now need
the average of these two which again is just going to be 4. And 4 times 2 is going to give me 6.
But now let's just see where did I get this from. I just want to reiterate. And I chose poorly by
letting this be 1 because now the 2 are going to be exactly the same. But
I need to get the slope at this point which is 2 and 2 which is 4. But I also need the slope at
my x value here of the improved method which will always be the same as this. These two x columns will
always be the same. But they're not the y value that I've gotten there. The y value that comes from
Euler's method. I need to plug that 2 in there. So that was going to be the f of 2 comma 2. So which is
there. 2 times 2 is 4. Okay. So this one is going to come from 3 and 6. 3 times 6 is the t. And now I've
got to plug in 3 there. So 3 times. But that y of sub n comes from this 6 on this side. Again as I say
bad example because it's always going to be the same in my example here. So this comes from there. The 6
comes from here. The fake n. A fake y of n. So 6 times 3 is going to be 18. Okay. So that is all you need.
Okay. You need just to remember that y of n plus 1 equals y of n plus h times this average. And this average
is this slope real. The slope at that point. At the previous point I should say. And the fake slope at
the previous point. And the fake slope at the previous point. And by fake I mean not really fake. The one you
would have gotten if you plugged in instead of y sub n which you've just gotten. You plug in oil.
