Let's do this interesting problem. We have again separation of variables in as much as this can
equal the h of y and it's autonomous actually in that I have no explicit independent variable here.
The reason why we're doing this problem is that we are going to have the loss of two solutions
which we'll have to bring back. One will be part of the family of solutions the other one is going
to be singular. What is happening here? First of all let's separate the variables. I'm going to have
1 over y squared minus 4 dy equals dx which I can transform by taking the single integral on both
sides. Now immediately I note that I now have y squared minus 4 in the denominator which cannot
equal zero. In other words y does not equal plus or minus 2. That will leave this undefined. So I'm
losing two potential solutions if I can call it that here. How do we solve this integral? Well
there are various ways. Let's remind ourselves of just having partial fractions because this will be
y minus 2 and y plus 2 and I can rewrite that as a over dy minus 2 plus b over dy plus 2. I can now bring
this denominator over to the other side and I'm left with 1 equals. If I have a times this times this over
that I lose the y minus 2 so I'm left with a and a y plus 2 plus b I'm going to be left with a y minus 2.
I can set the y equal to negative 2. Let's set y equal to 2 arbitrarily. That will leave me with 1
equals 4a. 2 minus 2 would be 0 so the b disappears. In other words a equals a quarter. I can set y equals
negative 2. In other words 1 over y squared minus 4 equals well a is a quarter so that will be 1 over
4 times y minus 2 minus 1 over 4 times y plus 2.
So I can do this as two integrals. I'm just going to bring out the quarter as a constant coefficient here
times the integral of 1 over
y minus 2 dy minus a quarter doing the same on the other side. 1 over y plus 2 dy
equals well this would just be x plus some constant c1. I'm going to multiply everything out by 4.
That'll leave me 4x plus 4 times c1 which I'll just now which I will call c2.
But this will leave me with the natural log of
absolute value of y minus 2
minus the natural log of
the absolute value of y plus 2 and that's going to equal 4 times x plus some new constant c2 because 4 times c1 gives me this new constant.
I'm going to make use of the properties of exponents in as much as I'm now going to rewrite this as
y minus 2 and y
plus 2 in the denominator and that's going to equal 4 times x plus c2. I'm going to exponentiate both sides here.
This is going to leave me e to the power of 4x and e to the power c2 which I'll call
e to the power of 4x and I'll call it now e to the power c2 where I'll call a new constant. I'll call it
c3
c3 on this side and because this constant can be positive or negative so I'm getting rid of my
my absolute value signs here so I'm going to have y minus 2 over y plus 2
equals
we'll have this constant c3
e to the power 4
times x
we can solve for y
y will equal
y minus 2 will equal
y plus 2
which I'll multiply by this c3 e to the power 4x
which will leave me
y times c3 e to the power 4x plus
2 times
c3
e to the power 4x
I'm going to bring this over to
this side and I'm going to take out y as a common factor that will leave me with
1 minus
c3 e to the power 4x
equals I'm going to take this negative 2 over to the other side so that'll be 2 plus
2
2 plus 2 times c3 e to the power 4x
and I'll just solve for y on its own I'll bring a 2 out which will be 1 plus
c3 e to the power 4x
divided by
1 minus
I hope you could still see there
1 minus c3 e to the power 4x
now I can rewrite this c3 just as c
in other words y equals 2 times 1 plus
c e to the power 4x
divided by
1 minus
c e to the power 4x
now what about the y equals plus minus 2 that I lost
well if I let this constant c equals 0
if I let if I let c equals 0 I'm left with 2 times 1 over 1 so y equals 2
so y equals 2 is just still one of this family of solutions
but there's no value of c that will allow me to get y equals negative 2
so I just have to bring in y equals negative 2 as a singular solution
a singular solution together with this family of solutions
together with this family of solutions so that I do not lose
because I potentially lost y equals plus minus 2
when I when I separated my variables I have to bring them back but it's not
I don't have to bring the plus 2 back because I can think of a value for c
in this family of solutions that will give me y equals 2
this is the y equals negative 2 that I have to bring back
