Okay, good morning everybody.
Today I'll be presenting an approach for upper GI bleed.
Before starting, I would like to wish DJ and Lian for passing their intermediate exam.
And I wish all the best for Anthony next time to join us.
Okay, so this is quite a big topic and it's a very common problem we face in our emergency
department.
So upper GI bleed is a very common medical condition with high mortality and morbidity
and commonly they present here usually with hematemesis.
Very rare you get them with melina, sorry, you get them with melina but very rare you get
them with hematogesia.
So these are some common causes which I'm not going to discuss but these are some common
causes in upper GI bleed which were discussed I think previously in the previous presentation
with Anthony.
So gastric and duodenal ulcer, esophageitis, malary waves, angio dysplasia, dilifoi lesion
and sometimes there will be no lesion identified.
Regarding dilifoi lesion this is submucosal dilatation of vessels which tend to erode into the epithelium
and bleeds.
This is a picture that shows the dilifoi lesion.
This is small, as you see in the center, this dilated small blood vessel.
Then this is gastric andral vascular lactasia which is known also as watermelon gastritis.
Again it's dilatation of blood vessels which gives watermelon look like.
Okay so some other less common causes are hemobilia which is presence of blood into the biliary
system.
Usually there will be some liver or biliary pathology like liver tumour or instrumentation
to the biliary system.
Hemocircus pancreaticus, presence of blood into the pancreatic duct and again it could be
because of tumour of pancreas or pseudocyst or any cause of bleeding into the pancreas.
Aorto-intric fistula and Cameron lesion and aorto-intric fistula is most common in the
third part of duodenum or fourth part of duodenum.
Cameron lesion is just an ulcer or erusive lesion in the sac of hiatal hernia which is
very rare, it's less than 5%.
Okay approach to, this is a general approach to upper GI bleed.
The initial evaluation of patient includes assessment and diagnostic study.
In assessment of the patient you are looking for stability of the patient, whether he is
stable or not.
Then you go for diagnostic studies that include the choices in the scope to check where is
the bleed from and to intervene.
Okay, coming to the initial evaluation, you assess the severity of the bleed, identify the
potential source and determine if there are any conditions which can be managed by endoscope.
Okay, part of the management is your history, history taken from the patient.
Sixty percent of the patients tend to bleed from similar lesion.
If they have history of previous bleed, they tend to actually bleed from the previous lesion.
Then your history can suggest the source of bleed, like patient with portal hypertension, you
suspect is fecal varices.
Patient with like aortic repair previously like aortic graft or aortic aneurysm can suspect aortoentric
fistula.
Then other things like epigastric pain can suggest like peptical cell disease and so on.
Okay, in your history you are supposed to take as well you should consider your comorbid condition
because that will affect your management.
Like patient who have coronary artery disease, you should take care of their hemoglobin concentration
that you keep it high up, plus they should get some oxygen.
Patient with CCF or renal failure, you should be very cautious with your fluid.
Okay, then patient with hepatic dysfunction, your management will be affected by giving
them like fresh frozen plasma, you should consider it.
Then some patients may need endotracheal intubation if they have dementia or encephalopathy.
Okay, then other part of history is your medication.
You should know whether your patients are taking NSAIDs, which can be the reason for their ulcers.
Maybe they are taking warfarin for some, or any antiplatelet therapy for some condition
that could be the reason for their bleed.
And other part of history you should know like a patient is taking iron and the color of the
melina is just an iron related.
Okay, this already I have mentioned, symptoms assessment of the patient.
Okay, one more point in the symptoms is regarding whether the patients are, means clinical condition,
whether they have hypotension, dizziness, or they have reduced mental status.
So that can indicate severity of bleed.
Okay, coming to physical examination, as everybody knows signs of hypovolemia.
If it's moderate or mild, the patient will be tachycardic only.
If it's more than 50% of blood loss, there will be orthostatic hypotension.
And if more than 50% or 40%, there will be hypotension, I mean supine hypotension.
So examination, while doing PR, you examine the stool color, but this is not a very reliable
thing.
Then presence of abdominal pain or guarding or anything, which suggests a proteinitis
can suggest that the patient may have perforation and should be worked up for that, like doing
erect x-ray, looking for air under diaphragm, and maybe CT scan.
Okay, lab test includes your blood counts, serum chemistries, liver test, coagulation studies.
Okay, if a patient with coronary heart disease or risk of infarction get electrocardiogram,
then it's important to get their blood urea nitrogen and urea because having a high ratio of
BUN to creatinine or urea to creatinine is very suggestive of upper GI bleed.
Nasogastric lavage is controversial in this, in diagnosis of, in diagnosis of upper GI bleed.
There was a study done regarding that, looked whether there, there be any clinical benefit in
NG lavage. 632 patients were admitted with bleed and they, some of them went into NG lavage and
some of them didn't. The NG lavage was associated with shorter endoscopy time, but there was no
difference in regard of mortality and length of hospital stay and or surgery or even transfusion
requirement. Okay, then coming to risk stratification. Endoscopic clinical and lab features may be useful for
risk stratification. There are certain factors used for that, like hemodynamic instability,
like systolic blood pressure less than 100 or heart rate more than 100, hemoglobin less than 10,
if there is any active bleed during endoscopy, ulcer size if it's ulcer is more than three centimeter,
then ulcer location if it's duodenal bulb or it's in the laser curvature.
Okay, I'll mention three scoring systems. That's Rucol system and Blatchford system and AIMS-65.
Coming to the first one, which took in consideration that endoscopic finding during
the endoscopy and as well as age of the patient, hemodynamic shock and major comorbid illnesses.
So each factor was given some points and a score of two or less was associated with low risk of further
bleed or death. But I have no idea if the score comes like 10. Where we stand, I'm not sure.
Okay, then that's the Blatchford system. In this one, they didn't take any endoscopic finding
as in scoring and a score of zero was associated with low risk of need of endoscopy intervention.
So they took in concentration urea nitrogen and blood urea nitrogen, hemoglobin, systolic BP,
and other markers. This score system looks easier to implement in emergency than the other one.
Okay, coming to AIMS-65, which is the easiest to implement.
The studies have showed that it has high accuracy. Five factors we're taking that include albumin,
and AIMS-65 actually is kind of mnemonic for the factors we are using. Albumin less than 3
grams per deciliter and INR more than 1.5, altered mental status, systolic blood pressure of 90 or less,
and H less than 65. So this is the scoring system and interpretation of this system is like this.
If you get zero risk factor, so chance of mortality is 0.3 percent, one risk factor is 1 percent and so
on. Easy way to remember this is zero into zero is equal to almost zero, then one into one is almost one,
two into two is four, it's almost three, then three into three, three into three is almost nine,
then four into four is almost 16, and five into five is almost 25. So you can remember,
if you remember it in this way, it's the easiest to remember that. And that's my discovery, by the way.
Okay, general management. So this is general points you have to do when you do a, when you manage a
patient with GI bleed. First you have to try out whether he needs an ICU or ward admission. Then
what kind of support he needs. If he has like coronary artery disease, he needs oxygen, then you have to,
you should have two large board cannulas, whether he needs intubation or not. Then fluid recess,
he gets like any other hypotensive patient, he gets fluid recess accordingly. Blood transfusion,
medication, and upper endoscope. So I'll go through last three points more extensively now.
Coming to blood transfusion, the slide looks very congested, but it's very easy. This blood transfusion
decision is individualized. Okay, so usually we, the recommendation is to keep, to initiate transfusion,
if your hemoglobin falls less than seven grams per deciliter. Okay, except in cases with the patient who
have comorbid illnesses or coronary artery disease, that time you fall below nine should initiate blood
transfusion. Okay, you should avoid over transfusion of in varicile bleeds. Okay, what are the studies
done in this regard? There is a RCT then suggest that using lower hemoglobin threshold for initiating
transfusion improves outcome. The trial had 221 adults with acute bleed, so they divided them into
two groups. One was the restrictive group and one was the liberal group. So restrictive group,
they never transfused them except if the hemoglobin fell below seven, and liberal group, they transfused
them if the hemoglobin fell less than nine. And this was the result. Restrictive group received fewer,
less units, mortality was lower in restrictive group, and it was less likely to have further bleed.
Okay, then patients with cirrhosis, the death and further bleeding were less in the restrictive group.
Okay, but we have to keep in mind something that all the patients got endoscopy within the first five
hours. So that was very early endoscopy. So theoretically speaking, if we wait like two days,
most probably they wouldn't do well. Medication. Acid suppression, that's an era of PPIs. High dose of
anti-security therapy are advised, which significantly reduce the rate of bleed compared with the standard
treatment. Okay, as you know, we give usually pentaprozol, 80 milligram bolus, then we will be
followed by infusion, 8 milligram per hour, and which lasts for, it's supposed to last for 72 hours.
Then we can shift them into oral dose, that will be 40 milligram per day or omeprozole 20 milligram twice
daily. Prokinetics. They have studied erythromycin and metaclopromyte regarding prokinetics,
and the goal of prokinetics is to improve gastric visualization by gastric emptying. Okay,
so reasonable dose was 3 milligram per kg, 20 to 30 minutes before the endoscopy. Okay,
there are many studies were done in this regard, and most of them showed improved visibility,
shortened endoscopy time, reduced the need of second relook or a second scope. So meta-analysis,
which included five trials, 316 patients suggested that the using of prekinetics decreased the need for
secondary look, but did not affect the number of unit blood transfusion transfused and length of
hospital stay or need of surgery. And the subgroup analysis showed that erythromycin showed a benefit
in the regard of secondary look endoscopy, but metaclopromyte didn't. Then there was another
meta-analysis which examined four trials and had 335 patients. Okay, and the meta-analysis found that the
patient who received erythromycin were more likely to have an empty stomach during endoscopy.
Okay, and they had the reduction in need, sorry, reduction in the time of endoscopy and volume
of blood transfusion and the length of hospital stay. I'm not sure about the volume of blood transfusion
because the first meta-analysis didn't show that. Then finally there was trend towards short endoscopy time
and decreased mortality. Again, that other study, other meta-analysis didn't show decreased mortality.
Then erythromycin was compared to nasogastric lavage. So they divided, it was RTC which divided into
three groups. One was compared erythromycin alone, then with gastric, sorry.
Okay, compared erythromycin alone with nasogastric lavage alone and nasogastric lavage plus erythromycin.
So there were three groups. One was erythromycin alone and one was NGT alone and one was both of them
together. Quality of visualization did not differ and there was no difference among all groups in
this regard. So it's NG lavage was not recommended. Okay, using somatostatin or ecterotide is not
recommended in case of non-varicel bleed. Antibiotics. Antibiotics were studied in that and it showed,
it has multiple trials were done and showed that they are beneficial in patients with cirrhosis because
20% of patients present to hospital with, patients of cirrhosis present to hospital with infection
and 60% develop infection while being in the hospital. So it was recommended to give cirrhotic
patient they get the antibiotic pre-scope. Okay, antifibrillinatic agent which is a transexamic acid.
Meta-analysis was done in this regard also. Seven trials examined and benefit with regard of mortality.
It showed benefit in regarding mortality but there was no benefit in regard of bleeding surgery or sorry,
re-bleeding surgery or transfusion requirement. So it has no role in upper GI bleed management.
I'm thirsty. Okay, upper endoscopy. Upper endoscopy is diagnostic modality of choice.
Okay, it has high sensitivity and specificity. Early endoscopy which is within 24 hours is recommended.
During endoscopy you can classify your ulcer according to forest classification which I'll
explain very soon. In patients whom blood obsecure the source they may need second endoscope but
second endoscopy is not routinely recommended. This is forest classification. If you see in the
left column it is divided into five sorry six groups which is forest 1a, 1b, 2a and so on. So 1a is
actively bleeding ulcer. Second 1b is oozing without visible vessel and 2a is non-bleeding visible vessel then
adherent cloth, flat spot and clean base ulcer. The prevalence of these ulcers is in second middle column
which shows that forest 2a, sorry clean ulcer base which is forest 3 is the most common followed by forest 2a
and I think last week we were discussing whether what is the risk of re-bleed in the forest classification so
you see in the right side column that 90 percent of the patient with the forest 1a tend to re-bleed and 50
percent of patients with forest 2a so but the patient with forest 1b only 10 percent re-bleed though it's in forest 1
and they were oozing initially. So visibility of the vessels it seems that it plays a big role in a re-bleed patient.
Choice of endoscopy. Currently most patients are treated with either thermal coagulation or
hemostatic clip with or without additional injection therapy.
Okay, why why they are doing so because a meta-analysis was done okay and the analysis included 74
trials which is I think it's big number. What did it show? The following were the major conclusion. Compared
with epinephrine monotherapy the risk of further bleed was significantly lower in the other patient
which treated with other modalities like thermal coagulation. Hemoclip were more effective than
epinephrine alone. Then the efficacy of endoscopic therapies for adherent corte was uncertain.
The choice between hemoclip and thermal therapy was dependent upon the other factors like location of
the ulcer and the endoscopist himself. Okay, the standard approach in when you treat patient with
endoscopy is thermal coagulation and hemoclip which also can be combined. It can be combined with
injection sorry. So injection therapy should not be used alone. It should be used in conjunction and
should not be ever used alone because the chances of re-bleed are higher. Thermal coagulation is
contact probe achieve acute hemostasis and prevent recurrent bleed by coaptive coagulation.
That's compressing that probe against the blood vessel and doing the coagulation so it seals off the
vessels and stops the bleed. Other other way is organ plasma coagulation but in this one there is no
you don't compress it against the blood vessels so there is no sealing as in the first one. Hemoclip
endoscopic application of hemoclip is alternate method which is similar to surgical
surgical ligation. If that hemoclip didn't stop the bleeding vessels it leaves a marker for further
things like when you go for interventional radiology or angio embolization. So if you have that marker
if the clip will be like a marker for you later on so it has disadvantage.
Okay alternate approach is uh okay these are other things other than the clips is fibrin sealant that
you inject fibrin sealant to the to initiate the hemostasis which prevents recurrent bleed and there
is something called hemostatic nanopowder which gets adherent to a moist surface and stop bleed.
I'm not sure about the mechanism how is the mechanism exactly but it forms a barrier to the ulcer.
Okay second relook endoscopy. Second relook endoscopy refers to
in practice performing a plant endoscopy generally within 24 hours of initial endoscopy.
Okay if i'll come to the reason why we do second relook endoscopy but if you have no reason usually
it's not recommended to go for second endoscopy. So when you are going to go for second relook and if
visualization during initial endoscopy was limited due to blood or debris if there is a concern about
part of on the part of endoscopy that the previous endoscopy therapy was suboptimal.
Okay how you manage recurrent or persistent bleed. Persistent bleed refers to the active bleed that
does not stop despite endoscopy therapy or bleeding that developed during endoscopy therapy of non-bleeding
lesion. Recurrent bleed refers to the bleeding that occurs following spontaneous homostasis of the
previous successful endoscopy homostasis. Okay we have options like surgery which was discussed in previous
presentation last week. I just mentioned that type of surgeries we can do. So surgical treatment of
peptic ulcer, bleeding peptic ulcer include overseeing the artery with truncal vagatomy and tructomy with
gastrogyginostomy which is pillorat 2. Highly selective vagatomy that this can be done in a stable patient
and you can do with laparoscopic. In addition to failure of endoscopic therapy, other indication
for surgery is hemodynamic in a stable patient despite vigorous recess like the patient we had last
week when shock associated with recurrent hemorrhage and perforation. Okay intervention angiography
is less invasive okay and it's equally effective but it should be considered for patient with high risk.
Okay best technique of treatment of bleeding into the biliary tree and pancreatic duct.
And it's less likely to be successful in patient with impaired coagulation. Follow patients. Once your patient
is ready to discharge you have to follow him up to treat the basic the main reason for his ulcer whether
it's edge pilot related or NSAID or whatever.
