Now we have to look at errors as far as these numerical methods are concerned.
And let's, for instance, suggest we have a function with k plus 1 derivatives.
What I mean by that is that we had y equals x squared.
The first derivative would be 2x, the second derivative would just be 2,
and then we just have zeros from there.
And then we have this k plus 1 derivatives.
And if we want to do a tail expansion of this function around some point,
this is what we'll have.
This is no derivative there, just the value of y and a over 0 factorial.
We'll have the first derivative.
We'll start with k.
At that point, x minus a to the power 1 over 1.
And then we'll have this correction right at the end where we'll have y.
Well, that would be the derivative at a point c.
We don't know what the point c is to k plus 1 and k plus 1 over k plus 1 factorial.
Now let's make life easier for ourselves.
Let's imagine k to be 1.
So here we'll have y double prime of x minus a squared over 2 factorial.
And the n will have.
And imagine we're just going from these two x of n plus 1 minus x sub n.
So we have x being x sub n plus 1 and a being x sub n.
And what we're going to have is y x sub n plus 1.
That's what we have there.
x sub n plus 1 equals y of x sub n.
Remember a was x sub n.
Plus we're going to have this.
Now k, we're starting k at 1.
So that's going to be y prime.
That's going to be y prime at a, which is x sub n.
At x sub n.
And then we're going to have x minus x sub n plus 1 minus x sub n.
Remember that was our h.
That was our h value divided by 1.
And what is y prime?
Well, usually in these problems we are given y prime.
Y equals the f of x and y.
So that's what we're going to get there.
So we can take, we can take this away.
And this is just our, our function.
f, well let's put the h in front.
f of x comma y.
And then we're going to have this creation at the end.
So we're going to have y double prime.
Y double prime at some value c.
We don't know what c is.
We're going to have h again there.
Squared divided by 1 plus 1 is 2.
And that is the error that we're going to deal with.
Now here, we just see this part here.
That's this Euler's formula.
We just have Euler's formula there.
And here we have this, what we would call a local error.
So every time we jump up by a value of h,
we're going to have a local, it's called a local truncation error.
And if we add all of those together, of course,
we're going to end with a, with a global error.
As we carry, as we carry the numerical method forward.
So all of these errors and really the higher order methods we're going to discuss,
Rangakata, you can all derive them from Taylor's expansion.
So Taylor's expansion, really, if you want to go into the depth of how to derive these things,
is quite important.
What we just want to see here is you're going to have,
you're going to have your Euler's formula and you're going to have your local error there every time you do this.
So we have h squared there, I just want to show you,
so if I have h squared there,
if I were to half my h,
so my h step was 0.2,
was the, the, the, the jump I make every time.
And to get my x and y values,
if I were to half that, I'll have h over 2 squared.
In other words, if I half it, I'm going to have a quarter.
So that's h squared over 2 squared, and that's 4.
So I'm going to, my error is going to shrink by a factor of 4,
or by a quarter then,
every time I half, for instance, my value of h.
So my error is going to get less.
The only problem that remains now is this unknown c.
We don't know what the unknown says, but we can choose c.
And remember, c sits somewhere between this x n sub 1 and x sub n.
It sits somewhere there.
And we can usually choose a value which will be the maximum of the absolute value on this side.
So that we can just get the biggest value here,
which initially would be a bit of an overestimation of the error that you're eventually going to make.
But we can certainly see what the maximum value of this is by just randomly choosing what we're going to put into c.
