Let's have a look at this problem where we cancel separate variables in as much as we have functions just in y and just in x, just in y and just in x.
So we can certainly separate them and it's an initial value problem.
This example problem is going to show us that we cannot always express y explicitly in terms of x as far as our solution set is concerned.
A family of solutions or in this instance perhaps a specific solution.
Let's just begin by separating all our variables.
We can keep e to the power 2y minus y on this side divided by e to the power y with respect to y.
And that is going to equal the sine of 2x which by trigonometric identity is the 2 times the sine of x cosine of x divided by being this cosine of x on this side.
So certainly those would cancel dx.
Now this would be a difficult integral to do but I can rewrite this by dividing this denominator into each of the components here of the numerator.
That's going to leave me with e to the power y minus y e to the power negative y dy and that equals 2 times the sine of x dx.
I can transform the equation by taking the integral of both sides.
I'm just leaving the 2 on the outside because it's a constant coefficient.
So here I'm going to be left with e to the power y dy minus the integral of y e to the power negative y dy and that's going to equal negative 2 times the cosine of x plus some new constant.
Let's call it c1.
Now this we'll have to do integration by parts.
Let's just do that.
We'll let u equals y.
That means v prime has got to equal e to the power negative y.
That leaves u prime to be 1 and v to be negative e to the power negative y.
We're just using two parts.
I've decided to let u equals y because if I take the first derivative of u I get rid of.
I just have a coefficient of 1 which means I am simplifying what comes after and that is why I didn't choose this to be the u value.
So here I'm going to be left with e to the power y minus, let us see, it is uv which is going to be negative y e to the power negative y minus the integral now of u prime v.
So that becomes a positive e to the power negative y dy equals negative 2 times the cosine of x plus c1.
So the e of y, that's going to be a plus y e to the power negative y equals negative 2 times the cosine of x plus c1 still.
So the e of y, that's going to be a plus y e to the power negative y, will be a plus e to the power negative y equals negative twice the cosine of x plus c1.
And I suppose I can go a plus e to the power negative y plus, here I'll be left with y plus 1 over e to the power y equals negative 2 times the cosine of x plus c1.
But it's an initial value problem, but it's an initial value problem, but it's an initial value problem.
And I can see it would be impossible for me to explicitly get y on its own here, but e to the power 0 plus 1 over e to the power 0 equals negative 2 cosine of 0 is 1 plus c1.
So that's going to be 1 plus 1 equals negative 2 plus c1.
In other words, c1 equals 4.
I've solved for c1.
So my final answer is going to be e to the power y plus y plus 1.
e to the power y equals 4 minus twice the cosine of x.
So that's implicit, an implicit form.
And I suppose one way to solve this is to bring this all to the one side so that equals 0.
And I'm going to construct, as we did in multivariable calculus, a new function in g and x and y,
which is now going to equal this minus that.
And I can look at one of the values for g that equals 0,
which means I'm looking at one of the contours.
One of the contours of this is z equals g of x and y function in three dimension,
but I let z equals 0, for instance, so that's where the three-dimensional surface is going to interact with the xy plane,
where it intersects with the xy plane, which will give me this, which will give me a curve.
But it's difficult just to have a look at this and to see what the curve is going to look like.
