So let's see how this works. So I have my function here, differential equation, y prime equals 4xy.
We can really quickly solve that. Let's just do that. This is a bit of exercise.
dy, that's going to be 4x dx. So I have to put dy into the other side. This is dy dx.
I put the numerator dx on that side. I can take the integral layer of both sides and just put the 4 out.
So the natural value of absolute value of y equals, that will be 2x squared plus the constant c.
I can exponentiate both sides and I'm left with y of x then equaling this value e to the power 2x squared plus the constant c.
And this plus constant c, I can just be, it's multiplied by e to the power c, which is another constant.
So let's just bring the constant there. So I have my initial value of condition here.
The y of 1 equals 1. So I'm going to have that the y of 1 that equals 1 equals c e to the power 2.
In other words, c is going to equal e to the power negative 2.
So I can plug that in there so I know y of x equals, if that is a negative e to the power negative 2,
I can, e to the power negative 2 times e to the power that, that's e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
So there is my, there is my solution for this initial value problem.
So let's write it up there.
y of x equals e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
So let's get the first derivative of that.
Remember that is going to be, that's 4x e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
So I just have to replace this with u, 2x squared minus 2.
And I can do that derivative.
Let's get the second derivative of x.
That is obviously the product rule that I've got to have there.
I've got two functions of x, f and x and g of x there basically.
So u prime, if I make that u and that v, u prime b, that would be 4 e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
And plus, so this will be 4x and another 4x e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
So what we have here is y double prime of x, y double prime of x.
So that's going to be 16x.
I can take this out.
So that will be 4 plus 16x squared multiplied by e to the power 2x squared minus 2.
So that's what we have.
Now we started at x equals 1.
We started at x equals 1.
Let's take our h step size to be 0.1.
Because now what we actually want, we want y double prime of c.
So that's going to be 4 plus 16c squared e to the power 2c squared minus 2.
We definitely need that to look at our local truncation error.
So what are we going to have?
Remember I said c is between x sub n plus 1, x sub n and x sub n plus 1.
So we started at x sub n, x sub 0 being 1.
We moved up 1.1.
So let's just take that at the maximum value that we can have.
So if I plugged in 1.1 there, that will do this for me.
So I'm going to have 4 plus 16 times 1.1 squared times e to the power 2 times 1.1 squared minus 2.
And I think we get 1, I think we get something like, I have written it down somewhere.
I think it's 35.553.
35.553.
See that you get the same.
And this is just to punch into your calculator.
And now we know the error has got to be this times h squared divided by 2.
So on this side we're going to have a 0.1 squared divided by 2.
And I think that gives us, did I write it down?
That gives us our error here as being equal to 0.1778.
Something like that.
So we know our first step that we're going to take with Weller's method,
we are going to have as a maximum this error.
The time that we're going to have is the normalization ahead!
And that doesn't take a lot of time for the hour,
but we don't have threats to until the end!
This sort of year since 2012...
The first step is going to take ourrust plan,
and we are going to take care of all the most.
And what do we keep doing?
So are we looking for our most continuing to improve CommentKE,
and we hope your checking on.
