Now, sometimes, not only can you not explicitly get a solution in y in terms of x,
you have to leave your answer in the form of an integral.
Here we have y prime equals e to the power negative x squared,
and it is separable, and it's an initial value problem.
Now, what we are going to do is we're going to have a solution defined by an integral,
and where we have y equals some y of 0 plus an integral now of a dummy variable
in a function g of t with respect to t.
And the reason why we can use this is because we need to make use of one of these two forms
of the fundamental theorem of calculus, which is the derivative of the integral in going from a to x,
so definite integral of g of t in t equals the g of x.
We can make use of that.
Now, let's have a look.
Let's separate these variables.
In other words, dy equals the integral of e to the power negative x squared dx.
And that can be, that's quite a difficult integral to do.
And, um, we can make use now of a dummy variable.
I should just take the integral of this side.
Let's make use of a dummy variable in which we're now going to say dy dt of dt equals e to the power negative t squared dt.
We only have to look at what happens to this value, though.
We do have 3 in here, and it's going to go to some value of x.
So, 3x, because if I rewrote that, I'm going to get back to e to the power x squared.
So, I'm just making use of this fundamental theorem of calculus.
If I do the left-hand side, that's going to leave me the y of t going from 3 to x.
And on this side, I'm left with this integral, e to the power negative t squared dt.
So, my answer is certainly, that's no easier, uh, that's no easier than, uh, than this was.
But I can leave it as such.
That's going to leave me the y of x, which is what I want, minus the y of 3, equals this definite integral, e to the power negative t squared dt.
But I know that the y of 3 equals 5, and I can bring that over to the other side.
So, the y of x is going to be 5 plus the integral going from 3 to x, e to the power negative t squared dt.
