Now we throw around the word microgravity quite a bit, microgravity, sort of a catchphrase term
used by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, used by NASA or NASA, depending
on where you live, a lot. But what does it mean microgravity? Is there just a little bit of gravity
there? So from time to time we're going to have these bonus physics lectures, so let's
have a look at this. We know from Newton that force is equal to g m1, m sub 1, m sub 2 divided
by r squared. So what does it say? That's the force by gravity, and we know that's proportional
to the product of the two masses, that's the mass of the Earth and the mass of the astronaut
or space station, or whatever, divided by the square of the distance between them. So
if we have the Earth, there's the center of the Earth, from the center of the Earth to
the surface of the Earth, that is the radius of the Earth, and it is a staggering 6371 kilometers
from the center of the Earth to the surface of the Earth. And the International Space Station
is another tiny little, very tiny little, 370 kilometers, 370 kilometers above that. So
if we have our little astronaut stand on the surface, we're going to calculate the force
of gravity on him, force of gravity on him by multiplying the gravitational constant with
his mass, or her mass, the mass of the Earth, divided by 6371 kilometers squared. Okay, now
it's used kilometers here. Remember g is in meters cubed. Okay, so you just have to convert
this to meters. You can't work in kilometers and meters, but it's not what this is about.
It's just a bit. Now, I'm going to increase this distance a little bit in orbit here, and now
he's on the International Space Station, so he's going to feel a different force of gravity,
but he's still going to feel, or she is still going to feel, the force of gravity. It doesn't
disappear. It's still there. Now, you can do very simple algebra. You can say the force
of gravity on the ISS versus the force of gravity while the astronaut is on the face of the Earth.
Now, what is that going to be very simply? Well, it's still going to be g, the masses of
the individual and the Earth, divided by, now it's a square, that's going to be the radius
of the Earth plus that height of the ISS. We're going to square that, divided by still, this
is still the same, g, m1, m2, divided by the radius of the Earth, because now it's just
on the surface, or she's just on the surface of the Earth squared. So all of these are going
to cancel out, and what are we left with? Well, that's the radius just of the Earth squared.
This is going to now be in the numerator, and that's in the denominator, and the radius of
the Earth plus the height of the ISS, if you just square that, and you say it's going to
be about 0.89 somewhere there, the ratio of the force of gravity that the astronaut feels there
versus there. So he's still going to feel this gravity, but so why do we say there's zero g?
Why do we say there's zero g? Well, it's very simple. The ISS and the astronaut are in orbit,
and an orbit has different components to it, and very plainly, there's a lot more physics to it.
It is falling, it is falling, it's positive, but it's falling at a rate that it keeps on missing the
Earth. So it's falling towards the center of the Earth, but it has a velocity tangential to the
surface that all the time. So in its fall, it's moving so fast that it always misses the Earth,
and it's more complicated than that. So if you were in an elevator, very high up in a building,
and lo and behold, the cables break, and you fall, you and the elevator are going to fall
initially, at least at the same velocity. Well, there'll be a bit of inertial mass difference there.
So you're going to fall, and you're going to experience weightlessness, and you're going to
float inside of this elevator, and it's going to feel as if you are weightless. So it is that fall,
that fall, that creates this effect of zero gravity. Certainly there is still a massive force,
almost a full force of gravity on the International Space Station as there. But because you and the
space station, the astronaut and the space station is falling at the same velocity towards the center of
the Earth, always missing it, because there's an orbit, it's freefall, and there is no way that you can
distinguish, in the absence of your senses, the difference between zero gravity and freefall.
And that is why it's called zero gravity. And that's where the catchphrase comes from,
just to distinguish that it's called microgravity. Probably means, well, there's still gravity,
there's still almost full gravity there. You haven't escaped the gravitational pull of the Earth.
You can never, ever do that. Even if you approach the outer limits of the known universe, there's
still going to be some radius between the Earth. By the way, you're still going to have mass,
there's still going to be the gravitational constants, there's still going to be some minute
gravitational force. Anyway, call it microgravity, because in effect, you are in freefall. And we know from
Einstein's thought experiments, there's no way that you can distinguish freefall from being
absolutely impossibly far away from any gravitational forces on you. That's quite phenomenal.
Okay, so zero-g microgravity, but there's obviously some physics behind it.
