Good, we're back with our auxiliary equation there.
It's just a bit of a revision of solving, or one method of solving homogeneous, second-order linear, ordinary differential equations.
So let's look at real roots.
We're going to use the fact that m equals minus b plus minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac.
Now we're really back at school, divided by 2a.
So just our solution then to polynomial.
So we're going to have that m equals, or should I really do this, minus b, which is minus 2 lambda,
plus minus the square root of 4 lambda squared minus 4 omega squared divided by 2.
So what we're going to have, m is going to equal minus lambda plus minus,
you can well imagine I can take a 4 out there, that's 2 squared, bring the 2 out.
So that 2 and that 2 is going to cancel, this 2 and that 2 is going to cancel,
plus minus the square root of omega squared minus lambda squared.
So that's where we have it.
Now let's look at overdamped.
The way that overdamped can be is that these two are different, of course.
So real, I'm going to put real plus different, the roots.
Okay, so if lambda squared is larger than omega squared,
lambda squared larger than omega squared, that's all we're saying.
If that is so, we're going to have real and distinct roots.
So what will be our solution?
Let's call this case number 1.
So for case number 1, we're going to have x at any time t is going to be c sub 1,
e to the power, m sub 1.
I'm going to have two different, one plus and one minus.
So plus and minus, negative lambda plus square root of omega squared plus,
oh, lambda squared minus omega squared, what am I writing?
Lambda squared minus omega squared t plus c sub 2,
e to the power, negative lambda minus square root of,
the square root of lambda squared minus omega squared.
So we can neaten that up.
We can take e to the power and negative lambda t out there.
We can just neaten up the mathematics of that.
I'm not going to do that.
I feel a bit silly doing this.
Now let's imagine lambda squared,
lambda squared equaling omega squared.
Remember lambda was beta over m.
So beta over m squared equals omega squared with k over m.
Okay, so if that is the situation,
this falls away.
So m sub 1 and m sub 2 is just going to be minus lambda.
So what would that give us?
X of t, and remember what we're saying is we can now know
at any time t where we're going to find out whether it's circular motion,
whether it's a harmonic motion just on a spring,
we're going to find that this would be c sub 1 e to the power negative lambda t
plus c sub 2 t e to the power negative lambda t.
Remember, when you have those real roots and they are equal,
we're going to call this critically damped, number 2, critically damped.
We can take out e to the power negative lambda,
e to the power negative lambda t out is a common factor there,
and just neaten that up as well.
And the third one, a bit more interesting,
if it's under damped, 3,
in what way can this now be imaginary roots?
Well, that will be if omega squared is larger than lambda squared.
If I have that,
if omega squared is larger than lambda squared,
I'm going to have a negative here.
So what can we do?
We can rewrite this.
Let's just look at this.
I can rewrite this,
and then as the square root,
and I can take the negative out.
So what is that going to be?
Omega squared minus lambda squared.
Okay, if I multiply those two out,
I'm still left with A.
This one's now larger than this one.
Remember, this is just the square root of negative 1
times the square root of omega squared minus lambda squared.
So that changes that round.
Square root of negative 1 is I.
So what do I have here?
I have M is going to equal negative lambda plus or minus I
times the square root of now.
It's omega squared minus lambda squared.
So my alpha value is negative lambda,
and my beta value is omega squared minus lambda squared.
Remember that.
Now to write this,
so my x of t,
any time t is going to be e to the power,
what is alpha?
It's negative lambda,
negative lambda t,
times c sub 1 times the cosine of beta,
which is A,
square root of omega squared minus lambda squared t,
plus c sub 2 times the sine of omega squared minus lambda squared t.
And there you go.
And you can also neaten that up
or write it a bit differently.
So there we have it over damped,
critically damped,
and under damped.
If you have graphing software,
Desmos calculated,
D-E-S-M-O-S on the internet,
you can write these equations
and play around with sliders
and you'll see beautiful graphs
of how this oscillation just dies down over time.
And that's much more physically real
and we developed that
just by this thought experiment
and introducing this new term
of the force being in opposite direction
proportional to the velocity at that time.
So this is a bit of beautiful physics
that we are developing here.
