Let's have a look at this initial value problem. We have x squared dy dx equals y minus yx
and it's an initial value problem in as much as y of negative 1 equals negative 1.
It might initially look like the variables are not separatable, but indeed they are.
If you would observe that x squared dy equals, I can take out a y as a common factor there,
that's 1 minus x dx. In other words, 1 over y dy is going to equal 1 minus x over x squared dx.
And I can simply transform by taking the integral of both sides,
which will leave me with the natural log of y on this side.
Whenever you see this kind of fraction, just know that you can rewrite this
and it's just dividing the denominator in each of these factors of the numerator.
So that will be an x to the power negative 2 dx minus, that will be 1 over x dx.
So I've just simply rewritten this as 1 over x squared minus x over x squared.
So that's why I got the x to the power negative 2 minus x to the power 1.
So that will be x to the power negative 1, which is just 1 over x.
So the natural log of the absolute value of y is going to equal,
I'm just adding 1, so that's going to be negative 1, x to the power negative 1 minus the natural log
of the absolute value of x plus some constant, some constant c.
I need to get rid of my natural log, so I'm just going to exponentiate all of this.
That will leave me with a y equaling e to the power.
Now this is e to the power minus 1.
If I just want to rewrite this, this is going to be negative 1 over x.
Negative 1 over x.
Negative 1 over x.
This is going to be e to the power negative the natural log of the absolute value of x.
And this is going to be e to the power c, which is just a new constant.
Let's call that 1, 1.
That will just be a new constant.
So y equals, it's going to be e to the power 1 over x.
I'm just bringing that negative into the denominator.
This will also be, let's do that, let's just do the whole thing.
That will be e to the power natural log of the absolute value of x.
Also in the denominator, e to the power c1, we can just make into a new, we can just make
into a new constant c, c2, maybe we should call it.
So y is going to equal some constant over e to the power 1 over x.
And e to the power, that will just be an x.
But I know that y of negative 1 equals negative 1.
So I can substitute that.
Negative 1 is going to equal c2.
That's going to be e to the power negative 1 times negative 1.
So c2 is going to equal this negative 1 times that negative 1 times that e to the power
negative 1.
So c2, in other words, c2 is going to be 1 over e.
And if I plug that c2 in there, I'm going to get the fact that y equals 1 over,
that will be e to the power 1 over x times x times 1 over e.
So that will be another e.
So that will be a plus 1 and multiply it by an x.
Okay, I might have gone a bit fast in this last one.
And I must just see that I did not make a silly mistake.
No, I think that is quite correct.
You can just pause, slow it down and see that you get to,
you might rewrite it differently.
You might take some of this exponents to the top and just make the powers into negatives.
But certainly if you bring them all down, they're all positive.
And this will be e to the power 1 times e to the power 1 over x.
That c2 there was 1 over e.
So that is the e that I find myself with that positive 1 there.
