So when you do numerical methods, things can become a bit pedantic. In other words, you have to write down so many little calculations on a piece of paper. You might think that there's an easy way to do it. Of course there is. You can use software. Not to give you the answer, but to do these iterative calculations for you.
The first example would just be using a spreadsheet software like Microsoft Excel. Or you can use a programming language such as MATLAB or Python or C Sharp. And just learn a few tricks of how to structure those programs and how to program a bit. And of course if you do know a bit of object oriented programming, this would be quite easy.
So what I'm going to show you just in these few added videos is how to use Python. First of all you need to install Python. I'm going to show you how to do that on the Mac system.
And I use vPython for that. That's the visual version of Python. Just if you want to do a few physics things and draw some nice arrows and particle systems and all of that.
You need not do that as long as you have Python installed with a Mac, with Mavericks 2.7.5 version of Python is pre-installed. There's versions into version 3 now. I think up to 3.3 which should mean a lot of changes are taking place and some things are a lot easier.
But you might find that some of the add-ons to the Python language you can't get to because it's still written for the older versions.
So that makes Python a little bit difficult. And as much as it's not a contained program that you download and now you can write code in Python, there's all sorts of added packages too.
That also makes it much more powerful because someone has written packages which you can just then use in your code.
In the Windows version, even though you run a modern operating 64-bit operating system such as Windows 7 or Windows 8, I would advise that you still install the 32-bit version because many of the add-on packages are still written in the 32-bit version and you won't be able to use it.
Good.
