In order for us to do a few of these numerical calculations as far as differential equations
are concerned, we need to install some form of computer language. One of the methods is
just use Python. Now here we are on the Mac and Python 2.7, I think it's 2.7.5, something
to that effect is installed as a default in Mavericks. I do also like to play with vPython.
So if you go into your favorite search engine just type vPython and you'll get to vPython.org
and here I've just landed on the, clicked on the Macintosh page and there are three things
you should do. Install Python 2.7.6, you needn't do all of this. If you want to use vPython then
you have to have the 2.7.6, the default installation with your Mac OS won't work. If you want to
use vPython and you also have to install Active TCL 8.6.1 and install all of these. So let's
go for it. We're going to click on Python 2.7.6 and we'll do the download. There we go. So
we're just going to click on it there. It'll open it for us. So here we have the Python package. We'll
double click on it and we're going to continue to install. You might have to go into your settings,
click the security tab, security icon, click on the little lock icon in the left bottom to unlock and
make changes and then accept installation from places other than just the Mac App Store. So
we're going to continue here and just continue, agree and we're just going to install it in the
default location. You can look at customization there but we certainly want all of those and we
click install. You have to type in your password and there we go. We can close and now we're going
to go for, well what we can do is if we just open terminal and just type Python and we see that we're
now at version 2.7.6. So you can find the terminal just by going into your launchpad and typing Python
or in finder it'll be under utilities. So let's close terminal there. Close. Now let's go for the vpython
installation. See the download start there. Here we have vpython now. We'll just click on that. Again double click on our package there. Continue.
You can look at customize. We certainly want all of those packages to be installed.
Numeric calculations there in Python. This is important also just to do the actual typing of your code. So we certainly want all of those selected. We're going to hit install.
There's our password and off we go. Close there, close there. You might just want to go back very quickly. This plotting function, if we do our
numeric calculations. Remember we're going to have x values and y values. So let's just click on that. And if we say browse all files there. And we go to
matplot library there. We'll see if we go into 1.3.1 for instance. We'll see all the files there. Let's look at them. If you just hover over them. That is for
python 3.3.3. But remember that's not what we have. We have python 2.7 for macOS there. So certainly we'll click on that one to install.
Now download starts. And we can just click on it. Now this matplotlib sometimes has quite a few dependencies. Other packages that you have to install that does not come as default. And that's one problem with python really. Well it's both a strength and a weakness. In as much as
it allows software developers and scientists and mathematicians to add new code to it. And just add these packages with new functionality. But certainly some of them are not always available to your operating system. And it's sometimes difficult to find all of these or to find out why your program doesn't work and which dependencies or which packages you still need to install. It's not an all encompassing program that you just download that can
download that can do everything. So let's close there. And back here. Remember we still have to do this active TCL 8.6.1. Download starts there.
So we'll just double click on the, there we go. And continue.
So we'll just double click on the, there we go. And continue. And install. Password.
So we'll just double click on the, there we go, and continue, and install.
And there we go, let's close Safari there, it was successful, we can close there, just
remember we can just go to our finder and just close up all of these.
Great stuff.
Let's close here, we'll close there, and certainly now we are ready to do some coding.
