Let's have a look at this first example. First of all, I'm just reminding you what
the standard form of a linear differential equation is and what the
integrating factor is. And we've got to recognize this as a linear equation and
as much as we have the first derivative with respect to x of some variable y,
and here we have plus negative 3. Now this negative 3 plays the role of the p
of x. In other words, the p of x equals negative 3. Now there's no x in there.
It's x to the power of 0, but that would be the same as negative 3, y. And our f of x,
our f of x equals 0. So we do recognize this as the standard form of a linear
equation. It's standard form because there is a constant coefficient here equal to 1.
If we just look at the interval where these two functions are continuous,
we see x can take any value. In other words, it's from negative infinity to infinity,
or we can also write negative infinity as less than x is less than infinity.
So that's the interval on which the family of solutions will be continuous.
Now I said we have the integrating factor here. We know what p of x is. It's negative 3.
Let's get that integrating factor. That's e to the power, the indefinite integral of negative 3,
negative 3 dx. That's easy to do. We can bring out the negative 3 as a constant coefficient dx.
So that is going to equal e to the power negative 3 x. Now you can go through various textbooks.
It will explain why you don't need this constant c. Because what we're going to do in the end,
we're just going to differentiate. But there's an explanation for that. We need to go in there.
Just to get this integrating factor, we need to do nothing else.
Now I alluded to before that this integrating factor is magical. Because look at this.
Let's multiply out this integrating factor into our standard form linear differential equation.
So we're going to have, and then I want to write it in a special way almost,
e to the power negative 3 x times d dx of y. So d dx of y, or dy dx, minus 3 e to the power negative 3 x,
y equals, well, it will still be 0. It will still be 0.
So I've just multiplied my integrating factor. My integrating factor here, I've multiplied it throughout.
Now what do we have here? We have, in essence, well, let me rewrite this.
I have, just to make it appear a little easier, e to the power negative 3 x, y prime,
plus negative 3 e to the power negative 3 x, y equals 0.
And remember when we did integration by parts, what did we do if we had the d dx of two functions in x, u and v?
Well, that was going to be u prime v plus u v prime.
That was going to be the answer of that. You just had to decide what was u and what was v.
But here I have y and y prime. So it can play the role of u inasmuch as if that's the u that is there, that's u prime over there.
Let's have a look at these two. That means this has got to be v, this has got to be v, and this will have to be v prime.
And just look at it. That is the v prime of this. The first derivative with respect to x of e to the power negative 3 x is negative 3 e to the power negative 3 x.
That's beautiful. Beautiful. And what I have here is u prime v plus u v prime, which is then nothing other than the d dx of, well, just u and v.
There's u and there's v. So it's e to the power negative 3 x and y equals, well, zero.
And I can take the integral now of both sides with respect to, the integral of both sides with respect to x.
Or what we can do is say what kind of, well, let's take the integral. It looks a bit ugly on this side.
But what's going to happen with respect to x, with respect to x, is that these will go, and the integral of the derivative, that just cancels out as well.
So that's negative 3 x y equals some constant. Now, I might explain later why we make this side into a constant.
But that just means that y equals some constant e to the power 3 x. And that is my family of solutions for this linear equation.
So for now, let's just leave that just for now, so that is a constant, a constant on this side.
If I take the derivative of a constant, if I take the derivative of this side, I'm left with that, d dx of this, and the derivative of a constant equals zero.
So that would be one explanation as to why this becomes a constant on this side.
So there is my family of solutions. Now, this was actually going to be the y of c. We won't have a y of p here.
But y of c plus y of p equals this y. My solution, you won't be able to see that.
y of c, y of p, y of c plus y of p equals this y. But there's no p because this was a homogeneous differential equation in as much as it was set equal to zero f of x was zero.
And, w of c and y of c, y of c and b fields.
Now, please leave that and put whisper on me in the air these days.
And, so we know that that the end of the day exists, in the day is not high.
What else would it be if you first want to use notification of the year?
Okay.
You're good.
That's all about f with tempting paradigms.
So here we have to frame that with respect to면 this square.
So we're only waiting we have to prevent the wings that you make.
What else would want to do here?
Wait, can you help me think you for the next lap of the space?
Fill through there accessible quarantine.
Okay.
So we're working clear and I'm listening to a part of this region.
So you guys can create it at the beginning of the Zoom screen that I wanna take.
