Welcome to this lecture series on select topics in the management of acute surgical conditions.
In this video, one of our registrars, Dr. Quinton Moody, is going to highlight some of the aspects
of one of the common diseases that we see, a spectrum of diseases, and that encompasses
soft tissue infections.
Let's have a look at what he has to say.
Okay, so we're going to discuss soft tissue infections today, and that actually initially
asked for us to discuss this before the exams, but the meeting was cancelled due to certain
people being invited for the orals, so yeah, let's sit back, relax, and basically at the
end of the session, we just want to have an idea what a cellulitis is, what's an abscess,
a systemic infection, what is a necrotizing fasciitis, how and why do they occur, and
then how do you evaluate them, what are the warning signs of a serious infection, and how
they're treated, and how basically to prevent them.
I haven't gone into writing down all the detail on the slides, hopefully you'll be able to
take out of the slides what's necessary to answer these questions.
So cellulitis is described as an acute spreading of infection of the skin, often involving subcutaneous
tissues, most likely the infection is a group A strep or staph, aureus, is what we usually
see, it's the most common things.
What happens is you get a break in the skin, often you'll see it on patient's feet or hands,
on the feet and the lower legs, you get a small crack often from the heel, you need to go and
look between the web spaces as well, they present this pain, tenderness developing over that area,
some of them might have fever, they usually have a cell count that's raised, regional lymphadenopathy,
especially if it's down in the feet or the legs, you can feel inguinal nodes, and up to
5% of the patients actually develop a bacteremia from this, it's reported as being.
And then you can also on top of this get super infections with gram negative, because you
get local tissue breakdown and opportunistic infections in that area.
In the cellulitis, the skin is usually red, it's hot, it's very tender to touch, it can
exist alone, or it can be surrounding an area of pus, and we've all had a cellulitis, that
nice red round area around a pimple is actually a mini cellulitis, I think that's one of the
the smallest forms you're going to see, or as it could be involving large body surfaces,
the arm, the leg, the face, half the face, the whole face, often you can get it in the
neck, or you often see it on insulin dependent diabetics where they inject themselves recurrently
on their abdomens, they could also get cellulitis there.
This is a picture of a very early cellulitis, if you have a look, the anatomy of the skin,
you get your epidermis and your dermis, and the cellulitis is usually in the lower part
of the dermis, close to the superficial fascia, and then spreading down into the subcutaneous
tissue.
You can see on this guy's hand, the cellulitis of the hand is red, swollen, it's usually warm
to touch, in this case there's no area of pus, they often complain of decreased movement
of the joint area related with it.
You can see over here, the cellulitis on the leg, we often go and mark it and map it, so
you can see if the patient is responding to your therapy or not, or if it's spreading,
should you change antibiotics.
Your treatment is, you need to give the right antibiotics.
Our choice firstly is cloxicillin or clindamycin that we often treat with, but the literature
does report people treating with doxycycline and Bactrim.
I think in our settings, mostly we get penicillins to use as smarties, and they do respond to
your penicillins.
So if you're cellulitis, especially in people that have some form of immunocompromisation,
be it diabetes, HIV, cancers and things, you often need to admit them and give them two
to three doses of IV antibiotics, just so that they can respond more rapidly to that.
You need to then decide as well if there are any collections, skin boule with fluid, if you're
going to send that away for an MCNS, and then from there, change of treatment if the patient
is not responding, try and direct it at cultures, that you can culture.
Overseas, they often give empiric treatment for MRSA, and in the UK at one stage they had
a large MRSA breakout in, basically as a community-acquired infection, not only hospital-acquired.
With us, we don't empirically treat for the MRSAs.
And something that you need to decide is, does the patient need inpatient or outpatient treatment?
Inpatient treatment, all that it's basically going to entail is the IV antibiotic usage.
Outpatient treatment, your patient can be rested at home, elevate their limb at home,
carry on with their oral antibiotics.
The main thing for the treatment is to elevate the limb to help get the swelling down, just
by the help of gravity.
And also you want to prevent recurrent episodes.
In diabetics, speak to them about shoe usage.
People with cracked heels need to take care of their feet.
Have a look, see, often with the autonomic neuropathy that the diabetics have, you need
to make sure that they protect their lower limbs.
With it, also people that do work with their hands a lot, make sure that they wear gloves
or protect the things if they keep on getting recurrent infections.
Also, an abscess is in the tissue.
When the tissue in the area of the cellulitis starts actually undergoing changes and you get
tissue breakdown with pus that usually collects under the skin, termed an abscess.
The pus is usually dead, liquefied tissue, and the reason why it's yellowish-white is due
to the white cell infiltrate into it.
The most common bacteria that we see is also your staphs.
The staph aureus, actually meaning the golden colour which they grow on the colonies and
the chains, and it's often got this yellowish-goldish tinge to it as well.
But you can get multiple bacteria causing abscesses, not necessarily this.
Abscesses should be drained.
You usually pop a pimple to get the pus out, the pain goes away, the cellulitis settles.
Any abscess pus-containing cavity needs to be opened and evacuated and drained properly
to get source control of your sepsis.
As you can see here, there's a cellulitis, in the middle there's a bit of breakdown.
It's usually quite a fluctuating area that's palpable.
You can actually feel very tender, often very painful.
Different areas, this one on the buttocks.
If you had to open this with a large area like that, sometimes up to a cup of pus could
come out or something like that.
If it's deep-seated, deep in the gluteus muscle, often seen with inframuscular injections.
Often when they're wrinkling on skin means that these patients usually have some form
of either antibiotics on board already that's treating the surrounding cellulitis or that
the body's immune system is actually working.
Very large abscesses, like the one you can see, often need to go to theatre.
You're not just going to open these things and debride them and clean them in your office.
You need to actually book the patients.
Something else, one of the skin infections that you see is erosipelas.
It's very distinctive, superficial cellulitis.
The thing is, it's often got prominent lymphatics involved and it's actually a raised, very
nice, demarcated area.
It's actually a ridge that it forms on the skin.
Strep A and the other streps can do it.
Treatment is basic penicillin, flucloxacillin once again.
As you can see on the face, there's a marked outline that you can actually see that forms.
So it's not just cellulitis in general, it's just because you have a very large red swollen
area.
Erosipelas has actually got this nice raised border to it.
Other things that you need to go and have a look at to distinguish from your cellulitis
is necrotizing fasciitis, which has two types.
Anaerobic myone, necrosis and things like cutaneous anthrax and things which we don't actually
see here.
And then also a prominent response to vaccination, often after vaccination, especially in kids,
you'll see it's a large red swollen area, which is just an immune reaction.
It's not necessarily a cellulitis or an effective process going on.
We often admit patients with cellulitis of the lower limb, but you rule out DVTs.
DVTs can also give you a swollen, warm area, skin changes, erythema, and then things like
your fixed drug reactions, which can also be life-threatening, which must then be seen
by dermatology.
So necrotizing fasciitis is when the bacteria in the cellulitis, or this abscess, actually
starts spreading.
So it's not contained to the local subcutaneous tissue.
It's usually between the fat, between the subcutaneous fat tissue and the muscle underneath
it with the fascial layer in between it.
That's why it's termed the necrotizing fasciitis, and it's actually putrefying of the flesh.
So it actually just kills off the flesh or the connective tissue going through between
that.
It spreads along these spaces and can spread quite rapidly.
The spreading is often further in the tissue than what you can actually see on the superficial
surface.
On the skin, you'll see a large area, often say 10 by 10 centimeters, but it might actually
be a 15 by 15 centimeter under the skin already.
The infection actually spreads through and then starts off mostly by venous clotting.
So it cuts up your venous system from your endotoxins and things that are released.
Severe inflammation, you get small venous thrombosis, which then basically goes back into small arterial
from occlusion as well of this tissue, your blood supply being cut off, thus with this
local necrosis taking place.
You often, in a case like this, these patients are septic.
They're in septic shock.
You can often pick up.
They do have bacteremias, and they're actually extremely sick.
If you ever see something like a necrotizing fasciitis, you often see these large, big blisters
with a dark black containing fluid in them as well over the area, surrounding areas, especially
on the lower limbs, you can also see it.
This is what it looks like if you clean them properly.
You need to cut away until you get healthy tissue.
You need to go and debride off all the dead tissue, surrounding tissue that's necrotic.
The only way to do it is to, it sounds nasty, but basically butcher away.
You need to cut very neatly, but you can never, ever know the extent until you're in theatre
as to what you're going to get and where it's going to go.
So the pain is very prominent in these patients.
They have severe pain.
They've got toxicity.
They've usually got tachycardias.
They've got raised white cell crowns.
They fever.
You can have crepitus over the area, depending on the bacteria that's causing it.
If there's a gas-forming bacteria, you can feel crepitus in the skin.
What you often also refer to is that it's a foul-smelling dishwater drainage.
Out of these areas, if there's any open area, it's this funny, milky-looking, dirty dishwater
that seeps out of it.
It's got this fluid seeping out of it.
You get two types.
The first type is a mixed pathogenesis, and can include your anaerobes.
And then your type 2 is usually your strep A, group A, organisms,
which are also described as flesh-eating organisms.
As I said, they destroy the tissue and actually petrify the flesh.
There are case reports as well that have mentioned about monomicrobial necrotizing
soft tissue infections by strange organisms that have cultured things like
Haemophilus influenzae and things out of this tissue.
No other organisms noted.
But it's very rare that you're going to get these.
It was just mentioned in the bottom of one of the articles that I looked through.
And the main thing, as I said earlier, which was in the previous slide,
is your surgery is going to determine your outcome.
Getting these patients to theatre as quick as possible.
You need to give them antibiotics immediately, basically.
But you need to get them to theatre.
This is where surgery really counts for sepsis control and source control of what's going on.
Your group A streps are toxin-reducing strains.
Basically what they do is they cause, as I was saying, with the toxins that they release,
you get a local response.
You get your vascular thrombosis.
And they also then putrefize their tissue.
If you don't go and debride these patients properly, they have a very high mortality.
A proper necrotizing fasciaitis does have a high mortality as it is.
You often have to take these patients back for recurrent surgeries.
And the problem is your extensive debridements usually become a debilitating debridement.
You cut away, cut away.
Eventually you've cut away the entire bitox.
It goes right up to the, around the anus.
Often sphincter muscles are involved.
They're usually spared, but in your debridement you can often take sphincter muscles,
so it means they end up getting leukolostomies, things like that.
Something that, the main thing is as well, you can put them on the cloxicillin and clindamycin.
You need to culture, send away cultures on these as urgent.
Treat accordingly and appropriate infections.
The problem is we've had a few bedsores currently that have been infected
and they've all been in hospital.
There have been nosocomial forms of sepsis in the tissues as well.
The literature makes a very big emphasis on giving these patients intravenous IgG.
Not IgG, sorry, immunoglobulins.
They also talk about giving empiric antibiotics before your surgery.
That is actually that you'll have a better outcome, which we usually do in our patients.
We treat them probably by adding, especially if it's around the perennial region,
add flageal to the necronidazole.
So other causes of your clostridial anaerobic cellulitis,
your gas gangrene, which often involves muscles,
foot and ears gangrene, which is perianal area.
But this is most, like foot and ears is described as being necrotizing fasciitis,
but due to urological cause, due to urethral strictures,
are usually the main cause of this.
And it's very difficult when we see the patients to decide
is it from perianal sepsis or from urological sepsis.
The patient has got a light-threatening condition
and needs to be treated and sorted out.
So, and then you also get certain necrotizing cellulitis.
The clostridia are known to cause your gas gangrene.
What often happens is they usually, due to trauma, post-op wounds are rare,
but also combat and things, especially people out on farms,
areas that are not very hygienic, combat zones aren't a most hygienic place,
usually don't have five-star luxury showers, things like that, baths.
And these pain is often not prominent in the cellulitis.
They'll have the cellulitis and they'll complain about a bit of discomfort,
but it's not the severe pain that they usually have.
You do get systemic toxicity in them, but it's not that pronounced.
And they often have this foul-smelling drainage,
and it's a thick pus coming out.
They might have crepitus with it as well.
In multiple of your different clostridia,
that they actually have cultured out of these wounds.
And interesting, I actually found an article there,
where somebody's actually gone and had a look at this,
that this guy's based all of his soft tissue work on,
he's actually on IV drug users overseas with popping,
where they eventually don't have veins,
and they inject themselves with this hot tar and things from their hair,
and things directly into the skin.
And these guys actually get all these little pits with these little abscesses forming,
and eventually end up getting necrotizing fasciitis,
and the strangest of strange organisms,
which I thought wasn't quite appropriate to our setting there.
Yeah, the muscle, it does involve muscle as rapidly progressive,
might be life-threatening, especially patients that have systemic toxicity from it.
And yeah, the adjacent skin is often very white,
and then later on becomes this funny brown color.
And the white is with the initial, or when you get the obliteration of the,
and occlusion of your arterial system.
So, and often if there's a discharge, it can actually be frothy and have bubbles in it.
They're actually bubbles.
So, the treatment for this again is surgery, your penicillins, pen G, your clender.
Gram-negative agents can also be used if on the gram stains they see them.
So if you have a look, this isn't the best picture.
It was actually on a smaller, better resolution,
that you could actually see the areas of white as well on it.
So, it's not just the light, there was an area of white there,
and an area of white over the toe, over this toe, yeah.
And there's actually, on the smaller resolution,
there was gas bubbles on that.
That's what it could look like as well.
So, and then other soft tissue infections that you get is your pyomyositis.
And this is usually involving isolated skeletal muscle.
Most common pathogens, your staph aureus.
The thing is, there's usually no penetrating wound for this myositis to take place.
It's usually from blunt trauma.
And then often seen in extreme athletes where they'll go running.
It was often seen previously in the old military training camps as well,
where people were subjected to extensive strenuous exercise.
And then also, it's often seen up to 60%.
It's very known to occur in the tropical regions or around the equator,
and then Vietnam and those areas it was described.
If you're out of the tropics, 60% of these people usually have diabetes,
ethanolic liver disease.
They have some form of immune compromisation going.
Steroid treatment, malignancies and things.
So, basically what happens is, as I said,
blunt trauma or vigorous exercise.
They get a period of swelling up to three weeks later,
and then they suddenly start getting this pain, fever, swelling.
And often they put a needle in, and you can actually aspirate pus out of this.
And, yeah, later on you can get metastatic abscesses forming
due to hematogenous spread and lymphatic spread.
So, you can diagnose it with x-rays.
You can often see a collection ultrasound or CT scanning and things.
You usually don't see gas loculations,
usually not your gas-warming bacteria in them.
And the big thing to do is to go and drain them surgically.
Put a drain in, wash it out,
and then also consider directed antibiotic therapy,
send away for cultures.
Group A can cause toxic shock with them.
With this you often get creatine, phosphokinase rays.
Once again, you need to go and do surgery.
They suggest your penicillins, glendamycin,
and your intravenous immunoglobulin, sorry, yeah.
And other infections just that you see is impetigo.
You see this often in little kids, teenagers,
especially kids in nursery schools.
You get these crass and superficial skin lesions.
Group A, staphs, streps.
Your young children usually, and people living in crowded places.
As I said, impetigo, you get pullers impetigo.
You get your scalded skin syndrome.
That's usually seen in neonates.
And then folliculitis.
Rare folliculitis that you see is things like pseudomonas and candida,
all these funny, nice things that you see in the tropical regions.
I don't know if pseudomonas has been community acquired.
I'm not quite sure on that one.
And you get furuncles and cubuncles.
So you've got some impetigo, staph, scalded skin syndrome, neonates.
Just in the, what's the name?
In the scalded skin syndrome, it's just superficial.
It's not, they're usually not systemically affected by that.
It's just a nice folliculitis.
It was the only reason MRSA was.
It was described in an article, a British article with an MRSA.
It wasn't responding to furuncle carbuncles that you often see.
And the big thing is these things just become self-infected
because you'll press this one and then you'll squeeze the one next to it.
And it just becomes this continuous thing that goes,
especially if you often see it in the hairlines and on the backs and things.
But it's most likely head and neck.
So, hopefully I could answer a few of your questions.
So, what a cellulitis is, what a abscess is.
Just to know that they can cause systemic infections.
Necrotizing fasciitis and the urgency behind it, taking these patients to theater,
why they occur and how they occur and, yeah, how to treat them.
Okay, who's got questions for Quint?
I just want to ask what the appropriate role of a blood culture is.
Who needs a blood culture?
Well, in a sense, I think if you're looking at your cellulitis,
which is basically a local superficial infection that we mostly know what it is,
I wouldn't do a blood culture.
I know in studies they've done them, that's probably where they get their 5% estimate of bacterial immune.
I think the patient with an acrotizing fasciitis is sick enough to warrant the blood culture.
Yeah, definitely.
Especially if you're doing appropriate, if you want to do appropriate antibiotic therapy.
Because often your biopsies that you're taking on the tissue has got mixed flora in it.
You never know, I mean, you can cut away a whole lot and then you go and cut a deeper piece.
But it's septic tissue, it's usually around the anal area or something like that.
It's the most common ones that we see.
I mean, it can grow a zoo from around somebody's anus.
So I think the next challenge is that's appropriate.
We'll ask Faisal's opinion, he will know more about any other one.
I think it's important, you can read many journal articles on this and everyone will sing a bit of a different story.
And there's a lot you can publish on this and it's an easy kind of research to do because we see a lot of these things.
It's important for me though just to differentiate two distinct types.
And I think many, many journal articles do.
You get non-necrotizing and necrotizing infections.
Non-necrotizing infections, well, folliculitis, pharynculosis, cabunculosis, cellulitis and abscess.
To some extent, wound sepsis from surgery.
Anything that does not necrotize or kill tissue.
Now there's a bit of a, it's not that well demarcated in as much as there are a bit of gray areas.
You can have a big abscess and then the center of the abscess on the skin that's so tight over that abscess,
there's some skin necrosis there.
But that's not necrotizing infection per se.
And those, as Quentin mentioned, there's a very low incidence of bacteremia.
And you're wasting your time and money as far as your blood cultures are concerned.
And it's important to know that, you know, bar the abscess that you have to cut away your wound that you have to open,
you know, most of these we just manage with antibiotics.
And in some cases you can get away with topical antibiotics even, you know,
with a very mild kind of skin and soft tissue infection.
The necrotizing infections is something completely different.
By definition, the necrotizing fasciitis has 100% mortality in the absence of surgical care,
plus supportive care, plus broad spectrum antibiotics.
You've got to bring all of those together.
And, you know, if you don't, specifically the time you're surgery,
you know, you're going to have 100% mortality.
That's the definition of necrotizing fasciitis.
I think it's also important just to have necrotizing, not call it necrotizing fasciitis per se,
but just call it, I think it's NSTI, necrotizing soft tissue infection.
Because you can get a necrotizing cellulitis, a necrotizing fasciitis,
and then a necrotizing myonecrosis, just depending on the depth of it.
And for those you're always going to need, for the necrotizing ones,
they are invasive by nature, and because of that, there is this vicious circle.
You get the bacteremia, which makes you sick, hyperperfusion,
which means more necrotic tissue, which means more organisms grow,
so it's this vicious circle.
And you don't only stop it by cutting it out,
you've also got to treat that bacteremia,
and then your blood culture becomes quite important.
One thing, and Quentin didn't mention though, is sometimes it's difficult to decide
when someone has, you know, to make that distinction between non-necrotizing
and necrotizing infection.
What you see initially out there, you know, we sit in the position in this unit
that people go to a lot of places before they eventually come to us.
You know, this is a tertiary referral service.
So by the time they come to us, it's usually overt and many times too late.
Since you've all been here, you've seen mortality as far as this disease concerned.
They just get to us too late.
It's much more difficult to be on the front line and you see these patients early on
to make that distinction between is it necrotizing or not.
And that's why I like to make this distinction.
For me, it's either a necrotizing infection or non-necrotizing.
And you've got to make that distinction because the necrotizing ones are the ones
that you almost sometimes blindly go to theater because it doesn't look that bad.
And the patient doesn't give you all kinds of clues.
Okay, the clues that they do give you are, for me, are the following.
They've got pain out of proportion to what you see.
Totally out of proportion to what you see.
And if they have that and they have some systemic signs, early systemic signs,
you might as well take them to theater.
And in some cases, you might just be a bit too aggressive, but rather that than being underaggressive.
And you didn't mention it, but there are some scoring systems.
Now, as far as I know, not many of them have been validated.
So I think it's something our unit can look at.
Perhaps it's some research, you know, to validate some of these scores.
The one, and I asked one of the interns, is to look at five previous patients of ours.
Unfortunately, you know, here and there, we do have CRPs, but the vast majority we don't
because it asks for CRP, white cell count, HP, sodium, creatinine, and glucose.
And you give various points to that.
And anything that more than six is, you know, enough clinical suspicion for you just to take
the patient to theater.
And that's this lab test.
There's no clinical evaluation whatsoever.
So I think if we can just get the lab to do CRPs for us, we might put forward to the research
committee that we do, you know, a small trial just to validate this.
Because we see both necrotizing and non-necrotizing, and we can very quickly see what the sensitivity
and specificity or accuracy is of one of these.
We can certainly try and validate this.
I think it's important.
Faisal.
Faisal.
Just one thing about the clinical signs.
So early on with necrotizing infections, the overt signs on the skin may not be that obvious.
And the one important clinical sign is anesthesia or hyperesthesia.
And I guess due to destruction of small cutaneous nerves.
Very important sign.
Yeah.
Just feel with your finger around.
Ask the patient can make feel it.
Outside of the red area.
Very good sign.
And the other thing also, we can try to help distinguish between an abscess and necrotizing
fasciitis.
With an abscess, it's completely or nicely walled off by glandulation tissue.
Whereas with necrotizing fasciitis specifically, you know, you can actually, as I'll describe
it, you can move your hand quite easily along tissue planes which normally wouldn't be possible.
So it's not well democated at all.
And you can just slide your hand.
Between the...
It's just pockets of parson that all...
Yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
That's it, yeah.
The pressure is just loose from the subcutaneous tissue.
Yeah.
And then histologically, one of the main things is the thrombosis within small bits that you
see.
And obviously the necrosis in the subcutaneous tissue.
It's not...
Yeah.
So I don't need the blood cultures now.
Always if you're going to go cut, send tissue away.
Yeah, sorry, yeah.
Tissue cultures.
You need the culture.
Because, you know, you've got to change your antibiotic status, you know, afterwards.
And the more cultures you have, from that first blood culture to all the cultures that
you send away.
Is it worth sending tissue for histology in this case or not?
Well, I tend not to send it for histology, but I'm going to send fair...
Yeah.
No, no.
I mean...
Tissue chunks for...
At least one to two pieces of tissue from different depths as well.
The interesting thing you mention is that immunoglobulins, which we don't use in this unit, we don't
use at all.
And it's not, at least in this part of the world, a common...
It's more European...
Common treatment modality at all.
Yeah, they don't even use it really in patients that are needed for other reasons, you know,
like IPP patients.
Yeah, no, no, no.
I'm just saying that the literature, I know it's on the European side and things made quite
a lot of reference to it.
And that to me was like...
I mean, they were still talking about treating cellulitis with first generation or second generation
get this forward.
You know, it's...
You can...
You can...
The problem with this literature is something works.
Yeah.
And how literature works is someone will prove equal efficacy.
So there will be some regime and you want to start a new one and you'll compare it to
something that's already been shown to work.
So it's always just this hundreds of comparisons all over.
It is almost never just to show superiority of one specific regime so that we know that specific
one works the best.
It's all these equivocal comparisons.
So every unit uses something different.
And of course we're restricted.
I think most of our patients just get augmented.
You know, even the ones that go to ICU just get augmented, you know,
amoxicillin-cavilanic acid.
Yeah, yeah.
I was going to say, and then they get urta.
And they get urta-panem if...
If that's not working.
You know, if the augment and the amoxicillin-cavilanic acid's not working.
If you have free access to drugs, I think it might be a bit difficult if your patient does
not survive to defend your choice of amoxicillin-cavilanic acid in a court of law.
You know, because someone's always going to say, well, there is an article that shows something
else.
And if you look at those sort of instances, if you want to use single drug or double drugs,
I would, you know, I would seriously consider something like Piptase, Piperacillin, and Tazabectin,
with or without metronidazole, or then imepinem or metanem, you know, as single-line drugs
with or without a proper anaerobic cover.
You know, to go for that class of drug versus what we have here.
The problem with your type 1 NSTI, you know, is we are seeing, I think, an increasing.
And we might look at our data because we've actually...
We should have good data to show what organisms we are growing.
You know, that gram-negatives also now starting at least to play a much bigger role, especially
these ones that we get that are nasocomial.
Yeah.
You know, and your amoxicillin-cavilanic acid, as far as your gram-negative cover is concerned,
I think there are better things for them to go in negative cover.
I mean, the hospital has Piptase and we just need to motivate to get it.
I think you could come up with something like that to be able to substantiate
and substantiate why you think this group of patients should be treated with it.
I don't think...
Well, I think we clearly have to look at our recent mortalities and see what they do.
And perhaps, if we motivate for, if we do see these ones that do need inotropic and ventilatory support,
that we do go for something bigger initially, because we just don't at the moment.
One important thing we haven't mentioned is also just the gas formation.
Remember, it's not only Clostridium that forms gas.
Yeah.
I think many, many organisms do gas formation.
Sometimes you can't feel it.
You can see it on an x-ray.
You can also see it even better on a CT scan.
And tissue plane is asymmetric.
Tissure plane changes due to edema that you can also see.
But I always hate to mention that, because then everyone thinks you should do these tests before taking a patient like that to theater.
Do not waste time with an x-ray or CT scan or an MRI or any fancy thing like that.
You know, this is an emergency surgical procedure.
And time lost equals, you know, it's historically proportional to mortality there.
So then waste time with all sorts of special investigations, except for your basic lab tests,
which have all of these things for the score anyway.
If you go back to all these studies, your ICU studies, your rooms, trial, things like that,
the main thing is for source control of your sepsis.
So give antibiotics, get source control of your sepsis, and in this case it's debridement.
You also mentioned, you know, sometimes you have to go back.
I think if it was neck fashion, go back 24 hours, no matter how happy you were with that first abridement.
And also, you also mentioned disfigurement and loss of function.
That is not your concern whatsoever.
You don't care what you cut off.
If it's dead, you cut it off.
You actually have to cut off some, you know, viable, surrounding viable tissue as well.
You know, don't just go to the edge.
You have to do some viable, a marginal viable tissue as well.
And as we said now, loss of limb, loss of sphincters, does not matter.
Any kind of disfigurement is not your concern whatsoever.
Any bit that you leave behind, it's just a nidus for this whole thing just to go again.
You know, there's no stopping this.
Especially your type 2, man.
Some of those type 2s can run like wildfire.
I think fortunately we see type 1 most of the time.
I think most of us we see type 1.
I think those that don't make it are probably type 2s.
It's also a bit artificial, this type 1 and type 2.
You can send a culture away and they only manage to grow one single organism.
That doesn't mean it's a monobacterial infection.
Others weren't properly cultured.
So it's a bit of an artificial thing.
But I think if you read about these outbreaks of flesh-eating infections in some foreign press,
that probably is a monocrobial, fast-acting kind of organism.
But I think we see the vast majority as of polymicrobial.
Questions?
So you're saying that in our current practice, because of lack of antibiotics,
is if a patient has necrotizing fasciitis, is something like Augmentin.
That's what you're doing at the moment.
I know that it's mostly like staph and strep, but surely you would want to put in more antibiotics
just to cover more things with such an extensive infection.
Look, don't get us wrong.
I think our mortality rate is actually quite low.
I think it's below, for what we see is below what people would publish in journals.
So it's not that high.
The problem is we've never sat down and looked at this in research form.
And your memory is only as long as your last case or two.
So we might be talking total nonsense here, but my feeling is that we are getting away.
We didn't thumb-suck this Augmentin or Moxolimka-Vilenic acid.
And it's not because someone is upstairs in some government department
is being nasty and short-sighted or doesn't want to hand out money.
These things are properly decided by infectious diseases,
and they look at what the profiles are and all of that.
So it's not an improper decision that we are using the Moxolimka-Vilenic acid though.
I think as clinicians it does make us slightly nervous because we feel that there are better stuff out there.
But I think until such time as we sit down and just do either an audit
or we do a prospective validation of, say for instance, this scoring system
and in that prospective trial we also look at the organisms involved and the outcome.
Unless we look at that critically, we can't really say that there's anything wrong with our choice as we are here.
Remember, what we see coming into this hospital is not the same that someone sees coming into a hospital in Paris
or New York or Mogadishu or wherever, you know, the community makes it where the patients come
and make an enormous difference in what is valid for one place is not the other.
I'm just making a call for the registrars that I think time is rife that we look at what the data is here
and whether the use of a Moxolimka-Vilenic acid, you know, is appropriate.
I must confess, outside in private, I never used a Moxolimka-Vilenic acid.
I was really too nervous, you know, to use that as a first-line drug
and, you know, I tended towards the much broader spectrum cover together with anaerobic cover.
And anaerobic cover is metronidazole.
I think if you compare metronidazole and clindamycin as an anaerobic cover, metronidazole will always win.
I can show you quite a few articles that have looked, you know, say compared three decades ago,
two decades ago, decades now.
The resistance to metronidazole has always been low, whereas clindamycin has climbed.
The one good thing about clindamycin, I think, that I don't know if it's still supportive,
but at least the last time I looked, it was that it inhibits the toxins produced by some of the grand positives,
whereas PNG, for instance, won't.
So it does have that toxin inhibition, which makes it a good gram-positive cover,
not for its anaerobic use, but for its gram-positive cover.
The other thing that also comes in is your aminoglycosides.
Now, for this gram-negative cover, the aminoglycosides work very well in this situation.
The only problem is, of course, is the nephrotoxicity.
And if a patient's already hyperperfused and in septic shock, you know, it's one thing you want to run away from.
And you really want to look elsewhere.
And if you look at the very broad-spectrum carbapenins, you know, you've got very good gram-negative cover anyway.
So in private, that's sort of a, I think most people would lean that way.
But we'll have to look at our data.
Just on the head, you said you've got to be careful as well just throwing any antipodics and things,
photoresistance patterns and things.
I mean, micro come on the world rounds.
They bring these sheets of, stacks of sheets of results from patients that have cultured things.
And it's the same as now, just basically with us.
If you have an ulcer and you're going to eradicate your ulcer,
you don't get eradication while you're in hospital.
To try and stop resistance with bugs that are here.
You've got to treat appropriate things.
You can't just, it doesn't help you give every person that comes in with a cellulitis,
or something, because you're scared it's a neck fascia as well.
You've got to be, you're going to run into it.
You've got to add in metronidazole just to cover.
Is it not worth it?
To cover what?
Just to add metronidazole to the Augmentin.
Augmentin has excellent anaerobic cover.
Make no mistake.
It really has good anaerobic cover.
I don't think flageol has enough side effects, metronidazole has enough side effects not to use it.
I think it's a very good drug.
Yeah.
And it has maintained its sensitivity over many, many years.
And it's not something I'm afraid of using.
And for the patient's sake, I've got no issue adding it to,
even to something that should already have some form of anaerobic cover like I really do add.
Quinta makes an important point.
And I'm going to reiterate that these decisions for the Moxel-Clavelinic acid comes from good research,
not done by us as a clinical unit, but by ID.
And in a big hospital setting like this, massive hospital setting,
where we don't always have the ability to isolate people properly
and we have massive amounts of movement and all of that resistance is a problem.
When I refer to private, I mean, you can totally isolate a private hospital.
Even the biggest private hospitals are small in comparison to this unit.
And you can get away from, to a large extent,
in not causing the potential drug resistance that is a potential here.
You can get away with that in a private place by totally isolating the patient,
isolating the staff with that patient.
You know, it's not, it's not the same scenario as here.
Here we've got to be careful.
There's no ways, I think, no ways that we should, you know,
pull the meronim, you know, from the shelf for all the necratchers.
That'd be a, that'd be a recipe for disaster.
Thank you.
The lindemations, but I'll give you .
It would have been proven.
Yeah.
Thank you.
