Let's have a look at this problem. It's exactly the same as the previous, although it's not
homogeneous. It's now non-homogeneous in that I have the P of x. P of x is still going to equal
negative 3, but my f of x now is 6. I can put x to the power of 0, x to the power of 0, which is
1 to show that these are functions. Even though they're coefficients, they are functions of x.
x can take any value, so the interval that I'm dealing with here again is such. Now here it
doesn't look like it's important, but it will get important with later problems. Again, I've got to
get my integrating factor, and my integrating factor again is e to the power negative 3 dx,
which is going to be e to the power negative 3x, which I'm now going to multiply out, which once
again is going to leave me with a d dx. I've got to watch the previous video for this part.
Oh, I don't know where my ruler went. Here we go. It's going to be the d dx of
e to the power negative 3x and y, and that is going to equal, now I had to multiply this on this
side as well, so that's going to be 6 e to the power negative 3x. It was going to happen
on that side. So I multiplied through my integrating factor through on this side. That was going
to leave me with this e to the power 3x, negative 3x, dy dx, minus 3 times e to the power negative
3x would have left me with another value there. And let's do all the steps. Let's do all the
steps just to make sure that we don't make a mistake here. That might be important. So
I'm going to have e to the power negative 3x, y prime, plus we're going to have a negative
3 times e to the power negative 3x in y, and that's going to equal 6 e to the power negative
3x. And what we recognize here is that I have a u prime and a u, which will have to leave
me this as a v, and this is a v prime. And what is the first derivative of e to the power
negative 3x? Well, it's negative 3 e to the power negative 3x. So that works out beautifully,
which leaves me just taking the ddx of u and v. If I take the ddx of this, and I make
this u and v, now even though this does not contain an x, just see it as a function of
x, so it's u of x and v of x, and I'm taking ddx of both sides, I am left with this, which
now means I can take the integral of both sides with respect to x, take the integral with
respect to x. This, the integral of the derivative cancels out, so I'm left with e to the power
negative 3xy is going to equal the 6 I can bring out as the integral e to the power negative
3x dx, and that is going to equal, well, negative 3. Well, let's do this, this to, I mean, we did
it here, we did it very quickly, but let's just do it, oh, shall we do it properly? Let's
say u, this biceps u equals negative 3x. In other words, du dx equals negative 3, and that
leaves me with dx equals negative 1 third du. So if I had to do this on this side, I'll have
the 6, I'll have the negative 1 third, I'll have the integral of e to the power u du. So
dx I've replaced with negative 3 du, and e negative 3x I've replaced with u. That is going to leave
me with negative 2 e to the power u, which is negative 3x, plus now some constant c, and that equals e
to the power negative 3x times y. I can now just divide everything by this, so y equals negative 2,
plus 6 e to the power 3x, and that will be c over e to the power negative 3x, and that is y equals negative 2,
plus 6 e to the power 3x. And there we go. So, oh, I think you might not have seen my last few steps.
It's so irritating when I do that. So I've just solved for this using u substitution, just as a reminder
how to do it from single variable calculus first here. And that leaves me with this, plus some constant c,
because I've taken the integral, and I've just divided both sides by this. So those will cancel out,
leaving me with just a negative 2, and here I'll be left with a 6 e to the power, 6 e to the power 3x.
Now look at this. Remember we said, remember we said that this solution was a combination of y of c plus y of p,
p, this homogeneous solution part, and p, the particular solution. And now look at this.
When it was a homogeneous solution, we had c e to the power 3x, which became a 6 here. So that was part of the
homogeneous part with c equal to 6. But here we'll have a negative 2. We'll have a negative 2.
And that's not 6. What am I saying? Things are going a bit wild in this video. That is c.
C e to the power 3x. No way. I suddenly saw that as a 6. And that make no sense. So negative 2, it gets added to you.
This was my homogeneous family of solution answer there. And that gets added now. The particular part gets added.
And I'm now left with the final family of solutions to my original problem here, which was a linear differential equation.
To be able to do this problem here. And it was that like something went along with this problem, we use the problem.
And I'm also left this problem so I may see that the results of it completely difficult...
.
