I want to move on to this very interesting example. I have that the y prime plus y equals the f of x.
I have an initial value, x equals 0, then y equals 0.
But I have a piecewise defined function of f here.
And it states the following.
That the f of x equals 1 when x is between 0 and 1, and it's 0 when x is larger than 1.
It's already in standard form.
My p of x equals 1.
Therefore, my integrating factors will be e to the power, indifferent integral of 1 dx.
And that is just e to the power x.
Let's multiply it throughout.
But let's first start off with the x.
Let's start off with this interval 0 is less than or equal to x is less than or equal to 1.
In other words, e to the power xy prime plus e to the power xy equals, so here it will be 1, that's e to the power x.
Rewrite this as ddx of e to the power xy equals e to the power x.
And take the definite integral with indefinite integral with respect to x on both sides.
That leaves me with e to the power xy equals e to the power x plus some constant.
If I now have to solve for y, I'm going to get that y equals 1 plus c, let's call it c, 1 over e to the power x.
Now, my initial value problem, my initial value problem stated that x equals 0, and that certainly falls in this interval.
So I can use my initial value problem, my initial value statement here.
So 0 equals 1 plus c, 1 over e to the power 0, in other words, c, 1 equals negative 1, in other words, y equals, or this interval,
y equals 1 minus 1 over e to the power x.
That's certainly the first part.
Let's look at the second part.
My integrating factor is not going to change, I'm going to have the fact that, so here we have x is larger than 1, our interval now.
So e to the power xy is going to equal, well, let's just do it properly, ddx of that is going to equal just 0.
Because now I have 0 on the other side.
0, and I can take the integral, so e to the power xy is going to equal some constant c,
because if I now take the derivative of this side, it looks like this.
If I take the derivative of some constant, it equals 0.
In other words, y equals c2 over e to the power x.
So at the moment, my solution looks like this.
It's 1 minus 1 over e to the power x for this interval.
And it equals c over e to the power x for this interval.
I cannot replace this initial value here, because x was equal to 0.
Let's move up.
x was equal to 0 in this initial value problem, but now my interval is x larger than 1,
so I can't put 0 in here.
I can, though, make this...
I can, though, solve for c if we want a solution that is continuous,
because it goes to 1 there, and then just larger than 1.
So I can solve for...
I cannot use my initial value problem, though, but I can make this curve continuous, the solution,
continuous at x equals 1, by doing the following.
What I will have to note is that the limit,
as x approaches 1 from the positive side of the y of x is going to equal the y of 1.
So what we're saying is this bit here, the y of x, has got to equal what the y of 1 would be.
The y of 1 is included here.
So I'm saying the limit as this little bit approaches 1 from this side has got to equal
what 1 looks... what the curve looks from this side, where y equals 1.
So how would that work?
Well, this would be... this here would be c over e to the power 1,
because it's trying to reach this limit,
and on the other side, the y of 1 is this.
It's 1 minus 1 over e to the power 1.
So if I just multiply both sides by e to the power 1,
c is going to equal e minus 1.
I'm just multiplying both sides by e.
So I can get this solution for e.
In other words, y is going to equal 1 minus 1 over e to the power x
on this interval,
and e minus 1 over e to the power x
for this interval.
So, and the reason why I could solve for c,
why I could solve for c here,
as I said, I just want to make things continuous
at this point x equals 1.
At the point x equals 1 to the negative side,
I'm going to have this,
and then up until 1,
but just larger than 1,
I have a different curve.
But at the moment, it's a family of curves,
family of solutions,
because depending on what value that constant takes,
but I can solve for that constant by saying,
of all the possible family of solutions
coming from this side,
x equals, or x is more than 1,
I want it to join up with this value,
where x equals 1.
In other words, 1 minus 1 over e.
1 minus 1 over e,
and I want that to be exactly equal to that spot
on this side,
which is c over e to the power 1.
The limit as x approaches 1
from the positive side of this function.
Therefore, I can solve for c
so that I can connect those two up
and get a value for c to make this
a continuous function at x equals 1.
Now, certainly,
it is going to involve,
it isn't going to involve a cusp,
and as much as we have,
what we have here is two functions.
It will be like this,
and another function
which will come down like this.
So, at this point,
we're going to have this,
this is x equals 1.
This is x equals 1.
So, we'll have something like this.
As far as our solution is concerned,
it will go from 0 to 1,
and then there will be this cusp
as we move on to this function here.
And all I wanted,
because there will be a family
of solutions on this side,
I wanted the one that hooks up
to this one exactly at x equals 1.
