Good, that was fantastic, but what about something like this now, a system of equations and we want to use numerical analysis.
Certainly we'll have to use numerical analysis here.
So I have these two equations, in second order, in as much as there I have an x double prime, there I have a y double prime, there's a y double prime.
But I also have an x prime there for instance, and I see here I have a third variable, even t.
So how are we going to solve these?
Well first of all you have to convert them to equations of first order.
So how would we do that?
The best thing to do that is unfortunately not always going to work out like that.
For instance the next example that I'm going to use Python, you'll see what else to do.
So I could simply just write x double prime, and that is equal to e to the power of t, I'm going to have plus x prime, plus 7x.
Man, my algebra is letting go of me, so it's minus 7x, I should say, minus y double prime, and here we're just going to have y double prime, and that is going to equal 4t squared.
And we're going to have positive 3x, and we're going to have negative 3y.
What I can clearly see is I can plug y double prime in there.
So I can plug y double prime in there, and that was negative that, so it's going to be minus 4t squared, minus 3x, and minus 3y.
So I have these, and the only thing that, well we need to clean that up, we'll do that now, but we have to have x prime, and we're going to call that u, and we're going to have y prime call that v.
So how's that going to help me?
Now remember what we want in the end, we want functions of x, y, and u, and then the same for v.
So what is this going to happen, what's going to happen to this?
Well this is going to be v prime, this is going to be u prime, and what we have here is a function of t, x, and y.
Let's call this the g of t, x, and y now.
And here we just have to clean things up a bit, let's have x prime, remember it's going to be a u, so this will change to a u.
We don't have v's, we don't have any v's in here, in this equation, and we have negative 3x, well let's just rewrite this whole thing.
So we have e to the power t, minus 4t squared, and what do we have?
We have negative 3x, negative 3x, that's negative 10x, negative 10x, we have, what do we have left?
We have negative 3y, we have negative 3y, and then we have the positive u, positive u, I should say.
So there's why there would be my 4 equations that I am going to work with, that I now have to solve.
So I just have to rewrite this as a system of first order equations, before I use my numerical analysis to solve for these problems.
Now there's 4, so we constantly have to have a v in there, and this is going to be our function f, for instance, of t, x, y, and u.
And u, I suppose I can here call this f as well, because that is a function of v, and that is a function of u.
So you have to convert them first of all just to the system of first order equations, differential equations.
