Now here we have a variable's derivative minus 2x times that variable equals 2 and it's an initial value problem when x equals 0, y equals 1.
So we'll quickly note that the P of x is going to equal negative 2x and if we get the integrating factor of that, that's going to be negative 2x dx.
And that is going to equal e to the power negative 2 will come forward, that's going to be x squared.
And you'll note that to integrate that is non-trivial so there's going to be a non-elementary function here.
Let's multiply that out. So it's going to be e to the power negative x squared y prime minus 2x e to the power negative x squared y equals 2 e to the power negative x squared.
This can be rewritten as this derivative. It's going to be of e to the power negative x squared and y because if I were to take this derivative of these two I would end up there.
And that's going to be of e to the power negative x squared and that's going to equal 2 times e to the power negative x squared.
I can take the derivative of the integral of both sides. It's taking the constant coefficient outside of the integral sign and I'm left with e to the power negative x squared y equals 2 times this plus some constant.
Plus some constant. Let's write this e to the power negative x squared dx which we said is a non-elementary function.
If I multiply both sides by e to the power x squared I get 2 e to the power x squared this plus c e to the power x squared.
c to the power x squared. Now it is a initial value problem so y equals 1 equals 2 times e to the power 0 so that's just 1.
The integral of this is just 1 so that's dx plus c times e to the power 0 squared that's just equal to 1.
So I'm left with 1 equals 2 and this is going to be just x but x equals 0 plus c that leaves me c equals 1.
In other words all the way here I'm going to have y equals 2 e to the power x squared e to the power negative x squared dx.
My c is just 1 so that's going to be plus e to the power x squared.
So let's have a look.
I can take e to the power x squared and let's have a look.
I can take that out as a common factor not 2 just a single one.
So e to the power x squared that's going to leave me 2 times this non-elementary integral plus 1.
Now I just need to rewrite this.
Now if I remember the error function where did we go?
So if I do remember this error function at least I see a part of the error function is in here and as much as remember we can rewrite this.
We can rewrite this in this form so if I rewrite this as let's put it here.
I hope you can still see that if I put e to the power negative x squared dx remember I can rewrite that as going from 0 to x of e to the power negative t squared dt.
That would be the same but this equals well it will be square root of pi over 2 times the error function of x.
So I've just taken the square root of pi over 2 times the error function of x squared over 2 times the square root of pi over 2 times the error function of x plus 1.
So y equals e to the power x squared those all cancel out those all cancel out so it's the square root of pi error function in x plus 1.
So if perhaps it was a little quick just remember that this can be rewritten as such from single variable calculus.
And I do remember that this and I do remember that this would just be square root of pi over 2 I'm just taking that over to the other side of the error function of x which is what I've substituted in here and the 2's just cancel out leaving me the square root of pi.
