Now let's have a look at this example.
Now you haven't seen equations like this before in differential calculus, differential equations.
So I have 2x and y dx plus x squared minus 1 dy equals 0.
So first of all I have to recognize the fact that the m of x and y equals this 2xy
and the m in x and y equals this x squared minus 1.
I have to recognize this.
So I have the fact that m dx and n dy equals 0.
What I'm trying to get to is some function of f and x and y, that's what I'm trying to get to,
equals some constant and if I take the derivative of that, of both sides, the constant would be 0.
So this is what I'm aiming for.
This is what I'm trying to solve or the answer that I'm trying to get to.
First of all we said remember that di m, di y has got to equal di n, di x.
So don't get your y's and m's and x's and n's and y's mixed up.
This is m dx, n dy, but this is the other way around when it gets to these partial derivatives.
Let's take this and get this partial derivative with respect to y.
So let's do it here, di m, di y, this is going to equal 2x and di n, di x, this with respect to x equals 2x.
So these are the same, so this is an exact equation.
This is an exact equation.
If that's an exact equation, and I told you before, well there are two ways to solve this.
Let's use the method of this is an exact equation.
Remember that I told you that m and x and y is nothing other than di f, di x.
Di f, di x.
So di f, di x equals this, 2x y, 2x y.
In other words, di f equals 2x, 2 times x, y, di x.
There we go.
And if I take the integral of both sides, I'm left with the f of x and y.
The partial derivative and integral, they cancel out, so I'm going to be left with f.
Now this is a partial integral only with respect to x, so 2y, 2 and y are constants.
2 and y are constants.
So it's only the x that I have to integrate.
We'll get the anti-derivative of, and that's going to be a half x squared.
A half x squared plus some constant c, let's call that constant c, 1.
But is it really a constant?
I actually want to get my eraser, and I don't know where I put it.
It is not.
It is not a constant.
Let me get my eraser.
There we go.
It's not a constant.
It is a function, and if you take multivariable calculus, this will make more sense.
It is a function just in y.
So the f of x and y equals, those will cancel, so it's x squared y plus some function just in y.
Think about it.
If I take this partial derivative now with respect to x, that's going to be 2xy, so I'm left with it.
And this is a function that just contains y, so the partial derivative with respect to y is the 0,
because g of y is a constant as far as a partial derivative with respect to x is concerned.
I still have to solve for that.
But if I get the f, the y, which is this now, with respect just to y, that's going to be x squared plus,
well, the derivative with respect to y of g and y is dg dy.
But I know what df dy is.
There is df dy.
It's just n.
Remember, we said that n equals di f di x, and n equals di f di y.
And I know what that is.
n is x squared minus 1.
x squared minus 1.
So I'm left with this.
Because these two will cancel out.
In other words, dg dy equals negative 1, or dg equals negative dy.
And if I now take the integral of both sides, I'm going to be left with that the g of y equals negative y,
now plus some constant c, because this is not partial derivatives.
Now I can have a constant c.
And now I have solved for the g and y there.
So the f of x and y equals x squared y minus y plus some constant.
Plus some constant.
But remember, this is the f of x and y.
This is not my answer.
I need y explicitly expressed in terms of x.
So this is not it.
But remember, this was equal to 0 to start off with.
The f of x and y was equal to some constant.
And I took this derivative of.
So if I call this constant 1, let's call this constant f, whatever.
In other words, x squared minus x squared y minus y plus some constant equals another constant.
In this example, it works out for us to be 0.
It doesn't matter.
I can take y out as a common factor.
And that will leave me with x squared minus 1.
And I can take this constant to the other side, which will just be a brand new constant.
Minus constant c1, which will be a brand new constant.
Or y equals some constant over x squared minus 1.
Over x squared minus 1.
So that's certainly one way to solve this problem.
And I got to the explicit equation for which this is an exact derivative or an exact equation.
Before we move on, let me use another method to solve for this.
And that is just going to be by separating variables.
So I can leave x squared on x squared minus 1 dy on this side.
And I take to the other side minus 2xy dx.
I can have 1 over y dy equals negative 2x over x squared minus 1 dx.
So I've just separated my variables.
So the absolute value of the natural log of y equals.
Now on this side, I'd have to do new substitution.
Let's do that quickly.
x squared minus 1.
In other words, du equals 2x dx.
And there we have it.
2x dx.
So I'm just going to bring that negative out.
So 2x dx equals du.
And that'll leave me 1 over u.
That equals minus the natural log of the absolute value of u.
Which is also equal to the natural log of the absolute value of u to the power negative 1 there.
Plus some constant c.
Plus some constant c.
I'll exponentiate both sides.
So I'll have the fact that y equals.
And I'm just going to leave the absolute value of sines out.
Because I have this constant.
That'll be e to the power of some constant.
Which is just another constant.
And here I'm going to have u to the power negative 1.
U to the power negative 1.
That equals c over u.
But u is.
Well, it's x squared minus 1.
x squared minus 1.
And there I have it.
U equals c over x squared minus 1.
Now, I can, look at this.
I can multiply this out.
So I'm going to have x squared minus y equals some constant c.
Equals some constant c.
I can say that, I can say let c equal 0.
And I call this now z, or the f in x and y.
And that equals 0.
And if I take this, and if I take this and I get dz,
I take the derivative, the derivative with z.
And remember I said that that must be m dx plus m dy.
Now, let's see if that is true.
What is di f?
Remember this equals now x squared y minus y.
What is di f?
What is di f di m?
Well, that is going to be 2xy, 2xy dx.
Plus, what is this with respect to, with respect to y?
Well, that's going to be x squared minus 1 dy.
And that equals 0.
It was equal to some constant.
I didn't have put that there, that's some constant.
But the derivative of a constant is 0.
And there we are.
That is the original, that was my original problem.
Right there and then.
So, I checked that, indeed, this answer, this answer is correct.
Because if I get the derivative of this dz, or the differential,
I'm using the wrong terms here.
If I get the differential of this, which is this dz equals m dx plus m dy,
I'm going to end up exactly where I started with putting it equal to some constant.
As I said, I needn't let it equal a 0 here.
I could still have kept this equal some constant,
because the differential of some constant is still going to give me this 0.
So, this is the differential, m dx plus m dy of a function that you have to remember
that is the differential of an equation.
So, this worked out beautifully, irrespective of whether we used it as an exact equation,
which we proved, because this was true.
Where is my...
Because this was true.
And I used this fact that I was given dy f dy x, which is n.
And I was given dy f dy y, which is n, which is right there.
And I used this to solve this problem,
just remembering that I have to put in here this g of y,
not to stay constant.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
