Now let's do this lovely problem. Again I can see I have an equation here in differential form and I have to think about the fact here that I'm dealing with the f of x and y equals 0 and I've written it in differential form.
In other words the m of x and y equals this e to the power 2y minus y cosine of xy and n in x and y or the partial derivative of f with respect to y that's n of x and y equals this 2x e to the power 2y minus x times cosine of xy plus 2y.
I have to see whether this is an exact equation. There's no ways I'm doing separation of variables here. I've got x and y locked up here in transcendental functions here.
So let's have a look at di m and di y. So this with respect to y. That's going to be 2e to the power 2y minus. Now I've got to see this as u and v.
So I've got u prime v plus u v prime. So u prime v that's cosine xy plus u and v prime. Remember this is partial to y though. So this is going to be minus sine of x and y and another x has to be added to that.
I just have to do the inside function as well. But it's with respect to y. So x is a constant. One comes forward. I'm just left with x. That equals 2e to the power 2y minus cosine of xy minus times negative times negative to positive.
And that's going to be an xy sin of xy. So there we have the partial derivative of n with respect to y. Let's get the partial derivative of n with respect to x.
So this with respect to x. So it's just that x there. That'll leave me as 2e to the power 2y. So we run on our way to showing that this is an exact equation.
Now minus. Now minus. I've got to do this in u and v. So u prime. This is 1. So that's cosine xy plus u and v prime. That's sine.
Is that correct? Have I done the right thing? Yeah, negative. It's going to be the negative.
Sine xy and that's with respect to x. So y is a constant. So I'm just left with y there. And that is with respect only to x. So there's nothing left there.
And indeed I'm left with 2e to the power 2y minus cosine of xy negative times negative to positive x and y is sine of xy.
And indeed they are exactly the same. So this is an exact equation. And I can now use the fact that this m in x and y actually equals di f di x.
So I can say that the fact that di f, di x equals, well there it is, e to the power 2y minus y cosine of xy.
And all of this is di x. I can distribute the di x's in and just take the derivatives, the integrals of all of them. So I've just done things in one step there.
You can pause and see. If you do it separately, it will be exactly the same. So here I'm going to be left with the f and x and y.
That equals e to the power 2y is actually a constant. So it's just a partial with respect to x. That is just going to leave me with an x minus the y I could bring out.
Actually, because this is with respect to x. So y is a constant. So let's leave it there. So that's going to be a y.
And here I'm going to be left with a sine of x and y. The sine of x and y.
But I still have to do the inner part as well, which is going to leave me with 1 over y.
Now plus some constant c. But it's not a constant, remember. It's not a constant. It is now the g of y.
The g of y. Because I'm taking a partial derivative of f with respect to x.
That will fall away. And my partial derivative of f with respect to x is going to leave me there.
Let's just cancel these out. So I'm left with x e to the power 2y minus the sine of xy plus the g of y.
Now is this correct? If I take the partial derivative of this with respect to x.
Just let's see. I'm going to have e to the power 2y. So that's going to be correct.
I'm going to have the cosine of xy times a y.
Because I've got to do the inner bit as well with respect to x.
And that with respect to x is just going to be 0.
So that is going to be the f of x and y.
If I now take die f and die y.
This now with all with respect to y.
That's going to equal, well, 2x e to the power 2y.
x is a constant.
E to the power 2y, the derivative of that.
That's e to the power 2y plus the extra y.
No, the extra 2.
Minus this derivative with respect to y.
That is going to be the cosine of xy.
And just with a y, so there's going to be an x there.
There's going to be an x there.
And plus dg dy equals, but remember die f, die y is nothing other than n.
It's nothing other than n.
So let's rewrite n here.
That is 2x e to the power 2y minus x cosine of xy plus 2y.
Very beautifully, these cancel, these cancel, and I'm left with the fact that dg dy equals 2y or dg equals 2y dy.
And I can take the integral of both sides.
That 2 is a constant coefficient.
In other words, the g of y is going to be y squared plus some constant c.
So the f in x and y equals, there I have it, x e to the power 2y minus the sine of xy plus, there's the g of y, y squared plus some constant c.
But remember that was equal to 0.
Now I can't explicitly express why in terms of x, because I've got it locked up in a transcendental, and they, in other words, this is my family of solutions, I've got to stop there.
And once again, if we, if we, if we had to call that, if we had to call that z, and we got the, the, the differential dz, you are going to end up exactly, you are going to end up exactly here.
So you can check your answer and you'll see that it is correct.
