Now stepping away from numerical calculations for a bit, let's look at autonomous systems.
Autonomous systems, let's have a look at this.
So, system already tells you we're going to deal with a system of differential equations
and we're going to have to solve them.
Just imagine we have these parameters, dx sub 1 dt.
Imagine that is some function.
Let's call it g1 and that is some function of x sub 1, x sub 2, all the way to x sub n.
And we have dx2 dt.
And that is some second function, also of these same variables.
And I can go all the way down to dx sub n dt and that is g sub n and I have x sub 1 still, x sub 2 still, x sub n.
So that's my system of equations.
Now, let's bring in an independent variable and we call that variable t.
If t does not appear explicitly in my set of functions here, that means it's autonomous.
So, this is the first thing to realize, t cannot appear explicitly.
Of course, x can be a function of t and if that's x, that's y, whatever.
Those can be functions of t, but t does not appear explicitly.
In other words, I can have the fact that dx dt equals x squared plus the sine of y.
So, there's my x sub 1, there's my x sub 2, different variables, but t does not appear explicitly there.
This is an autonomous equation and I have dy dt as well.
dy dt and let's make that as x plus the cosine of y.
Whenever t does not appear explicitly there, this is an autonomous system of first order ordinary differential equations.
Autonomous is what we're dealing with.
The other thing that we are dealing with, if there are just two variables here, x and y, just x sub 1, x sub 2, just two of them,
we call it a plain autonomous system because we are dealing with a plain.
Now, what we are mostly going to work with here is this.
If we let this independent variable t, which we can bring in, if we call that time,
we're dealing with a dynamical system and here we have just such a system and I'll get to it.
And so we call this a dynamical system and then for any specific value of t, that would be the state that the system is in.
Now, imagine this is my plane, so I have a y axis and x axis and that at any x and y, at any point x and y in my two dimensional plane,
in my two dimensional plane, I can take a derivative.
So we, it reminds you when you start studying differential equations of a direction field.
So at any point I have, at any point I can take a derivative and if it is such that the first derivative equals,
so that's x, if I can have a function in each point, each point in x and y is a function of x and y.
If I take the first derivative of that and that gives me these two functions,
if it gives me those two functions, I can write this as a vector field.
So this becomes a vector field. So where my v and x comma y, so it becomes a vector, remember there's nothing other than this velocity of my position matrix here.
If I can write it as p of x and y, q of x and y, that would mean this is a vector field.
And what you can imagine is that at any point, at any point x and y, there's going to be a velocity.
See this as water flowing down this pipe. Well not a pipe, but it's two dimensional.
So it's just this surface that we're looking at the top and water's just flowing, laminar flow there.
So if there's a, there is a, at every point I have this system of first order derivatives,
that means this turns into a vector field. There is this x and y directional vector at each point.
So here what I'm suggesting is we place an obstacle, and of course we're going to get flow around this obstacle.
Now I can suggest, if I bring in this parameter t, that if I drop something right there, over time,
it's a dynamical system, over time, this is going to be the line that, that'll, if I drop the cork in there,
that's the line the cork is going to take, or if I drop the cork there, I can see where it's going to be.
And at any time t, I have a state of the system I can give you, if I solve, this is what I'm going to get.
A system of, for which I now have to get a function, x and t equals something, and y of t equals something.
I have to solve the system, and at any time t I'll know the state of the system, I'll know where the particle is.
And because this is parameterized, it'll actually be aligned with an arrow in, so as time evolves,
I can work out precisely where this is going.
So this is what we're going to deal with in this section.
We are going to develop this plain autonomous system, and we're going to get equations like this,
a system of autonomous equations like this in two variables, two dependent variables,
which is parameterized to an independent variable t, and we have to solve the system.
But understand, under these circumstances, it is a plain autonomous system, because there's just two.
This actually represents then a vector field, because it's autonomous, it's a vector field in that plane,
but it comes from the fact that we are dealing with an autonomous system.
The first thing that we're going to look at before we start solving is just equilibrium, or steady state points,
stationary points in our system, which I'll just tell you very equal now.
We just equate this to zero, and equate this to zero, and solve for x and y.
Two variable, two unknowns, this is going to be a difficult one of us,
but two unknowns and two equations equal to zero there, we can solve for x and y,
and that is going to give us these stationary points.
That's the next thing we'll have a look at.
So I mentioned these equilibrium points, proper term for them would be stationary points or critical points.
Stationary or critical.
These critical points.
So what that means for a plain autonomous system, which we're then going to see as a vector field,
is the fact that if I were to place a particle in that spot, it's going to remain in that spot.
Which necessarily tells us a couple of things.
There are going to be, or there can be, these critical points, if you think about a vector field.
Then the solution might also indicate an arc.
So that just means I started it there, but remember the vector fields everywhere would have looked like this.
But that means there's lots of others all around.
And it might be that this one went there.
So if I dropped a particle there, it would be there.
So I'll have to have these initial conditions where I place it immediately.
So I might have a critical point or stationary point.
I might have an arc.
Or my solution might indicate a periodic motion.
So it is just going to repeat after a certain time period.
I'm going to be back at the same spot, back at the same spot.
So I'm going to have one of these three.
Just remember something that this cannot be a solution.
Because when I get here, I have two directions.
There are two solutions at that point.
And any point in a plain autonomous vector field cannot have two equations,
two differential, two first order derivatives for that point.
There can only be one derivative with respect to x, with respect to t for x and y.
So I can't have that.
I'm either going to have these stationary or critical points.
Sometimes they might be a line.
Sometimes they just might be specific points.
I'm going to have an arc.
Or I'm going to have periodic motion.
So how do I get these critical points?
We need the stationary or critical points here.
We just let this on the right hand side equal zero.
So it's very easy to do.
I'm going to have x squared plus y plus 12 equals zero.
And I have the fact that x squared minus y equals zero.
In other words, x squared equals y.
So every place I see x squared, I can put a square there.
So if I do that example, let's see how this is going to work out.
So actually where I see x squared, I can put a y in.
So I actually have y squared plus y plus 12 equals zero.
And that's easy to do.
So it's going to be y.
It's not going to work out.
So well, let's do that one.
Let's make that a negative 12.
Sorry, I'm just thinking these examples out as I go.
Let's make that a negative 12.
A negative 12.
So we're going to have y plus 4 and y minus 3 equals zero.
So I'm left at least to y equals a negative 4 or y equals 3.
There's a solution.
If I plug that back in there, I can't do this one.
I'm just interested.
This is just a plain autonomous system.
I'm not interested in complex numbers here.
So I'm going to not be concerned about letting x squared equals negative 4.
So I'm just interested in this one.
So x squared is going to be 3.
In other words, x is going to be plus or minus square root of 3.
So I have these two critical points in this autonomous plane, the plane autonomous system.
In other words, there's going to be negative square root of 3 comma 3 and square root of 3 comma 3.
If, for instance, again, I see this as some flow of fluid.
If I drop my cork into one of those two points, it is going to stay stationary.
There's no reason why we can't also have a line or set of points in the line or whatever that will be stable or stationary or critical point.
So in the end, it's very easy to do.
Look at your equations to set them both equal to zero and solve for x and y.
Now let's do our first example.
I'm going to do this on the blackboard.
But subsequent examples, I'm just going to use Python and SymPy.
You can still follow along with us.
But I think if you get to this stage, you should actually know it's quite fun actually to do this with a computer
rather than sitting and working out eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
Of course, we should all be able to do it.
So I think it's the right thing to do.
But once you can do it, why not use a computer system to do that for you?
So if we think about the system that we know, we have to set our matrix A of coefficients 2 and 8, negative 1 and negative 2.
Remember, we're going to have the determinant of A minus lambda I.
We're going to set that equal to zero.
So that's going to be a 2 and 8, negative 1 and negative 2.
So that's going to be 2 minus lambda.
And we're going to have negative 2 minus lambda minus a negative 8.
We're going to set that equal to zero to work out our eigenvalues.
So we're going to have a negative 4 here.
We're going to have negative 2 and a positive 2.
So those cancel.
Plus lambda squared plus 8 equals zero.
So we have lambda squared plus 4 equals zero.
So we're going to have the fact that lambda is going to be plus or minus.
So that's negative 4.
That is the 2i.
2 squared plus or minus 2i.
Now, it depends which ones you want to work.
If you're used to Python or SymPy or one of those, you're going to work with.
It works with a negative 1 first.
So let's do that.
Let's say lambda sub 1 equals negative 2i.
Negative 2i.
And for that, we now have to work out our eigenvectors.
So what are we going to have?
We're going to have then that a minus lambda sub 1i.
And we're going to multiply that by k sub 1.
If it's negative 2i, I have this.
That will be 2 minus negative 2i.
That's 2 plus 2i.
I'm still going to have my 8.
I'm going to have a negative 1.
And I'm going to have a negative 2 minus negative 2i.
So it's plus 2i.
And I've got to multiply that by k sub 1 and k sub 2 to work out my eigenvectors.
So we're going to have 2 plus 2i multiplied by k sub 1 plus 8 times k sub 2 equals 0.
And there we're going to have a negative 1 k sub 1 and a plus a negative 2 plus 2i k sub 2 equals 0.
To solve these easy, let's make, let's set k sub 2 equal to 1.
If we set that equal to 1, we have the fact that 2 plus 2i k sub 1 equals negative 8.
That's 1, bringing that to the other side.
And now I have the fact that k sub 1 equals negative 8 over 2 plus 2i.
To divide by a complex number, we're just going to multiply by its complex conjugate.
So that divided by that is just 1.
So I'm just multiplying by 1.
So here I'm going to get a negative 16.
A negative 16 plus 16i.
And I'm going to divide that by 2 times 2 is 4.
Those 2, those 2, those 2 cancel out.
So it's going to be minus 4.
Minus 1 is plus 4 times 2 is 8.
So I'm going to be left with minus 2 plus 2i.
And that is going to be my first eigenvector.
So that's case of 1.
So my first eigenvector is going to be negative 2 plus 2i, 1.
And that is for, remember, that is for my first eigenvalue, which I took to be negative 2i.
So I only need one of those to actually do the problem, to actually solve the problem.
Remember, if I took that to be my first eigenvalue, my alpha is 0 and my beta equals negative 2.
And I also have to have my b sub 1, which is for k sub 1 is going to be the real parts, which is negative 2 and 1.
And I've got to have my b sub 2, which is the imaginary parts, which are 2 and 0.
Negative 2 and 1 and 2 and 0.
And now I can write my set of solutions.
In other words, I'm going to have c sub 1, x sub 1.
And that is going to be c sub 1 times e to the power alpha t, which is a 0 there.
So that's 1 times I'm going to have b sub 1.
So it's negative 2, 1 times the cosine of beta t, which is negative 2t, plus b sub 1, which is a 2, 0.
And the sine of negative 2t.
And I'm going to have c sub 2, x sub 2, and that's going to be c sub 2 times e to the power alpha t.
So that doesn't help.
Oh, a little mistake there.
That should be a negative sign.
And they remember, now b sub 2, 2 and 0, cosine of negative 2t, plus b sub 1, negative 2 and 1, sine of negative 2t.
So I have that.
So from that I can read off what x of t is going to be and what y of t is going to be equal to that.
So the c sub 1 times negative 2 times this minus 2 times that, plus c sub 2 times that times this, plus negative 2 times this.
And y sub t is, of course, going to be the lower part of my eigenvector there.
And if I have an initial value problem, I'm going to have x sub 0 being some value.
I can work out the values for c sub 1 and c sub 2, and that will be a parametrized curve, as I say, which is going to be either an arc or some periodic function.
So we've dealt with this before, we know how to solve a system of differential equations using eigenvalue and eigenvectors.
In the next example, I'll do some of these using a computer algebra system, and I like to use some pi as part of, as an extension to Python.
so on filerus, you can manage to see if I can manage these anymore.
So, now we'll use this because of the whole system.
So this is my concern of one unit.
It's important to understand the size of the system.
Just lets on子 on the left.
I'm also proper Gogja.
You're right.
I have a phone call.
So I go virtu dramatically.
You've got a phone call.
