Let's have a look at this problem.
Number one, it's an initial value problem.
Now we are dealing with exact equations at the moment,
but let's have a look at it.
Can I separate variables?
No, I've got the...
Looks like I've got things locked up.
In transcendental functions here.
Together with that, so I can't separate variables.
Can I write this as a linear equation?
Once again, I can't see that I can get an f of x and a p of x.
Just a y, and the only other way I know is by making...
or following the recipe for an exact equation.
Well, let's multiply things out.
xy squared minus cosine x sine of x dx equals y 1 minus x squared dy.
I've got to bring this to this side.
So xy squared minus cosine x sine of x dx.
Now, remember, there has to be a positive sign here.
But if I bring this over to the other side, it's negative that.
So that becomes y and then x squared minus 1 and dy equals 0.
I'm just distributing the negative in there that was there to make this into a positive.
Now, let's have a look.
What is dy m, dy y?
This is now m and this is the correct form.
I just had to look out for.
If I just brought this to the other side, there would be a negative there.
But it has to be a positive.
That's the most important bit.
If I do this with respect to y, I'm going to get 2xy.
And those are just x's.
So there's nothing there.
And die n, die x.
If I just redistributed this, that would be x squared y minus y.
So that's going to be 2xy minus 0.
And lo and behold, they're the same.
So I can treat this as an exact equation.
That was the only little trick that you had to get right in this instance.
So let's also do things in reverse.
Let's say die f, die y, we now know, equals n.
And that's that, x squared y minus y.
Corrected for the sign.
In other words, die f equals x squared y minus y, die y.
Or I can just rewrite that as x squared y, die y minus y, die y.
And then take the integral of all of them.
And this will leave me with an f and x and y equals.
Now this is just with respect to y.
So the x squared is a constant.
So that's a half x squared y squared minus a half y squared plus h of x.
So if I take the derivative of this with respect to y, that will fall away and I'll be left back with that.
If I now take die f, die x.
So I'm taking this with respect to x.
I'm going to be left with xy squared plus dh dx.
And I know what that is.
Well, it's got to be this.
xy squared.
Now let's just, and you'll see why I want to do this.
I'm just going to redistribute this y in there.
That's the cosine of x minus the sine of x.
Just put that in there.
Fortunately, these will cancel out.
So I'm left with the fact that dh equals the cosine of x negative the sine of x dx.
Taking the integral of both sides, I'm going to be left with the h of x equals.
Well, I can say u equals the cosine of x.
That means du equals negative the sine of x dx.
So that will equal u du.
Cosine of x is u.
Minus sine of x dx is du.
In other words, the h of x is going to be half times u squared.
Which is cosine squared of x.
Plus some constant.
In other words, the f of x and y equals.
Where did we write it?
Where did we write it?
There.
That's a half x squared y squared minus a half y squared.
Plus a half cosine squared x.
Plus some constant c.
And that equals zero.
But it's an initial value problem.
X equals zero.
Y equals two.
If I take this constant to the other side.
It's just another constant.
That'll be zero.
That'll be negative a half times four.
That'll be plus cosine of zero is one.
Squared is still one.
That equals plus some constants.
I take it over to the other side.
It just makes it a new constant.
So that's negative three over two equals c.
In other words, a half x squared y squared minus a half y squared.
Plus a half cosine squared x.
Equals.
You can bring that to the other side.
So that would have been my negative three over two.
So I can multiply this whole lot out.
I can multiply this whole lot out by negative a half.
So I'm going to get y squared minus x squared y squared minus cosine squared of x equals three.
Suppose I can take that y squared out.
That'll be one minus x squared minus cosine squared of x plus three x equals zero.
And I can actually solve this for y to write this equation explicitly.
