Now let's move on. We don't have a straight line here, but we might have an experiment that we do.
And if we plot the values, various variables that we measure in an experiment,
and we plot two of them against each other, we might get this parabola.
Now this becomes a lot more difficult in as much as we don't have a straight line.
So if we do two points, and if you look closely there,
we have a straight line representing a slope between these two points,
and the actual curve, they don't concur, they don't fall on top of each other completely.
And the problem might become more and more.
Well, we can do this when we do have a straight line to represent a slope between two points.
We call this a secant line, as opposed to what you would remember a tangent line,
which just theoretically, at least, we can't draw it that fine, but we touch just at one point.
Still though, for the secant line, we're going to have a slope of this y value,
minus this y value, over this x value, over this x value, minus this x value,
so the change in x and change in y.
So if we look at that, that's going to be 8 minus 2, which is 6, over 4, over 2, which is 2,
so that's 3.
And you will remember, and the point of this is the point slope form.
So point slope.
So if I have, if I have the point of, and here I'm going to use x1 and y1,
and the slope, which I've just done, I can also use point x sub 2, y sub 2.
So y minus y sub 1 equals m times x minus x sub 1,
and that gives me the equation for this line.
Now what you will remember from first year calculus, or school calculus at least,
is if we bring these two points closer and closer and closer,
but think about that, when I move these closer to each other,
this delta x value will get smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller,
until these two lines approach each other and delta x approaches zero.
If we do that, then this line will become the instantaneous rate of change,
which is another word for slope, the instantaneous rate of change,
right at that point, as this delta x approaches zero,
as these two points come closer and closer to each other.
I've Hemphered in Derek and him with group disks,
and I'm sure, you know the lengthened by number three points here,
so it's just one of the prompts and I have this commandland,
I'll be adding in.
The same way, transferred the mathematicians,
an article about half of this,
that's how you should be retaining the Renee Technaaaase Park.
After quite a minute, we are gonna share that歓 down something.
At least a minute, we are gonna continue to put up a microphone there.
So there's just one of the parameters that we're representing ourselves.
At least a minute!
Hello, engage!
Whatem who%kабат accomplishes together?
