Now we want to deal with a problem where we almost have an exact differential equation but not exactly in that we don't get this equality that the partial derivative of n with respect to y does not equal the partial derivative of n with respect to x in this what looks like an exact equation.
And we can turn it into an exact equation by multiplying by something we've learned before and that was this integrating factor.
This integrating factor and we'll remember that by linear equations that was e to the power the indifferent integral of p of x dx.
That was one form of that integrating factor.
And here we'll call the integrating factor mu and if we multiply it's an equation of both x and y if we multiply it up on both sides we'll get this and what we would then suggest is that it becomes an exact equation.
Once it is an exact equation we can use what we've learned before as far as these equations are concerned.
Now, how do we calculate what this is?
Well, let us do the following. Imagine we knew what this mu was and we now this whole thing if I multiply these two by each other let this whole thing now be taken up in here so that we can see if we have this equality.
So it will be di, di, di y on this side but not only of m of m of x and y times mu of x and y and on this side the di, di, x of this whole thing.
And I remind you with these functions how to do integration by parts u prime v plus u v prime whichever way you learned how to do that.
So that is going to be, but remember these are partial derivatives not normal first derivatives.
So that's going to be the first partial derivative of mu with respect to y times m.
That's my u prime and then v is just u prime and v and then u and v prime but it's m just with respect to partial derivative of y.
So this is what these subscripts mean partial derivative with respect to y. So just change the notation.
And on the other side I'm going to have mu sub x partial derivative of mu with respect to x times n plus mu and x and y times the partial derivative of n with respect to x.
I've just brought things on over to the one side. I've just brought things on over to the one side. Just some algebraic notation manipulation.
Actually these two should have been on the other side, these two on this side. I've skipped a step here.
So if I take out mu here as a common factor I'm left with partial derivative of m with respect to y minus partial derivative of n with respect to x times mu.
And I have this on this side. Now it still makes it very difficult for us to get to an equation for this integrating factor.
So let's make things easier on ourselves. What we're going to suggest now is just to let mu be a function of x only.
We just arbitrarily decide this, that mu is a function of x only. If mu is a function of x only, and I take the partial derivative of y, this is going to fall away.
That would be zero. So I'm only left with a mu, a partial derivative of mu with respect to x times n equals this right hand side.
I can divide both sides by n. And now I'm left with mu sub x on its own, but because it's only a function of x,
it's not, you don't have to take the partial derivative, you can just take the first derivative.
So that, that would equate to d mu dx. And this equals this side. Now I can separate variables.
I can bring the mu over to this side and the dx over to that side. And I'm left with this equation.
On the left hand side I'll get the natural log of the absolute value of mu. On the right hand side I still have this.
And if I now exponentiate both sides, I'm going to get the mu, which is now just a function of x, is going to equal e to the power this.
And that is suggesting though that this, m of y minus n of x, die m, die y minus die n, die x divided by n, must be a function only containing x.
Because this is with respect to normal derivative x. So this is certainly going to be one that I could try to multiply through my differential equation to see if I can make it exact.
The other way is if I let mu be a function of y only. That means this du, die, die mu, die x is going to fall away.
Do that for yourself in the same fashion. You'll get to this equation here. So that is the other equation that I might try.
As an integrating factor to multiply through and see if I can then get an exact equation. Remember though, that this bit here, this bit here should be a function only of x.
If that doesn't work, try it the other way around this way. Die n, die x minus die m, die y over m. Note the difference. Do this one exactly the same way but let mu be a function of y only.
This has to turn out to be a function containing only y for me to be able to use this integrating factor.
We'll do an example and this will become very clear.
