Let's have a look at this example. I have dy dx equals x times y over 20 minus 2x squared minus 3y squared.
I just want to make sure I've copied that problem correctly. It looks like it.
Now, these are the techniques that we know by now. Separation of variables is going to be very difficult to separate these variables.
Is it a linear equation perhaps that I can use as an integrating factor? Well, can I write it in standard form where I have dy dx plus p of x of y equals the f of x?
I don't think I can write it in that form. Is it an exact equation? Is it already exact?
Well, first of all, I have to change this into a form that I recognize as an exact equation.
Let's do that. I'm going to have 20 minus 2x squared minus 3y squared dy equals xy dx.
Remember, the dx has to be in front, so I'm going to take this over to the other side.
So I'm going to be left with xy dx minus 20 minus 2x squared minus 3y squared dy equals 0.
But I cannot have a negative here, so I'm going to distribute that negative in there dy dx plus, so I'll have 2x squared minus 3y squared, 2x squared plus 3y squared minus 20 dy equals 0.
So now I have an m and I have an n. Let's see what dy dy is.
Well, just with respect to y, in other words, x is a constant, will leave me with x.
And dy n dy x, just with respect to x, that's going to leave me with 4x, and these two are not the same.
So, I better remember my two equations for the integrating factor, because these are not equal, so this is not an exact equation, but I can try and make it exact.
Remember that the mu of x was going to be e to the power, the indefinite integral of m sub y minus n sub x over n dx.
And mu of y was going to be e to the power, and mu of y was going to be e to the power of this indefinite integral of n sub x minus n sub y divided by m dy.
So, I need to look at these two.
So, what is di m di y? Well, I have di m di y here, so that is going to be x minus, what is di n di x? Di n di x is minus 4x.
And if I can find a ruler divided by n, and I see here what n is, it's just this.
n is this 2x squared plus 3y squared minus 20.
That doesn't look like that's going to work at all, inasmuch as this is not a function of x only.
Let's try this one.
n sub x, which I have there, that's 4x minus m sub y, which is there, divided by m.
And m was, there we go, xy.
And that looks like I'm going to have, if I take x out, I'm left with 4 minus 1 over xy.
Those two would cancel, and that will leave me with 3 over y.
And that's a function of y only.
So, this becomes my integrating factor.
Let's see what that's going to be.
So, the mu of y, e to the power, natural log of 3, indefinite integral of 3, 1 over y dy.
Taking the 3 out, because it's a constant coefficient, that leaves me with e to the power, natural log absolute value of y,
and with a 3 there, by my properties of logarithms, I can write that as the natural log of y to the power 3,
and that equals this y to the power 3.
So, y to the power 3 becomes my integrating factor, which I now have to multiply out.
Here, so I'm going to get, xy to the power 4 dx, plus, just multiplying y, to the, y cubed out here,
plus, I'm going to get 20x squared y cubed, plus 3y to the power 5, minus 20, y to the power 3 dy, equals 0.
Now, let's see, we know still, let's get di m, di y, it's going to be 4xy cubed, and if I now look at di n, di x,
I'm going to get, this with respect to x, that's going to be 4xy cubed, they'll be 0, they'll be 0,
and lo and behold, it is the same, so now I have an exact equation.
If I have an exact equation, I know this is m, and I know that a di m, a di x, shouldn't write that, it's wrong.
We're trying to get this function of f, di f, di x, equals m, and that equals xy to the power 4.
In other words, di f equals, put y to the power 4, x there, di x, I'm just going to take the indefinite integral of both sides,
I'm taking y4 out as a constant coefficient, because this is a, this is just with respect to x.
In other words, the f of x and y is going to equal a half x squared y to the power 4, plus, yes, g of y is my constant function just of y,
because if I take the partial derivative of this with respect to x, I'm left with xy to the power 4,
and the partial derivative of a function that only contains y with respect to x is going to be 0, so I am left back there.
I can now take the partial derivative of this function with respect to y, that being a 4 to it, that's 2x squared y cubed,
plus, this is a partial derivative with respect to y, but it only contains y, so I might as well write dg dy,
but I know what di, if di y is, it is equal to all of this, m, n, I should say, 2x squared y to the power 3,
plus 3y to the power 5, minus 20y to the power 3.
Fortunately, this x can go, and I'm left with a dg, oh, look at that.
I'm left with dg equals 3y to the power 5, minus 20y to the power 3.
And dy, I've taken it over to the other side, I take the indefinite integral of both sides,
in other words, the g, which is now just a function of y, equals a half y to the power 6, minus 5y to the power 4,
plus some constant c1.
In other words, I have a function now of x and y.
I have a function in x and y, and that is going to equal, there we go, a half x squared, y to the power 4,
plus my g of y, plus my g of y, which is here, a half y to the power 6, minus 5y to the power 4,
plus some constant c1, that's an exact equation, so remember that's going to equal 0.
And lastly, I can't write this explicitly as a function of y, but I can write the fact that half x squared, y to the power 4,
plus a half y to the power 6, minus 5y to the power 4, equals, I'm taking this to the other side,
becomes a new constant, I'll just call it constant c.
So there is my family of solutions to this initial differential equation.
And actually, if you look through, if you look through this whole thing, it's actually quite beautiful to behold,
if you think about it. And all we had to do was to look for an integrating factor to make this into an exact equation.
And I had to remember these two equations to look for my integrating factor.
And as I said, it had to be a function just containing x, which that wasn't,
or a function just containing y, which fortunately this was.
So this became my integrating factor.
That's really a function of the scale price.
I'm excited.
