We're now going to move on to solutions by substitutions.
What we need to just remember when we move on to this section is what an exact equation is.
So in this differential form of an exact equation.
And it would be exact if di n, di y equals di n, di x.
So just remember that.
The linear equation, which we actually did before exact equation,
where we have this y prime equals some function of x times y equals some other function of x.
And we must also remember where we could separate variables.
Now we need to keep those in mind as we're going to find new functions,
which almost look like these, but we cannot solve by any of the techniques that we learned here.
And instead of multiplying by an integrating factor or doing one of the other things that we learned,
we're going to do a substitution.
There's three substitutions.
This first, these two, then this one, and then lastly this one.
I just want to show you what they are before and where we're going to apply them
before we actually do some examples or explain each of them in more detail.
The first substitution we're going to do is y equals the u of x or x equals u times x and x equals v times y.
So if I take the d dx on both sides, it'll be dy dx on this side equals, it's u prime v plus v u prime.
So it's x du dx plus u dx dx.
It's a separation, just multiplication there and I'm taking the derivative of both.
If I take the dx dx is just one, so there I'm just left with a u.
If I take this dx over to the other side, I'm left with this differential form dy equals u dx plus x du.
Same if I had x equals vy, I'm going to end up with dx equals v dy plus y dv.
Now, we're going to employ this when we find a homogeneous differential equation.
Before we go any further, let me explain what a homogeneous differential equation is.
Now, this is the second time we've used this term homogeneous function or equation.
Here it means something completely different from before.
Before we just had this equals zero on the right-hand side.
What it means here is the following.
A homogeneous function is a function where if I have f and x and y and I replace the x with tx and the y with ty,
it is going to be t to the power of some constant times the f of x and y.
And let's just do one example of that.
Say, for instance, I have the f of x and y equals x squared plus y squared.
If I now take the f of tx and ty, that is going to be t squared x squared plus t squared y squared.
I can take t squared out as a common factor and I'm left with x squared plus y squared, which is the f of x and y.
Originally, the f of x and y.
So that would be a homogeneous function.
Just to note that if we find a first order differential equation in differential form like this,
it is homogeneous if both the m of tx, ty equals t to the power of alpha, m of x and y.
And same for n, but this alpha has got to be the same.
If they're both the same, then that's an homogeneous equation.
And we can use this substitution here.
If we have a Bernoulli's equation, and we'll have a look at what a Bernoulli's equation is.
I just want to hold it like that.
Then we're going to substitute with u equals y to the power of negative 1.
And I should actually not write that.
I should say 1 minus n.
Apologies for that.
Let's write u equals y to the power of 1 minus n.
And n is usually 2.
On the first example, it is 2.
2 minus 1 is negative 1.
So that would be u equals y to the power of negative 1.
And lastly, we're going to get these equations.
dy dx is a function of an ax plus by plus c.
Then we're going to use this substitution.
Anyway, there's a Bernoulli's equation for you.
dy dx equals p of xy plus p of xy equals f of xy to the power n.
If that n was 0, we'll be just left with the normal linear equation.
But here we're adding y to the power of some function.
As I said, the first ones we usually do is y squared.
And we're going to use this substitution.
So as it stands now, you probably have very little idea of what is going on here.
I just want to show you, you're going to get equations in this form.
We've learned how to tackle them.
But there will be some problem with them that you can't tackle them the way that we used to.
If you can't do that, you're going to do one of these substitutions.
You're going to do this substitution, one of these two.
If it's an homogeneous differential equation.
Remember, homogeneous differential equation is this one in this exact form.
But it's not actually going to be exact.
And the fact that di n, di y is not going to equal di n, di x.
The next step would be to get some integrating factor.
And you'll see not even that will help.
Then you've got to go on to this substitution method.
Bernoulli's equation, which is going to look almost like linear equation.
It's just going to be y with some power.
For that, we're going to use this substitution.
And then lastly, there's going to be a function.
If we just change it slightly.
If we just change it slightly, we'll be able to do separation of variables.
It will almost look like you can do separation of variables.
And if we do this substitution, you will be able to do separation of variables.
So in the next video, we'll start looking at examples of all 1, 2, 3 of these substitutions.
And equations that look almost like this, but you can't use the techniques that you know up until now.
