Now here we have a Bernoulli's equation clearly that we need to solve. I don't have a constant
coefficient here so let me divide throughout by x. So I'm left with dy dx plus 1 over xy
equals xy squared. In other words I can see my value of n equals 2. I'm going to substitute
with y equals u of 1 minus 2. That's u to the power negative 1. So now I can substitute
y and y but I still need to substitute dy dx. So dy dx through the chain rule we know is
going to be dy du times du dx. So what is dy du? Well that's going to be negative u to
the power negative 2 as far as that's concerned and then du dx. So I can replace everything
now I've got y and dy dx so that I can just get rid of my y. One thing we have to realize
though is the concept of a singular solution. Now a singular solution, well we've solved many
differential equations now and we've gotten an answer usually explicitly for y and there
will be some constant on the right hand side. And depending on the value of the constant
that will give us a family of solutions. Now if I could get another solution that is not
part of that family of solutions irrespective of what the value of c is, that is a singular
solution. Now just imagine I let y equals zero. Now if y is zero, this term will be zero, that
term will be zero and this term will be zero and zero equals zero so that would be a solution.
So you can either try and remember it at the end or at the beginning but certainly y equals
zero, y of x equals zero, would be a solution to this differential equation. And we just have
to look at what the final family of solutions are and depending on what that is, this might be a singular
solution. Remember that the first derivative of a constant is zero so that's zero, that's zero, that's zero.
Okay let's just solve or if indeed you put it in here as well. But anyway let's do all our substitutions.
So we're going to be left with minus u to the power negative 2 du dx. That will be this part plus
1 over x and y equals 1 over u. 1 over u equals x and y squared will be u squared but in that denominator.
But in the denominator. Now once again I've got to multiply by something to get rid of this
coefficient and let's multiply here by negative u squared. If we multiply throughout by this negative
times negative is a positive. u squared over u squared is just 1 so here's du dx. That's what I wanted.
Now plus this is going to be 1 over x
and my negative. Let's bring the negative out there so we keep the standard form.
and u squared over u that's just going to be u. That's going to equal a negative times a positive.
There's my negative. There's my x and
u squared over u squared is just 1. So I'm left there. And now I have this linear equation. In other words,
I have this y prime equal plus the p of x y equals some function just of x. That's exactly what I have there.
In other words, I can now look for an
integrate an integrating factor. E to the power. That's not an e.
Still looking. Let's neaten this up a bit.
Let's just clear here and clear there. That's going to be a positive. So e to the power absolute value of
p of x dx. But remember now this is u. We're dealing with u. So that's going to be the p of u du.
Now the p of u is this minus 1 over x.
That's not true, is it? That is the p of x dx. We're dealing with the integrating factor.
Oh, I don't know where my mind is probably.
Okay. So that's going to be e to the power p of x is minus 1 over x dx.
That is going to be e to the power minus the natural log of the absolute value of
x, which is going to equal e to the power natural log of x to the power minus 1.
And that is just equal to x to the power negative 1.
So I can now multiply x to the power negative 1 throughout here.
That is going to give me x to the power negative 1 du dx.
Multiplying my integrating factor throughout. Plus I have this negative 1 over x.
But I'm multiplying now by 1 over x. So that's going to give me x squared.
u equals, now I've got x over x. So this is going to leave me with a negative 1.
Now I can see on this side, I can rewrite this as the ddx.
I can rewrite this as the ddx of x to the power negative 1 and u.
That still equals negative 1. Now think about it. I have two functions in x. Both of them are in x.
I'm going to get uv prime plus uv prime. And indeed, if this is u, there's u.
u prime would be negative 1 over x squared. That it is. There's u and there's u prime.
So that's indeed correct. And all that is left for me is to, well, I can do various things.
Write a differential, I suppose. I'm never quite sure which is the best way of doing these.
is negative dx. And now take the integral. It's a constant coefficient. So those two will go.
So I'm left with u over x equals negative x plus some constant c1. And I can let u equals negative x
squared plus c1 times x. Some constant there. Okay, before that interruption, we now multiplied
throughout by x. And that gives us u. But remember, u equals 1 over y. I did a substitution. So 1 over y
y equals minus x squared plus c1 x. And we can then just rewrite that as y equals 1 over. Instead of c1,
let's just make it c. So that's cx minus x squared. And you will note that irrespective of what value I
give to c, I cannot get to y equals 0. So this will be a family of solutions. Family of solutions.
And there is my singular solution, y equals 0, that I should not forget. Both of these,
if you would take, if you would multiply this with x, and you would take, or take the first derivative
and multiply it by x, you are going to get back there. You can check your answer. But you can also
substitute y equals 0 in there. And you'll also get an answer. So the full answer is not only this,
you are missing one of the solutions. The other solution is y equals 0, which is a singular solution.
It is not part of this family of solutions in as much as no matter what value I give to c,
I cannot get to y equals 0.
