Now, this last form of substitution is a little more difficult in as much as we have this equation, initial value problem, and we can multiply this out, I suppose, and then get to a very difficult kind of differential equation.
What we can notice, though, is instead of having this equation in y and x, we can make it an equation in u and x. If we let this equal u, u equals negative 2x plus y.
In other words, that will just be u squared. If I get du dx, that will be negative 2 plus, well, the first derivative of y is just 1 times dy dx.
And through the chain rule. And what I notice now is that dy dx equals 2 plus du dx.
And with that realization, I see I can get rid of y there and y there, and I'm only going to be left with a u and an x, which I can separate.
And this is what you'll have to realize by just thinking about this equation for a couple of seconds.
So let's do that. We're going to have 2 plus du dx equals u squared minus 7.
In other words, in other words, 1 over, well, I'm going to say u minus 3 and u plus 3, du equals dx, of which I can take the integral.
So, separation of variables by realizing what can be done through a wise substitution up here.
Now, this might cause the last bit of problems.
Just looking again at first year calculus, I can rewrite this as u minus 3, u plus 3, I can rewrite this as a over u minus 3, plus b over u plus 3.
Okay. So, it's fractions here.
I can multiply both sides by this denominator.
That leaves me with a of u plus 3, plus b times u minus 3.
I can just let u equal negative 3.
If I do that, I'm left with 1 equals negative 6b.
In other words, b equals negative 1 over 6.
And if I let u equal 3, you'll see that a equals 1 over 6.
So, I can rewrite this fraction as 1 over 6 times the integral of a is that.
So, that's 1 over u minus 3 du.
minus 1 over 6, u plus 3 du, and that is going to equal x plus c1.
Okay. So, I just took out, I just made it into two separate ones.
I took out the constant coefficients there.
Negative, I just have to realize that a was over the negative 3 and b was over the positive 3.
As far as getting the values of a and b are concerned.
So, this is going to be 1 over 6, and I'm going to be left with the natural log of u minus 3 absolute value.
Minus 1 over 6, natural log of u plus 3 equals x plus c1.
And that will leave me with the natural log of u minus 3 over the natural log of u plus 3 by the properties of logarithms.
I've brought that 6 out, and I've multiplied 3 out by 6, so that will give me 6x plus c2.
6 times c1, I'll call that 2.
If I do this, I am left with u minus 3 over u plus 3 equals e to the power c2, e to the power c2,
which is just a new constant, times e to the power 6x.
Now, let's multiply both sides by u plus 3.
So, u minus 3 equals u plus 3 times, let's call that a new constant, constant 3, e to the power 6x.
Let's carry on.
So, I'm going to be left with u minus 3 equals u times c3, e to the power 6x plus 3 times c3, e to the power 6x.
Don't change that to c4, just of yet.
Bring all the u's to one side, and I'm left with 1 minus c3, e to the power 6x.
equals 3 plus 3c3, e to the power 6x.
In other words, u equals 3 times 1 plus c3, e to the power 6x,
divided by 1 minus c3.
That's why I kept the c3, because now they're both the same.
e to the 6x, I can just let go of that 3.
But this was a substitution.
In other words, remember u was negative 2x plus y,
so negative 2x plus y equals this 3 times 1 plus c, e to the power 6x,
over 1 minus c, e to the power 6x.
And I can bring that to the other side.
In other words, y equals 2x plus 3 times 1 plus c, e to the power 6x,
divided by 1 minus c, e to the power 6x.
But it was an initial value problem as well.
x equals 0 and y equals 0.
In other words, I hope you can see that last one.
I just took the 2x to the other side.
0 equals 0 plus 3 times 1 plus c,
divided by 1 minus e to the power 0, so it's 1, so it's 1 minus c.
So 0 is that, or 0 equals 1 plus c.
Put that to the other side, divided both sides by 3,
so I'm left with c equals negative 1.
In other words, my final solution equals y equals 2x plus 3 times,
and that's a negative 1, so that's 1 minus e to the power 6x,
divided by 1 plus e to the power 6x.
Beautiful.
Okay, so there's no way to really, there's no way to teach this.
There's no recipe to follow as to what to substitute.
You've got to look at it for a while,
and it might be given to you in a very complicated form.
So this square might have been multiplied out,
and you should have noticed that that is a square,
and that if you do take that to substitute that,
you will end up with some equation in which you can separate,
in which you can separate your variables,
and use that as a method of solving this,
which you could not have done unless you've done this judicious substitution.
Thank you.
Thank you.
