Now we can start playing with a few linear models. Now that we know at least a few techniques in the solving of ordinary first order differential equations, let's have a look at this.
The first models we're going to play with is just the linear model.
What the linear model just says is that the rate of change of a variable is proportional to that variable.
If you do some experiment and you notice that there's this proportionality, so what the rate of change changes depending on the value of the variable.
Now this is with respect to time, but it needn't be with respect to time, although with linear models these make more sense.
And to get rid of this proportionality we put in a constant of proportionality.
So if it was proportional to y, it means it's equal to some constant of proportionality times k.
And we can solve for this in two ways.
First of all, we can get this linear equation.
It's homogeneous.
By bringing this over to the other side and I'm writing it in standard form.
In other words, I'm writing y prime equals, let's say this function, positive, sorry.
Plus, there will always be this plus, this constant, this function of t.
And y, this must equal some other function in t and yet zero, so that makes it homogeneous.
One form of homogeneous equations.
Now, here we just have the p of t as some constant minus k.
I'm getting my integrating factor, which is e to the power negative kt.
Multiplying that throughout, which leaves me with this d dt of this.
And if I used, just get the derivative of these two functions, I'm left back with that.
And the first derivative of a constant, if I now take the integral of both sides.
If I take the derivative, the integral of this side, and if I take the derivative of this side, I'm left.
Then if I take the derivative of a constant, I'm left with zero.
So that's how I get the constant there.
Just multiply both sides by e to the power kt.
So this was one way using homogeneous linear equations to solve this problem with an integrating factor.
But just to show you, it might just as well easily be done by separation of variables.
Separable variables.
Let's see if we could have used that technique.
We should always at least try and stay.
Well, I've got this dy dt equals the k of y.
So I can bring over the y on one side, the dy, and leave the k on the other side dt.
Take the integral of both sides.
That's a constant.
So I bring the constant coefficient out.
Natural log of the absolute value of y equals k times t plus some constant.
Call it constant 1.
I'll get the exponent of both sides.
That'll leave me with y.
I'm leaving these out because dependent on this value of c, that can be a positive or negative.
So that's going to be e to the power c1.
Let's just call that a new constant times e to the power kt.
And that's exactly what we have there.
So I could use linear equation, homogeneous, or separation of variables to solve this problem.
Now, the c, as we'll see in example, that's usually y0, how much there is at time 0.
This is this constant that we'll see in growth and decay.
And that's just the time t.
We'll do one or two examples and this will become very clear.
Stop moving.
Keep running.
This is constant that we can't hold enough and really be clear.
Let's have a clear.
Keep running.
