So let's look at this linear problem. The half-life of this isotope of carbon, carbon-14, so there's two extra neutrons in there, is 5,600 years. So this is in years. Calculate the age of a fossil if the concentration of carbon-14 in the specimen of this fossil is one one-thousandth of that of living tissue.
Now, this is a direct linear model, or if we suggest that it is, we know that the rate, let's call this concentration just y. So the rate of change in y with respect to time is proportional to how much there is now. That's how a half-life works.
If it is, how much time will pass for it to half. If you start with eight in a certain time, only four will be left. So it decreased by four. In that exact same time period, after that exact same time period, there will only be two left. So the rate of change was now two.
And same time passes, and there will be one left, the half of two. So the rate of change was only one. So the rate of change depends on what the value is at that time.
So we were going to get to the same sort of equation as we had before, that y equals some constant e to the power kt.
Now, what we are suggesting is we don't know how much there was at the beginning. So let's say y, now this is a function of t, y of t, remember?
So we're saying that y times zero, let's call that y zero. We don't know what that was. We don't know what that is. But let's just substitute t equals zero.
So the y is zero, or y, we call it y zero in the beginning. There was some constant, e to the power k, we don't know, but t is zero.
E to the power zero is just one. So y zero equals the constant. So what we have in fact here is that the y at any time t, we can now work out as being whatever it was in the beginning, we don't know, times e to the power kt.
e to the power kt. Now we know what should happen in 5,600 years. So y of 5,600 should be half of what it was in the beginning. That's what half-life means.
It'll just be half of y, of y zero, whatever you started off with, irrespective of what it was, and in the next 5,600 years, there should be half of this left, which is a decline of a quarter of this.
Okay, in other words, half of y zero equals, well, on this side, it's whatever we started with, e to the power k, 5,600.
Look at this, the y zeros cancel out. So it plays no part, whatever the original value was. So this, on this side, I can take the natural log of both sides.
On this side, I'm going to be left with negative natural log of 2, which is the natural log of 2 to the power negative 1, or otherwise known as a half.
So the natural log of half equals negative natural log of 2, equals natural log of e to the power 5,600 k.
Now by the law of logarithms, 2, that equals 5,600 k, and this constant of growth or decay is negative natural log of 2 over 5,600.
And what we notice, k is larger than 0, there's exponential growth.
If k is less than 0, as it is here, we're going to get exponential decay. And it's actually what happens.
Over time, what happens is, or the theory goes, that carbon-14 is made in the atmosphere by effects of radiation on carbon in the atmosphere.
So here, that carbon-14 lands on the planet, for instance. It is then breathed and consumed in food by animals.
So while an animal lives, as the carbon-14 undergoes decay, it is constantly replenished by eating and breathing.
Once the animal dies, becomes a fossil, there's no replenishment, and that exponential decline can be used to calculate age.
So now we know what k is. So specifically, for carbon-14, y at any time t can now be calculated by knowing what it was in the beginning,
which we never know. We don't know how big the animal was, how much it was in the beginning, but you'll see it makes no difference.
e to the power negative natural log of 2 over 5,600 t.
But now we're saying at some time t, we don't know what it is, at some time t, we have one one-thousandth of whatever it was in the beginning.
In the beginning, in other words, in the beginning, it was the same as what natural, what living tissue would be today.
We think there's been a slight change over the millennia, but let's just ignore that for the moment.
So let's go to equal y0, e to the power, because I want to solve for t now, e to the power negative natural log of 2 over 5,600 t.
Once again, the y0 will cancel, and I'm left with the fact that 1 over 1,000 equals e to the power negative natural log of 2 over 5,600 t.
I want to solve for t. I want to know what this value of t is, and I want to know what it is at one one-thousandth of y0 of the beginning.
So I can take the natural log of both sides.
That will leave me the natural log of 1 over 1,000 by the laws of logarithms, the properties of logarithms, natural logarithms.
That will be natural log of 1 minus natural log of 1,000.
Natural log of 1 is just 0, so I'm left with negative natural log of 1,000 equals natural log of e to the power anything is just that anything,
divided by 5,600 times t.
Good. Now, the negatives will cancel out, so I'm left with 5,600 times the natural log of 1,000 divided by the natural log of 2 equals t.
And if you solve for t, let's use the calculator, it should be 5,600 times the natural log of 1,000 divided by the natural log of 2 gives me about 55,800, about 55,800 years, the age of that specimen.
What you'll read in many books is that the problem with carbon-14 is after this long a time, there's very little left, and to accurately get the concentration of that's difficult.
You also need a lot of specimen, which you don't always have.
But there are newer scientific methods to get more accurate values with smaller specimens, so these days you can stretch it out to about 100,000 years before it becomes too inaccurate.
And for anything older than that, you can use isotopes with half-lives for millions of years, then you wouldn't really use carbon.
But through this beautiful linear model, we can now date, and hence we found out that lo and behold the Earth is not only 4,000 years old.
Let's get closer.
And here are another 20,000 years old.
