And this brings us to the derivative.
Now apologies, you'll see the video go dark and light
because it's quite a stormy day in Cape Town
and the clouds move.
Thicker and thinner clouds move in front of the sun
and that makes setting off the aperture and shutter speed
on this recording makes it quite difficult.
Anyway, so the derivative.
And with that we mean M, the slope.
That is what the derivative of a function is.
So we start with y equals x.
I can also have called that the f of x.
I just want to show you all the various ways
that we can write the derivative.
That's dy dx.
Now that also represents what we had in the previous video
where we said M equals, sorry, M equals delta y over delta x.
But that delta we usually use if the change,
if those changes are quite large.
We can see it with the naked eye as far as we draw the graph,
as far as that's concerned.
When we say d, it represents this limit as delta x.
So it's differential y, differential x.
What it just means is we make those, we make it instantaneous.
dy dx.
In other words, an infinitesimally small delta x
so that those two points approach each other.
So we can write the dy dx.
Some textbooks will have d dx of y.
If we had called this the f of x.
We could also have written the d dx of the f of x or d f dx.
These are all the same thing.
What is important though, let me just see if I've got my markers with me.
This is the important bit.
That's the important bit.
We have the limit.
And we're not going to study limits in this course.
Everyone hates limits.
Anyway, the limits is delta x approaches zero.
Of y plus delta x minus y over delta x.
What does that mean?
It means I'm just adding, I'm just adding a little bit of delta x to my one point.
Remember, let me just get this one, this back.
Let's use this one.
So we at this point, we're just going to add a little bit of delta x.
So in other words, from whatever our y value was, which for this is x.
y equals x.
We just add a little bit and we're going to see where we end up.
So it's y, whatever y is now, plus delta x minus the y.
So what we're actually saying is, is like the y, y2 minus y1 and x2 minus x1.
So if you think of it that way, nothing has changed here, but we make delta x go to zero.
It approaches zero.
It can't be zero because then we're dividing by zero.
So in this very simple example of ours, y equals x, what is that going to be?
Well, y equals x is x plus delta x minus y, y is x.
So it's minus x divided by delta x, which just gives us delta x over delta x, which is one.
So the limit as delta x goes to zero of one is just one.
Delta x doesn't appear here.
So we don't have to do anything with a zero.
So that's just one.
And we know from the derivative, don't we, that the derivative of this x to the power one is just one.
Because we will get to the power rule.
I think in the next, in the next year, let's just move there quickly.
We will get to the power rule.
If I have some constant in front of the x and the n there, we bring that forward.
So it becomes a times n.
And we subtract one from that power n minus one.
And that's called the power rule y prime.
So yeah, I could have also have written y prime.
All the same thing.
But it stems from the fact that we are moving from our one point.
From our one point here, we're just moving an infinitesimally small delta x across.
And we see what that change is in delta y.
So it's still delta y divided by delta x.
That's all we have here is delta y minus delta x.
And delta y is this.
We've added a little bit of delta x.
We've gone a little bit across and see what happens as far as the change in y is concerned over the change in x.
And that is what slope is.
For a tangent line just at that specific point, we'll have another line with another slope.
And as you can imagine, on a curve, anywhere we go, the slope will change.
The slope will change at each and every point.
In bedeutet on the curve when votre camion be estimated.
So you can see how strong that of a change.
Now let's take a certain way of adjustment through 44 hours.
So the left pt goes around 500-502 months.
So you can see more of these districts.
Now let's take a certain effect.
Look at how long the 평 public states are.
Now let's take a clear slide.
So let's take a share of these districts here.
Now let'smist earth here.
Let's take a nutshell.
There's a circle here.
Now let's take a second one.
