Because you might not be too familiar with Taylor's expansion, Taylor polynomials,
let's just run through this again slightly slower. Remember that this p of x,
this polynomial, is almost going to be equal to the f of x, our function, and we
say that this p of x equals the sum from k equals 0 to some value n of f and then
k up there which means the derivative. So if that is 0, we start with 0, that means just the f of,
and we're going to choose some point c, and we're going to multiply that by x minus c to the power
k, and if I can get a ruler somewhere that means we're going to do over k factorial. Now in case
you're not familiar with summation, let's just do that. So it's this sigma sign. So let's say
k equals 1, 2, 3 of k. What would that mean? It means k starts at 1. With summation we always go
up in integers with a difference of 1. So 1, 2, 3. Here we go, 0, 1, 2, 3. So what does this mean?
That equals, well first of all we're going to let k equals 1. So k equals 1. And it's summation,
so plus. The next time k equals 2, 2. The next time k equals 3. So that is 6. So this would equal,
this would be one way to write 6, summation. So here we're going to start at k equals 0. And here we've
listed them. You can use a spreadsheet software, for instance, Excel. I have, so k is going to go
from 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And n can approach infinity. And if n approaches infinity, these two are going to
be, well, they are going to be the same. We can say that for practical purposes. So with the f, if that's a
zero, it just means the f of x. The f of x is just e to the power x. Okay, so we are dealing here with
the f of x. Now, if one, if there's a one in there, that means f prime of x. What is the f prime of e of
x? Well, it's e of x. Now k is going to go to 2. What's f prime prime of x? Well, still e to the power x.
So e to the power x is a special expression in as much as it will always stay even. It doesn't
matter how many times you take the derivative. Now, we don't need f prime of x. We need f prime of c.
Now, c refers to where on the x-axis we want this approximation to equal our function. So here we've
chosen it at the x equals zero. So at x equals zero, we want to know. So it's f prime of x at x equals zero.
So I put a zero where an x is. e to the power zero is one. e to the power zero is one. e to the power
zero is one. e to the power zero is one. So it's always just going to be one. So in this case, it's
always also easy. If I let c equal zero, that means it's x minus zero, which is just x. So x to the power
zero is just one. x to the power one is just x. x to the power two is x squared. x to the power three
x cubed, etc. And k factorial, remember zero factorial is one. One factorial is also one.
Two factorial. Three factorial. Remember what factorial means. So three factorial equals one
times two times up to three. And four factorial will be times four. So that's what you get there.
So let's construct this p of x as far as e to the power x is concerned. So we'll have f prime of zero,
which is just there. There we have it. So it's one times x to the power zero. There we have it's one
divided by divided by zero factorial is one. So that was just going to equal one plus. Next one,
we were going to still have one times x divided by one to see here, here, here, there, there, there is
where I get these from. So that's just going to be x plus then I'm going to get one times x squared
divided by two. So that's x squared over two plus. And then next one, we're going to have x cubed over
six, and x to the power four over 24. And that is how we construct the the Taylor's expansion of e to
the power x. And here in the red, and I hope you can see it come out, you might have to view this video
in higher resolution, increase the screen size, there in red, I have the f of x, f equals, e equal,
f of x equals e to the power x. And here is the graph of this function, the graph of this function.
And you can see here by x equals zero, they lie on top of each other. So in this region, this function
approximates e to the power x, it approximates e to the power x. And the more of these functions,
more of these expressions I add, these factors that I add, the closer and closer all these parts
are going to become, it's going to become closer and closer still over a wider range domain here on
my x axis, the more I, the more factors I add. And then I can also say, for instance, if I want
a nicer approximation around x equals two, that just means I'm going to put two in there. And I'm going
to put x minus two in there. So if I have x minus two squared, it's going to be x squared minus four x
plus four. So it's going to be a more complicated, each one is going to be slightly more complicated. And
there, I shall have to put a two in, so it will be e squared. All of these, that will be
e squared, e squared, e squared, e squared, as much as I'm letting not the f, not the f of zero,
but the f of two. So it's going to be e to the power of two, e to the power of two successively.
Now, one thing you can look at, let's have that the e of x, e to the power of x is approximately
equal one plus x, plus x squared over two, plus x cubed over six, plus x to the power of four over
24, plus x to the power of five over 120. Let's take the first derivative of this,
d dx of e to the power x. Let's do that. Well, that's a constant. I hope you can see there,
that's a constant. So this is going to be zero, plus what's the first derivative of that one? What's the
first derivative of this? The two comes forward. So it's two x divided by two, which is just x,
plus what is this? It's going to be a half x squared. What is this? It's going to be x to the power
three, x to the power three over six. And look at this. If I just take the zero away, it's exactly
that. It's exactly that. And this also shows you that the first derivative of e to the power x is
just, I've just rewritten e to the power x.
