Now let's have a look at this example problem. You don't need to know the biology behind all
of this but imagine we have a protein in two states. And state A can be transformed into
state B and state B can be transformed back into state A. And at any kind, any specific temperature
eventually all things being equal the system reaches what we call equilibrium. At equilibrium
if I take the concentration in a solution, for instance just of B divided by A, at equilibrium
this will be a constant. That's the constant of equilibrium. And in any kind of system such as this
there is this notion of free energy which we denote here by delta G sub zero. And there are two
equations in biology for this free energy of this system. The first one is negative R, R is the
universal gas constant, times the temperature times the natural log, the natural logarithm of this
equilibrium coefficient. The other way to do it is to say the change in enthalpy minus the temperature
times the change in entropy. And because these are two equations for the free energy we can write
them, we can equate them to each other. I can divide both sides by negative RT and this is what I'll end
up with. This is very simple, this is very simple algebra. Now I've got two unknowns really here in as
much as I don't know what the change of entropy is and I don't know what the change of entropy is,
I certainly know the universal gas constant and I can do the, I can do an experiment to get this value
at least. And I can do this experiment multiple times at various temperatures so I can get these two
known. So what I can do is the following. I can make a table at various temperatures and see what this
concentration of B is at equilibrium, what the concentration of A is at equilibrium and for any
kind of temperature I'm going to get a corresponding K equilibrium, K sub equilibrium, the equilibrium
constant. I can take the natural log and I can plot these two or I can make a table at least of these two
and because this is one over T I'm going to, I'm going to put on this side one, a value for one over T.
And if I look at this closely, if I look at this closely, Y equals MX plus C. So C is going to equal
this, my slope is going to equal this and this is my X value. One over T would be my X value and indeed if I do
an experiment I'm going to get a plot such as this. So in this plot I'm plotting the natural log of K
equilibrium on the one side and I'm one over T. So these would be the values of one over T and this
is the natural log. So it's not K equilibrium and temperature on the two axis. It's the natural log
and one over T on this side and I get the straight line. For the straight line it's very easy for me
to get the slope of this and it's also very easy to get the Y intercept
by setting X equals zero. So if I do that, if I do that, I can take any of the values I want in my table,
substitute it in there, the corresponding value into there. I know what the universal gas constant is
for those two. In other words, M is going to equal this. M is going to equal negative delta H sub zero
divided by R. I can get this from my table or from my graph. And C I can get from my graph as well,
equals delta S over R. So I can, because these, the R is known, it's a known constant, I can solve both
for this change in entropy, negative the change of entropy at least, and the change in entropy.
So I had this equation, I didn't know how to solve these two, but through a simple experiment and setting
up this mathematical model. And what I've shown you here is that we needn't just have, if I just had
k equilibrium versus t, if I just plotted those, I would not have gotten the straight graph. So,
but because I get the natural log on the one side, 1 over t on the other side, I was going to get the
straight graph. And it's very easy from a straight line, at least to get the slope and the Y intercept,
and I can solve this problem.
