So in this video we're going to discuss biliary colic.
So gallstone disease is an overarching term and most commonly we'll find uncomplicated
gallstone disease in the form of biliary colic.
In a previous video I mentioned that about 9% of women and 6% of men will develop gallstones.
Fortunately remember most of those are asymptomatic.
So you are in an oral exam, a clinical exam or faced with a patient.
What are you going to talk about when it comes to biliary colic?
Let's start off with the incidence.
Only about 15% of patients with gallstones will develop biliary colic.
Once a patient has developed biliary colic though they have an 85% chance of repeated attacks.
They also have about a 2-3% incidence per year of complicated disease, that's cholecystitis
and other complications.
So why do patients develop biliary colic?
Well, food enters the duodenum from the stomach.
Cells in the duodenal wall secrete cholecystokinin.
It circulates in the bloodstream and acts on the smooth muscle cells in the gallbladder
wall causing contraction.
A stone blocks the flow of bile from the cystic duct and that severe contraction of the gallbladder
causes tremendous pain.
Of course this usually follows the intake of a meal, especially a fatty meal.
Most patients consume their largest meal at dinner in the evening so they'll get pain
during the night.
Causy and vomiting can accompany biliary colic.
The pain is typical in the right upper quadrant and usually lasts for about half an hour up
till several hours.
If it lasts longer though really do consider cholecystitis.
The pain is relieved as the stone dislodges from that opening of the cystic duct allowing
for emptying of the gallbladder.
When a patient comes to hospital it's important to confirm the diagnosis and that is usually
done through ultrasound.
Ultrasound is a good examination to visualize the gallstones and also complications of gallstone
disease such as thickening of the wall, pericolecystic fluid or even perforation of the gallbladder.
Biliary colic though is uncomplicated gallstone disease.
So usually on the ultrasound we will not find those signs of complication, only the presence
of gallstones.
In patients with very typical symptoms without any gallstones please remember to bring them
back in two weeks time to repeat that ultrasound in case of missed stones.
It is important to provide these patients with good analgesics.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been shown to be very effective.
Of course there are contraindications for the use of these drugs so don't give them to
patients at risk for or with peptic ulcer disease and also not in the dehydrated patient.
Cephine is safe to use in these patients.
It really does not cause more contraction of the sphincter body than any other opioid.
Once your task of relieving the patient's pain is done please do some further investigations.
We really do need some blood tests.
We need to see whether the patient's white cell count is elevated.
That would be in the case of cholecystitis.
Also look at the liver enzymes and the bilirubin levels as well as the lipase to rule out pancreatitis.
Urea in electrolyte levels can be used to determine whether a patient needs intravenous fluids
and replacement of lost electrolytes in case they vomited a lot.
The definitive treatment of biliary colic is a cholecystectomy.
Now it's not an absolute emergency so that cholecystectomy can usually be done on the next elective list.
So why do we do a cholecystectomy for a patient with biliary colic?
Well we've already mentioned that they have a high incidence of repeated attacks
and a 2-3% incidence per year of complicated disease.
And really this complication risk is higher than the risk for complications during a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Of course there are always patients who are unfit for surgery and who refuse surgery.
In these cases we'll do expectant management and that is through simple analgesics.
Patients can take these simple analgesics when they have an attack.
Of course do tell them that when the pain persists they should come to hospital
because they might have acute cholecystitis.
The solution therapy of the gallstones have been reported.
Unfortunately in most cases it will not work.
External beam lithotripsy where we try to break up the stone with shock waves
has no role to play in the management of gallstones.
While most patients have cholesterol stones the management of hypercholesterolemia
will have no effect on the outcome of the gallstone disease.
I hope you found this informative.
If you have any comments please leave them down below.
Also subscribe to this channel and hit that notification bell
so that when I do release new videos you'll be the first one to find out about it.
