Let's look into research in private practice. I'm doing this video lecture
series on research in private practice to entice those interested in doing some
research but also to help those who read medical journals to have a better
understanding of what they are reading, to make more informed decisions to
analyze the articles that they are reading. So in this first lecture we'll
look at the types of research and as opposed to a normal introductory series
on medical statistics whereby we look at median, mean, mode, standard deviation, terms
like those, we're going to start with a p-value, probably the most important
concept in medical literature. So in this talk we'll talk about about what this
is all about. What is medical research all about and why should it be done? We'll
look at the types of research that you can embark upon and some introductory
statistics, the p-value. So here the why of medical research. Why give a lecture series
like this? Why be worried about it at all? Why think about it? Well there is much more
to medicine than just service delivery. We sit in our practices, we sit in our rooms and
we see patients. There is more to medicine though than just the service delivery. There
are questions that need to be answered. There's critical thinking. There's also the need to audit
your practice. It is very good practice to look at the outcomes of certain management plans that you
have, certain ways that you treat patients. You have to look at your own outcomes. So if you don't do
your own bit of personal research, you're not being a proper healthcare provider. As far as the knowledge of
statistics goes, if you have some knowledge of statistics, if you have some knowledge of
research, you can critically read a paper. You don't just have to follow others' lead. You don't
have to follow the opinion of others. You can critically look at that research paper. You can critically decide
whether it was done properly and what to take from it. You don't just have to read the conclusion
in the abstract. You can dissect that article and take something proper from it.
What about private practice specifically? While you sit on an enormous amount of data in private practice,
your files are filled with reams and reams of data that can fill many hard drives. It is sitting there and it might be
and probably is of enormous value. Locked away in a file in a cabinet.
Now consider where most research is done. If you open any local research journal, most of the articles will be from academia,
from some academic institution. And not from the private sector at all.
Look though at what the private practice has to offer versus academia. Usually, academia is in a setting where there is severe financial and resource and personnel constraints. There is not access to modern first world medical care in many situations. Yet, that is where most research is done. In private practice, most doctors have a first world setting where there is access to
to the most modern, best forms of the most modern, best forms of care. And data from that
is absolutely important. And research done on data from this sort of setting is a very important
Why aren't medical journals filled with it?
Why aren't medical journals filled with it?
Why aren't medical journals filled with it?
Lastly, in your private practice, you have questions. You have seen so many patients with a certain condition or in certain situations,
and you often sit by yourself, maybe late at night, maybe watching TV, or watching TV, or watching TV.
You have seen so many patients with a certain condition or in certain situations, and you often sit by yourself, maybe late at night,
maybe watching TV, maybe before falling asleep, waking up in the morning, taking a shower, there is something that bugs you about a certain condition. Why not research it?
So, if you want to improve your practice, you have questions.
Lastly, in your private practice, you have questions. You have seen so many patients with a certain condition or in certain situations,
and you often sit by yourself, maybe late at night, maybe watching TV, maybe before falling asleep, waking up in the morning, taking a shower.
So, if you want to embark on that, or just more properly engage with journal articles when reading them,
just think about the different types of studies you can do.
There's the observational studies, there are the clinical trials, and then other, which is usually two of them, we'll get to those.
So, observational studies, four types, case series, case controls, cross-sectional, and cohort studies.
Now, you can read definitions on any of these, and they're all slightly different.
The reason being, these are not clear-cut divisions. You can have aspects of one type of observational study inside of another.
Observational means, whichever way you put it together though, that you are observing some trait.
You're not necessarily engaging the patient in a certain management. Those we'll get to later.
So, let's look at a case series. So, it's a very simple descriptive account of a characteristic.
Sometimes, it's also known as a clinical audit.
So, you have a defined time period, and you look at, from start to finish, record some data on a patient's site.
Perhaps during an epidemic, there might be an epidemic going around, and during that time, you record some aspect of patient scene,
the way that they present, and just report on those. That's a case series.
It is of enormous help for future planning.
You can really use a case series to critically look, critically audit your practice, and therefore be able to plan for the future.
Let's look at case control as a second form of observational study.
Well, that starts with the presence, or absence, of an outcome, and then we look backwards.
Now, don't get confused now between retrospective and prospective.
That's not exactly what we're talking about here.
But, you start with the presence of an outcome, a certain disease, a certain outcome, and you look backwards.
And you compare subjects with or without the outcomes, and then you look for risk factors and characteristics that differ between the two groups.
Now, prospective and retrospective simply refers to how the data was created.
You might say that from today, I am going to have a form that I fill in for certain patients.
But no, you don't necessarily have to have a plan in mind with this.
But, there's certain pieces of information that will always be captured.
And that goes into your files.
Years later, you might decide, I want a case control study.
And you're going to look backwards at patients that have already been done.
That data, though, was collected actually prospectively.
You decided beforehand what data was going to be collected.
Retrospective just means, I'm going to try and find the data points that I'm interested in from the file,
so that data was never designed to be collected in a certain way.
So, that's retrospective.
In any case, we're dealing with case controls.
So, you're looking backwards and comparing two or more groups to see if they differ in some way.
So, an example would be, you give the same antibiotic to the same disease.
And you have a group of responders and non-responders.
And you have numerous data points, white cell counts, types of cultures, whatever that you're collecting to see.
Is there a difference between the groups?
Can I identify characteristics or even risk factors that are different between the two groups?
Let's move to cross-sectional studies as a form of observational study.
So, this particular observation is made at a particular point in time.
It's not stretched over a long period.
A good example of this is a survey.
You might design a survey regarding a specific disease or management and hand it out to your patients.
They can form part of that study.
And you might test their knowledge or their attitude towards a certain healthcare topic.
A cross-sectional study can also form part of many of the other study types.
So, as I say, don't see these as clear-cut, completely distinct types.
The last one, a cohort, can also be involved in these.
Let's look at the definition then of a cohort.
A cohort is a group of individuals with a common trait who remain part of that group over an extended period of time.
So, it's these lengthy studies usually to look at the risk factors for common diseases like diabetes or hypertension.
We think about the Framingham studies.
So much data in those study sets.
And those patients formed a cohort.
The second type is a clinical trial.
Now, here we're going to have groups of patients and we're actually going to do something to them.
Operate them.
Give them a medication.
Do some investigation on them.
And in these clinical trials, you have to have controls.
So, patients can be a self-control.
You can have a data set before and after an intervention.
We can have external controls.
And these might be of historic type.
They might be a cohort of patients that you can use as a comparison
between them and your patient set who actually had looked exactly the same initially
but had some form of intervention.
And then there's the gold standard, the randomized control trial
where a group of people with the same characteristics will be taken
and they'll be randomly selected to have an intervention or not.
And then those groups compared to each other.
The other that I was referring to, the meta-analysis and the reviews.
Meta-analysis just groups similar articles together that looked at the same problem
so you'll have an enlargement of your numbers.
Now, modern literature really loves meta-analysis
but there's one large problem with meta-analysis
in that it would only look at articles that actually have been published.
The problem we deal with in medical research is that there might be an enormous amount of data
that no one ever publishes because the outcome was negative
or there were no difference between groups.
That never gets published or hardly ever gets published.
It's only when there are large differences, statistically significant p-values,
usually these things get published.
So we'll always have this bias.
But that's something inherent to science and we have to live with it.
And then lastly, reviews.
We're going to look at different forms of data, most specifically continuous data.
And then lastly, some combinatronics combinations and the central limit theorem.
So this is quite a dangerous slide because it might scare some people off.
Relax though, make it quite easy.
Let's look at the software, Microsoft Excel.
Now most of you will have Microsoft Office installed
and most of you will be quite familiar with Word.
But there's also a second piece of software there,
usually in that's Microsoft Excel spreadsheet program.
If you used to Microsoft Word, jumping to Excel is not a big difference.
Now, I have to warn you, there's a difference between the Microsoft version and the Apple version.
The Microsoft Windows Excel, I should say, has this built-in statistical ability
which is emitted in the Macintosh version.
In the Macintosh version, you actually have to download a piece of free software called FromStatSoft
that will do exactly the same statistical analysis as the Windows version.
Now, having said that, many of you, most of you will have this program on your laptop
and you've never even opened it, not knowing that you can capture data in it
and by the press of a few buttons, it will give beautiful p-values for you.
I'm going to pause a moment and we'll go to a short demonstration of how this can work.
Here then we have Microsoft Excel Mac version.
So, very simply, you'll see these cells.
I can just highlight one of them and start typing a name.
Let's call my name group A and I can hit the tab button or the arrow keys
and I jump to the next cell and I can just move around in them.
So, say for instance, just below it, I can just click in it.
I can type a value of 110, hit enter or tab.
All the arrow keys, it will all take you in different directions
and I can type the next value.
So, look at the left hand here.
I have my two groups of patients.
I've named them group 1 and group 2
and for each patient, and I seem to have 31 patients in each group,
I can simply type the values.
Consider these as some liver function test of value.
So, those were the values of 31 patients in group 1
and 31 patients in group 2.
I can now very simply launch my statistical add-on called StatPlus
and here it's added.
We'll see at the top, I can simply go to Statistics
and then look at all these statistical tests.
Now, some of them are not available in this free version.
You'll actually have to pay for the professional version
but most of what we want to accomplish here, we can do with the free version.
And all of these, as I say, are already included in the Windows version of Excel.
So, I want basic statistics and I want to compare the means of two groups.
A t-test.
This will come up.
I have my group 1 and I have my group 2.
So, I'm going to just click on here
and I'm going to highlight and tell it where all these values are.
So, I'm going to click there.
It disappears and I just click on the first one,
hold the click and drag it all the way down.
So, I've highlighted group 1.
I bring StatPlus back and it's referenced all those values.
Now, I'm going to go to my second group
and I'll highlight all of them.
Click and drag.
Bring back StatPlus and there they are.
I'm just telling the software that in the first row
where it said group 1 and group 2,
there are labels in the first group.
So, it mustn't see that first row where I've written group 1 and group 2 as values.
Everything under that.
I don't have to fill in any of this.
I'm going to choose an alpha level.
That is my p-value of 0.05 or 5% as my cutoff.
There are different types of t-tests.
Let's not be too concerned about these now.
All I have to do is hit OK,
wait for a second or two
and lo and behold, there's a sheet with all my answers.
Let's just say view, zoom.
Let's zoom in a bit so we can have a look.
Beautiful statistics there.
It'll tell me each of my samples sizes are 31 patients,
the mean of each of these groups and the variance,
which is this, the square of the standard deviation.
Don't worry about that.
And there I have a p-value.
0.03, statistical significant difference between the two groups.
Just to remind you there's two different types,
a two-tailed and a one-tailed p-value.
A bit later in this video I'll tell you what the difference is.
But this is so empowering.
You can go to your practice right now,
make two groups of patients,
type in the values under group 1 and under group 2,
hit a few buttons and voila,
out jumps a p-value for you.
That's beautiful.
Now we're going to move on to the roll of a dice.
Now that I've shown you how to easily get a p-value,
you've got to understand what this p-value really means.
And we're going to start that off by the roll of to die or some dice.
Difficult slide to see, but what I want to point out to you,
we have die number 1 and die number 2.
Now remember, a die only has values of 1 to 6.
It cannot land in any other way.
Let's just leave out those where it can land on an edge in some bizarre setup.
It can land face up with values of 1 to 6.
So look at die 1 and die 2.
So I can throw a 1 and a 1,
a 1 and a 2,
a 1 and a 3,
a 1 and a 4,
a 1 and a 5,
a 1 and a 6.
Then I can throw a 2 and a 1,
a 2 and a 2, etc.
And what I'm interested in here is just the totalling.
So if I throw a 1 and a 1,
it totals 2.
If I throw a 2 and a 4,
it equals 6.
So under the total,
you'll see there you can throw values of a 2,
a 3, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7,
a 3, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, a 8, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, a 8, a 4, a 5, a 6, a 7, a 8, a 9, etc.
up to 12.
Now, the next column over, you'll note frequency distribution.
So how many times or how possible is it to roll a value of 2?
Well, there's only one combination that can give me a value of 2
and that's if I throw a 1 and a 1.
But if I go down to a total of 7,
there are actually 6 possible combinations that can give me a 7.
So it's much more likely for me to throw a 7.
Now, if I look at this data set,
it encompasses all possibilities and probabilities.
There's no ways I can throw a 1 or a 13 or a 27.
So everything possible is in this data set of mine.
So whatever I throw these, the dice,
I'm going to land up with a value totaling between 2 and 12.
Nothing else is possible.
So I can work out what the probability of each is.
So in total, we have 36 combinations.
And in 6 of those combinations will give me a 7.
That means in 16.67% of times we will get a 7.
In 2.79% I will get a value of 2.
That's very easy to conceptualize.
If I total all those probabilities, it should be 100%.
And indeed there you can see it totals 100%.
Good. So I can work out beforehand what my probability is as a total as I roll these dice.
Now remember it says 100% there or 2.79%.
Remember percent is you actually multiply something by 100.
So the total is really between 0 and 1.
0 being 0%, 1 being 100%.
That's how we see probability.
And that's the p-value.
So p of 0.05 actually means 5%.
That's right.
So number 1 on the line there.
Frequency distribution of 2 only happens once.
So that will be 0.0278.
That is the probability of throwing a 2.
The probability of totaling a 7 is 0.1667.
Okay.
Now think about that.
So, if you were to roll two 6's to get 12,
the probability of doing that,
the p-value of getting that result is actually 0.0279 less than 0.05.
It's actually statistically significant when you get either a double 1's or double 6's.
Quite interesting.
So let's look at this graphically.
So I have now just made little columns
and the column height represents the probability of getting that value.
So you can clearly see it's much easier to roll a 7 or total a 7 than it is a 2 or a 12.
So I've represented it like that.
There's one important thing and some others as well,
one important thing I want you to take from this
is if I were to ask you what the probability is of rolling 7's
and you look at that central column
and it has a height of 16.67
or in actual fact remember that's 0.1667
and you take its width as just being a value of 1
and you think back about the equation for the area of a rectangle
that is height times width.
So if the width is 1 and the height is 16 times 6, 7
the area of that column gives me the probability.
So I can read from a graph, I can read the geometrical area, the surface area of that little bar
is equal to the probability.
probability.
So if you had all the probabilities totaling 100% or all possibilities is included in that 0 to 1.
So everything is included.
So the total surface area, if I were to total the surface area of all these little columns
that we're going to get to 100% or 1.0
I can now use surface area to equate probability.
Very important.
Now though, let's look at continuous data.
What if the data is not discrete?
Now what do I mean by discrete?
And that's why I bring in this little slide here.
Discrete refers to the fact that nothing in between is possible.
I can roll a 1, a 2, a 3 on each specific die.
I cannot roll a 1.3456794.
It's impossible.
They come in discrete values.
So if you were to look, strictly speaking, at the number of red blood cells, units transfused,
we usually would transfuse these in one full unit, not as 1.345 units.
If I looked at the total milliliters, maybe I could see that is continuous.
You have to understand that the conceptual difference between discrete and continuous.
And you'll see that at the bottom.
It's forms of data.
Now the rolling of the die was most definitely discrete.
And if it's discrete, I can see the width of my column as having a value 1.
But what if I have continuous value?
What if I look, for instance, at white cell count?
Now, of course, you don't get a fraction of a white cell.
But we do express white cell count, or Hb, in such values that they are, for all intents and purposes, continuous data sets.
Take that for granted.
Very quickly though, I am digressing.
Look at the two forms of data.
We get categorical data and numerical data.
Categorical data, there are two types, nominal and ordinal.
Nominal would be, name a few types of cars if we were to walk outside and look at everyone's cars.
There will be BMW's, Volkswagen's, Peugeot's.
I cannot order them in any way.
I cannot say that Volkswagen comes before Peugeot.
I might be able to say, well, someone likes one more.
One car is better than the other.
Alphabetical spelling.
But I can't really put them in any kind of proper order.
Ordinal categorical data, I can.
I can say, please mark on this little smiley face chart how much you enjoyed attending this restaurant.
One smiley face to five smiley faces.
Someone might mark four smiley faces and another person might mark two.
There is some order to it.
Four smiley faces mark means, well, you like that restaurant more than someone who marked two.
I cannot say I like the restaurant twice as much as someone else if I marked four and they marked two.
There is no numerical, real numerical difference.
But there is some order to that dataset.
Numerical is different.
In other words, it's numbers.
Interval and ratio, the only difference being is the presence of a true zero.
Degrees Celsius, for instance, is interval because although we have zero degrees Celsius, it's not a true zero.
So if the temperature is 10 degrees Celsius outside and 20 degrees, I cannot really say it is now twice as warm because there is no real zero.
The Kelvin temperature scale has an absolute zero.
So then I could say 200 Kelvin is twice as hot as 100 Kelvin, but you have to convert to that scale.
Anything else, white cell count, there is an absolute zero.
There can be a zero white cell count or a zero HP.
So these would be ratio.
And you just have to be careful.
There are certain mathematical equations and terms that you cannot use interval data for, only ratio data.
So a bit of information you probably don't need in your everyday life.
What is important here is discrete versus continuous data.
And here we go.
Here's a continuous dataset.
Now, how do we now go from being able to use surface area of my little bars that have got a width of one?
How can I now use this dataset that is continuous data to use geometrical area to represent a p value?
Well, integral calculus actually comes to the rescue because we can determine the area under a curve using integration.
Don't have to worry about it, though.
We won't go into any of this.
What is important to note here, though, is I don't have a tiny little base with a value of one and a tiny little height.
That does not exist.
There is no specific width.
So what we have to do here is to say between a certain x-axis value and another value, let's determine between those two values the area under that curve.
So it is not an absolute value as to how high the curve goes at any one point.
It is the value of the surface area between two points on the x-axis.
For us to better understand this, we need to know something about combinations and the central limit theorem.
So let's have a look at this.
This is back to our friend, the spreadsheet software.
And you see the function there equals COMBIN stands for combinations.
Now think about this.
If I had 10 patients and I wanted to make groups of two, how many groups can I make?
Well, it's easy in the spreadsheet software.
I can just write equals COMBIN 10 comma 2.
Hit enter and it will tell me 45.
Think about that.
Only 10 of you.
How many little groups of two can I make?
Now, combination says if I choose John and Sally and then the next time I choose Sally and John, there's no difference.
That would be the same combination.
So, permutations are different.
If I choose Sally and then John and John and then Sally, those are two different permutations.
So we talk about combinations.
But it's fantastical.
With 10 people, I can make 45 separate groups of two.
If I had to make groups of 4, I can make 210 completely different groups of 4 people just from 10 people.
Now look how that suddenly escalates.
If I had 100 patients and I were to make groups of 10, I have 1.7 times 10 to the power of 13 different combinations that I can draw from that.
So why is this important?
It is important for the following reason.
If you were to include 50 patients in your research study.
Let's say 50 patients with a urinary tract infection.
How many people on the face of this planet can suffer from urinary tract infections?
Millions.
Now if there are about 7 billion people.
Now remember, let's say at risk would be, let's just round things down.
And it's really a round down.
A million.
And from those, you take 50 for your study.
So from a million people making groups of 50, can you imagine how many different combinations there could be that you could have included in your research?
That has nothing to do with the fact that you live in Cape Town and a certain geographical area and certain patients are going to come to you.
In everyone in the world involved, your little group of 50 is just one tiny, tiny, tiny example of one of countless possibilities that could have made up that study.
If you decided to start that study a month later, your 50 patients would have been different, included a different set of patients.
So they are countless, countless, countless.
And this is where the beauty of statistics lie.
The beauty of the p-value.
The beauty of the central limit theorem.
And there we have it.
In one graph.
So what does this represent?
Now, it doesn't represent all the individual values.
What we are representing here is a bell curve.
And that's what the central limit says.
If there were a million patients and your little group of 50 was chosen in amongst almost countless different combinations.
And let's say for instance, you are just comparing two groups to each other.
The difference in some characteristic of your two groups would have been one single data point on this graph.
This graph represents all of those different possible studies that could have been done.
Now remember, from 10 patients and 4 combinations, I can already get over 200 combinations.
So imagine how many there really are.
So your study forms a tiny little blip on that.
And what the central limit theorem says.
If by some very unnatural process, we could have done all of those combinations.
All of those countless different combinations from those million patients.
We could have chosen this 50 combination.
That 50.
That 50.
That 50.
A different 50.
In each of those studies, we would have gotten, for some characteristic, a difference between two groups.
And if I could plot all of those differences, it would almost always, let's say always, land up as this bell curve.
And if I saw that total area under that whole curve as one.
The area there is one or 100%.
I can now say, well, the difference that I found must now lie somewhere on that curve.
And the difference between my subset would be so rare.
Not a lot of studies would have found this difference that I found.
It would have been much more common.
That would be the hump in the middle.
To find that difference between the two.
To find that difference between the two, then the one I found, would mean your little value would fall here on the outside extremes.
And if we were able to calculate the area under the curve, between where your line was, your finding, towards the outer edges, that's what we normally do.
And that area there represents less than 0.05, you have a statistical significant difference.
That's phenomenal.
That is just mind blowing.
Now, we made an arbitrary decision.
We decided that if the area under the curve was less than 5%, I would see that as statistically significant.
You could also have chosen 0.01 or 1%.
It does represent the area under the curve.
If the total area under the curve is 1 or 100%, I'm going to repeat that.
Your study of 50 patients is just one tiny possibility of countless others you could have done by choosing at a random 50 other patients.
If everyone could do that, if all of those different combinations could have been involved in the study,
you did one with 50 and 50 and 50, and you plotted the differences,
it will be much more common to find a certain difference, very common, and those would be under the hump.
If you found a difference that wouldn't normally happen, it would be very rare in amongst all of those,
remember when we rolled the dice, it was very difficult or rare to get a double 1 or double 6.
It might be very difficult.
You don't often find such a difference as what you found.
Your value falls under those narrow bits.
The area under the curve would that thus be small and you could say,
I found a statistically significant difference.
That is mind-blowing.
So I bring you back to one consideration you must have and it's critical to do when you do read a journal article.
Look at that.
Under the green we have a two-tailed distribution p-value and a one-tailed distribution p-value.
One is 0.06 and if we chose 0.05 as our cut-off value, that's not statistically significant.
But the one-tailed distribution gives me a 0.03 and that's a statistical significant difference.
So if I was an unscrupulous investigator, I'd choose the second p-value there because that will make my paper look better.
That's not how it works in research.
You have to have chosen between those two beforehand.
And that's how you can read a journal article from now on.
Read how the authors constructed that paper.
Read the methods section and see if you can pick up where they might have cheated.
I'm not saying anyone does, but you can look for it.
So how does it work?
You have to set an hypothesis beforehand.
It's called the null hypothesis and the test hypothesis.
The null hypothesis might say there's no difference.
And the test hypothesis says one of three things.
The group, the value of one group will be less than the other group,
will be not equal to, or will be more than.
These are three distinct things.
Look at this graph.
So these are one-tailed tests.
So what this test hypothesis said before embarking on data collection was,
my one group will have a value higher than the other.
I choose 5% or 0.05 as my cut-off value,
but that means I have to group all my area under the curve,
not on both sides, but just on the one side.
Here it's on the extreme to the right, so that would be more than.
If it was on the left-hand side, it would have been less than.
The first graph I showed where there were pink areas under both sides,
that is where the test hypothesis just said it will be different than.
So let's say, for instance, some test and you're looking at white cell count.
The one group will have a white cell count of 12,
and you're just saying that the other group will have a value different than 12.
That's a two-tailed test because it can be either more or less.
If my test hypothesis said the test group will have a value of more than 12,
this becomes one-tailed or less than.
This becomes one-tailed and I can actually use that one-tailed p-value.
But I'm grouping that whole 5% under one side of the curve.
I don't split them in 2.5% on one side, 2.5% on the other.
So what the software actually does, as you'll see in the thin little green line there,
it works out a value.
And for that value, we look towards the edge,
further away from that line, what the area under the curve is.
So on the left-hand side graph, you'll see that will denote statistical significance.
The area under the curve of that little green bit is less than 5%,
because the pink represented the 5%.
That is a statistical significant difference.
But I used geometrical area.
I used the surface area of that little funny shape there
to determine whether things are statistically significantly different or not.
On the right-hand side though, you see the line that was calculated is to the left
and the green area under the curve is actually more than 5% or more than 0.05%.
So that finding would have been statistically insignificant.
Some final thoughts.
Questions in your daily practice.
Questions in your mind.
Think about it.
Think about all the data that you sit on.
Think about embarking on a bit of research and publishing that.
If you have any questions, please give me a call or send me some email.
Thank you.
