In this section we're going to start looking at higher order differential equations.
But before that there's a few things that, at least terms or concepts that we have to be familiar with.
The first is about the existence of a unique solution for a differential equation in this form.
So this is usually how this higher order differential equation is written.
We'll mark that in green.
And a sub n of x and the next one until a sub 1 and a sub 0 of x.
These are all functions containing just the dependent variable x.
We'll see that it's equal to some other function just of x on this side.
And as far as the derivatives of the dependent variable is concerned,
you'll see that there are higher order derivatives until the first derivative and then just the function itself, y.
So that's how we state it.
And we say that there is a unique solution for differential equation if all of these functions of x,
this coefficient functions of x and the right hand side function of x are all continuous on an interval.
So they're all continuous.
And this first coefficient function is not zero for all x values on the interval that we are dealing with.
So we can make the interval smaller and only deal with that interval.
And we might find unique solutions on that interval.
So whatever interval we decide on.
So if that is true and the first one is not equal to zero,
then for every x on the interval i, a solution y of x of the initial value problem exists and is unique.
So let's have a look at this.
Would if a sub n of x equals x squared, would that give us?
No, it won't.
Why?
Because if I let x equals zero, certainly this function becomes zero.
And as I said, it's not allowed to be.
Why?
Because we'll see when we start solving these, we're going to,
we want a constant coefficient of one for this first highest order derivative here.
So I've got to divide each term by this and I can't divide by zero.
Okay.
And if there's a discontinuity on my interval, for instance there,
if zero is included in my interval, then this, whatever, whichever of these coefficient functions,
whichever of them, if that is one over x, I can't divide by zero.
There's going to be a discontinuity.
But I might decide that zero is not included on the interval that I'm looking at.
So things might change.
Okay.
The next thing we just, I'm just going to mention here is this boundary value problem
where y, where the function passes through two points, two y values, which is then the boundary.
Stating it in this form doesn't make much sense.
I just want you to be aware of if there's a boundary, unique solutions might not exist
if there are boundary value problems.
And we'll do examples of this to make this clear.
Let's just be aware of it for now.
Okay.
The next thing perhaps to be aware of is just some notation.
Instead of writing d dx, with x this year, e is just an independent variable,
can also just be written as a d.
And if we put an exponent there, it would mean the second derivative of the function of y.
We've all seen this kind of notation.
What is important to note that is that this differential operator d obeys algebraic operations.
In other words, if I had a function, two functions, y plus some z, I can do this.
And if this was with respect to x, that means this is dy dx plus dz dx.
I can distribute this operator in its algebraic, all the algebraic operations,
you can do with this differential operator d if you use that notation.
Good.
Next, the superposition principle for homogeneous equations.
Remember what a homogeneous equation is.
That will be a differential, a linear differential equation in higher form.
It is linear because I don't have higher powers.
It's not dny of dxn, all of that squared.
It's just linear, each of them to the power of 1.
If g of x equals 0, then that would be homogeneous.
Although, remember from the previous two chapters ago or so,
we looked at another form of homogeneity in solving differential equations.
Okay.
So, homogeneous and linear.
The superposition principle states that if I have all of these solutions for a homogeneous,
in other words, g of x equals 0,
then I can group them all together into one solution by putting a constant coefficient in front of each of them and multiplying them.
And this is then the general solution set this is called.
But it's only for linearly independent solutions.
In other words, one of these solutions, y equals x squared, y equals 2x squared,
one is just a constant multiple of the other.
So, if I take any two of them and I do this division and it comes out to be a constant,
that means one is just a constant multiple of the other.
Then I don't have an independent set of...
So, I've got to have an independent set of solutions before I can just put a constant place hold in front of them
and make a new, a new final solution.
So, if I just look at y equals x and y equals absolute value of x,
those two will not be, or those are linearly independent.
If I divide one by the other, I'm not going to always get a certain constant value.
I might have positives or negatives.
There's another way to test for linearity.
What this boils down to is you're going to have an equation that's not equal to zero.
You're going to set it equal to zero and get a family of solutions or different solutions.
You can add all of them...
You add all of them up by putting a constant in front of them
and that gives you your final, what's called the complementary solution.
And you can't do that though once there's a constant multiple of the other,
then you've got to drop that one because it will just appear as another one.
So, one way of looking at this is if you have it in this form
and at least two of these coefficients are not zero,
not all zero, they can't all be zero.
There must be at least two of them that are not zero.
If you add all of them up and you get zero, it means they're all linearly independent.
The fancier way of doing it is to setting up what is called the Ronskian matrix.
I'm not quite sure how you pronounce it, anyway.
So, you put in a matrix all your family of solutions and you take the first derivative, each of them,
second derivative until n minus one derivative.
So, they must all have these derivatives, must have n minus one derivatives, to put that.
And if you take the determinant of this Ronskian matrix and it does not equal zero,
that means you are dealing with an independent set.
You are dealing with an independent set.
As I said, you're going to get these complementary solutions by setting your differential equation equal to zero
and then equal to the g of x that is not zero, that was initially stated,
and then you're going to get some particular solution.
And if you add the complementary solutions to the particular solutions,
you end up with the final solution.
That is called the superposition principle.
And there's a second form of the superposition principle.
If you have the exact same differential equation,
y prime prime prime plus 4y prime prime plus 5y plus y equals,
they're all the same.
But once you let it equal to one function, another function, a completely different function,
and of each of those you get this particular solution.
If you then take this and you set it equal to this plus this plus this,
your final answer is just going to be this one plus this one plus this one.
It needn't only be 3.
It can be 2, 3, 4, 5 till infinity.
So that's one form of the superposition principle.
So one is just to put the constant coefficients
in front of your linearly independent set of solutions.
And the other is you can, if you have on the right hand side various functions,
you can just look at each of them individually.
You can also set this exact same differential equation just to one and get a particular solution.
And then to the next one and to the next one,
you've just got to add all your particular solutions then.
This won't be the final, final solution because you still need to set this equal to zero,
make it homogeneous, which will give you a family of solutions
on which you, if they are linearly independent, you do this to them.
So in the end you're going to have this long list of solutions.
You add all of them and that will give you the final solution
to your higher order linear ordinary differential equation.
For AWS, you can understand.
Yeah.
And to the next one.
The next one.
Calling emissions.
The power Base.
Opportunity.
The danger.
The power Base.
The power Base.
The beauty.
Coase.
To the power ofbeing.
The power Base.
The power Base.
You have to realize.
The power Base.
The power Base.
