So now that we have a few definitions and ideas done, the first method we're going to
look at for a higher order linear differential equation is reduction of order. So for reduction
of order at least one of the solutions must be known and we're going to call that y sub
1 and we say it's a non-trivial solution on some interval i. Now if we have this for instance
the second order linear ordinary differential equation and we know at the end it must have
this solution, two constants here y1 y2 and y1 and y2 must be linearly independent. We
can have this final general solution. So there'll be two because it's a second order. Now for
this to occur the quotient of these two must be non-constant otherwise they're dependent.
You can also look at the Ronskian matrix the determinant at least of that. But if you just
take the quotient you know that it must be non-constant in other words it must be another function and
here we're using the independent variable x. So if I just get this y2 and its own we usually
just call it y equals u of x times y1. I can now get y prime by doing u prime v plus u v prime.
So I'm using the product of two functions. I'm just doing the derivative of the product of two
function. By the product rule and I get y prime prime. I get this. What I can now do is to substitute
this into the original problem. Substitute this into the original problem and I solve and what I
will then get is just this new function new differential equation in which I'll have a u prime prime
a u prime and a u and what I can do is just make a new variable w and I can set that equal to u prime.
In other words now I will just reduce that to w prime and the w. I now solve and it looks a bit
you don't know. I'm not telling you how to do it. You'll see an example. You back substitute the u and
you integrate in the end and you're left with whatever this value of y2 was and then you can
build this you can build this family of solutions. So in the next example just remembering what happens
here we'll make it clear how to reduce the order of a of a second order at least differential linear
differential equation.
