Now that we know something about the reduction of order, let's look at this problem.
It's clearly linear and it's clearly second order and we have the second order derivative there.
And we are told that one of the solutions would be y sub 1 equals e to the power x
and x is on this interval of all no numbers.
Now, it's a second order equation, so I'm going to be left with some answers
c1 y1 plus c2 y2 and these c1 and y1 and y2 should be linearly independent.
So, I need to reduce the order of this to a first order and the substitution that I'm going to make
is the fact that I'm going to let y equals u times y1.
Now that's the u of x because if this was y2 and I did have y2 divided by y1
I should not have a constant otherwise this would be a linearly dependent set.
I should have some function of x there.
In other words, I'm going to be left with u e to the power x because y sub 1 was e to the power x.
If I look at what y prime would be, this is a function of x, this is a function of x, this is a product of two functions of x.
So, I have to use the product rule.
There will be u prime e to the power x plus u and what is the first derivative of e to the power x?
That's e to the power x.
So again, I have the product of two functions in x and the product of two functions in x.
So, if I'm looking at y prime prime, I'm looking at u prime prime e to the power x plus u prime e to the power x plus u prime e to the power x plus u e to the power x.
Just using the fact that the first derivative of e to the power x is e to the power x.
In other words, y prime prime is going to be u double prime e to the power x plus, there's two of these, 2u prime e to the power x plus u e to the power x.
If I now substitute back into my original equation
y prime prime minus y, so it's going to be this minus that
I'm left with the fact that u prime prime
e to the power x plus u prime e to the power x equals 0
I've just subtracted this from here
Those two terms are the same
I can divide throughout by e to the power x
So I lose those
So I'm left with the fact that u prime prime plus 2u prime equals 0
So I've simplified greatly
Oh, can you say that?
Well, I've almost simplified this, we can say
I can make another substitution
Because now I'm really going to reduce the order
I'm going to say I have this function w
Which is u prime du dx
I'm going to let that be
So u prime prime would be w prime plus 2 times w equals 0
Now I can do this in two forms
Because I see here
I can just use integration, integrating factor
But I can also do this to separate variables
I have a choice
Let's do separation of variables
In other words, I'm going to have the fact that dw dx
Is going to equal negative 2 times w
Or 1 over w dw equals negative 2 dx
I take the antiderivative of both sides
I bring the negative 2 out because it is a constant coefficient
I'm left with the fact that the natural log of w equals negative 2x
Plus some constant, we'll call it constant 1
I exponentiate both sides
I'm left with the fact that w is going to be some new constant
Let's call it constant 2e to the power negative 2x
I'm not done because I need to have an answer of y explicitly in terms of x
But w was u prime
So w was equal to u prime du dx
That was my choice here
So that equals c2e to the power negative 2x
In other words, du equals c2e to the power negative 2x dx
Again, I can take the antiderivative of both sides
I'm bringing the c2 out as a constant coefficient
And I'm left with u equaling
There'll be a c2, there'll be negative 1 half
There'll be e to the power negative 2x
Plus some new constant
Just look at this
Just differentiate this
First derivative of this would be negative 1 half
e to the power negative 2x
Times the chain rule
The first derivative of this
Which is negative 2
Negative 2 times negative 1 half is just 1
e to the power negative 2x
So certainly that works out
I can also rewrite c2 times constant times this constant
Let's just call it a new constant
C4e to the power negative 2x
Plus some new constant
But u was also a substitution
And as much as y was equal to u times e to the power x
So u equals y divided by e to the power x
So y divided by e to the power x equals
Well let's make it, just call it two brand new constants
Now let's just make it c1 and c2
C1e to the power negative 2x plus c2
I can multiply both sides by e to the power x
So I'm left with the fact that it'll be c1e to the power negative x
Plus c2e to the power x
And as you can see there are my two
My y1 and my y1 and my y2
And it forms a linearly independent
Or an independent set
So one divided by the other
Will leave me with linear independence
Certainly would not leave me with a constant
In other words
This is the form that I was going for
I knew my general solution had to be in this form
And lo and behold
That is where I got
