Let's have a look at this absolutely beautiful problem.
Linear, second order, and I'm given one of the independent solutions there, x squared.
Now you immediately see x, the interval that we have, is this open interval from 0 to positive infinity.
Of course, here in my general form, I have a sub 2 of x being x squared.
And we said remember that you're not allowed to have that equal to 0 because we're going to divide throughout by x squared and you can't divide by 0 so that automatically goes out.
And you can probably see that we are somewhere along the line going to end up with a natural logarithm which cannot be negative.
You can't take the natural log of a negative number.
So it's not that we only exclude 0, we're probably also only going to deal with the positive numbers.
Hence, already setting up this interval.
So let's do that.
Let's divide throughout by x squared.
That's going to be 3 over x it looks like.
Y prime plus 4 over x squared.
Y equals 0.
What we're dealing with here obviously is our first method of higher order linear ordinary differential equations.
And that is to reduce the order.
To reduce the order, we use the system of an independent set of variables.
And as much as, remember, our answer is going to be something like this.
Y1 plus some constant y2.
Those have got to be linearly independent.
In other words, if you get the Ronskin, the determinant of the Ronskin matrix, it should not equal 0.
Or if you just divide that by other, it should not be some constant.
But actual fact, it should equal some function in x as these y's are functions of x's.
If this is true, we use the fact that y equals u, which is a function of x, one should actually write it out, not to be lazy, times this y1 of x as well.
I've just brought this to the other side.
And I don't write 2 there.
It just saves a step in the end.
If you do enough of these, you'll see y.
Okay, so for that I need y' this is the product of two functions with the same independent variable.
So I have to use the product rule.
That will leave me with y' of x, y1 of x, u' of x times y sub 1 of x.
And then u of x times y, 1 prime of x.
It's been a bit silly here because we know what y1 is.
Of course, that is x squared.
So that's ux squared or u of x times x squared.
So if we do this, we were going to get u prime.
Forgive me for not writing the of x all the time.
It just makes it so difficult.
It's called x squared plus 2u prime x.
And then y prime prime of x, which usually takes two steps because there's usually some simplification.
We're going to use this as two functions in x.
So product rule for each of them.
So that's u prime prime of x squared plus 2u prime of x plus...
What are we going to have here?
It's this prime now.
Let me just see, did I do this correctly?
That was...
It should just be there, shouldn't it?
Let's just see.
Yeah.
So it's u prime v plus u v prime.
That looks better.
Okay, so here we're going to have 2u prime x plus 2u.
That will simplify in u prime prime of x squared plus 4 times u prime of x...
Uh, u prime times x plus 2 times u.
Now I've got each of these three, 1, 2, 3, that now needs to be substituted back in here.
So y prime prime is u prime prime of x squared plus 4u prime of x plus 2u.
Now we're going to have minus 3 over x minus 3 over x times y prime, which was this u prime x squared plus 2u x.
And then plus 4 over x squared times this y, which is u x squared, and that's going to equal 0.
So let's hope for no small little algebraic errors there.
x squared plus 4u prime x plus 2u.
That's going to be minus 3u prime x minus 6u plus 4u equals 0.
I think we're still going to be left with this x squared u prime prime, just rewriting that.
So that's gone 4 minus 3, that's plus 1u prime x plus 2u plus 4u minus 6u, nothing left there.
I can divide 3 out again by x squared, which means x cannot be 0, but fortunately it's not included in this interval.
So if x is included in your interval, the solution is not valid for this differential equation.
So u prime prime plus 1 over x, u prime equals 0.
So beautiful, yeah.
I can just do reduction of order into this fashion.
So that is actually dw dx, in other words, plus 1 over x, where are we?
1 over xw equals 0.
I can get an integrating factor or I can separate the variables.
And as much as dw dx equals negative 1 over xw or 1 over w dw equals negative 1 over x dx.
I take the antiderivative of both sides.
Let's just save some space here, if you can still see.
So the natural log of the absolute value of w is going to equal negative times the natural log of the absolute value of x plus some constant.
We'll call it constant C1.
Note though that I can get rid of this absolute value sign because my interval only includes positive values of x.
So I'm left here with, and I can also manipulate this depending on the variable.
So we're just going to write the fact that w equals, if I just exponentiate both sides, it's going to be x to the power negative 1.
By the laws of logarithms, I can bring that up to acquire negative 1.
e to the power C1 will just call some new constant C2.
But remember, w is du dx equals C2 x to the power negative 1.
Or du equals C2 1 over x dx.
Antiderivative of both sides.
Take the constant coefficient out.
So u is going to equal C2 times the absolute value of the natural log of x.
Remember that x I can just write like that because all the negatives are outside of my interval.
Plus a new constant.
But what was u?
Remember u was, there we go, y equals ux squared.
So u equals y over x squared.
So y over x squared is some new constants.
C2 x squared natural log of x plus C3.
I'm just going to just rewrite these as constant 1 and constant 2 just to make it look nice.
Multiply 3 up by x squared.
So that's going to be C1 x squared natural log of x plus C2 x squared in the format that we said.
If you divide these two by each other, you are left with natural log of x.
So this is a linearly independent set.
The x squared natural log of x and x squared.
We're each with their constant to make it a general solution.
One second one.
One second one.
One second one.
One second one.
Two second one.
One second one.
One second one.
One second one.
One third one.
One third one.
One third one.
One fourth one.
One third.
One third one.
One third one.
One third one.
Is this the entire equation?
One fourth one.
One third one.
One third.
One fifth one.
Nine fourth one.
