Good let's have a look at this problem. We'll note here that we have a constant coefficient in front of this second order derivative which we have to get rid of first so we're going to be left with y prime prime minus 12 over 9 which would be 4 over 3 y prime plus it will be 4 over 9 y equals 0.
Now this is a higher order or a second order derivative so I have to make use of substitution as the only way that I know for now of how to deal with this by reducing the order.
And I'm going to do that by remembering that my final solution y is going to be equal to some constant y1 plus some constant y2.
And so I'm going to have these two linearly independent solutions and as much as if I divide one by the other I'm not left with a constant. One is not a constant multiple of the other.
And I'm given one of them as y sub 1 equals e to the power 2x over 3. So I'm going to say that my final solution is going to equal u times y1.
It's going to be my substitution because if this was y2 I divided this one by that one I'm going to get another function u of x. Not a constant.
They're not a constant multiple of each other. In other words y is going to equal u which is a function of x times y1 which is that e to the power 2 over 3x.
So there we go. y equals u e to the power 2 thirds x. I need to get y prime for my substitution and y double prime.
So y prime is going to equal this is a function of x. This is a function of x. It's a product so I've got to make use of the product rule.
That's going to be u prime e to the power 2 over 3x plus u e to the power 2 over 3x and by the chain rule I've got to do that as well.
So that's two thirds there. y prime prime. So that's a product of two functions in x and that's a product of two functions in x.
So both have to be dealt with by the product rule and then just by the chain rule those as well.
So this is going to be u prime prime e to the power 2 over 3x plus I'm going to have a 2 over 3 u prime e to the power 2 over 3x.
So that's that one. This one's going to be exactly the same as this. So in actual fact there's going to be 2 times this.
And then lastly we're going to have 4 over 3 u e to the power 2 over 3x. Simple first year calculus. No problem there.
So now I've got to substitute it into this original function. So I'm going to have this all minus 12 times this plus 4 times that. Let's do that.
Long hand. U prime prime e to the power 2 over 3x plus 4 over 3 u prime e to the power 2 over 3x plus 4 over 3 u e to the power 2 over 3x.
Now minus 12 times this. So that is going to be minus, not 12, minus 4 over 3. Minus 4 over 3 times this. So that's negative 4 over 3 times this. So that's negative 4 over 3.
U prime e to the power 2 over 3x. Minus 4 over 3 times this. So first of all that's a negative. 4 times 3 is 8.
Where are we? 4 times 3 is 8 over 9. 8 over 9. 8 over 9. u e to the power 2 3 over x. And then plus 4 times this. Plus 4 times u e to the power 2 3, 2 3 x equals 0.
Pretty sure this double prime is going to stay. As they do with most of these problems.
So I have positive. So I have positive u prime there and a u prime there. So that's positive 4 over 3 and a negative 4 over 3. So those go away.
I have, do I, do I, let's just make sure that I, oh, you see? Already I made a mistake. That's 4 times that. 4 times, 4 over 9 times y. So that's 4 over 9.
4 over 9. 4 over 9 times y. So that, that is correct there. So I've just got to look at these.
Um, whether I made any mistake here. So that's 4 over 3. So that is going to be 4 over 3. And that stays the same. And here with the y prime, I have 4 over 3.
times this, that's the 4 over 3 there
and that gives me 8 over 9 and 4 over 9
so there's negative 4 over 9
I'm just going to stop the video and just make 100% sure I didn't make a mistake here
and there we see when I did this
the second part of this
it's 2 over 3 times 2 over 3 which is 4 over 9
so that's going to be a 4 over 9
right, that's the one mistake we can find in there
and then this one should also be 4 over 9
4 over 9, making a mistake there
so those go, that's positive 4 over 9
positive 4 over 9 which is 8 over 9
minus 8 over 9 so nothing gets left there
either
now I'm going to do my reduction of order by setting
w equals du dx
so du double prime would be w prime
or dw dx in other words
for that
u prime prime, e to the power 2 over 3x
equals 0
now e to the power 3x
x being now an element of going from negative infinity to infinity
no matter what value we choose
that can never be 0
so this has got to be 0
and the only way that a function
a function's first derivative can be 0
is of that function itself
w
which is function of x equals some constant
we'll call it
let's call it constant 2
I'll show you why a bit later
instead of constant 1
it's called a constant 2
the first derivative of this function with respect to x
if that is a constant it would be 0
so that's it
in other words du dx
equals
which is what it is
equals some constant
we'll call it constant 2
or in other words du equals some constant 2 dx
I take the indefinite integral on both sides
it's a constant coefficient which I brought out
in other words du equals c2 times x plus some constant c1
but what was du?
well if I looked at du there du was y
divided by
you can bring this to the other side to get du on its own
so y over e to the power 2 thirds x
equals some constant 2 x plus another constant
I can multiply both sides by that
so I'm going to be left with c1 e to the power 2 thirds x
plus c2 x e to the power 2 thirds x
and that's why I did this little c
call it c2 1
because y1 goes with constant 1
it doesn't have to be like that
I mean this is neater to write it like that
and I know what y1 was
there's y1 there
there's y1 which goes with constant 1
so constant 2 goes with this
which is now y sub 2
x e to the power 2 over 3x
so important lesson to learn here
is when you do this first year calculus
very simple derivatives
product rule with a chain rule
don't make the same mistake
as I made initially
and just if you get to silly answers
or even if you don't
just always go back and just check
this is where the mistakes lie
in this first derivative
second derivative
with the product rule and the chain rule
just make sure that there are no mistakes there
and there is this reduction of order
is a very simple technique indeed
that's7
but now I had to check
I'll see you next time
I know
it looks nice
but it's nice
and I'll see you next time
and then come back
and ik
I miss
there is
