Let's have a look at this beautiful problem y' prime minus 4y' plus 4y equals 0
second order linear ordinary differential equation
and fortunate for us we have one of the solutions
this should be an independent one y sub 1 equals e to the power 2x
and x is an element of all the numbers
first of all I think what we should do is realize that we can make use of the substitution
and the first and only method we're now up to now is reducing the order
in other words we're going to let y equals u y1
in as much as that should be a linearly independent set
and that for us is u remember which is a function of x
and y1 which is e to the power 2x
so that's u e to the power 2x
and we know later that we'll have to back substitute
in other words u is going to equal y over e to the power 2x
so we need y prime prime
oh y prime I can't just jump there
so y prime is going to be
product rule that's u prime
e to the power 2x plus 2u e to the power 2x it seems
and then y prime prime we're going to have u prime prime e to the power 2x plus
that's going to be u prime e to the power 2x with an x of 2 plus
here we're going to have 2u prime e to the power 2x plus we're going to have
4u e to the power 2x those two can combine so I'm left with u prime prime e to the power 2x
plus 4 times u prime e to the power 2x plus 4 times u e to the power 2x so let's mark these
so there's my substitutions y of y prime y prime prime let's substitute that in our original
problem remember here our a sub 2 of x was this equal to 1 so we don't worry about having to
divide by anything so we can just write u prime prime e to the power 2x plus 4u prime e to the
power 2x plus 4u e to the power 2x there we have that minus 4 times y prime there we have y prime
it's u prime e to the power 2x plus 2u e to the power 2x plus 4 times y and there's y u e to the
power 2x should equal zero should equal zero now we can simplify u prime prime e to the power 2x plus
4u prime e to the power 2x plus 4u e to the power 2x minus 4u prime e to the power 2x minus 8u e to
the power 2x plus 4u e to the power 2x equals 0. This seems to leave me with u' e to the
power 2x. That's gone. Plus 4, negative 4, nothing left there. Plus 4, plus 4, minus
8, nothing left there, equals 0. So I've got two functions and each an x and their product
should be 0. e to the power x can never be 0. You can also see that I've got to divide
both sides by e to the power x. I'm just left with u' prime. u' prime equals 0. And this
looks slightly different from what we've had before. No problem. We're still going to use
reduction. So we're going to set that w equals u' prime. So if we do that here, we're left
with w' equals 0. Or dw dx, let me write it out like that, equals 0. And what is the only
way for a function to have its first derivative be equal to 0? The only way that will work
is the function equals, oh, a function equals a constant. It's called a constant 1. If w
equals constant 1, a constant, the first derivative with respect to whatever, with respect to x,
has got to be 0. But it's not w we're talking about. We're talking du dx equals some constant
c1. In other words, du u equals some constant dx, anti-derivative of both sides. u is equal
to c1 x plus some constant 2. But u is actually something else. u equals y over 2x. y over 2x
equals c1 x plus c2. In other words, y equals c1 x e to the power 2x plus c2 e to the power
x. And that is indeed the form. These two are linearly independent, a linearly independent,
or independent set of solutions. x e to the power 2x and e to the power 2x with my two constants.
So I hope you could see there. I hope I didn't write off the screen as I usually do. So just
multiplied this on both sides and I'm left beautifully with the equation that I desired.
