Now we know our first method for managing second-order ordinary differential equations,
linear differential equations, and we need to look at a new method.
We're not going to jump straight into that new method.
Instead, we're just going to look at a first-order linear differential equation.
And we're also only going to be specifically looking at the homogeneous linear equations,
which is equal to zero on the right-hand side, with constant coefficients.
So a is not a function of x, it's just a constant a and b, and a does not equal zero.
Now, I need you to think of an equation whose first derivative is just a constant multiple of itself.
And the only one that we really have is y.
If y equals e to the power x, y prime is also e to the power x, etc., etc.
But e to the power m times x is just going to be me to the power m times x.
We're just going to use the chain rule there.
But if I divide this one into that one, we're just going to be left with this constant m.
So one is just a constant multiple of each other.
So the only function whose subsequent derivatives are only constant multiples of itself is this function.
So if I substitute this y prime in there and this y in there, I'm left with this equation,
for which I take e to the power mx out as a constant factor, and I'm left with am plus b equals zero.
Now, if m is a non-zero constant, there's no value for x.
Well, for the matter even if m is zero, it doesn't really matter, does it?
If x, irrespective of what the value of x is, even though x is an element going from negative infinity to infinity there,
that's our interval, irrespective of the value of x is never going to be zero.
So the only way that we satisfy this equation is for this to be zero.
So it's only satisfied when am plus b is a root of this function.
And if we solve for that, we're just left with m equals minus b over a.
And what we are stating is that for this single value of m, y equals e to the power mx is one of the solutions to the original differential,
to this original differential equation.
And we will note that y equals, for instance, y equals some constant e to the power mx is going to be the general solution.
Let's have a look at this example.
We have 2y prime plus 5y equals zero.
And what we are stating is we actually want, in this section, we are dealing with higher order linear equations,
but we're just starting with this first order.
Now, we have the fact that a equals 2 and b equals 5.
In other words, we're going to have the fact that m equals minus 5 over 2.
And we're going to state that y equals some constant e to the power minus 5 over 2x.
Done.
Done.
It's as simple as that.
But let's check on ourselves.
Is there another method that we know?
Yes, we do.
We can do, this is first order, and I can think of two other things that we can do.
We can do the fact that y prime equals negative 5 over 2y.
So I've just brought that over to the other side.
Divide the 3 out by 2.
I'm going to bring the y over this side.
So 1 over y dy equals negative 5 over 2 dx.
So I've written this as dy dx.
Dy over dx.
I've brought the dx over to this side.
I've brought the y over to this side.
I'm going to take the indefinite integral of both sides.
So I'm left with the absolute value of the natural log of y equals negative 5 over 2x plus some constant.
We'll call a constant 1.
We're going to exponentiate both sides.
I'm left with y equals e to the power negative 5 over 2x and e to the power c1.
E to the power of some constant is just a constant.
We'll call that constant.
E to the power minus 5 over 2x.
And voila, that's exactly the answer that we got there.
Is there another way to do it?
Yes.
First of all, we can just write things in standard form, which will be y prime plus 5 over 2y equals 0.
I've just divided 3 out by 2 to get rid of this constant coefficient.
I'm going to, this is now in standard form, homogeneous linear equation.
I can get an integrating factor.
Integrating factor.
And that is going to be e to the power, the indefinite integral of the p of x dx.
Now, the p of x is just a constant, 5 over 2 there.
So, it's going to be e to the power of 5 over 2x.
Remember, we don't do the constant here for the integrating factor, even though it's an indefinite integral there.
If I multiply throughout,
if I multiply throughout as far as this equation is concerned,
I'm going to be left with, remember, d dx of e to the power of 5 over 2xy equals 0.
And I can bring over the dx to that side, take the indefinite integral on both sides,
or just take the indefinite integral.
But remember, that any function, e to the power of 5 over 2xy,
if I put this here as constant 1,
the derivative, first derivative of this with respect to x,
is d dx of that.
And the only function or expression which has a first derivative being 0 is a constant.
So, the first derivative of this is d dx of that.
The first derivative of a constant is 0.
So, I'm left with that.
All that remains, I have to divide both sides by this,
or multiply by e to the power of negative 5 over 2x.
So, it's going to be some constant, e to the power of negative 5 over 2x.
A third method.
So, we see all of these methods work.
And I've shown to you that we get the same answer as we got here.
So, now that we understand this method, this is actually what we did.
I'm going to show you how to go from here to higher order,
or at least we're going to go to second order linear differential equation.
