Let's do this example and we are going to note that we're going to have this conjugate complex roots and I've showed you in the previous one of the previous videos that we're going to use Euler's formula and this is what you should take from that explanation of all of this is in the lecture series on linear algebra.
But without in this video series or this lecture series going into how to use these complex numbers we are going to imagine that in number i at least we're going to have e to the power alpha x c sub 1 and a c sub 2 there cosine of beta x sine of beta x on that side.
Let's have a look. Our auxiliary equation first of all is going to be m squared plus 4m plus 7 equals 0 so for the we're going to have m equals negative b which is negative 4 plus minus the square root of b squared that's 16 minus 4 times 7 is 28 negative 28 so we already see that's going to be the square root of a negative number over 2 times a which is just 2.
Now what is the square root of that's going to be negative 12 well that can be written as the square root of negative 3 times 2 squared 2 times 2 is 4 4 times negative 3 is negative 12 I can bring that out so that's going to be 2 times the square root of negative 3 which can also be written as 2 times the square root of 3 times the imaginary number i.
Remember i equals the square root of negative 1 so the square root of 3 times the square root of negative 1 equals the square root of negative 3.
So I'm going to have the fact that m equals negative 4 plus minus, we're going to have 2 square root of 3i divided by 2.
So m sub 1 is going to be negative 2 and what we're going to have is plus square root of 3i and m sub 2 is going to be negative 2 minus square root of 3i.
Irrespective of that, if you watch the lecture series on linear algebra, this is alpha, alpha is going to be negative 2 and this is beta which is this square root of 3i.
Ok, that's how you get alpha and beta and your answers there be positive and negative, alpha and beta is just this negative 2 and that square root of 3 or this negative 2 and that square root of 3.
Not that sign out there.
Ok, so remembering this format to write it in, so e is going to be, y is going to equal e to the power alpha, so that's negative 2x times c sub 1 cosine of square root of 3x plus c sub 2 sine of square root of 3x.
is going to be the passive 1 cosine of square root of 4, but it's going to be the easier peeled d
it's going to be the easier alerts.
