Now let's have a look at this beautiful problem. It's obviously a linear equation, homogeneous, second order, linear, ordinary, differential equation.
It's an initial value problem in that I have the y of 0 equals negative 1, so when x equals 0, y equals negative 1, and when x equals 0, y prime equals 2.
And I hope I didn't make a mistake in the rewriting of this problem.
I want to remind you just of the fact when we have these conjugate complex roots, that we are going to write it in that form,
and I've taken the liberty of actually giving you the equation of the solution for y,
and you see it's this oscillating function, except that it's damped.
And as much as the amplitude gets less every time we cycle, the amplitude gets less,
and as x approaches infinity, y approaches 0.
So let's have a look at how to do this.
First of all, when you see these problems, reduction in order was the first method we learned,
but now we have, with constant coefficients, we have this new method of using,
or using this method where we look at the auxiliary function.
So the auxiliary function is going to be 4m squared plus 4m plus 17 equals 0.
So we're going to have the fact that m equals negative 4 plus minus the square root of 16 minus 4 times 4 times 17.
And that's all divided by 2 times a, which is 8.
And I'm going to tell you now that it's going to be negative 4 plus minus the square root of negative 256.
I looked at the problem before, and it's the square root of 256.
Remember that that can be written as negative 4, 256, 2 to the power 8.
I can bring 2 to the power 4 of those out, which is 16.
So it's going to be plus minus 16, square root of negative 1, divided by 8.
Square root of negative 1 is this i.
So I'm going to have the fact that m sub 1 is going to be negative 4 over 8 is negative 1 half,
plus 16 over 8 is 2, i.
Square root of negative 1 is i.
And m sub 2 is going to be negative 1 half minus 2i.
In other words, alpha equals negative 1 half, and beta is going to be equal to 2.
So writing that in this form, I'm going to have the fact that y equals e to the power negative 1 half x,
c sub 1, cosine of 2x, plus c sub 2, sine of 2x.
But this is an initial, oh, you can see down there, c sub 1.
I'm just reusing this format because I know what alpha and beta is now.
So I'm just rewriting it in this form.
So now we're going to use the initial value problem, which states that y equals negative 1.
As I said, I just hope I wrote this correctly, but anyway, let's go for it.
Negative 1 equals, when x is 0, y equals negative 1.
So e to the power 0 is just 1.
So I'm going to have c sub 1, and cosine of 2, oh, can you see there?
Cosine of 2 times 0 is just 1, oh, 0, cosine of 0 is just 1, and the sine of 0 is just 0.
So I'm going to be left with c1 equals negative 1.
In other words, y equals e to the power negative 1 half x times negative 1.
So that's minus cosine of 2x, plus we're going to have, I'm just distributing it out, e to the power negative 1 half x times c sub 2 sine of 2x.
I've just distributed this in, and I've replaced the c1 with negative 1 half, because I need y prime.
I need y prime.
Let's do this one first.
I have a function in x, another function in x.
It's a product.
I have to use the product rule.
So if this is u sub prime, that's going to be a half e to the power negative 1 half x.
I have to do this chain rule in between the product rule, inside of the product rule.
And that negative 1 half comes forward.
That becomes a positive 1 half cosine of 2x, and negative times the negative of the sine.
Cosine's first derivative is the negative of the sine of x.
So that's going to be positive e to the power negative 1 half x sine of 2x, as far as this is concerned.
And this one is going to be negative 1 half c2 e to the power negative 1 half x sine of 2x.
And the sine of 2x is the cosine of 2x, with an extra added 2.
Did I do the extra 2 here?
I'll see now.
Let me just have a quick look.
Plus 2 times c2 e to the power negative 1 half x cosine of 2x.
When I did this, it was negative the sine of 2x, but I still had to do the channel in between.
So that has got to be a negative there.
A 2 there.
Okay, just check on that.
I might have made a small mistake there.
I must be confident that I haven't.
So that's going to equal 2 when x is equal 0.
So 2 is going to equal a half cosine.
So that's going to be a half e to the power 0.
e to the power 0 is just 1 to the power 0.
That's just going to be 1 plus, if we put in a 0 there, that term is 0.
If we put in a 0, that term is 0.
If we put in a 0 there, that term becomes 1.
This term becomes 1.
So it's 2c2, 2c2.
So 2 sub c, c sub 2 equals 3 over 2.
And c sub 2 equals 3 quarters.
Again, you can't see there.
Just solving for c sub 2.
In other words, if I rewrite the whole thing, I'm going to have e to the power negative 1 half x.
And c sub 1 was negative 1.
So negative cosine of 2x.
And c2 was 3 quarters sine of 2x.
So I went a bit quickly there, but I think by now you should be able to do differentiation quite easily.
Not make a silly mistake.
Fortunately, I caught myself there, but even more fortunate by my initial value problem,
it was going to be the sine of 2 times 0, so the term was just going to fall out anyway.
Anyway, there's my final solution.
And as this whole course is about, real-world applications of these differential equations,
so the first time we're going to see damped oscillation.
And when you have an equation in this form, your final, your family of solutions,
we know it was an initial value problem, so we know what c sub 1 and c sub 2 is.
If you see something in this form, you know it's going to be a damped oscillation.
