Now we move on to the next section that is usually called undetermined coefficient using the superposition approach.
What this boils down to is the fact that we're now going to move on to non-homogeneous linear higher order ordinary differential equations.
So on the right hand side we're going to have an equation in various forms, either constant, a polynomial, or sine or cosine function,
or an exponential function in this form, e to the power alpha x, alpha is a constant, or a finite sum or product of any of these.
So this method we'll see actually involves a guess, and because of that it'll only work for the g of x on the right hand side of our differential equation being in one of these forms.
So it's not going to work for these transcendental functions like natural logarithm of x, or 1 over x, or the tangent of x,
it's only going to work for sine and cosine, or any of these inverse trigonometric functions.
It's also not going to work for those.
And the reason why that is so, why we can only use it in this form, is that it's easy to realize that,
or to understand that the derivatives of g of x, if it is in one of these forms,
its derivative, first derivative, second order derivative, will have basically the same form as the g of x.
It'll have the same form as the g of x.
So if I have x cubed plus x squared, the first derivative of that is 3x squared plus 2x, whatever.
It's still a polynomial.
And if I have the sine of x, the derivative of that would be the cosine of x.
It stays in the same form.
And because of that it's going to help us.
These don't change completely.
And therefore, this method is not going to work for that.
Now, before we go on to some examples, which is going to make this abundantly clear,
remember, in the preliminary section of this chapter, we saw that the general solution will have this form,
where there's the complementary and the particular part,
where the complementary part is going to be the same as we have done before with a homogeneous equation.
So you're going to take your differential equation that's non-homogeneous.
First, you're going to change it into homogeneous form,
by letting the g of x, or the right-hand side, equal 0,
and using the methods that we've learned up until now just to get that solution.
That solution will then form part of this.
And then we're going to go on to other approaches for now.
You're going to learn how to do the superposition approach
to learn how to calculate this particular solution.
And you just basically add those to get to the family of solutions.
