So let's look at this example. It's linear, it's second order, it's non-homogeneous, ordinary differential equation.
And here's our g of x on this side and we note that it's a polynomial of second order.
So first things first, we know that we're going to get a general solution in the form of the sum of a complementary solution and a particular solution.
That's the first thing to remember. So let's go for the complementary solution.
So y of c, we do that by setting the g of x or the right hand side f of x, whatever you want to call it, to zero.
So we're going to have the fact that we have y prime prime plus 4y prime minus 2y equals zero.
Constant coefficients, so we are going to make use of the auxiliary function.
So we can write m squared plus 4m minus 2 equals zero.
Now we can solve that by stating that m is going to be negative 4 plus minus the square root of 16.
It looks like negative 4 times 1 times negative 2, that's 8.
And that is 24 divided by 2, so that is going to give us m equaling, well, negative 2 plus minus the square root of 24 with an extra half.
Oh, not an extra half, where am I? That's so wrong, I'm working way ahead of myself.
Plus minus the square root of 24 over 2. I've already divided the 2 into there.
So m is going to be, well, 24 is equal to 6 times 4, and 4 is 2 squared.
So it's going to be negative 2 plus minus 2 divided by 2 is nothing, and the 6 is left.
So m sub 1 is negative 2 plus square root of 6, and m sub 2 equals negative 2 minus the square root of 6.
So let's check that up. In other words, the complementary part is going to be equal to c sub 1 e to the power negative 2 plus square root of 6x plus c sub 2 e to the power negative 2 minus the square root of 6x.
There's our complementary part.
Now we've got to do this superposition approach as far as why sub p is concerned the particular solution.
And let's just note that this is a polynomial of second order.
So we can suppose that y of p might be in the form of the same order, let's start with that, the same order, ax squared plus bx plus c.
The same type of form as this, this right-hand side is going to be.
If I then get y sub p prime, that's going to be 2ax plus b, and if I get y prime prime sub p, that is just going to be 2a.
Now let's do, let's use this because this is going to be, so this is going to be the form that a solution is going to take.
So I can replace this in there, so I can replace this in there, and let's have a look.
So I'm going to have 2a plus 4 times 2ax plus b minus 2 times ax squared plus bx plus c, and that is going to equal 2x squared minus 3x plus 6.
So all I've done is, there's y double prime, there's y prime, there's y, and since I am guessing that the particular solution will have a form like this,
and its first derivative and its second derivative, I'm just using this and substituting it into my original problem.
And this is a beautiful thing to do, as you can see, because 2a plus 8ax plus 4b minus 2ax squared minus 2bx minus 2c equals 2x squared minus 3x plus 6.
So let's get all the x squared together, in other words, minus 2ax squared, so that is gone.
The x's is going to be 8ax and minus 2bx, so that is going to be plus 8a minus 2bx, it seems.
So those two are gone, and then plus, we're going to have this 2a plus 4b minus 2c on this side, and that's going to equal 2x squared minus 3x plus 6.
Now, lo and behold, look at this, I've got an x squared on this side, x squared on this side, with some constant coefficient, there's a constant coefficient, there's an x, there's an x,
this, and it has a constant coefficient, and this constant coefficient, and this constant at the end.
So for this equality to hold, it means that this constant coefficient, negative 2a, has got to equal that constant coefficient, 2.
And very simply, a equals negative 1.
Now, if a is negative 1, so negative 2 times negative 1 is 2, and there's a 2 on the other side, 2x squared equals 2x squared.
There's no other way for this to work.
Same with this constant coefficient and this constant coefficient with this single variable xx on that side.
So 8 times, well, we know what a is already, negative 1, minus 2b is going to equal negative 3.
In other words, negative 2b is going to equal 5, or b is going to equal negative 5 over 2.
That means 2 times a, which is negative 2.
Ooh, look at me, I'm writing way off the screen.
So all I've done is I've taken 8a, 8 times a, but I already know what a is, minus 2b.
It's going to equal that negative 3 on that side, so that solves b for me.
And now just 2a plus 4b minus 2c squared equals 6.
So 2 times, I already know that's negative 1, that's negative 2.
And this has got to be minus 10, 4 times negative 5 over 2.
2 goes 2, that's negative 10.
Minus 2c has got to equal positive 6.
And that leaves me with, I think, c being, let's say that's negative 12.
That's 18 divided by 2 is negative 9.
In other words, y sub p, which I can now just replace what was there.
Sorry, I think I've done it again.
So I've just replaced the a and b that I already know into this equaling 6.
So I can start for c.
So y sub p, which I have there, I know what a is now.
So that's going to be minus x squared.
And b is negative 5 over 2 minus 5 over 2x.
And c is negative 9.
So from that equation, I know now what a, b, and c are.
I can plug that in and I know what y of p is.
All that is left for me to do is to remember that I've just got to add the 2.
So I'm going to have c sub 1 e to the power negative 2 plus square root of 6x plus c sub 2 e to the power negative 2 minus square root of 6x minus x squared minus 5 over 2x minus 9.
And there is my general solution to this constant coefficient, linear, second order, ordinary differential equation of a non-homogeneous type.
