Now we're going to move on to the annihilator approach.
Still with undetermined coefficients.
Let's just first have a look at this.
What we have here is this written in a very specific form.
A linear, higher order, ordinary differential equation.
It's non-homogeneic, non-homogeneous,
with these constant coefficients.
Where d just denotes it was just a different way to write.
We remember the different ways to write the derivative.
dy dx, d dx of y, or just this capital D, y.
It's just different ways to write it.
What we do know though, if we write it like this, dy dx, or we write it like this, dy,
that means if we just write it like this, it means we can take out this y here as a common factor.
And we're left with this.
We're left with this part, which we can write as the L.
And L is known as the nth order differential operator, or the nth order polynomial operator.
Let's see if I've got some, if I've got my colors here.
That is the nth order, there we go, differential operator.
Such as if I do this to y, if I do this to y, whatever y is, that's what I'm looking for in these differential equations,
I will get the g of x.
So that is the differential operator on y will give me x.
And there it is, this whole part here that's called L.
Now in the superposition approach, we were mainly concerned, first of all, with the,
or we were concerned with a particular solution,
and it had to be written from a set of rules and then differentiated and then used in the substitution of your original problem.
But we had to learn these arbitrary ways, not arbitrary, I mean it works,
but we had to learn these different forms depending on what our function g of x was on the other side.
What we're going to do here is just develop this differential operator
and we're going to call it an annihilating operator because what we want is that we want it to then operate on y
and make the g of x zero.
If we can do something to this function y, the answer that we're looking for,
so that it equals zero, g of x equals zero, then we call that the annihilating differential operator.
It annihilates g of x.
Okay, so let's just consider this.
We have this function y equals x.
y equals x, we can see it there.
So dy dx, I said before we can also be written as d dx of y or d of y.
So if we take the derivatives of that,
if you can see it, but if we take the first derivative of that,
it equals one.
So d of y equals one.
If I take the second derivative, remember that's also d squared over dx squared of y,
that will equal zero.
So I have now annihilated, I have found an annihilating differential operator,
and that annihilating differential operator is d squared.
It annihilates y.
If I do this, d squared to y, remember d squared is the second derivative of y,
I'm annihilating the right-hand side.
It goes to zero.
Okay, so the differential operator d squared annihilates y of x.
The differential operator d squared annihilates y equals x.
Now note here, for the polynomial, the differential operator has a degree one more than the highest power,
so that was x to the power of one.
If that was x squared, the differential operator would have had to be d cubed.
So the third derivative of y, if that was squared,
so that always has to be one more.
Now for exponential functions, here we have e to the power alpha x,
x, e to the power alpha x, x squared, e to the power alpha x,
all the way to, remember this has got to be the one less power,
so it's usually written as n minus 1, e to the power alpha x.
The differential operator is d minus alpha to the power n.
There's your alpha, so if it was e to the power 2x, it would be d minus 2.
If it was e to the power negative 2x, it would be d minus negative 2, which would be d plus 2.
And then to the power n, and n we find right there.
Remember that that actually denotes n minus 1, so you have to go one up.
If our problem was x squared, we would have had to go to the third derivative to annihilate.
So this is then called the annihilating differential operator.
In the next video we'll have a look at some examples.
Where do I restart?
Therefore, full passive Dirac, which is aADTeX, with MH3, the power of rinator,
the capy the is about the same character.
Let's clean up with this one here.
So if we can get unified, if we can remove this one, turn out the knowledge of the charge,
showing everything which I am trying to return, then we can go to the here in the mirror so we get one too.
