Now that we've seen the annihilating differential operator, let's have a look at these three examples.
Let's have a look at the first one. This is obviously a polynomial and it is a third order polynomial.
So we know if we just take this differential operator to the power of 4 of 1 minus 5x squared plus 8x3,
we know that that should equal zero. Why? The first derivative of this, in other words, let's just check,
d of 1 minus 5x squared plus 8x cubed, what does that equal to? Well, it's negative 10x plus 24x.
If I take the derivative of this, so I'm with x squared, where are we now, where are we now?
Yeah. If I take x squared, d squared now, that's of negative 10x plus 24x squared.
So that was the first, now I'm at the second, so that is going to equal negative 10 plus 48x.
By the third time, I take d of negative 10 plus 48x, I am left with this 48.
And in the fourth derivative here of 48, that equals to zero.
So if I take the fourth derivative of this function, I end up with zero.
So this is equal to zero. So my annihilating differential operator is d to the power of 4.
If I look at this second problem, well, with this second problem, e to the power negative 3x,
we note that alpha equals negative 3, and we know it should be d minus alpha to the power n.
Now there's no x's there, so that doesn't really have to bother us.
So we're just looking at d minus negative 3 of e to the power negative 3x.
So that is d plus 3 e to the power negative 3x, and that should equal zero.
Now is this indeed true? Is that the way it works?
Let's have a look. I mean, we are just treating this now as a normal expression,
a polynomial to the first power.
So it will be d e to the power negative 3x plus 3 e to the power negative 3x.
Multiply d by that, multiply 3 by that.
What's the first derivative of e to the power negative 3x?
Well, it's negative 3 e to the power negative 3x.
That's what this operator does to this expression.
Plus 3 e to the power negative 3x, and that leaves me with a zero.
So indeed, d plus 3 is an annihilating differential operator as far as e to the power negative 3x is concerned.
Now let's look at this example now.
4 e to the power 2x minus 10x e to the power 2x.
We note here that this is to the power 1.
So we'll have to differentiate twice to get rid of that.
And we also note that alpha equals 2.
So we're really looking at d minus 2 squared as our differential operator of 4 e to the power 2x minus 10x e to the power 2x.
So what are we going to do?
So what are we going to do?
We're going to multiply, do this square first.
So it'll be d squared minus 4d plus 4.
And then we're going to multiply it out algebraically by this.
And if you do those, take the second derivative and then minus 4 times the first derivative.
And then plus 4 times that, plus 4 times that, it should give you 0.
This is one thing, the textbooks don't do that.
But what one should actually just do is, you should just have clean your mind where this n comes from.
So in fact, if you had a polynomial, let's do this polynomial, you should actually, you should actually have this.
How can we, how can we state that?
We should have that as, well, you just have to remember that it's, that has got to be one more, as we stated before, than that.
So if that is a 1, that is why this had to be a 2.
And if we just looked at this problem, there was an x, x to the power 0 in front, actually.
As much as, or there as well, x to the power 0, which is just 1, which is just 1.
And therefore, this n here had to be just one more than that.
And that's why it was 1.
There's actually a 1 there, to the power 1.
So never get confused.
It was easy just to think back at polynomials.
You would have to do a fourth derivative to get rid of this x cubed, to get it down to a constant, whose derivative then is 0.
I didn't hold it down to a tender.
This is ...
You should think that one or two is definitely, you should have to release the EV.
So if you're doing this in a month or two to a 9th, you should be set up today.
Excuse yourself.
