Now we've got to do a proper problem and there's a way to do this and I just want to warn you
it differs from the superposition approach. It differs from superposition
approach that we had before. Some parts of it are the same and some parts of it are different.
Let's just mark that. Let's just mark that. It's very important.
Okay, let's see what parts are the same and what parts differ. First of all, we are going to have to
get the complementary solution. That means we need to do the homogeneous equation. I'm going to write
all these steps down, homogeneous equation. And that equals y prime prime plus 3y prime plus 2y
squared equals 0. That means we make use of the auxiliary equation. The auxiliary equation
would be m squared plus 3m plus 2 equals 0. Thus, that's the m plus 1 and the m plus 2
equals 0. Thus, m sub 1 equals negative 1. m sub 2 equals negative 2. In other words, our complementary
part of our final solution, our family of solutions would be c sub 1 e to the power negative x plus c sub 2
e to the power negative 2x. Now that is just all the same and there certainly should be no problems there.
Then we've got to move on to the second part. To the second part and we've got to look at what will
annihilate this side. And clearly that is just going to be d cubed. d cubed will annihilate both sides. But I
have to rewrite this just in a different form. In as much as we're going to have d squared. Now I'm
going to say y there. We would have said y sub p there and we would have used one of our rules here.
For instance, ax squared plus bx etc. One of the rules that we were going to use for 4x squared being a
polynomial plus 3d plus 2 of y. That is the same way. I've just rewritten this in a different way.
So it's d squared of y or d squared y over dx squared plus 3 times dy dx plus 2 times y. I've written it in the
same way. We've said that the annihilating operator would be d cubed. So I've got to do d cubed of both
sides. Of d squared plus 3d plus 2 y equals d cubed of 4x squared. If I took the third, remember this was my
g of x. That was my g of x. If I took the third derivative of 4x squared I was going to land up with
0. That means this equals up being 0. In other words, what am I back to? I am back to a homogeneous
equation. This equals 0. If I'm that equals 0. This equals 0. I'm back to a homogeneous equation. Being
back at a homogeneous equation I can just use my auxiliary equation which is going to be m cubed
m squared plus 3m plus 2 equals 0. Once again that's back to auxiliary equation.
Oh I'm spelling auxiliary on all different ways today. What does this mean? Well that's m cubed
and that again is m plus 1 and m plus 2 equals 0. In other words m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals m sub 3
equals 0 and m sub 4 equals negative 1 and m sub 5 equals negative 2. That means my new solution is
going to be c sub 2 equals negative 2. That means my new solution is going to be c sub 1. These are all the
same so I've got to have those x's grow exponentially just grow by 1. So the first one would be that
e to the power 0x. Silly to do that you can just do it all in your head but c sub 2 x to the power 1 e to the
power 0x plus c sub 3 x squared e to the power 0x plus c sub 4. Now these would just be e to the power
negative x plus c sub 5 e to the power negative 2x. So y is going to be what will this be? c sub 1.
That's 1. That's 1. Plus c sub 2 x plus c sub 3 x squared plus c sub 4 e to the power negative x
plus c sub 5 e to the power negative 2 x. Now realize something. Now is the big difference between
what we had done before. Now we see that this these are just constant multiples of what was there in
there before but we don't change these. We say we already we're going for the whole of y. Not y sub p
we're going for the whole of y and now we're saying well there's y sub c already so this part
now we're saying this part should be y of p and instead of writing c1 c2 c3 we're just going to
write a plus bx plus c c squared cx squared because we're more familiar with that. So there is the big
difference between the two forms of of doing this. Okay I didn't change those and then use
this as the y of p I'm saying that's already in there this must now be that and if I take the
first derivative of that I'm left with b plus 2 cx and if I take the second derivative of that that
is just going to be 2 c which I now put back into my original equation. So I'm going to have
if you can see at the bottom I'm going to have 2. Where are we? For y prime is 2 c plus 3 plus 3 y
double prime is 2 c plus 3 times y prime so that's plus 3 times b plus 6 times cx plus 2 times y so
that's 2 a plus 2 b plus 2 b plus 2 b plus 2 b plus 2 c x 3 has got to equal 4 x squared.
Now let's just move to a new page to make things a bit easier.
So we're going to have the fact that we have a 2 c plus a 3 b plus a 2 a has got to equal 0
because there is plus 0 there and a plus 0 x. As far as the x's are concerned that will be a 6 cx
plus a 2 b x that has also got to equal 0 x and then lastly for the x squared we should actually
started with that it's making life for ourselves a bit difficult that must be 4 x squared. This is
different parts because remember it's plus 0 x plus 0. What did I write x cubed here for?
Because I had an x cubed up there which was just wrong sorry. That has got to be squared. This one has
got to be squared. Okay so x squared those fall away in other words c equals 2
plus 2 b equals 0. 2 b equals negative 12 and b equals negative 6 and 2 times 2 plus 3 times negative 6
plus 2 times a equals 0. So I'm going to have 4 minus 18 plus 2a equals 0. So a is 7.
7 so y is going to be so y is going to be this a which is 7 minus 6x plus 2x squared
that was this part. That was this part plus those then plus and then I can just rewrite those as sub 1s
again c sub 1 e to the power negative x plus c sub 2 e to the power negative 2x and there we go.
Now if you did that with the old method you'll get to the same answer. I hope I didn't make a mistake
anyway to that answer but the fundamental difference here is just to note here that we don't change these
as we did before. We're saying well the complementary part's already there. This must be the particular part.
I put that write that out as the particular part and solve that as per usual but the other new part
obviously to this is just to get this into an homogeneous equation by taking an annihilating
differential operator applying it on both sides making that and then using this now or because
it's homogeneous I use the annihilator approach use the annihilator approach again.
