In this problem, let's just try to get to the form of the particular solution.
So on the left hand side, let's just first of all get the sun on the paper.
This is right on this side. So I'm looking for the complementary solution.
So I'm going to have the fact of my auxiliary equation m squared minus 2m plus 1 equals 0.
In other words, m sub 1 equals m sub 2 is going to equal 1.
In other words, my complementary solution, which I need first,
because I have to take those functions, expressions in this away from my family of solutions
after getting the annihilated differential operator.
And anyway, so this is going to be quite easy to do.
And as much as we have c sub 1 e to the power 1x plus I can't repeat it.
So I have to add an extra x there e to the power x.
That's quite easy to do.
Now on this side, the right hand side, let's look what the annihilated differential operator is going to be.
You can also see that this is times x to the power 0, which is this 1.
So if I look at this, it looks like my alpha value.
Remember the alpha value is e to the power, it is there.
So it's negative 2.
My beta such as x times 1.
So that's 1.
And this is n minus 1 represents this.
In other words, n equals 1.
So if I write my annihilator operator.
That is from this d squared minus 2 alpha d plus alpha squared plus beta squared all to the power n.
I'm going to have d squared.
Negative 2 times negative 2 is 4.
So that's positive 4d.
Negative 2 squared plus 1 squared is plus 5 all to the power 1.
So that's what I'm left with as far as l is concerned.
So if I rewrite now and my operator on this side is going to be d squared plus 4d plus 5.
And if I rewrite this, it's going to be this d minus 1 squared d minus 1 squared y equals.
And if I do this differential operator on this side, that should equal 0.
And you can test it out if you have enough time.
Play with this on that.
And you must get 0.
And this d minus 1 is just a rewrite.
Oh, I can't write.
Yeah, d minus 1 is just a rewrite of this.
Remember if I rewrite this, it will be d squared minus 2d plus 1 of y.
It's just a rewrite of that, which is d minus 1 squared y.
So that's where that comes from.
Now we've got to write y in these terms.
So we've got to get something there.
Now we'll have to factor all of this to get our m values.
Because this is 0, though, let's do that.
So we're going to have our auxiliary equation being m squared plus 4m plus 5 on this side and m minus 1 squared on this side.
So how many m's am I going to have to have eventually this?
If I multiply these two out, m minus 1, m minus 1, that's going to be m squared times this m squared.
So m to the power of 4.
So I better have 4 values of m when I'm done.
Now this one's easy.
So at the end, these two m's, m sub 3, m sub 4, they're both going to be 1.
This one's a bit more difficult.
I'll have to use the fact that m equals negative b, which is negative 4 plus minus the square root of b squared, which is 16 minus 4 times a times b.
So that's negative 20.
And I've got to divide that by 2 over a.
So that's this 2.
So m is going to be negative 2 plus minus a half square root of negative 4, which is minus 2 squared.
So m is going to equal negative 2.
I can bring that 2 out.
When this 2 out, 2 times a half is 1.
So it's going to be positive or minus, plus or minus the square root of negative 1, which is just i.
So we have m sub 1 equals negative 2 plus i.
m sub 2 equals negative 2 minus i.
And then m sub 3 equals m sub 4 from this side, which is going to equal 1.
So y is going to equal the following alpha here.
So alpha equals negative 2 and beta equals 1.
So I'm going to have e to the power negative 2 x times c sub 1 cosine of x plus c sub 1 sine of x.
That'll take care of this part.
And on this part, I'm going to have c sub 3 e to the power x, 1 x.
And I can't repeat that.
So I have to have c sub 4 x e to the power x.
So if we look at our homogeneous solution set there, they already appear there.
So what I'm going to be left with is this.
So y sub p.
And I'll just multiply that out.
It's going to be a e to the power negative 2 x cosine of x.
I've just used a instead of c1.
And I've multiplied this out by both sides plus b e to the power negative 2 x sine of x.
Because those two already appear there.
That is going to be my y sub p, which I'll now have to differentiate twice.
But we won't do that in this problem.
We only wanted to get to this part.
So, let's take over and see.
We just tried to make this part.
So we can make this piece of easy about d there.
And in this first part.
Finally, we did a p, which I found out of tail this part.
Here we go.
Now we go.
So let's look at this part to touch.
So let's find a new mark at that.
Now you see we can see here.
Yeah, let's take the last part.
cosa is a new mark.
Now it's a new mark at that, and it's going to help here.
Now let's try.
Now I take that first part to use this part.
So let's take this part.
