Now for some matrix algebra. What I want you to realize is I have a y sub 1, a y sub 2, and a y prime there, and a y prime there, but these two are the same, that one and that one, that one and that one.
So I might as well have this following thing. I might have an x and a y, and an x and a y, and for this one I'm going to have y sub 1, where shall we go, a y sub 1, and a y sub 2, and a y sub 1 prime, and a y sub 2 prime, plus, plus, and that equals 0, and that equals 0.
In other words, I might as well have a x plus b y equals 0, and c x plus y equals 0. So I have two unknowns, x and y, there's my two unknowns, that one and that one, not equals 0, I should, where is my, equals the f of x.
This has got to be the f of x.
It's not a very good eraser. Anyway, those two are the f of x. Come on.
It's decided to hide away, or that board comes out here. That looks ugly. I hate that. Anyway, f of x and the f of x.
So it's two equations and two unknowns, so I can use matrix algebra, and you have to know something about linear algebra, otherwise you won't be able to do this.
So I'm constructing my first matrix there from these coefficients, y sub 1, y sub 2, y sub 1 prime, y sub 2 prime.
My x, which is my, a column vector of my two unknowns, u sub 1 prime and u sub 2 prime.
There they are. That one, that one, that one, that one, and my b on the other side, my column vector of solutions.
And I can write this whole thing now as ax equals b. So that times that equals that.
And if you know linear algebra, it's a 2 by 2 matrix times a 2 by 1 matrix is going to leave me, if I multiply these all out, I'm left back.
I'm left back exactly here.
And I know if I get the inverse of matrix A, I multiply this side by the inverse, and that side by the inverse, I'm left with x.
And what is x? It'll give me those two answers.
So let's have a look at that.
So I'm going to calculate. Remember, how do we calculate that?
It's 1 over the determinant.
1 over the determinant times, remember, I just shuffle these around.
That one goes there, that one goes there, and these two get minuses.
So that one goes there, that one goes there, and these two just get minuses.
Okay, so that's what I'm left with.
If I multiply this by each one of those, this is what I'm left with.
And so that's a 2 by 2 matrix.
If I multiply this by this 2 by 1 matrix B, this is what I get.
There's my inverse of A.
There's my matrix B.
I'm going to be left with this, which is a 2 by 1 matrix, which is exactly my x matrix that I want,
my column 2 by 1 matrix that I want.
So in other words, u sub 1 prime is going to equal that, and u sub, u prime sub 2 equals that.
So it's easy.
Now, this is referred to, this is referred to as the Ronskian, Ronskian, Ronskian, and you can look that up.
Most textbooks make use of that, but you need to know that, or now at least you know where the Ronskian comes from.
Finally, I had these two.
If I integrate both sides here, if I integrate both sides, I'm going to be left with u sub 1 and u sub 2.
If I integrate that, this is what I'm left with.
And I remind you, initially I chose the particular solution as u sub 1, y sub 1, and u sub 2, y sub 2.
I got y sub 1 and y sub 2 from the homogeneous equation, from the complementary set of solutions.
Now I know what u sub 1 and u sub 2 is.
And all I have to remember now is that the final family of solutions equals the sum of the complementary set of solutions and the particular set of solutions.
And that is beautiful.
Now, you can't go through all of this every time, but I wanted to make this video to make it clear how textbooks get, how they get to this.
It might be a bit difficult to understand how they get to this.
Now you've got to understand linear algebra and you've got to make those initial assumptions.
Otherwise, you'll never get to this.
But these are, if you're going to memorize anything, how to get u sub 1 and u sub 2, here they are.
This is how you get u sub 1 and u sub 2 by constructing, and you know what y1 is, you know what y2 is, you can get their derivatives.
You know what the f of x is, you know what the f of x is.
If you put it in this form and integrate it, you put it in this form, you integrate it, you're going to get u sub 1 and u sub 2.
And you know where to use u sub 1 and u sub 2.
You know where you get y sub 1 and y sub 2 from.
And finally, you just have to remember to put the two together.
And all in all, I hope, let me do this again because I'm sure it was outside of the scheme.
We know how to construct this.
We know what y sub 1 and y sub 2 is.
We got them from the complementary set.
We can just get their first derivatives.
We know what the f of x is.
That's given our initial problem.
If I write it in this form, in this form, I integrate, I'm going to get u sub 1 and u sub 2.
So as I said, I know where y sub 1 comes from.
I know where y sub 2 comes from.
I've just calculated u sub 1 and u sub 2.
And all I have to remember is that that's the particular solution.
And I just have to add the complementary set of solutions to that.
So I'll pick that out.
There we go.
If you start using this, I'll see the solution.
I know where y sub 2 comes from.
I know where y sub 2 will be.
No idea where y sub 2 comes from.
Then I'm going to try to get checked.
