Now let's look at an example where we're going to use the variation of parameters for this second
order. Ordinary differential equation, constant coefficients, non-homogeneous. Now first of all
let's just use the, probably going to be a long video because of that, but let's use the annihilator
approach. And as much as, first of all, let's set this as the homogeneous equation. And there's a
reason why I want to do this, first of all, as a, using the annihilator approach. There's one or two
things that I want to refer back to the previous two videos where we looked at how this variation of
parameters work. Now I've got a constant coefficient here so I needn't divide this a sub, a sub 2 of x
equals 1. So we needn't worry about that. Let's just do the complementary first by setting this
f of x on this side, which is now an f of x to 0. In other words, we can just write the
auxiliary equation m squared minus 4m plus 4 equals 0. In other words, it looks like m minus 2 squared
equals 0. That means m sub 1 equals m sub 2 and that's going to equal 2. In other words, my
complementary set of solutions is going to be c sub 1 e to the power 2x and I can't repeat that.
So I'll have to put an x in there, e to the power 2x. Now just have a look, just have a look at this. I might as well put in here an x to the power 0.
Well, let's carry on. Let's just carry on. Let's just get the annihilator of this. I can rewrite this
right-hand side as x e to the power 2x minus e to the power 2x. My n minus 1, my highest layer is going to
equal 1. In other words, n equals 2. And my alpha equals 2 as well. So I'm going to have d minus 2 squared, it seems.
If I use this annihilator differential operator on this right-hand side, I'm going to get 0.
And if I rewrite, I can rewrite this side as also as a d minus 2 squared of y. Remember that'll be d squared
minus 4d plus 4 of y, which is exactly this. If I multiply this annihilator differential operator
on this side, d minus 2 squared, I should get 0 on the other side. So on this side, I have d minus 2 to
the power 4y equals 0. Homogeneous equation. In other words, I can use the auxiliary equation in as much
as m minus 2 to the power 4 equals 0. m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals m sub 3 equals m sub 4 equals 2.
In other words, we're going to have the fact that y equals c sub 1 e to the power 2x plus c sub 2x e to
the power 2x plus c sub 3 x squared e to the power 2x plus c sub 4 x cubed e to the power 2x. Remember,
that's the whole of y. I've got to look at what occurs in my complementary. That one does over there,
and this one does over there, and this one does over there. So I know that y of p has got to equal
these two. I'm going to use a, b, c, etc. So it's going to be ax squared e to the power 2x plus
bx cubed e to the power 2x. Okay. Now remember, first of all, we said when we looked at the
um, variation of parameters method in the previous two videos that we, we, we set up y sub p to equal,
remember we said, and we're going to do it for this problem, y sub p equals u1 y1 plus u2 y sub 2,
where u sub 1 and u sub 2 are functions of x. Now look at y sub 1 and y sub 2 inside of here. There we have
them. There we have them. And if we look at y sub p, which is this. Here we go. There is y sub 1.
There's y sub 1. There's y sub 1. And there's u sub 1, ax squared. There's y sub 2. There's y sub 2
in there. The x e to the power 2x and the bx is my u sub 1. And that's why we could state,
you're always going to find this to be, you're going to find the y sub 2 in there. So the y sub 2 of this
part in there is going to be an x e to the power x and the u sub 1, u sub 2 is going to be this.
It is going to be this bx squared is going to be this u sub 2, also a function in x. And this is the
reason why we could state this. We didn't just pull this out of the air in those videos. This,
these two will always be reflected in there as they are there. Okay, but now we have to get you one
in u 2. And the only way that we, well, we're not going to do that in this section. We're still
going to carry on with this annihilator operator approach, y sub p. Now this is the place not to
make a mistake. 2ax e to the power 2x plus 2ax squared e to the power 2x plus 3bx squared e to the power 2x
plus 2bx squared e to the power 2x as far as y prime is concerned, y sub p prime prime.
And now we really should not, at least should not make any mistakes. So let's go for it. That's going
to be 2a e to the power 2x, I'm using the product rule, plus 4ax e to the power 2x, this two comes to the
front, plus 4ax e to the power 2x, plus 4ax squared e to the power 2x, that's product rule, chain rule,
all in one, plus 6bx e to the power 2x, plus 6bx squared e to the power 2x, plus 6bx squared e to the power 2x,
plus 6bx squared e to the power 2x, plus 4bx cubed e to the power 2x. Now I can clean this up,
y sub p prime prime, and as much as I'm going to have 2a e to the power 2x, that's 2 plus 2,
that's going to give me 8ax e to the power 2x, plus 4ax squared e to the power 2x, plus that looks like
12bx e to the power 2x, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, where am I going, where am I going?
So that was my 4, this is just a 6,
that's just a 6bx, and then those two together come 12bx squared e to the power 2x, plus 4bx cubed e to
the power 2x. So I've got to take this, subtract 4 times this, and add 4 times that, let's go.
So I'm going to have 2a e to the power 2x, and there's no other x to the power 0's, x to the power 0's
there. Remember that I make, this is my method to do this, I'm going to have an 8ax e to the power 2x
there, and there's one, but it's times negative 4, so that's minus 8ax e to the power 2x,
it's minus 4, you can see that it's minus 4. I hope you can see the problem to start off with.
Anyway, so that's that one gone, now I have a plus 4a, let's do a new line,
plus 4ax squared e to the power 2x, let's get rid of this, clutter things up, so that's that one gone,
and I've got an ax squared there, but it's negative, times negative 4, so that's negative 8
ax squared e to the power 2x, and I have it there as well, but it's times positive 4,
so it's plus 4ax squared e to the power 2x, so you can see that disappears.
We're going to have a 6bxe to the power 2x, do we have, that's an x squared, x cubed,
and x cubed, so nothing else left, I'm going to have a 12bx squared e to the power 2x,
and there's a bx squared there, but it's times negative 4, so there's minus 12bx squared e to
the power 2x, and it's satisfying to see these all cancel out, you're always going to find these
probably in the problems that you do see, and then, okay, so that one's gone, now we're left with a
with a positive 4bx cubed e to the power 2x, and that's negative 8, bx cubed e to the power 2x,
and that's another plus 4bx cubed e to the power 2x, and that has got an equal on this side, remember I
have on this side, an x e to the power 2x, and a negative e to the power 2x, so when it comes to
e to the power 2x, I'm going to have negative 1, let's just see, let's just see, I think this problem
was wrong, that should be plus, apologies for that, just let's make that a plus, so that is a plus,
okay, so that's going to be an e to the power 2x, there is no, and there is an x e to the power 2x,
there is none of those, none of those, none of those, none of those, and anyway,
this one cancels out, that cancels out, that cancels out, I shouldn't do that, let's just see, let's just see,
that 6bx, let's just see, that 2a is going to be 1, that x e to the power, and the b, okay, so that one goes,
so we needn't worry about this one here, but we should worry about this one here, apologies for that,
this one's just going to cancel out, those, this one should have been added there, apologies for
that, now this is going to become x e to the power 2x, let's have a look at that, these all,
these all cancel out, and those are the ones I'm left with, so 2a e to the power x equals e to the
power x, in other words, 2a equals 1, or a equals a half, and 6b, e to the power 2x equals 1,
x e to the power 2x, in other words, b equals a 6, okay, you have to get a method,
I can't see that, you've got to get a method where this works for you, and instead of writing it all
in one line, now that one, this one indeed, I should have put there, and so that I don't have this,
this blank gap here, but those two do cancel, and as far as the x e to the power 2x is considered
certain of any left with a 6b, so 6b equals, there's a 1 there, and there's a 1 there, hence my 1 and 1
there, in other words, I can write y equals the y sub c's, remember, that was c sub 1 e to the power 2x,
plus c sub 2 e to the power 2x, and add to that the y sub p, and the y sub p is going to be,
a is now equal to a half, so that is a half, x squared e to the power 2x, plus b is a 6,
which is x cubed e to the power 2x, there's my answer.
Now, I'm going to stop the video, I'll probably put these together, or make two, two videos,
because we have this answer now, but now we're going to use the variation of parameters to see
if we can get to the same answer. The reason why I wanted to do this is just to show you we did not
grab this out of thin air, that y sub 1 and y sub 2, that is e to the power 2x, and x e to the power 2x
do appear in my y sub p. There is an e to the power 2x there, so ax squared is this u sub 1,
and y sub 2 is x e to the power 2x, so bx squared, bx squared is the, is the u sub 2, u sub 2 there.
So it was legitimate for me to start off with this, to get this u sub 1 and u sub 2.
