Now we're going to use the method of the variation of parameters. My a sub 2 of x there is 1,
so I don't have to do anything. So this will be my f of x. Let's just write these things down,
that's what we need, the f of x we need, and that is going to be x plus 1 e to the power 2x.
Now I need to write down y sub 1 and y sub 2. Now we've already done that y sub c in the previous
video. We got c sub 1 e to the power 2x plus c sub 2 x e to the power 2x. That leaves my y sub 1
being e to the power 2x and my y sub 2 which is there is x e to the power 2x. Now I need to write
this as a matrix in as much as y sub 1 y sub 2 and y sub 1 prime y sub 2 prime. And if I can get a
ruler, we'll write that neatly as a matrix. And I need to get the Ronskian of that matrix. And I showed
you in the first two videos on this section, Ronskian, is where we got this from. It's 1 over
the determinant and the determinant is y sub 1 times y sub 2 prime. So that equals y sub 1 times y sub 2
prime minus those two y sub 2 y sub 1 prime. Let's just do that. So our y sub 1 y sub 2 is e to the
power 2x and x e to the power 2x. Y sub 1 is 2 e to the power 2x. And y sub 2 is a bit more complicated.
It's e to the power 2x. I've got to use the product rule and then the chain rule.
Plus 2x e to the power 2x. So if I get the Ronskian of this, that is going to equal
e to the power 2x. And then e to the power 2x plus 2x e to the power 2x. Those two minus these two minus
2 e to the power 4x times another x. I've written that badly. And anyway, so that's going to be,
let's have a look. Let's just multiply these out. e to the power 4x plus 2x e to the power 4x minus 2x e to
the power 4x. So that equals e to the power 4x. Okay, so that would be my Ronskian. I'll put this as a W.
Let's have it there. The Ronskian equals then e to the power 4x. So instead of writing this,
as I showed you in those videos, and how we got to that, we're going to use that. And we're going
to remember that u sub 1 equals the integral of negative negative y sub 2 times the f of x divided by
the Ronskian. Which we'll put there. So u sub 1 is going to be negative. The integral, what is y sub 2?
Well, y sub 2, let's just see, y sub 2 was x e to the power 2x. f of x was this x plus 1 e to the power 2x.
There we have it. And the Ronskian is going to be e to the power 4x. e to the power 4x dx. Now there's
e to the power 4x e to the power 4x e to the power 2 and 2 and 4. So u sub 1 equals negative. The
integral of looks like x squared plus x dx. u sub 1 equals negative a third x cubed negative a half x squared.
We're not going to put plus c there as for indefinite integrals because our constants are going to appear
as far as the complementary solution is concerned. Remember u sub 2, that's going to be integral of
y sub 1 times the f of x divided by the Ronskian. I should put d of x there, d of x, d of x. And I
actually want to get my green marker because I showed you how, but you can't go through all those
steps every time to try and remember how to get here. These two things should be in your memory.
So u sub 2 is going to be the integral of y sub 1 is e to the power 2x times x plus 1.
Another e to the power 2x. And we're going to divide that by the Ronskian which is e to the power 4x dx.
That one, that one, that one, those go. So u sub 2 is going to equal a half x squared plus x.
And that leaves me finally with y sub p. Remember that is u sub 1 y sub 1 plus u sub 2 y sub 2.
In other words, y sub p is going to equal negative a third x cubed negative a half x squared times y1 which
is e to the power 2x. And I'm going to add to that, let's do this, and add to that a half x squared plus
x plus x times y2 which is x e to the power 2x. So y sub p is going to be this negative a third x cubed e to the power 2x minus a half x squared e to the power 2x plus a half
x squared e to the power 2x. So we've got a half minus a half x cubed e to the power 2x plus x squared e to the power 2x.
So we've got a half minus a third. Let's just first do this. One minus a half is just going to leave me with a half x squared e to the power 2x.
And a half minus a third leaves me with a half x cubed e to the power 2x. And to that I've got to add my y sub c which is going to be c sub 1 e to the power 2x plus c sub 2 x e to the power 2x plus a half x squared e to the power 2x plus a half x squared e to the power 2x plus a six x cubed e to the power 2x.
And if you look at the previous video. Do I still have? Yes I do. There was our annihilator approach. And here is our variation of parameter approach. Let's just get that in neatly. There we go. They are exactly the same.
