Now what we've just seen is to get this u sub 1 and u sub 2 of x, I'm just looking for,
there we go, we used, actually used, made use of Kramer's rule. So if we had this y sub
1 and y sub 2 in their first derivatives, we could get the determinant of that, which
was that, we called that the Ronskian. And we actually had two Ronskians, if you think
about it, Ronskian 1 and 2, and that was minus y sub 2 f of x and y sub 1 f of x. And how
do we actually get those? Remember we said that u sub 1, we said that u sub 1 was going
to be the integral of minus y sub 2 of the f of x divided by the Ronskian and then the d of x.
Remember that's how we found, where's my green, there we go. That's how we found, how we found
that. But we can write this part up here, negative y sub 2 f of x, we can write that as the Ronskian
1. So u sub 1 was going to be the integral of the Ronskian of 1 divided by the Ronskian
dx. I could have written it like that, but why, how did I get that? Well it was very simple,
I replaced, I used Kramer's rule, so I replaced the appropriate column with a column matrix b.
Remember the column matrix b was, was that matrix 0 and the f of x. If you, if you watch the
introductory videos on this, on this section, that was my column vector b. So for the first
Ronskian I do that, so I'm going to have 0 minus y sub 2 times the f of x. And that is a very good
thing because now we can really expand this, we can say the u sub any K, we can upscale this to higher
order, we've only done second order now. So we're going to have the Ronskian sub k divided by the
Ronskian dx. With each of these Ronskians, say for instance the first, the first one, to get the
first one we're going to get the determinant of this matrix. So we're going to, we were going to have for
the Ronskian, it's going to be a bit more difficult because this is now for, for third order, we're
going to have a three by three matrix. We're going to have y sub 1, y sub 1 prime, y sub 1 prime prime.
But if I want the w sub 1, I replace the first column with that column vector b. For w sub 2,
I was going to replace this column with that column in here, then I'll have y sub 1, y sub 1 prime,
y sub 2, y sub 1 prime prime, and then 0, 0 f of x, and then y sub 3. And I need to get the determinant
of that. Now this is much easier to get the determinant. Just remember that we have plus,
minus, plus, minus, plus, minus, plus, minus, plus. You have to watch videos on, on, on linear algebra
to be able to do this. So I'm going to choose this, get the determinant along the first column,
because I'll just have the zeros, which means, in essence, it's going to be the f of x times,
I close that row in that column, the determinant of this 2 by 2 matrix that is left is going to be
y sub 2, y sub 3 prime minus y sub 3, y sub 2 prime. That was going to be my Ronskian sub 1.
Now the Ronskian itself is a 3 by 3 matrix, and which means you'll have to choose either a certain
row or column, whichever one is easiest, and to get the determinant along, along that column or that,
or that row. As I say, you need to know linear algebra before you can do these differential equations.
