So let's have a look at our first problem. What I've included here is just a few of the
graphs of a few of the solutions and this one in black just has C sub 1 and C sub 2 equal to 1.
Just to start giving you some form of idea as to what these solutions look like.
But let's have a look at the problem. I have x squared y prime prime minus 2xy prime minus 4y
equals 0, homogeneous, linear, second order ordinary differential equation but a very
special type in as much as I have the non-constant variable here raised to the power 2 and that
equals the order of the derivative in each of those three separate expressions that make
up this equation on the left hand side. So what I'm going to do first of all is I'm going
to select y equals the x of m. So y prime is going to be m, x to the power m minus 1 and
y prime prime is going to be m, m minus 1, x to the power m minus 2. And those we're going
to substitute. I can't see the bottom and y subprime just using the normal power rule.
So let's substitute those in, into our equation. Let's have a look at what we get. So we're
going to get x squared. We're going to get our x squared, our m squared minus m. I'm just
multiplying this out for now. And another x to the power m minus 2, minus 2x and y prime
is an m, x to the power m minus 1, minus 4 x to the power m. And that equals 0. Alright,
we've substituted. Let's have a look. Let's have a look. Now it's x to the power 2 plus
m minus 2. So that just leaves me with x to the power m. So it's going to be m squared
minus m. x to the power m minus 2m. It's also going to be an x to the power m. If I multiply
these two x's, I have to add, remember, I have to add their powers, minus 4x to the power
m equals 0. I'm doing this all longhand. I'm taking x to the power m out as a common factor.
I'm going to be left with m squared minus m minus 2m minus 4 equals 0, which is just my
auxiliary equation. So if this multiplied by that equals 0, either this is 0 or that is
0. So we're going to set this equal to 0, which is going to be m squared minus 3m minus
4 equals 0. And that'll be an m minus plus 1 and an m minus 4 equals 0. So m sub 1 equals
negative 1 and m sub 2 equals 4, which leaves me with an equation of c sub 1 x, not the e,
to the power negative 1. And plus c sub 2 x to the power 4. And that is our first look
at using this method to solve for this very special kind of linear differential equation.
