Now we've got to deal with a problem where we're going to have complex roots.
So first of all, x to the power 2, y prime prime, x to the power 0, no y prime.
So we know we can suggest that y is going to equal x to the power m, y prime is m, x to the power m minus 1, y prime prime equals m squared minus m, and then x to the power m minus 2.
And I can substitute it all in there, which means I'm going to get a 4x squared, another x to the power m minus 2, and my m squared minus m, and plus 17x to the power m, and that's going to equal 0.
I'm going to take my x to the power m out, so I'm left with, so that'll be x to the power m, so I'm left with 4m squared minus 4m plus 17 equals 0.
In other words, what is m going to be? Well, m is going to be negative 4, which is 4, plus minus the square root of negative 4, that's 16, minus 4 times 4 times 17, over 2a, which is 8.
Good.
Now, let's see, 4 times 4, 16, 17 times 16, what does that give us?
7 times 2, 1, 0, leave me 0, that's 7, 1, that is 272, and from that I have 2, so that'll be negative 272.
And I've got to do 16, add 16 to that, that looks to me like we are going to be left with negative 256, which is negative 2 to the power 8.
So, it looks like m is going to be a half plus a minus, that's an 8th, and just dividing 8 in there, and 8 in there, and that is going to be a 2 to the power 4, which I can bring out, 2 to the power 4 is 16i, because I'm left with the square root of negative 1.
So, m sub 1 is going to equal a half plus 2i, and m sub 2, just to remind myself that I've got to have 2 answers, minus 2i, doesn't matter, alpha equals a half, and beta equals 2.
So, what are we left with, y equals x to the power alpha, which is a half, times c sub 1, times the cosine of beta, which is 2 times the natural log of x, plus c sub 2, sine times 2 times the natural log of x.
And there's our general family of x, and there's our general solution, but I note that I have an initial value problem.
So, I can substitute the y of 1, that is going to be 1 to the power half, which is this 1, so I'm going to be left with c sub 1, times the cosine of 2 times the natural log of 1.
The natural log of 1 is 0, because e to the power 0 would give me 1, so 2 times 0 is the 0, so that's the cosine of 0, plus c sub 2 times the sine also of 0.
And that has got to equal 1.
Cosine of 0 is 1, so c sub 1, c sub 1 equals, did I make a mistake somewhere, let's have a quick look.
Let's have a quick look, I think I did the problem before, and let's have a quick look.
Somewhere I have done this problem, I think, and we just have to look out, so c sub 1 for us is going to equal, c sub 1 for us is just going to equal 1.
I just have to look, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, there's, minus b, minus b, so that's positive 4.
I just want to pause this video and just make sure I didn't make a mistake somewhere.
Good, let's go, I think the mistake of why I couldn't remember that this was my answer was that this was wrong, this was negative 1.
So, that would equal negative 1, so c sub 1 equals negative 1.
So, what do I have? Apologies for that, so I have y equals x to the power half, this is now negative 1, so let's have c sub 2 sine of 2 natural log of x, minus cosine of 2 times natural log of x.
That is what I have now, I need to get y prime.
So, I have to do that, so let's let u equal x to the power half, I am going to do this in a very long hand, v equals c sub 2 sine of 2 natural log of x, minus cosine of 2 times natural log of x.
I am bringing that x up, so you can actually write a lot of x squared, but let's leave it there.
So, for v, let's do u prime, it's just going to be 1 over 2x to the power half, or half times x to the power negative half, it's there.
What is this going to be?
Well, I am going to be left with c sub 2 cosine of 2 natural log of x, but I still have to get by the chain rule the derivative of this.
That's a constant times the natural log of x, the derivative of that is 1 over x, so there will be 2 over x.
Derivative of cosine of x is negative sine of x, so that will be positive the sine of 2 natural log of x, again multiplied by x over 2.
So, I am going to have uv prime plus u prime v.
So, let's go y prime, let's have it here, equals these two, so it's going to be x to the power half, times c sub 2 cosine of 2 natural log of x.
Well, I might as well put a 2 there, and then divide it by x there, make it look a bit better, and here we are also going to have plus x over 2 sine of 2 natural log of x.
And to that I am going to have to add these two, so that's that one, that one times that one, plus this one times this one, which is going to be plus c2 sine of 2 natural log of x, minus cosine of 2 times natural log of x.
And all of those divided by 2 times x to the power half, right, where does that leave us?
We know we have to get a 1, so that will be a 1, so here we are left with 2 times c2, times the cosine again of 0, 2 times natural log of 1 is 0, so that's a 1.
Plus this one, plus this one is a half, sine, that is going to be 0, plus c2, plus c2, do we have to have c2 there?
Let's have a look, we are going to have c2 sine, so that's going to be a 0 in there, that is going to be a negative 1,
and this is going to be 2 times the 1 to the power half is 1, so that's just 2.
Okay, quite a long problem, oh, and I'm sure you couldn't see what I was doing there.
So I'm just substituting my 1 equal into all of these, and that's going to equal negative 1 half in the end.
So I have the fact that, let's have a look, we're going to have the fact that 2 times c2, 2 times c sub 2 minus 1 half equals negative 1 half,
so 2 times c2 is going to equal 0, c sub 2 equals 0, in other words, y is going to equal x to the power half,
and we're going to have negative the cosine of, negative the cosine of 2 natural log of x.
There we go, because c sub 1 was negative 1, c sub 2 is 0, and if you want to have a quick peek at what that looks like,
that would be a function, or graph of this function, and we only have on the domain, obviously up,
and for the fact also that you can't get the natural log of a negative number.
So, there would be a nice graph of this particular solution, because it was an initial value problem.
