And now we've got to move on beyond the non-homogeneous equations
by looking at beyond the homogeneous equations to the non-homogeneous equations
and these basically are the steps we're going to go through.
First of all we've got to set the g of x that's right inside equal to 0
so we make it into a homogeneous equation and we solve as we did before.
In this section we've looked at, well remember we're always just talking about these Gauchy-Euler equations
so we're just going to solve as before by making it into.
And then this, they're not our final set of solutions, that just leaves us with a complementary set of solutions
from which we get y sub 1, y sub 2, if it's second order just those two or more.
Now we begin to make use of the variation of parameters.
But when we do make use of the variation of parameters, we've got to have the f of x on the right-hand side, not the g of x.
We've got to put it in standard form.
So we're going to divide throughout by the leading non-constant coefficient of the highest order derivative.
So we multiply and divide throughout so we're left on the right-hand side with the f of x.
And then we're going to calculate the Ronskians still from y sub 1, y sub 2, whatever, and their derivatives.
Then we're going to just use the integrals that we know, u sub 1 equals the integral of negative y sub 2 times the f of x divided by the Ronskian.
But that's why we need that f of x, not the g of x that we started with in the problem.
And finally just remember that we now have to combine the complementary and the particular solutions to get the final set of solutions.
In the next video we'll have a look at a problem.
How would Pastor Trevor say and Southskllenery started here.
We'll be looking to discuss even anAnother enfrent is twice the highest one at the level,
and we would have to choose strong solutions for many previous challenges to get Christians.
A lot of challenges can be achieved every day, we won't come back and be awesome now.
You won't be better.
You won'tBo買 in black as a line.
You'll be one of the mostounding things coming back and you will need to be asked if you can't complete it.,
Just tell them from a partner.
We've got more tips to our creative innovators.
If you can do anything I said before, that just Rohit, throw out and draw them all 잡 네onsk.
