So, let's have a look at this problem. We have squared to the second derivative, 1 first derivative, x to the power 0, no derivative, but it's not homogenous.
So, let's go through those steps that we mentioned. First of all, we are still going to stay stuck with y equals x to the power m, y prime equals m, x to the power m minus 1, and y prime prime equals m squared minus m to the power x, m minus 2.
First of all, though, or know that what we have done is we've said x squared y prime prime minus 3xy prime plus 3y equals 0.
So, we're just doing this and now solving the way that we know about. So, we're going to have x squared. Let's put it there. We're going to have x squared and y prime prime.
So, that's x to the power m minus 2 and an m squared minus m. We're going to have a negative 3x and an x m minus 1 and an m plus 3 times x to the power m and that equals 0.
So, we're going to be left with x to the power m and we're going to have this m squared minus m. We're going to have negative 3m and we're going to have a positive 3 there and that should equal 0.
And that leaves us with the auxiliary equation m squared minus 4m plus 3 equals 0. In other words, m, I think that would be minus 1 and m minus 3 equals 0.
So, m sub 1 equals 1 and m sub 2 equals 3.
So, I have this complementary set of solutions now.
This is not, I've changed this into, we would have been done if this was our initial problem, but we've made it into a homogeneous, so this is not the final set of solutions.
So, I'm going to have c sub 1 x to the power 1 plus c sub 2 x cubed.
From that, I get my y sub 1 because now I'm back at variation of parameters.
I've got my y sub 1 which is x, my y sub 2 which is x cubed, but now I need my f of x.
Now, I can't get my f of x, that is not my f of x, that's g of x.
I've got to divide throughout by this leading non-constant coefficient there.
So, if I divide x squared into there, I'm left with 2x squared e to the power x.
That is my, that is my, my f of x.
It's not that, I've got to divide throughout because I've got to put this in standard form.
I'm going to say that from the standard form, which says that this leading coefficient here has to be 1.
Okay, all I need now is my Ronskian, which is going to be the determinant of this matrix, y sub 1.
So, let's just do it all in one go.
I think this battery of mine is going to die.
Let's just carry on as long as we can.
So, that's x and x cubed.
So, that's 1 and that's 2x squared.
And, if I get a ruler, if I do this and I get the determinant of that, that is going to be, the Ronskian is going to equal 2x cubed.
What's that?
That must be a 3.
Silly mistake, 3.
That's going to be 3x squared, x cubed, minus x cubed, that leaves me with 2x cubed.
So, that's my Ronskian and that's equal to 2x cubed.
Now, I remember that my particular solution is going to be u sub 1, y sub 1, plus u sub 2, y sub 2.
I now need this y sub 1 and remember that's going to be the integral of negative y sub 2, which is x cubed, times the f of x.
There's my f of x, 2x squared, e to the power x, divided by the Ronskian, which is 2x cubed dx.
And, that looks like quite a, something that, so, u sub 1 equals negative, the integral, I'm going to be left with x squared, e to the power x dx.
Now, I think this is one of those good examples where we can go back to first year calculus and just remind ourselves how we did this.
Because, this is the product of two functions, so, I'm going to have to select one which is going to be u and one which is going to have to be v prime.
So, we always choose one that will get simpler as we go along.
And, e to the power x, that leaves me with u prime being 2x and that means v had to be e to the power x.
And, I remember how we do this, so, that's going to be negative, remember that negative there outside, don't drop it.
So, it's uv, which is x squared, e to the power x minus the integral of u prime v.
So, it's a 2, I can bring out an x, e to the power x dx.
And, I see I've set it with exactly the same problem, so, you could have made this iterative thing.
But, let's just go through the whole thing again.
So, I'm going to select u equals x, that means u prime equals 1, which is what I want.
So, that means this is the v prime, which is e to the power x, which means v is e to the power x as well.
So, u sub 1 equals, I still have this negative outside, I'm going to have x squared, e to the power x minus 2 times.
Now, x, e to the power x minus the integral of e to the power x dx.
Now, well, that's quite long, so, this leaves me with a negative there, an x squared, e to the power x minus 2 times x, e to the power x minus e to the power x.
So, u sub 1 equals negative x squared, e to the power x minus 2x, e to the power x plus 2 e to the power x.
And, that if I distribute the negative in there, it's going to be negative x squared, e to the power x plus 2x, e to the power x.
And, finally, minus 2 times e to the power x.
So, that's lovely first year calculus, and that is my u sub 1, which has to go there.
Okay, let's carry on, I now have to do u sub 2.
Now, u sub 2 is going to equal the integral of y sub 1, which was x, times the f of x, which was 2x squared, e to the power x, divided by the Ronskian, which was 2x cubed, dx.
Good, so, we carry on, as I said, the battery was going to go, indeed it did, I was still doing u sub 2.
If I cancel all of that out, it's just going to leave me with e to the power x dx, and that's just e to the power x.
So, my y sub p is going to be my y1, which is x, x times this negative x squared, e to the power x, plus 2x, e to the power x, minus 2e to the power x, plus e to the power x.
So, y sub p equals negative x cubed, e to the power x, plus 2x squared, e to the power x, minus 2xe to the power x, plus x cubed, e to the power x.
So, y is going to be c sub 1x, plus c sub 2, what was that? It was x cubed, and then these two left, minus 2xe to the power x, plus 2x squared, e to the power x.
So, I hope that wasn't too fast, but it's actually, once you get into the rhythm of it, this is actually fantastic, really good problems.
I must say, I do enjoy them, and it just gives you this chance to review all calculus.
You don't have to do it that way, you can do it, just set up an iterative integral there, it's easy to do, and it's most important to remember this f of x.
So, first of all, change it to homogeneous, solve it as we did now, because it is this special kind of equation,
but just remember, the Ronskin is then easy, because we do get y sub 1 and y sub 2, remembering that this is now the homogeneous set.
But to change this to standard form, once you get to the f of x, don't do it beforehand, otherwise this is not going to work out for you.
Well, at all, you have to multiply x to the power 1 ever through again.
Don't put it in standard form first, first put it homogeneous, solve it, and then put it in standard form, get the f of x.
That's the Ronskin you can do, and then it becomes simple, just in the end to remember that you've got to put the complementary and the particular set together.
