Now the next method we're going to look at to solve these types of equations is to notice two things.
If I have constant variables versus constant coefficients versus these non-constant coefficients,
and I look at the answer set that I am going to get, you'll notice some similarities.
Now if we just choose this domain of x being larger than zero,
remember that through the laws of exponents we can write any number as e to the power of the natural log of that number.
So in actual fact this can be written as c sub 1 and then x to the power m can be written as e to the power m sub 1 natural log of x.
And by the further laws of logarithms this m sub 1 can become the power of x.
So it'll be e to the power, let's write it there, c sub 1 e to the power the natural log of x to the power m sub 1 plus c sub 2 e to the power natural log of x m sub 2.
So this e to the power natural log of anything is just that anything.
So it's c sub 1 x to the power m sub 1.
So I've just rewritten this.
What I do notice now, what I do notice now, if I just bring in a new variable, so for instance t, and I let that equal the natural log of x.
If I exponentiate both sides e to the power t, I get e to the power natural log of x.
So x becomes e to the power t.
x becomes e to the power t.
And I can rewrite all of this, or at least through that part.
I can write e to the power natural log of m sub 1 natural log of x.
I can write as e to the power m sub 1 t.
And e to the power m sub 2 t, which now looks very much the same as what we had there just with a new variable.
y is now a function of t, and here it was a function of x, despite introducing this new term.
Now I can use this information that I have, this substitution that I've made, to solve this type of non-constant variable coefficient problem.
And of course it needn't just be homogeneous.
I can solve it for non-homogeneous equations too.
But I now need to differentiate y, not with respect to x, but with respect to t.
In other words,
if y is now a function not of x anymore, I should have said that differently.
I'm still getting y prime and y prime prime because I still want to replace it in here.
I still want to substitute it in here.
Here it is a function of x.
So y prime is actually dy dx.
I need to know what to put in there, but not as a function of x, as a function of t.
So I have to make use of the chain rule.
In other words, dy dx, if y is now a function of t, would be dy dt times dt dx.
This is the chain rule.
And what is dt dx?
Well, if t equals the natural log of x, dt dx is 1 over x.
So there's my 1 over x and I still have dy dt.
So instead of y prime there, I can now substitute 1 over x dy dt in there.
A bit more complicated for the second derivative.
Let's have a look at the second derivative.
So that is d squared y over dx squared.
Which now I have to make use of the chain rule.
It's the second derivative of this.
But in actual fact, y is a function of x and this is a function of x.
So I can write this as u and v.
So if I get the derivative of this, remember it's u prime v plus u v prime.
It's just the power rule.
Power rule.
Okay, here I've made use of, let's write it there.
Here I've made use of the chain rule.
Here.
But to get the second derivative of this, I need to use the power rule.
And so there I have it.
It's 1 over x and then the derivative of dy dt.
So it's 1 over x times the derivative of that.
And this times the derivative of that.
So 1 over x and then the first derivative with respect to x of dy dt.
Because this is with respect to x, remember.
Plus the first derivative of 1 over x is negative 1 over x squared times the dy dt.
Now the only complex part is what is the first derivative with respect to x of dy dt.
Again, I have to make use of the chain rule.
So I still have 1 over x.
What is the first derivative with respect to x of dy dt?
Well, I have to take the derivative of this again.
So this becomes second derivative.
And then through the chain rule I still have to take the derivative of t as well.
Which is just the derivative of t is 1 over x.
So I have my extra 1 over x there.
And I have this derivative twice.
Minus that.
I can take out 1 over x.
Oh, look at that.
1 over x times 1 over x is 1 over x squared.
So I can take out 1 over x squared as a common factor.
In other words, I have the second derivative with respect to t of y.
Minus the first derivative with respect to t of y.
And that is my y prime prime.
And I can now substitute this y prime prime.
And this y prime.
Of course you could go to third order as well.
Into an original problem that I might have.
And I can solve the problem.
In the next video we'll have a look at an example.
