Let's try and solve this problem. We need, though, a couple of reminders.
The first reminder that x equals the natural log of t.
And in other words, t equals...
What have I written? x equals e to the power t, I should have written.
Let's redo that.
x equals e to the power t, in other words, t equals the natural log of x.
Those are important things to remember.
I also have to know what y prime is.
I also have to know what y prime is, and remember that's 1 over x dy dt.
And I have to remember what y prime prime is.
y prime prime is 1 over x squared.
And now I have d squared y over dt squared minus dy dt.
Those are...
In the previous video we looked at where these came from,
using the product and the chain rule after the simple substitution.
And we can use all of these now to be substituted in here.
I hope this focus seems to be a problem today.
So I'm going to have x squared.
I'm going to have x squared.
And then y prime prime, which is 1 over x squared.
And then d squared y minus the dt squared minus dy over dt.
minus x times that, which is over x times dy dt.
Plus just a simple y.
It's going to equal the natural log of x, which is just t.
Natural log of x, which is just t.
So these two cancel out.
So I'm going to have d squared y over dt squared minus this,
minus another one.
So I'm going to have two of these.
dy dt plus a y equals t.
In other words, if I wanted to write this,
it would be y of t prime prime minus 2y of t prime plus y of t equals t.
And what I could do with that, first of all,
is just to get the homogeneous equation from that.
And from the homogeneous equation,
I'm just trying to get my complementary set of solutions.
I can change this to the auxiliary equation,
which is going to leave me m squared minus 2m plus 1 equals 0.
Or m minus 1 squared equals 0.
Or m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals 1.
In other words, y sub c.
What is that going to be?
y sub c.
We have to see what y sub c is going to be.
Well, it's going to be c sub 1 e to the power,
but it's not x now, it's t, remember,
plus c sub 2 t e to the power t.
And I'll have to substitute those back in.
Now there's various ways that I can now get y sub p.
And one way to do it, remember,
we just have this variable on the other side,
so we can let y sub p equal, what would that be?
a plus b t.
I could just do that.
y sub p prime is going to equal just b.
And y sub p prime prime is then going to equal 0.
If I substitute this in there,
I'm going to have 0 minus 2 b plus a plus b t.
And that's going to equal 0.
In other words, I have this a minus 2 b.
It's not going to equal 0.
There's a t on the other side.
It's going to equal t.
In other words, a minus 2 b plus b t equals 0 plus t.
So this a minus 2 b has got to equal 0.
In other words, a equals 2 b.
And this b t has got to equal t.
In other words, b equals 1.
And therefore, a equals 2.
In other words, y sub p is going to equal,
where did we have it there?
a, which is 2 plus t.
So my final solution here is going to be my complementary set,
which is c sub 1 e to the power t plus c sub 2 t e to the power t,
plus 2 plus t.
But I don't want y of t.
I want y as a function of x.
So that's going to be c sub 1 e to the power.
What is t?
Well, that's natural log of x.
c sub 2, what is t?
Natural log of x.
e to the power natural log of x.
Plus 2 plus natural log of x.
It's going to be, what is this?
c sub 1.
What is e to the power natural log of x?
That's just that.
Plus c sub 2.
There I have x.
e to the power natural log of x.
times the natural log of x.
Plus 2 plus the natural log of x.
And there we have it.
Another method.
Through knowing these four equations.
We know how to get them.
And if you want to solve these problems quickly, of course,
you can just memorize that.
And it brings us another way of solving these types of equations.
Remember though it was linear.
And I have my non-constant variable squared.
And my second derivative minus my non-constant variable to the power 1.
And my first derivative.
So it's got to be in this form for us to use any of these last few methods that we have looked at.
