Now, here we go. Again, something that might catch out. This is the fourth derivative of y, but my non-constant coefficient there, my variable coefficient, is to the power of 1.
I cannot make use of the fact that y equals x to the power of the m. That is not going to be the form of my solution. I'll have to think of something else.
What, though, if I let p equals y prime prime prime? In other words, I'm going to have x p prime plus 6p equals 0.
What do I have now? I have a function in its first derivative, x to the power of 1, a function to the 0, to the, I could have had an x to the power of 0 in here,
so my power would be 0, and it's the 0-th derivative, just like that. In other words, I can write p in this form.
Now I have, I've changed this into a Couchy-Euler equation. Couchy. Still don't know how to pronounce that.
In other words, p prime is now going to equal m, x to the power of m minus 1, and that's all I need.
I just need to the first derivative. I just need to the first derivative.
In other words, I'm going to have x times m, x to the power of m minus 1, plus 6 times x to the power of m is going to equal 0.
x times x to the power of m minus 1, so there's 1 minus 1 plus 1, that's x to the power of m, times m, plus 6 times x to the power of m equals 0.
In other words, these I can take out, divide through out by x to the power of m, so m is going to equal negative 6.
In other words, y equals c sub 1, x to the power of m minus 6.
Now it's not y, it's not y that I'm solving for here, it's p.
It is p.
Is that what is p?
Well, p is y prime prime prime.
y prime prime prime is equal to c sub 1, x to the power of m minus 6.
But this is something else.
I can rewrite this as dy dx of y prime prime, can't I?
That equals c sub 1, x to the power of m minus 6.
In other words, dy of y prime prime equals c sub 1, x to the power of m minus 6, dx.
Now I can differentiate, integrate both sides, and what am I going to be left with?
Well, y prime prime is now going to equal, now c sub 1 divided by negative 5, a constant divided by another constant.
That just leaves me a constant again.
Let's call that constant 1 now, x to the power of negative 5, plus some new constant.
Plus some new constant.
Just note what I've done here.
I've not written c sub 1 over negative 5, because it is a constant divided by another constant.
This gives me a constant again.
This c sub 1 is not that c sub 1.
I'm just suggesting that whatever, doing this indefinite integral, you're still going to be left with a constant.
But this can be written as dy dx of y prime, can't it?
It's going to equal c sub 1, x to the power of negative 5, plus this constant.
If I take this over to the other side, let's take this over to the other side, I'm just saving some space here, dx, and I just integrate both sides, I'm going to be left with y prime.
It's going to equal, what is the derivative of this?
Well, it's going to be c sub 1 over negative 4, which is just another constant again.
x to the power of negative 4, plus this will have an x, plus there's a new constant.
It's an indefinite integral.
And that means dy, this is now also dy dx, is going to be c sub 1, x to the power of negative 4, plus c sub 2x, plus c sub 3, dx, which I can just integrate again.
And that finally leaves me with y, which again is going to be some constant, now x to the power of negative 3, some x to the power of negative 3, plus this is going to be a half, c2 times a half x squared,
but c2 divided by 2, that's just a constant again, x squared, plus c sub 3x, and finally, well, these have got to be negative 2s, don't they?
Where did I go wrong? Let's have a look.
This is going to be negative 4, oh yeah, okay, so in other words, it's going to be an x, plus some new constant c sub 4.
So let's just rewrite this in a proper form, so I'm just going to change the subscripts, well, you can leave it in that form.
It doesn't matter, you know, where your constants are, but you are certainly going to have this row of constants finally with a variable, with a constant all on its own.
So it's just the fact that you're working backwards from a third derivative of a function all the way back to that function.
And you just have to realize that every time you have this constant in front and you've got to add one there and divide by this side,
so you're just left with that.
But c sub 1 divided by negative 4 is just another constant.
If c sub 1 was positive, you'll have a constant constant here.
If c sub 1 was greater than 0, you'll have a negative constant there.
That's not what it's about.
It's just remembering that every time you divide this, one of these c's with another constant, you're just left with another constant.
And the indefinite integral of a constant, remember, is just a constant times that variable.
