Now in this video I want to solve this problem and I think I'll do it over two
videos and use two methods to do that. First of all we are going to notice
linear, second order, non-constant, variable coefficients, non-homogeneous but
I will notice x squared to the power 2, x to the power 1, y prime, x to the power
0, no prime there. So first of all I can make use of the fact that I know that my
answer is going to be in this form, x to the power m. In other words y prime is
going to be x, m x to the power m minus 1 and y prime prime is going to be m
squared minus m and then x to the power m minus 1. So I know that that would be
the case and if we do that and we first solve for this complementary set making
this a, making this a homogeneous equation. I'm going to be left with x to the power
m and then m squared minus m. I'm going to be left with negative that is going to be
x to the power m and another m plus x to the power m is going to equal 0.
Those can all go in other words m squared minus 2m plus 1 equals 0 or m minus 1
squared equals 0. In other words m sub 1 equals m sub 2 is going to equal 1. In other words y sub c
c because I'm making use of that is going to be c sub 1 x to the power 1 plus c sub 2
still going to have this x but I add a natural log of x. That is what I'm going to have to
add there. This gives me a y sub 1 equal x and a y sub 2 equaling x times the natural log
of x. The Ronskian of that is going to be the determinant of this matrix x natural log
of x. What x natural log of x. That's y1 and y2. Y sub 1 and y sub 2. That's 1. What is
the first derivative of that? I have to use the power rule so that's going to be natural
log of x plus x times the derivative natural log of x is 1 over x so it's x over x so it's
plus 1. So I've got to get the determinant of this matrix and that is going to equal x natural
log of x plus x minus x natural log of x. So multiply those two. Subtract the multiplication
of those two and that just leaves me an x. So definitely the Ronskian is just going to
be an x. And then very lastly I need the f of x. Now I need this to be in standard form
so I need this coefficient of the highest derivative expression to be 1. So I've got to divide
throughout by x squared. 2x divided by x squared is 2 over x. 2 over x. I must not forget to do
that. Now to get u sub 1. I remember that that's negative. The integral of y sub 2 times the f
of x divided by the Ronskian of the d of x. So if I take y sub 2 times that that leaves me with
that leaves me if I multiply y sub 2 times the f of x that leaves me with 2 times the natural
log of x. I can bring that 2 out. I'm left with a natural log of x divided by the Ronskian
which is x dx. Now I see what is the natural log of what's the derivative of the natural
log of x. It's 1 over x. So I can very easily here make use of u substitution but don't confuse
that with this u please. So I can let u equal the natural log of x. The u dx is going to be
1 over x dx. If I bring this dx this side du dx the first derivative of u with respect
to x is 1 over x. So u sub 1 is going to be this negative 2 times the natural log of well
the natural log of x equals u and what remains 1 over x dx is just du du. So u sub 1 is going
to equal negative 2 times a half u squared and u is natural log of x squared. In other
words negative natural log of x squared. There's my u sub 1. u sub 2 I know is the integral of
y sub 1 times the f of x. So that's just going to be a 2 divided by the Ronskian which is 1
over x dx. And that is just going to be 2 times the natural log of x. 2 times the natural log
of x. Let's hope we did not make a silly mistake anyway. Let's have a look. Let's have a look.
Let's have a look. Let's have a look. So now. Why do I get a feeling something is wrong. Let's
have a look. So my y of p is now going to be my u1 y1 plus u2 y2. So what is u1? u1 is where's my u1?
That's that. Times x. So that's going to be negative x natural log of x squared. And there's
my u sub 2. There's my y sub 2. So that's going to be plus 2 times x natural log of x squared.
So what does that leave me? y sub p leaves me with 2 times x minus this. So that just leaves
me with an x natural log of x squared. So eventually my y is going to be c sub 1 x plus c sub 2 x plus
x times the natural log of x all squared there. So that was the one method of solving this. That
was the method we did before this substitution of letting t equals the natural log of x. So
let's use that method and see if we can get to the if we can get to the same answer.
