So here we are. We're going to see if we can make use of the fact that we let t equals the natural log of x.
In other words, x equals e to the power t.
I know that therefore y prime is going to be 1 over x.
That's y of t prime. Otherwise, y is known as 1 over x dy dt.
I'm going to have that and I know y prime prime is going to be 1 over x squared.
And that's going to be y of t, a function of t prime prime minus y of t prime.
That is what I'm going to make use of.
So if I substitute that into my original equation, what am I going to get?
I'm going to get y of t prime prime minus y of t prime minus x times that.
That will just leave me a y of t prime plus a y and that equals 2 times x.
So that's 2 e to the power t.
In other words, y of t prime prime minus 2 y of t prime plus y of t equals 2 e to the power t.
So don't get confused with this notation.
This is just y now expressed as a function of t as opposed to just there where it's in a function of x.
So y prime prime is there.
Remember the other way to write this would have been 1 over x squared.
And then I have d squared y over dt squared minus dy dt.
It's just different notations and I've put it back in there.
So if I look at this, if I look at this now, again I can see this is a Cauchy, how do you pronounce that, Euler equation.
And I can use various methods again to solve this one.
Now, let's first of all make this, I think, let's just make this into an homogeneous equation and write the auxiliary solution to that.
Which means m squared minus 2m plus 1 has got to equal 0.
And once again I have the fact that m minus 1 squared is going to equal 0.
So m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals 1.
Now, in what format is this?
Remember, I have not used the fact here that y equals x to the power m.
I haven't used that.
I'm not using this.
This is a normal equation.
I've made it into that.
So y of t sub c, it's the complementary set I'm looking at.
It's going to be c sub 1.
That's e to the power 1t plus c sub 2t e to the power 1t.
Don't get confused.
If this was an x, if this was a function of x, it would have been c sub 1 e to the power x plus c sub 2x e to the power x.
I'm just going in that fashion.
Do not get confused with a video before where we set the fact that y equals x to the power m.
That's not what we're doing here.
Okay, so we've gotten this far and remember once we've done this, what can we do now?
Well, I suppose we can just use, let's just use the annihilator approach.
Let's do that.
The annihilator.
Let's see if we can remember how to do the annihilator approach.
So if I have to do the annihilator approach, I've got a c now because what I'm trying to get to now is y of t sub p.
That's what I'm interested in now.
So what's going to annihilate my right hand side?
Let's just first write this.
I can write in a slightly different format.
I can write d squared minus 2d plus 1 of y equals 2 e to the power t.
I can write it like that.
Let's see if I can resurrect my pencil here.
Okay.
I can do that.
What is going to annihilate this side?
Well, this is t to the power 0 there.
So my n minus 1 is 0.
Otherwise, n equals 1.
And my alpha, alpha equals 1.
So I know what's going to annihilate this side.
It's d minus 1 to the power 1.
That will annihilate this side.
So if I do this to both sides, I'm going to have a d minus 1 on this side.
And what is this?
Well, this is d minus 1 squared of y equals 0.
Or d minus 1 cubed of y equals 0.
Very easy to solve.
This is a homogeneous equation.
I can use the auxiliary equation again.
So m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals m sub 3 going to equal 1.
In other words, y sub t of p, what is that going to be?
Well, that's going to be c sub 1.
Now, let's have a think about this.
That's going to be e to the power t plus c sub 2 t e to the power t plus c sub 3 t squared e to the power t.
Now, which of these, it's the annihilator approach, remember, which of these already appear there?
That one appears, that one appears.
So I'm just left with this.
So my y is going to equal, and I'm going to use an a there instead of c sub 3, a t squared e to the power t.
Now, I've got to substitute this back into my original equation there.
So y prime, remember this is all of t, all of t, is going to be what, let's have a look.
So it's 2 a t e to the power t plus a t squared e to the power t.
And y of t prime prime is going to be, what will that be?
2 a e to the power t plus 2 a t e to the power t plus 2 a t e to the power t plus 2 a t e to the power t plus a t squared e to the power t.
So I need this minus twice that plus 2 a t plus 2 a t plus a t squared e to the power t plus a t squared e to the power t minus 2 of these.
So that's negative 4 a t e to the power t, negative 2 a t squared e to the power t plus 1 of these plus a t squared e to the power t.
And that's going to equal 2 e to the power t.
It looks like I'm going to have 2 a e to the power t, I'm going to have a, so that one's gone, I'm going to have positive 4, negative 4, so that's gone.
I'm going to have, that's plus 2 there, sorry about that, 2, no, no, just a t squared.
What am I doing? Don't do that.
So plus a 2 squared plus a 2 squared minus a 2 squared, that's also 0, it's going to equal 2 e to the power t, and it looks like a is going to equal 1.
So what do we have here?
y of t equals 1, so that's just going to be a t squared e to the power t.
But remember, this is the p I'm still dealing with.
So, all in all, it gets difficult and you must not get confused between all of these.
So all in all, my y of t is going to equal, remember that must be the y of t of c plus the y t of p.
So y t of c, what was that?
That was c sub 1 e to the power t plus c sub 2 t e to the power t plus this y of t of p was just 1.
That was t squared e to the power t.
Now I've just got to back substitute because I want the y in x.
So that c sub 1 e to the power, what was t?
Remember, that was natural log of x plus c sub 2 natural log of x e to the power natural log of x plus t squared.
What will t squared be?
Well, that will be natural log of x squared e to the power natural log of x.
Lo and behold, c is going to equal c sub 1 e to the power natural log of x is just x
plus c sub 2 x natural log of x plus x natural log of x squared.
And that is exactly the same answer as I had with the other technique.
And that is exactly the same answer as I had with the other technique.
And that is exactly the same answer as I had with the other technique.
