Let's solve this problem. Non-homogeneous, linear, x squared, second derivative, x1, first derivative, x0, no derivative.
We can make use of the fact that y equals x to the power m, y prime is going to be m, x to the power m minus 1, y prime prime is going to be m squared minus m, times x to the power m minus 2.
If I substitute all in there, I'm going to get 3x squared times x to the power m minus 1, just leaves me x to the power m, and then m squared minus m, plus 6 times y prime.
Oh, did I make a mistake somewhere? I think when I wrote this, they should have, and I actually show you that it is, and I don't even realize the mistake.
There must be an extra x in there, okay?
x to the power m, and multiply by another m, plus x to the power m equals 0. Apologies for that one.
Which makes it very easy, because I can take these out as common factors, and I'm left with 3m squared minus 3m plus 6m plus 1 equals 0.
In other words, 3m squared plus 3m plus 1 equals 0, and I can see that we're going to have complex numbers for the solution here in as much as m is going to be negative 3 plus minus square root of 9 minus 12 over 6.
Where's my ruler?
Where's my ruler?
So, m is going to be negative 1 over 6 times the square root of negative 3.
So, m is going to equal negative 1 half plus or minus the square root of 3 over 6 times i.
In other words, alpha equals negative 1 half, and beta equals square root of 3 over 6.
I remember that my solution has to be in this form as x to the power alpha, and then I have c sub 1 cosine of, what was that, beta times natural log of x, plus c sub 2 sine of beta times natural log of x.
I remember that my solution has to be in this form, so it's going to be x to the power negative 1 half times c sub 1 cosine of square root of 3 over 6 times natural log of x, plus c sub 2 sine of square root of 3 over 6 natural log of x.
Simple as that, apologies for that initial mistake, so silly that I show you x squared, second power, x, and I don't even see the x.
Anyway, it's the one problem that if you're dealing with a specific section, your mind is just focused on that one form of solution, and you don't see that you might be sitting with a problem.
I think the next one I'm going to show you is another little one that always catches you out, specifically because you're not in an exam situation where you expect anything, or in a real life situation where you expect any kind of equation to solve.
You're sitting here doing chapter by chapter, and your mind's only focused on that one or two methods.
Good.
