And here we have our second problem which is going to take a long, long time and it's
going to go over many, many pages I think.
Let's see where we can get to.
I think the most important thing here is all the techniques have been learned up to now.
The only thing is not to make silly mistakes and for me to try and keep the paper inside of the view of the camera.
First of all we'll note here that we have a linear set of equations here and our first priority is just to write it in differential form.
So here we're going to have d of x minus 4x.
Let's see, plus a d squared of y and that equals t squared.
And we're going to have the d of x plus this and x plus a d of y equals zero.
I think we can just rewrite this as well as a d minus 4x plus a d squared y equals t squared.
And I have a d plus 1 of x plus dy equals zero.
There's in differential form a linear set, a linear system or system of linear equations I should say.
So where are we going to start?
First of all, I mean it doesn't really matter.
Let's start, let's start with this first one and let's eliminate, let's eliminate x.
So we're going to start here.
So we're going to have d minus 4x is going to equal t squared minus d squared y.
In other words, x is going to equal t squared minus d squared y over d minus 4.
Perhaps not the easiest place to start, but we've got to start somewhere.
Let's substitute it now into number 2.
Let's call this our equation 1 and our equation 2.
Let's substitute this into equation 2.
So I'm going to have d plus 1.
Then I'm going to have a t squared minus d squared y over d minus 4 over d minus 4.
So let's the c plus a dy and that's going to equal zero.
So let's multiply out.
I'm going to have a d squared minus d squared y.
I can multiply throughout by, I can multiply throughout by this d minus 4.
So I'm going to have d plus 1.
I'm going to have a t squared minus d squared y plus I'm going to have a d and a d minus 4y.
And that's still going to equal zero.
So let's multiply out. I'm going to have a dt squared minus d3, d to the power 3y, plus a t squared minus a d squared y, plus a d, d minus 4y, and let's go to equal a 0.
So that leaves us with a negative d. Where is this b suddenly coming from? I'm way ahead of myself here.
See, again, I'm already off the page. So I have that. I've just multiplied d by those two to get dt squared minus d to the power 3y, plus d squared minus d squared y, and then d, d minus 4y.
Okay, so I have negative d to the power 3y. I'm going to have a negative d squared y, and I'm going to have a positive d, d minus 4y, and on the other side, I'm going to have a negative t squared, and a minus d dt, d dt of t squared.
That's what this means. If I multiply throughout by negative 1, and I just group my terms, I'm going to have d to the power 3.
I'm going to have a negative d squared. Well, let's just do all of that in one. So I'm going to have a d squared minus 4dy, and that is going to be, well,
I've got to multiply 3y by negative times the negative is a positive. That becomes a positive. That will become a negative.
That'll become a negative, and that'll become a positive. So for that, and I'm going to have a t squared, and plus 2t.
d dt of t squared is 2t, and I've multiplied 3y by negative.
So, those two will cancel, so I'm left with a d to the power 3 plus 4d of y, and that equals t squared plus 2t.
That is what I'm left with, and I can certainly try and solve, I can certainly try and solve this equation.
Now, the first order of business is just to solve for y of t sub c. That is my complementary set, and if I do that, I have this d.
Let's put d squared plus 4y is going to equal 0.
My auxiliary equation is going to lead, I just took a d, a common d out, so m.
m squared plus 4 is going to equal 0, so m sub 1 equals 0, m sub 2 is going to equal 2i, m sub 3 is going to be negative 2i.
Just think about that, m squared is negative 4, and in other words, my alpha equals 0, and my beta equals 2.
Out of the screen again, long time ago.
So, I have this equation. First, I'm going to just solve for the complementary set.
So, I set this equal to 0.
That gives me an homogeneous equation, which I just write my auxiliary equation for, and I've solved for m,
and I get 2i because we have the square root of, or m squared equals negative the square root of 2 squared.
So, alpha equals 0, and beta equals 2.
So, I'm going to have that the y of t, sub c, is going to equal c sub 1, e to the power 0t, which is just 1,
plus, what are we going to have, e to the power 0t, which is just 1,
then c sub 2 cosine of 2t, plus c sub 3 sine of 2t.
So, that was simple enough.
Now, I've got to get y of t sub p, and I can do that in a variety of ways.
First of all, I think, well, you can just do substitutions.
I suppose that'll be 8t cubed plus bt plus c on this side, but let's use the annihilator approach.
Annihilator approach.
If we just do the annihilator approach, what will annihilate this side?
Well, here I just have n minus 1 equals 2.
In other words, n equals 3, so I'm going to have d cubed.
It's going to annihilate this side.
Think about it.
If I take the first derivative, that's going to leave me 2t plus 2.
Second derivative is going to leave me 2.
Third derivative is going to leave me with a 0 on this side.
So, if I do this on this side as well,
So, I'm going to have d to the power 4, d squared plus 4, y is going to equal 0.
In other words, again homogeneous.
I'm left with m to the power 4, m squared plus 4 is going to equal 0 as far as my auxiliary equation is concerned.
And I'm just now going to have that m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals m sub 3 equals m sub 4 equals 0.
And I'm going to have again m sub 5 equals 2i.
m sub 6 equals negative 2i.
So, alpha equals 0 and again beta equals 2.
Nothing wrong there.
So, let's just carry on.
That leaves yt sub p equals, we're going to have a c sub 1 e to the power 0 plus a c sub 2t plus a c sub 3t squared plus a c sub 4t cubed plus a c sub 5 cosine of 2t plus c sub 6 sine of 2t.
Now, remember for the annihilator approach, I've got to see which of these already occur in my complementary set.
Certainly, that one does.
This one does and that one does.
As far as all of those are concerned.
And in other words,
I am left with a few things.
I can write yt of p.
That's going to, I can just rewrite this now.
I just put constants a t cubed plus b t squared plus c t.
Now, where have I got to substitute it?
I've got to substitute it in here.
So, I need up until the third derivative of y.
So, y prime of tp, that's going to be 3 a t squared plus 2 b t plus c.
y prime prime prime prime of t of p is going to be 6 a t plus 2 b.
y prime prime prime t of p is going to be equal to 6 a.
And I've got to substitute all of this into this equation.
So, d3 of y, d3 of y is the 6 a.
What is the d of 4 times y?
So, if I had a 4 in front of each of these,
if I multiply this out by 4, 4, 4,
I'm going to have plus c here,
it's d of 4 times y.
I've got the d of y here,
but I need the d of 4 times y.
So, I can just multiply this out by 4 as well.
So, I'm going to be left with
12 a t squared plus times 4 is 8 b t plus 4 c.
And that has got to equal on the other side
a t squared plus 2 t.
A t squared plus 2 t.
So, let's have it.
We have 6 a, we have a positive 4 c,
and on this side there's nothing, no constant.
So, that's just going to be a 0.
We have an 8 b t.
And on this side we have a 2 t.
And on this side we have a 12 a t squared.
And on this side we have a 1 t squared.
So, it's easy to see that a is going to equal 1 over 12.
Looks like b is going to equal 1 over 4.
And 6 times 1 over 12 plus 4 c is going to equal 0.
In other words, a half.
Plus 4 c equals 0.
4 c equals negative a half.
In other words, c equals negative 1 over 8.
In other words, y of t sub p is going to equal,
what's a?
Well, a was a 12th t cubed plus b was a quarter t squared and c was negative 1 over 8 t.
So, if I put all of this together, y of t has got to equal,
where's my complementary set?
Oh, I'm already way off the page.
All I've done with it, I've just solved for a, b, and c as we usually do with the annihilator approach.
So, I've got to substitute this, put this together with this.
So, I'm going to have c sub 1 plus c sub 2 cosine of 2t plus c sub 3 sine of 2t.
And so, I'm just taking the complementary set.
Now, I've got to equal this, just add this particular.
So, that is 1 over 12t cubed plus a quarter t squared minus 1 over 8t.
So, as far as we know, that is my y of t.
Now, I've got to go the other way around and solve for x of t.
I'll do that in the next video.
So, I'll do that in the next video.
