We carry on with the problem. I remind you this is my two differential form of my system
of linear equations. Now I'm going to start with one and because I need to eliminate or
at least we've got to get y on its own. So let's do, I think, well let's do this. Let's get
d squared y equals t squared minus d minus 4x. In other words y equals t squared minus
d minus 4x over d squared. Let's substitute this. So which one, so we started with this
one, we've got to substitute that into here. So we're going to have d plus 1x plus d and
now I have this y. I have t squared minus d minus 4x over d squared and I've substituted
in there, my y in there and that's going to equal 0. It's going to equal 0. So I'm going
to have d plus 1x. That d will go there. So I'm going to have plus t squared over d and
I'm going to have minus d minus 4x over d. That's equaling 0. I can multiply throughout
by d. So I'm going to have d plus 1x plus t squared minus d minus 4x equals 0. In other
words, I can have d, d plus 1. And let's just take this out as a common factor x minus d minus
4x plus 4x. And that's going to equal negative t squared. So I've just taken x out as a common
factor. I've taken t over to the other side. In other words, I'm going to have d squared
plus d minus d plus 4x equals negative t squared. In other words, d squared plus 4x equals negative
t squared. Now, I can solve x of t sub c by making this a homogeneous equation. d squared
plus 4x equals 0. Therefore, I can use my auxiliary equation m squared plus 4 equals 0 or m sub 1
equals 2i. m sub 2 equals negative 2i. alpha equals 0. beta equals 2. So I think my battery
is going to go. Let's just stop here. I'm just going to change the battery. Battery changed.
Let's carry on. So I can write x of t sub c is going to equal, well, remember that's going
to be to the power e to the power 0t. So there's nothing there. So I'm just going to have a c
sub 1 cosine of 2t plus a c sub 2 sine of 2t. Now I've got to get my x of tp and let's just
use the annihilator approach again. The annihilator approach. What is going to happen here? Well,
n minus 1 equals 2. So n equals 3. So again, d3. So I'm going to have d3. d squared plus 4x is going
to equal 0 because d to the power 3 will annihilate the right hand side for me. So I can again use my
auxiliary equation. I'm going to because this is homogeneous. Sorry about that. d to the power 3.
I'll just do that on both sides of this equation. That will annihilate this side, leaving me with
an auxiliary equation for which I can write a homogeneous equation for which I can write
my auxiliary equation equals 0. In other words, m sub 1 equals m sub 2 equals m sub 3 equals 0.
And again, I'm going to have an m sub 4 equals 2i and m sub 5 looks like negative 2i, leaving
me again with an alpha of 0 and a beta of 2. Again, I have m squared plus 4 there. So my
x t sub p, oops, let's look at that. That is going to be a c sub 1, a c sub 2t, a c sub 3t squared
for that 1, 2, 3 there. Then I'm going to have a c sub 4 cosine of 2t and a c sub 5 sine of
2t. Now let's see if what I have, what I already have, I have this and this already in my, represented
in my complementary set. So I'm left actually with x of t sub p equals, well I can rewrite
this as at squared plus bt plus c. Now the equation I have to put it back in is here and
that goes to a d squared. In other words, I need up till the second derivative of this.
Let's do that. So x prime of t sub p is going to equal 2at plus b and x prime prime of t sub
p is going to just equal 2a. That is just going to equal 2a and I now have to, I now just have
to substitute that in, in there. Let's just have a look, let's just have a look. I've got
to substitute this in there. And so I have d squared plus 4 times x equals negative t squared.
Let's see. Let's see. Let's see, let's see, let's see, let's see. So d squared of x, so d squared
of x plus 4 times x equals negative t squared. So d squared of x is my second, that's 2a plus
4a plus 4c. So it's 4a plus 4c, that has a 0 on that side. A 4b t has a 0 on that side.
And a 4a t squared has a negative t squared on that side. So it looks like my 4a is going
to equal negative 1. So a equals negative 1 quarter. b is very simple. b is going to equal
0. And 2 times negative 1 quarter plus 4c is going to equal 0. In other words, 4c equals
a half. c equals an 8th. In other words, x of t sub p is going to equal a, which is negative
1 quarter t squared. b is 0 plus c is an 8th. In other words, x of t is going to equal c sub
1. Now, just be careful. Previously we had this. Let's have a look. Where was our answer
for this? We had, for y we had a c sub 1, c sub 2, c sub 3. So we've got to start with
c sub 4. So that's going to be a c sub 4 cosine of 2t plus a c sub 5 sine of 2t minus a quarter
t squared plus a quarter t squared plus a quarter t squared plus a quarter t squared minus an 8th t.
That was our answer there. Now, we can't unfortunately just leave it there because we've got 1, 2, 3,
4, 5 constants. But this is a system of linear equations. So certainly that cannot be. We need
to now substitute it into one of the equations to just get this relation. Let's use, let's use
d plus 1, d plus 1 of x plus dy equals 0. That's the simplest of the two, of the two differentials
that we had. So let's do that. So we need d of x, the first derivative of this x. What would that be?
The first derivative of this x, it looks like negative 2 c4 sine of 2t. That'll be plus 2 times
c sub 5 cosine of 2t minus an 8th t plus 0 plus 1 times x. So I'm going to have plus c sub 4 cosine
of 2t plus c sub 5 sine of 2t minus a quarter t squared plus an 8th. Plus I need to add to that
the first derivative of y. So that's going to leave the first derivative of y. So that's
going to leave me with negative 2 times c2 sine of 2t plus 2 times cosine of 2t plus a quarter
t squared plus an 8th t. That's a half. That's 3 over 12 is a quarter t squared. That's going to be
a half t minus an 8th. That's going to equal 0. So let's just simplify all of these. Let's have a look.
Let's have a look. Let's have a look. Did I make a mistake somewhere? Let's have a quick
look. Let's have a quick look. Minus t4. That's right. Plus 2 negative a half t. Where did I get
this? That's not right, is it? So if I bring this 2 forward, that's going to be a half. That's
going to be a half. And I've got this. So these 8ths can go. I have a half t and negative a half t.
I have negative a quarter t squared. I have a quarter t squared. So that seems to all go.
So let's take out all the cosine of 2t's. I have 2 times c sub 5. I have 2 times c sub 5. I have a c
sub 4 there. I have a negative 2 c sub 2. Negative 2 c sub 3 there. For that one, let's take out
a sine of 2t. To do that, I'm going to have a negative 2 c sub 4 there. I have a plus c sub 5
there. Negative 2 c sub 5 there. That's going to equal 0. And again, all we're going to do,
even though there is a value for t, for which this can be 0, we're just going to say, well,
let's just let these two be 0. So I'm going to have 2 c sub 5s plus c sub 4 minus 2 c sub 3s.
And let's see if that's correct. Equals 0. And I'm going to have a negative 2 c sub 4 plus
a c sub 5 minus 2 c sub 2 equals 0. So let's express, first of all, just c4 in terms of these
others. So c sub 4 is going to equal, c sub 4 is going to equal, well, 2 times c sub 3 minus
2 times c sub 5. But we want to express c sub 4. We really want to express c sub 4 and c sub 5
in terms of c sub 5. So let's just go on this side and we have c sub 5. It's going to equal
2 c sub 2 plus 2 c sub 4. But we can express c sub 4. So c sub 5 is going to equal 2 c sub 2 plus
4 c sub 5 minus 4 c sub 5. So if I bring this all over to the other 5 c sub 5, it's going to equal
2 c sub 2 plus 4 c sub 3. And the c sub 5 is going to equal 2 c sub 2 plus 4 c sub 3. And the c sub 5 is going to equal
2 c sub 4 is going to equal 2 times c sub 4 minus 2 times this, which is 2 over 5 c sub 2 plus 4 over 5 c sub 3 on this side, which I can now
simplify as a c sub 4 minus 4 over 5 c sub 2 minus 8 over 5 c sub 3. And I suppose I can just
just simplify those two, but this video for this problem is getting really long. It's quite exciting that you can use all the information, all the knowledge that you've
that you've gained up to this point, and use all of that to solve this very long problem, which has now gone over many minutes and many pages.
So now I can just substitute c sub 4 and c sub 5 into there and there so that I have only c sub 1, c sub 2 and c sub 3.
So because this is a system of linear equations, those two initial problems we had were connected.
And this will be my answers for x and y in t.
A all the time on the channel.
So that is enough to show you ok so here.
นะคะ in this video, there's almost nothing gegeben of.
