Let's move on to the next section. We're going to now deal with non-linear differential equations.
So we will not have the function y and its derivatives y prime, y double prime, etc.
all to the power of 1. Some of them will now be to the power of 2, 3, etc.
Now very few of these non-linear differential equations will have an explicit solution.
There are a few though that do, and we'll have a look at them.
And we solve them by just reducing the order by introducing a new function in the independent variable, so u in x.
And we set that equal to dy dx.
We then reduce the order and we can solve the problem usually by separation of variables.
Now, most of the time though, the answers will be in the form of some form of Taylor polynomial, and we'll get to that.
So first of all, let's have a look at some of these examples that we can find a solution for by the reduction in order.
In the first example, we see that the dependent variable y does not appear, but the independent variable x does, and then we call these non-autonomous.
The next example will not have the independent variable x in it, and that would be an autonomous non-linear differential equation.
But this one is non-autonomous in that x does appear.
So let's have a look at the problem.
I have y double prime, so that's d squared y over dx squared, equals 2 times x, so my independent variable does appear.
But it's not linear anymore inasmuch as one of the derivatives, y prime, is squared.
This is one of the situations, though, that we can try and solve by introducing this new variable in x, a new function called u of x, and that equals dy dx.
In other words, y double prime would be u prime, or du dx.
In other words, if I substitute this into there, we'll get du dx, equals 2 times x, and y prime, which is now u, is just u squared.
In other words, I can separate variables now.
I can bring this u squared over to this side, so it's going to be u to the power negative t du, and that's going to equal 2 times x dx.
I can take the indefinite integral of both sides, I'm left with negative 1 over u, and that equals 2 times a half, which is this 1x squared plus this new constant.
And I can take u over to the other side, bring this over to this side, and I'm left with this.
Negative 1 over x squared plus c1 squared.
Now, I've got to solve this by integration, so what I'm going to introduce is this new variable, and I'm going to let this c sub 1, which is now my denominator, be c sub 2 squared.
I'm just choosing that.
I can again now, now u, remember, is dy dx.
I can take x to the other side, and I'm again now left with variables that are now separated.
Take the indefinite integral on both sides, and on this side, I'm left with this that I remember from a first course in calculus, or even second course in calculus.
It's 1 over x squared plus some constant squared, so I'm going to let x equals that constant times the tangent of u.
Now, this u has nothing to do with the previous u, it's just a new constant that I'm introducing.
dx will then be c sub 2 secant squared of u du, just dx du, and I've taken the du to the other side.
So, x squared plus c2 squared is then c2 squared tangent 2 squared u plus c2 squared, and I've just taken the c sub 2 out, squared out as a common denominator, a common factor, I should say.
And then I'm left with tan squared of u plus 1, which is a trigonometric identity, equal to secant squared of u.
So, if I substitute all of this into my original problem, I'm going to be left with negative the integral of this, which is just 1 over u du.
I should say just du, left, these cancel out, 1 over c sub 2 comes out as a common factor, and I'm left with this, introducing a new variable, and I've got to solve for u, and if I solve for u on this side, it's going to be x divided by c sub 2, and I take the inverse tangent on both sides, I'm left with what u is.
So, y equals negative 1 over c sub 1, inverse tangent of x over c sub 1 plus c sub 2.
Now, what I've done for clarity's sake is just in my final answer, just made it c sub 1, c sub 2.
Don't get confused, though, that is, that c sub 2 was actually there, and c sub 3 was there.
So, this c sub 1 is not the previous one I'm talking about.
That's just for clarity's sake in my answer, my final answer, I just wanted a nice growth here in my subs of my constant.
So, that was quite easy to do.
Now, one thing that's important to remember as we go on to the next example is to do the chain rule.
If I let u equals y prime, in other words, dy dx because u is a function of x, if I take y prime prime, that will be du dx, u prime.
But, u prime, because u is a function in x, I have to do the chain rule.
So, du dx is actually du dy times dy dx.
But, dy dx is u, so that actually is u times, u times du dy for y double prime.
So, let's look at an example where there's no x, but it's an autonomous equation.
So, here we have y, y double prime equals y prime squared, again non-linear.
y, we've just seen what y double prime is through the chain rule.
I'm again letting u equals y prime, so that becomes u squared.
And, you'll very quickly notice I can just separate the variables.
If I bring u squared over to this side, it's u over u squared, which is just 1 over u du, and 1 over y dy on the other side.
I take the indefinite integral of both sides.
I'm left with a natural log of the absolute value of u equals the natural log of the absolute value of y plus c1.
I throw away my absolute values because I let the constant take care of the signs.
In other words, and I exponentiate both sides, so u is going to equal e to the power c sub 1y, and this is a constant.
I'll replace it with a new constant, c sub 2.
But, u, remember, is dy dx.
So, again, I can separate variables.
Take the integral.
The integral will leave me with a natural logarithm.
I'll exponentiate both sides, leaving me with clear y.
And, instead of these all new constants, I'm just writing them again.
These constants have nothing to do with those.
I just use these so that I don't get them all mixed up.
But, in my final step, I'm just simplifying by introducing these as if they are brand new constants.
So, these are explicit solutions to these non-linear differential equations, but most definitely not the norm.
In the next video, we'll look at an example where we have no choice but to use a Taylor polynomial.
And, we're going to get an answer which only approximates the true answer in a specific region of the x-axis.
