So let's have a look at this problem. At equilibrium a weight of 10 Newton pulls
a spring down by half a meter to hang at equilibrium. It is pulled down another
10 centimeters and released at an initial velocity of negative 5 meters per
second. Consider the downward direction as positive and calculate the solution
to this initial value problem for free oscillatory movement. Now we know that
as far as Hooke's Law is concerned that equals some spring constant times the distance
that any any force pulls it down. So we're going to have that k equals this force divided by s. So
in this instance it's this 10 newtons pulling it down by 0.05 meters. Pulling it down by 0.05 meters.
Now let's have a look where our calculator is. So that's going to be let's do 10 divided by 0.05
that leaves us with about two with 200 newtons per meter. That is going to be our spring constant
in this example. Now we know that x at time zero is another
we are pulling it down by so we'll take that as our zero line when it's pulled down by five centimeters.
So pulling it down another 0.1 meter will be now our x at zero. So when it hangs at equilibrium we'll
take that as x equals zero. When it is now pulled down five centimeters this hangs there. We pull it
down and then x prime of zero we have negative five meters per second. That means we're giving
it some upward velocity as we let it go. So let's have a look. We know for free oscillatory motion that
mx prime prime this is all functions of t plus kx has got to equal zero. So we've got to work out what
the mass of this of this spring is. So the weight equals mass mg. In other words mass equals weight
divided by g. So if we take g to be I think in this example it's not about being that accurate. Let's
just take let's just take g to be 10. Let's just take g to be 10.
10. So 10 divided by 10. 10 divided by 10 so that's 1 kilogram.
So we're going to have this
mass of 1 kilogram x prime prime plus k we've just worked out to be 200.
x that's got to be zero. In other words I can rewrite this as d squared plus 200
x equals 0 which is a homogeneous equation. I can use the auxiliary
equation here which is going to say that m squared is going to equal negative 200
negative 200 and that equals so m sub 1 is going to equal positive
10 square root of 10 square root of 2i and m sub 2 is going to equal negative 10 square root 2i
so in other words x in t is going to be now alpha is alpha equals zero here so we're just going to have c sub 1
cosine of beta now being this 10 square root of 2 so 10 square root of 2 plus c sub 2 sine
10 square root of 10 square root of 2 but it's an initial value problem and i know
that the x of 0 has got to equal summing well i forgot my t's there didn't i that's silly
so if i put 0 in here that becomes 0 the cosine of 0 is 1 so it's c sub 1 times 1 sine of 0 0 so that
falls away and i know that that has got to equal 0.1 so c sub 1 i can really work out let's get the
x prime of x prime of t from this equation so that is that going to be that is going to equal 10
square root of 2 c sub 1 and negative there sine of 10 square root 2t plus 10 square root of 2
i know what x prime of 0 is got to be well the sine that one's going to fall away so here i'm going
to have 10 square root of 2 c sub 2 now what is the cosine of 0 that's 1 and this has got to equal
negative 5 so c sub 2 equals negative 5 over 10 square root of 2 and that equals negative 1 over 2
square root of 2 so i have values for c sub 1 and c sub 2 and as much i can now write x of t
equals c sub 1 which is 0.1
cosine of 10 square root of 2t plus c sub 2 which is negative 1 over 2 square root of 2
sine of 10 square root of 2t so at any time t i can work out what what the position is going to be
now there's one more thing to add to this imagine i just let it go
if i just let it go that extra 10 centimeters would have been the amplitude because it would
have gone beyond the equilibrium point another 10 centimeters up and 10 centimeters would have been
the amplitude now look at this c sub 1 and c sub 2 are not the same because
that 10 centimeters that i pulled down i gave it an initial velocity in the upward direction so it's
actually going to go more than 10 centimeters beyond the equilibrium point in the negative or upward
direction so the amplitude is not going to be this 10 because i gave it that upward velocity
in other words when we see the c sub 1 and c sub 2 not being the same we can think about the fact that
the amplitude is the amplitude is not going to be the extra amount that i pulled it down
you
