Now in this short video I just want to show you that we don't always want to write an equation of the form x of t equals c sub 1 cosine omega t and c sub 2 sine of omega t.
It might sometimes be useful to write it like this where a refers to the amplitude that we will eventually have sine of omega t plus some phase angle phi.
And this phase angle phi, if you just think of uniform circular motion, and instead of starting at an angle of zero, remember I said we can see this up and down oscillatory motion as circular motion viewed from the side.
So we needn't start at the equilibrium position, we might start at some other position.
So initially at time zero we add some angle to the circular motion, and if we viewed that from the side it means we needn't start at the position that we pull it down.
And that's analogous to saying, look, we're giving it some initial velocity either down or up when we let it go, which means that that extra bit that we pulled it down from equilibrium will not be the amplitude.
And we can do that by just viewing our simple free harmonic motion as circular motion, and doing this, and we'll make this side c sub 1, this side c sub 2, making the hypotenuse here c sub 1 squared plus c sub 2 squared to the power half, or the square root of that, and we call that a.
So we're going to write it.
So we're going to write it in this form, which will give us this amplitude.
So how do we prove that these two are exactly the same?
Well, we just do some algebra and use some trigonometric identities.
We know that the sine of the addition of two angles equals just the cosine of one of them, sine of the other, plus the sine of one and the cosine of the other.
Just swapping those out.
I remind you that a equals the square root of c sub 1 squared and c sub 2 squared.
And if I just look at this, I do note that the sine of phi equals c sub 1 over a.
That leaves me with a just through simple algebra being c sub 1 over the sine of phi.
Now the cosine of phi is c sub 2 over a.
That means through simple algebra a equals c sub 2 over the cosine of phi.
So if I just substitute this trigonometric identity in there and I multiply a throughout by both these terms, I'm going to be left with this.
And if I now substitute a in this form and a in that form, I'm left with this, with the sine of phi and the cosine of phi simply canceling out.
And I'm left with c sub 1 cosine of omega t and c sub 2 sine of omega t.
So I do know now that if I do get an answer in this format where I don't have c sub 2 being zero, as we said before, where c sub 1 solely will then be the amplitude.
And look at that, if that is solely the amplitude, the square root of c sub 1 squared is the c sub 1, so that'll be the amplitude.
But if there is a c sub 2, in other words, I've given it a phase angle or, in other words, an initial velocity, I can get the amplitude by getting the square root of c sub 1 squared and c sub 2 squared.
Or, I can use c sub 1 and c sub 2 to get to phi.
And it's easy to get to phi because if I just look at what the tangent of phi is, if I just look here, the tangent of phi,
well, that is just going to equal c sub 1 over c sub 2.
In other words, phi is the inverse tangent of c sub 1 over c sub 2.
And that is as simple as that.
