Now we're asked now to rewrite this x of t as two-thirds cosine of a t minus a six sine of a t.
And we've got to write that in our alternate form, which I remind you is x of t equals a times the sine of omega t plus phi.
We know very easily how to get a, that's going to be the square root of c sub 1 squared plus c sub 2 squared.
So in our example problem here, that is going to be the square root of two-thirds square, which is 4 over 9 plus 1 over 36 for negative 1 over 6 squared.
That's negative 1 over 6 squared.
And that leaves me just checking on my calculator.
Let's do the square root of 4 over 9 plus 1 over 36.
That gives me square root of 17 over 6.
So that's very simply a.
Now to get phi.
Now we saw in the previous video that the sine of phi in our little triangle was just c sub 1 over a.
But we've got to be a bit careful because if we were to draw a Cartesian coordinate system here, remember that this would represent equilibrium.
So this would represent 0 phi.
But if we look at c sub 1 and c sub 2, there's c sub 1 and there's c sub 2.
c sub 2 is actually negative 1 over 6.
So it's not in a positive x direction, it's actually negative 1 over 6.
And then c sub 2 we go up two-thirds.
So there will be something like this, not to scale.
And I'm left with this.
Remember this is my angle phi.
And this right here is my angle pi minus phi.
Because there's 180 degrees.
That's pi minus this is phi.
So that's the angle I'm looking at.
c sub 1 is still two-thirds.
And what is the length?
If I'm just looking at a normal triangle, forget that it's on a Cartesian coordinate system.
This is just going to be the absolute value of negative 1 over 6 or 1 over 6.
And this length of this is still going to be square root of 17 divided by 6.
Okay, so if I now get this angle, the sine of this angle, the sine of this angle is two-thirds over the hypotenuse,
which is square root of 17 divided by 6.
But I've just got to note that this is not phi.
This is the sine of pi minus phi is going to equal that.
In other words, pi minus phi is the inverse sine or the arc sine of two-thirds times 6 over square root 17.
So that goes in there.
That's two.
So phi is pi minus the arc sine of 4 over square root 17.
So phi is going to equal, let's do that.
I get pi minus the inverse sine or arc sine of 4 over square root 17.
So that is about 5 for me.
It's going to be about 1.8157.
So let's just do three digits there.
In other words, x of t equals a, which was square root of 17, divided by 6, times the sine of omega was 8.
t and phi is plus 1.816.
So you just have to be careful how you get phi.
And just think clearly about what phi is by constructing it.
And this positive x-axis is always phi equals 0.
Phi equals 0, so phi goes from this side anticlockwise.
And just through C sub 1 and C sub 2, remember C sub 2 represents your y-axis.
That represents your y and this represents your x-axis for the Cartesian coordinate system.
So I went negative, oh, that's all wrong.
What am I doing?
Oh, let's have a look.
So this represents my x-axis.
Remember from our drawing in the previous video, this represents my x-axis.
This represents my y-axis.
So I'm going negative 1, 6 on the x-axis, then 2 thirds on the y-axis.
And that constructs the position that I'm at.
And this is phi, meaning this angle is pi minus phi.
And if I just express all of these as links, so I express this as the absolute value,
that being now square root of 17 over 6,
I can use simple trigonometry to solve the problem.
