Let's have a look at this problem, where we actually have also asked to express the answer in an alternate form.
Again, I can write this as d squared plus 2d plus 10, x equals 0, homogenous.
So I can write the auxiliary equation, let's just get the pencil working again.
There we go, and I can write this as m squared plus 2m plus 10 equals 0.
And that's not going to solve properly, so I'm going to have m equals negative 2 plus minus the square root of b squared,
which is 4 minus 40 divided by 2, divided by 2, and that equals negative 2 plus minus, that's the square root of negative 36.
That is 6i divided by 2, in other words, I'm going to have m is going to equal negative 1 plus or minus 3i.
In other words, alpha equals negative 1 and beta equals 3.
That leaves me with x of t, now x of t equals e to the power negative t.
Then I'm going to have c sub 1 cosine of beta t, that's 3t, plus c sub 2 sine of 3t.
As far as the answer is concerned, but it's an initial value problem.
Let's rewrite this, x of t equals, let's just distribute that in, so it's going to be c sub 1 e to the power negative t cosine of 3t,
plus c sub 2 e to the power negative t sine of 3t.
Just distribute this e to the power negative t in.
If I now get the x of 0, the cosine of 0 is 1, e to the power negative 0, or just negative 1 times 0 is 0, e to the power 0 is 1,
so that is just going to be left as c sub 1.
Sine of 0 is 0, so that's going to equal negative 2.
Now, x prime of t, if I look at this equation, again, the product of two equations,
so that's going to equal negative t.
Now, I could have already put this in for c2, put it in there, because I already know what c sub 2 is, and do it.
But let's do it this way.
So it's negative t, c sub 1 e to the power negative t cosine of 3t.
Cosine is a negative, so that's going to be a negative 3 c sub 1 e to the power negative t sine of 3t.
And we're going to have here negative c sub 2 e to the power negative t sine of 3t,
and plus we're going to have 3 c sub 2 e to the power negative t cosine of 3t for that product rule here.
So, c prime of 0, so that term is going to fall away because there's a t in.
So we're going to have here another negative, because sine is negative, that sine of a 0 is negative,
so I'm only left with this one.
So it looks like it's 3 times c sub 2 e to the power 0 is 1.
Cosine of 0 is 1, and that has got to equal...
Oh, did I make a mistake somewhere? Let's just have a look.
I think, I think, I think, I think, I think.
Did I make a mistake when it comes to these?
That c sub 1 has got to equal negative 2.
And let's have a look.
Let's just have a look at these.
So, that's negative c sub 1.
Oh, did I do that right?
That mustn't be a t in there, should there?
I don't know where that t came in.
For x prime of t.
So, it's negative c sub 1 for this.
Negative c sub 1 e to the power negative t, cosine of 3t.
So, indeed, I still have that one left.
Minus c sub 1.
Minus c sub 1.
Apologies for that.
Minus c sub 1 e to the power negative t, cosine of 3t.
Minus c sub 1 e to the power negative t.
That's correct.
Sometimes you just have to look over these and over these until you realize where your mistake was.
So, this must be negative c sub 1.
Negative c sub 1.
That's correct.
And plus 3 sub 2.
That's all correct.
That's all correct.
So, 3 times what's c sub 2 minus c sub 1 is a negative 2.
That equals 0.
So, 3 times c sub 2 is going to equal negative 2.
And c sub 2 equals negative 2 over 3.
Apologies for that.
So, I can rewrite x of t.
x of t.
We can now write.
Let's write it in this form.
So, c sub 1.
c sub 1 we noted was negative 2.
So, it's going to be negative 2 e to the power negative t, cosine of 3t.
And c sub 2 is negative 2 over 3 e to the power negative t, sine of 3t.
Good.
Now, we need to write it in alternate form.
Now, we need to write it in alternate form.
Now, a is very easy.
A is quite easy to do.
Let's just remind ourselves what this alternate form is going to look like for these problems.
I'm going to have the x of t.
And that is going to equal.
I think the battery is going to die.
If it does, I'll just swap and continue.
That's going to be i sine times omega t.
But remember, omega is a bit different now.
It's the square root of omega squared minus lambda squared t plus phi.
That is the format that we're looking for.
Let me stop here, change the battery pack, and then I'll continue.
OK.
Okay, so I remind you that's the format we have to write it in now.
A is easy, that's the square root of c sub 1 squared plus c sub 2 squared.
So in our example here, that's going to be the square root of c sub 1, which was named that's a 4.
Plus, that is 4 over 9.
So that is going to be 36 over 9 plus 4 over 9, that's 40 over 9.
That equals the square root of 40 over 9, that's 10 times 4, that's 2 square root of 10 divided by 3.
So A is indeed simple to get.
Now we've got to do this phase angle phi.
Let's have a look at it again.
Now c sub 1, I remind you, c sub 1 is our y value.
c sub 1 equals our y value on our Cartesian coordinate system.
And c sub 1 was negative 2.
c sub 2 is actually our x value on our Cartesian coordinate system.
And that was negative 2 over 3.
So I've got to go negative 2 thirds on this axis.
And then all the way down negative 2 on the y axis.
So my angle is here.
This is the angle we're talking about.
This is my position at the start.
Now this all the way down here is phi.
That's the phi we're talking about.
So just to get this angle that I'm interested in, this tiny little angle here,
that, just think about it, it's this whole phi minus this part here, which is this phi.
So that's the angle I'm looking for.
As far as my y axis is concerned, this is, that's its length.
This length here is negative 2 over 3, the absolute value of that.
And this one is, what was it, 2 square root of 10 over 3.
2 square root of 10 over 3.
There.
So if I'm looking for the sine of this little angle here,
and the sine of phi minus pi,
sine is opposite, which is 2 divided by hypotenuse.
So let's just multiply it by its reciprocal there.
2 square root of 10.
In other words, phi minus pi equals the arc sine or inverse sine,
2's and 2 go, of 3 over square root of 10.
In other words, phi equals pi plus the inverse sine or the arc sine of 3 over square root of 10.
So we're going to have pi plus the inverse sine of 3 over square root of 10.
Let's have a look.
And that leaves us with 4.391.
Phi equals 4.391.
And we know that our omega squared minus lambda squared t.
And our example here is 3t.
So we're left with the x of t equals a, which was there, 2 square root of 10 divided by 3 times the sine of 3t plus 4.391.
So we don't work that out.
In our example, we've already got the other form, which was 3t.
So this would still equal 3t.
This would still equal 3.
I just have to work out phi properly.
