Now we've got to consider resonance. Now imagine a glass, nice wine glass sound,
external sound, high-pitched, starts to resonate and eventually, eventually it
breaks or some famous bridges with wind blowing over the bridge and the bridge
starts resonating and eventually it eventually breaks. So what we have here,
if we imagine that, is that over time these amplitudes just become larger and
larger and eventually breaks. So the first thing we have to consider basically is
driving force, so that's the sound coming into the glass or wind blowing over these
bridges with undamped motion. Now that is first of all unrealistic in as much as
there's always going to be some damping force. But what might happen is as the
resonance increases, obviously those forces go beyond the net, forces keeping the
structure like glass or the bridge in place and causes breakage. But to get to
those equations, first of all let's consider the unrealistic situation of
external driving force on an undamped system. So it's the spring that can just
move with this amplitude, you know, without any dampening and there's some
external force on that. So we've got to consider this where there is this periodic
force, equals this periodic force on the right hand side and we start to the
position zero and with a phase angle there zero, well at least an initial
velocity of zero, let's put it like that. We have sub-zero some constant and we let
gamma not equal omega. So first let's solve for that, we can solve definitely for our
transient term here. We know there's going to be a transient term and but is, well
actually is there, in as much as we are just going to have this resonance take
place. Let's have a look. C sub c of t and we're going to have a d squared plus
omega squared of x, we're going to have equal to zero, in other words m squared equals
negative omega squared or m equals plus or minus omega i, which leaves an alpha of zero
and a beta of one. In other words, x sub c of t is going to equal e to the power zero
t, that's nothing, just one I mean, c sub one cosine of t and c sub two sine of t. So
that was quite simple. Now we've got to suggest an x sub p of t and of course today is the day
that they break the building down anyway. Not really, someone's just being annoying with
a hammer. So we're going to imagine that's going to be some cosine of gamma t plus b times
some sine of gamma t. We're going to presume that to be in this form. Remember f sub zero is
a constant. In other words, x sub p prime of t, that is going to be negative gamma a sine,
just differentiating each term, sine of gamma t, and here we're going to have plus gamma b cosine
of gamma t, and here we're going to have negative gamma squared b sine of gamma t, and I've got to put
it into this original equation of ours. So I'm going to have negative gamma squared a cosine of
gamma t minus gamma squared b sine of gamma t plus omega squared times this. So I'm going to have plus
omega squared a cosine of gamma t plus omega squared b sine of gamma t, and that's going to equal f sub
zero sine of gamma t. So if I just look at all these sines of gamma t's that I can get, sine, so that's
going to be negative gamma squared b, and a plus omega squared b. It seems like on this side, on that
side, I'm going to have my sine of gamma t, and an f sub zero, and that's got an equal plus. Remember here's
a cosine of gamma t as well as a cosine of gamma t as well, and a zero. So if my cosine of gamma t's,
I'm going to have a negative gamma squared a, and a plus omega squared, omega squared a, and omega squared a.
So there we go. And that sine will go there. In other words, we have the fact that here we have a b,
omega squared minus gamma squared, that's going to equal f sub zero, and here we have the fact that,
in other words, b is going to equal f sub zero divided by omega squared minus gamma squared,
and on this side, we've got to have this a equal zero, and the only way that these two are going to
equal zero is if a is zero, so a equals zero. So we have x sub p and t, there we go, a is zero, so we
have b equals, b is going to equal f sub zero omega squared minus gamma squared sine of gamma t.
Okay, so eventually we have this whole x of t is going to equal
c sub one cosine of t plus c sub two sine of t plus this term f sub zero
over gamma squared, omega squared minus gamma squared sine of gamma t.
Now let's just have a look, I think what I did here, beta is not one, beta equals omega
equals omega, and I forgot all my omegas here, let's just bring them back, that's just silly,
silly, sloppy work. That's an omega t and an omega t, and that should be omega t and omega t,
that looks much better. Maybe it's all this knocking on the hammer, it can really stop now.
Anyway, we've got to, it's an initial value problem, so x of zero is zero, so we're going to have
equals c sub one and the sine will disappear, so c sub one is zero. The x prime of t, let's have a look
at what that's going to be, so that's going to be negative c sub one omega sine of omega t. Here we're
going to have plus c sub two omega cosine of omega t, and this is a constant, so we're going to have
plus f sub zero with a gamma omega squared minus gamma squared cosine of gamma t, it looks like, and we've
got to set this to zero, so we've got to set this to zero, x sub prime of zero equals zero, the sine will disappear,
so we're left with these, c sub two omega and cosine of zero is one, this is zero is one, plus we're going to have
f sub zero gamma over omega squared minus gamma squared, is that correct, so c sub two is going to equal
negative, and that is going to be f sub zero gamma over omega, omega squared minus gamma squared for omega squared,
does not, omega does not equal gamma, does not equal gamma, and we said that in the beginning.
Let's have a look now, let's have a look now, so we have c sub two, in other words, x of t is going to
equal c sub one, we saw zero, so c sub two is this, minus f sub zero gamma over omega times omega squared minus gamma squared,
c sub two went with sine of omega t, and then we're going to have this f sub zero omega squared minus
gamma squared, sin of gamma t, and I think if we can just put another omega up here, and another omega here,
we can have perhaps take out, let's have a look, can we perhaps take out, um,
x, yeah, we can take out, x of t, we can take out f sub zero, over, let's have that omega and omega squared minus,
lambda, gamma squared I should say, so then I'm left with, if I took this out, I'm going to be left with a
negative gamma sine of omega t, and I took all of those out, so I'm going to have a positive omega
sine of gamma t, omega sine of gamma t, yet again with omega not equally,
not lambda, gamma,
gamma, oh, let's hope that, uh, you could still see all of that, so I just added that just to simplify
matters in this instance, but what if, uh, what if, uh, so this is a constant times this and a constant
times that, and so you can see as time approaches infinity, obviously this periodic function is just
going to get bigger and bigger and bigger, um, now, we've got to have a look at what, well,
it's not going to, if you just have a look, this is this periodic, because this is a constant, that's
a constant, and this whole thing is a constant, so it's just going to have this periodic motion,
but now we've got to look at what happens at resonance, and, and for instance, what happens if,
if, uh, if, uh, the frequency of the driving, uh, driving force equals, or approaches the frequency
of the free, free vibration, so what we're going to do is let the limit as, um, as, um,
gamma approaches omega, what's going to happen here, so this goes to zero, the denominator goes to zero,
uh, let's do that, of course, of, of the x of t, let's do that, uh, uh, and have a look at what
happens, this is called pure resonance, pure resonance, without, without this damping,
the whole problem was still without this damping force, so let's have a look,
I mean, this is a senseless knocking for no particular reason, other than someone's pet,
tiny little project, but anyway, so let's do that, we can bring the f sub zero out, because that's a
common, uh, or that's a constant, and we're going to have this minus, uh, what was still then the limit
of gamma approaching omega of negative gamma sine of omega t plus omega sine of gamma t divided by
omega times omega squared minus gamma squared, and if I let the gamma approach omega, that's going to be
zero there, so I can make use of Lehopital's rule, Lehopital's rule, in other words, I can take the derivative
independently of the numerator and denominator, that's going to leave me f sub zero of the limit
of gamma approaching omega, um, now, uh, I've got to get the derivative of this with respect to,
to, to gamma, so this is just going to leave me with negative the sine of omega t,
and with respect to gamma, so that's going to be omega t cosine of gamma t,
and, uh, that would be omega to the power three, but that's just a constant, so that's going to
leave me with negative, uh, two times, uh, negative two times, um, omega gamma, and now I can let this
approach omega, and I won't have zero in the denominator, so I'm going to have f sub zero,
here I'm going to have negative times the sine of, now omega t, now plus, uh, here I am going to have
an omega t cosine of omega t, and I'm going to divide this by negative two times omega squared,
so I'm going to have the fact that I have here f sub zero over, um, let's put that two omega squared,
two omega squared, so that leaves me with, let's have a look, omega t cosine omega t,
that leaves me with f sub zero, uh, sine of omega t, uh, for this first term, I'm just distributing that in,
um, looks negative and negative, and this leaves me with a negative there,
I'm going to have on this side f sub zero over two, uh, two times omega, there's going to be another t in
there, cosine omega t, there we go, let's just bring that all up in there, so I've just distributed this
f sub zero in there, and with this common denominator, so I'm left with this function,
x of t, this is now as we have, um, uh, as we have, uh, gamma approaching omega, we're going to be left
with this, which is called pure resonance, and of course now, as time increases, uh, we're going to
have, we're going to have this fact that it just gets larger and larger, now, obviously there's going
to be some damping in reality, we can't have this, but as I say, in many instances, you're going to
drive the system so far, that it's going to go beyond the amplitude, it's going to go beyond
what the net forces are keeping the structure together, and you're going to get a breakage.
