In this section we're going to look at series starting off with power series as
solutions to differential equations. So just to remember what a power series is
about a point x minus a. We can have the function here y represented as this
power series and summation notation for these counting integers starting at
zero to infinity so n equals zero one two three of some constant and every time
the constant may change as n grows x minus a to the power n. That is a power
series. Now it also yields a first derivative so if you write this out so
it'll be c sub zero x minus a to the power zero which is just one so it'll be c sub
zero plus. Then we'll have a c sub one and x minus a to the power one. If you
write this all out term by term you can do differentiation term by term. That means
we can write this the first derivative if you if you looked at this that means we
could write the first derivative as such. In other words we just took c to the
power n x minus a we brought the n forward and then n minus one as far as the power
is concerned. There we go. And if we do term by term differentiation of this we're
going to end up with this. So again we brought the n minus one forward and then
that became n minus two. So just normal differentiation and it stays within the
summation notation. Just remembering now every time of course as you
differentiate you start n at one counting number higher. So when does the series
represent a function? Well every power series has an interval of what you call
convergence. That is where a specific value of x the sequence of partial sums
converge. Now I do have a video series on advanced calculus. The first few lectures on
that is on series and you can see in those videos exactly what this means. But this
interval of convergence is a set of real numbers for x which the series
converges. So that's the interval of convergence which every power series has
and then every power series has a radius of convergence. For a radius larger than
zero the power series converges at this value and it diverges for another value. So as n
grows it either converges to a single value or it wildly diverges. Absolute
convergence is then for all values of x in the interval of convergence. The end
points need checking though. Just reminding you of some points once you
watch the video series on sequences and series. Just remember also if the series
converges only for a then the radius of convergence is zero. The most common test
we used I think I might do one example problem on that is the ratio test. So you take the limit as n
approaches infinity. You take your two power series summation notation that you were
given but you take n plus 1 n plus 1 in the numerator and then just n as you were
given it in the denominator. x minus a can then be bought out of course in absolute value. It's because it's a
ratio test is the limit in this absolute value and that will give you a value L. If L is less than zero
then the series converges absolutely. That should actually be one. I'll change it later. In the printer L should be if it's less than 1 the series converges. If it's larger than 1 the series diverges.
If it's larger than 1 the series diverges and actually if it is less than 1 then it converges. If it's larger than 1 it diverges and if it's 0 if it is equal to 1. Let's change this now.
So if it's less than 0 it converges. If it's less than 0 it converges. If it's larger than 1 then it diverges and if it equals 1 you have to test each of the two endpoints to see whether there is indeed divergence or convergence. It's inconclusive.
So those shouldn't be 0's. Those should be 1's. So power series defines a function f of x whose domain is the interval of convergence of the series. So you can write any function, you can write a function as a power series and it actually is that function on the interval of convergence.
So if the radius of convergence is larger than 0 then this function is continuous, differentiable and integrable on that interval and that's exactly what we did here. We showed that term by term you can integrate it, differentiate it but you can also integrate it.
And the identity property. And the identity property that is for all values of x in the interval of convergence. If that equals 0 and the radius of convergence is larger than 0 then all these, that means, it just means that all these constants have to be 0.
Then arithmetic procedures of the power series. They can be added, subtracted, multiply and divided and we use what we call shifting of the summation index. So we start with the powers of x and we get them equal by starting the summation with a different value of n and writing the extra values of the terms outside of the summation signs and then we introduce this new variable k and after the video on the ratio test we'll do an example.
Just of this.
Just of this.
