Let's have a look at this problem. So we just need to find the interval of convergence of this series.
So we're going to use the ratio test.
Remember for that we're going to write the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value.
Now I've got to have x minus 3 to the power n plus 1 divided by 2 to the power n plus 1 and n plus 1.
Everything's got to be added to that.
So I'm going to divide this by just that which means I multiply it just by its reciprocal.
So that's going to be 2 to the power n divided by x minus 3 to the power n.
And that's going to be the, oh this is terrible, I've got to look for my proper ruler.
So that's got to go there.
So that is the limit as n goes to infinity of, now I can rewrite this as an x to the power 3 to the power n and an x minus 3 just like that.
So this I can write as a 2, a 2 to the power n and an n plus 1, 2 to the power n and an x minus 3 to the power n.
So I'm just rewriting all of those terms, just using the rules of powers and I'll quickly see that I can just get rid of a few things.
Of course this is the limit as far as n is concerned so this half has got nothing to do with it.
The x minus 3 is an absolute value, half is an absolute value in as much as its own value.
It can't be plus or minus a half just because it's an absolute value sign.
It is a half, there's the 2.
But depending on the value of x, if x is 0 this is a negative, if x is a 4 this is a positive.
So that has to remain in the absolute value, in the absolute value brackets.
But I bring that out because it has nothing to do with, as n changes, as n changes nothing happens to this.
So I can bring it outside of the absolute value signs and what is left is n and n plus 1.
And if I take this limit I have indeterminate form as I have, I'm going to have infinity divided by infinity.
Therefore I can use the Opital's rule and that means I can independently take the derivative of the numerator and the denominator.
Not as a quotient, I'm not doing a quotient rule there for differentiation, I'm just taking it independently.
So a half absolute value of x minus 3 of the limit as n goes to infinity of, what's the derivative of that?
That's 1 over 1 which is just 1.
In other words, a half x minus 3 is going to be less than 1 because I want to know where this series converges.
We said it converges absolutely at where this is less than 1.
I can rewrite this as negative 1 is less than a half, x minus 3 is less than 1.
That's what this would mean.
Or I suppose I could have just written x minus 3 is less than 2.
Because I can now say negative 2 is less than x minus 3 is less than 2.
So I can just take the 3 out.
So I'm going to have 1 is less than x is less than 5.
So this is where there is convergence, convergence.
So that is where there is convergence at this interval of x.
Now you'd have to plug 1 in and 5 into this and see if at 1 there is convergence and at 5 there is convergence.
So you'll have to test the two endpoints itself.
But watch the video series on advanced calculus.
First few videos you'll see how to do all the ratio tests as far as summation and sums and sequences are concerned.
