And this is how we're going to do it. We're going to use the theorem of Frobenius. There
we have it. F-R-O-B-E-N-I-U-S. Frobenius. And that is a series solution that we're going
to find for regular singular points. Only for regular singular points. There we go.
And this is it. Where's my green highlighter? This is the equation you have to remember.
We're going to have y equals, so a different y that we're then going to take the first
derivative of, the second derivative of, and substitute it back into the original problem.
We're going to have x minus x sub 0 to the power of times the sum of n equals 0 to infinity
of C sub n times x minus x sub 0 to the power n. To the power n. And now I say the series
will converge there where we said absolutely. And we said at least on some interval 0 is
less than x minus x sub 0 is less than this radius of convergence.
Now this is not the format in which we use it. We distribute this in there. So we're going
to have, this is the one that we're actually going to use. It's the sum of n equals 0 to
infinity of C sub n. Now what happens if I distribute this in there? Well it's going to be x minus
x sub 0 n plus r. N plus r. That's what we're going to have. So let's take the first derivative
of that. That's still going to be the sum of n equals 0. Now remember, what did we do when
we took the first derivative when we just had the normal power series? That crept up to
n equals 1. Because of the normal power series, we're going to have a constant when n equals
0 for the first. We're just going to have C sub 0 x to the power 0. So that just left
us with C sub 0. When we took the first derivative of a constant, that falls away. So we don't
start at n sub 0 again. Yeah, it's a different story though. We don't have just raised to the
power n. Depends what r is. That first term might still contain an x. So you can't discard
it. You can't start at n equals 1 for the first derivative, n equals 2 for the second
derivative. If you write out these terms, you'll very quickly know when you take, when
you do term by term differentiation, that you can't necessarily get rid of that first sub
0. So don't do that. So that's going to be C sub n. We're going to use, have n plus r.
And now we're going to have x minus x sub 0, n plus r minus 1. And what are we going to
have for the double prime? Well, same story holds. We're still going to start at 0, not
at 2 this time, for the regular power series. We're going to have C sub n, n plus r, n plus
r minus 1. And x minus x sub 0. And now n plus r minus 2. So those are the equations because
we're only going to do, we are only going to do, or yeah, let me put it out there. I think
for this series, I'm only going to do second order and our singular point x sub 0. I think
most of the problems I'm going to do, I'm going to let the x sub 0 clearly be, use examples
where x sub 0 is clearly going to equal 0. So in the end, this is just going to be x
to the power n plus r minus 2. So not only are we now going to have to have iterations
of C sub 0 and C sub 1, express everything in terms of C sub 0 and C sub 1 so that I can
still have the two series as a solution to the original problem, but I'm also going to have
to find out what this r value is. And we'll start some examples shortly and we'll show you
how, how to get this value.
