Good, let's start with a brand new section and we're going to do what is called the Laplace transform.
Laplace transform.
First of all let's have a look at what a transform is.
A transform is exactly as the word implies, we are transforming something.
If I have a function f of x equals say for instance x cubed and I take the first derivative of the f of x with respect to x.
That is going to be 3x cubed, squared I should say, 3x squared.
So, whereas before I had a function which was x cubed, I now have a new function called 3x squared.
I have transformed this function into something else.
I have transformed f of x and the transform I performed was applying the first derivative with respect to x.
That was a transform.
We are now going to have a new transform and it is going to be in the form of a very special integral.
We are going to do a special kind of integration.
Well, it is still normal integration but we are going to add something to a function.
We are going to add something to it.
I am not sure how we should do this.
Let's do this.
We are going to add something to this function.
And then we are going to integrate it.
And we are going to do this type of integration to it.
And I suppose here it would be dx.
Usually we use t in this instance.
So we are going to have a function f of t.
And we are going to take the Laplace transform of the f of t.
It is written like this.
And l.
Curse of l.
And then these curly braces.
The f of t.
Close curly braces.
Very nice.
That is taking the Laplace transform of something.
This was taking the first derivative with respect to x.
Everything we do has its own form of writing.
So here we use this notation to say we are transforming this function.
We are now going to use this notation to say we are transforming this function.
And how do we do that?
What is this part that gets placed in here?
Now of course you can see that the eventual integral is going to be an improper integral
from 0 to infinity.
But what is this that we put in there?
This thing, and this is a very unmathematical way of doing this, is e to the power negative
st such that s is larger than 0.
We definitely want this to be 1 over the e to the power st.
It's definitely got to be in the denominator.
So we want that s to be at least larger than 0.
Just as it stands here.
Depending on what the answer is.
And the answer is always going to be some new function.
Let's call it the uppercase of f just to distinguish the two.
And it's always going to be a function of s.
If f was just a function of t and I introduce this, I'm going to end up with a function in s.
We're always going to see that.
Ok, so let's have the f of t being a constant and that constant was 1.
So if I take the Laplace transform of 1, what is that going to be?
Well, we said first of all, we're going to do the improper integral.
So that's going from 0 to infinity.
With respect to t, we always write these things with respect to t.
I suppose I could put an x there as long as I then have an x there as well.
So I'm going to, this becomes this e to the power negative st times the function itself.
In this instance, it's just 1.
So, if s is this constant, which is now at least larger than 0.
What is the integral of this?
Well, it's negative 1 over s times e to the power negative st going from 0 to infinity.
Now, how did we do these initially?
How did we do these initially?
Remember, in first year calculus we used to write something like this as b goes to infinity of the integral of zane from 0 to b of e to the power negative st dt.
That's how we would have done it.
So we would have got a function and then we would have seen if there's a limit.
If there was a limit, this was convergent.
If there's no limit, it didn't exist.
This was divergent and we couldn't.
This is an area under a curve, so there wouldn't be an area under the curve as b goes to infinity.
There wouldn't be a definitive area under the curve.
It wouldn't be convergent.
Okay.
So for these, remember L'Hôpital's rule and all the rules we have for these limits.
And we always just use short hand instead of going to the b and then putting in b.
We just do that.
But remember what should happen behind the scenes.
So what do we have left here?
It's negative 1 over s.
And what is this?
Well, it is 1 over e to the power st because there's a negative there.
And this has got to go from 0 to infinity.
So I'm going to have this negative 1 over s.
I'm going to have this negative 1 over s.
And what are we going to have?
We're going to have 1 over e to the power s times infinity minus 1 over e to the power s times 0.
Just putting those two in.
1 over anything to the power infinity, well that's the 0.
So I'm going to have negative 1 over s still.
That is 0 minus anything to the power s times 0 is 0 e to the power 0 is 1.
So it's minus 1.
So that equals 1 over s.
As I said to you, it will always be a function of s.
So the Laplace transform of 1 equals 1 over s.
Equals 1 over s.
And I remind you what the Laplace transform is.
The Laplace transform of a function f of t equals the improper integral going from 0 to infinity of e to the power negative st times the f of t.
Here it was just 1.
So that is the Laplace transform.
You have to remember that.
And the definition is what is a transform.
You're transforming a function.
And in this instance it is called the Laplace transform.
It's difficult to get used to in the beginning.
To remember how to do all of these.
Eventually it becomes second nature.
And you'll start to show what it is useful for.
Why we would transform a function, a differential equation.
And I can tell you now it's because it changes it into a normal function that we can just do algebraic manipulation on actually.
Makes the differential equation easier to solve.
Another form of solving linear differential equations.
By taking the transform first.
Laplace transform.
That is how to do it.
That's the equation.
And here we have our first one of the constant one would be 1 over s.
Now let's start a sencillocalyptic equation.
