Let's see if we can do something a bit more difficult. Let's set the f of t equals t. So
let's get the Laplace transform. You never know how to do these curly braces properly of t. Now
we do have our shorthand of doing that. That is going to be the improper integral going from 0
to infinity of e to the power negative st times t dt. So here I have the product of two functions
of t and I'm taking the integral with respect to that variable. In other words I better use
the power rule of integration here. I'm going to select, there's various methods of doing
this, I'll do it longhand this way. I'm going to select this t as being u, which means v'
has got to be the e to the power negative st. That makes u prime equal to 1 and that means
v should have been negative 1 over s e to the power negative st. If I take the first derivative
of that with respect to t I'm going to end up with that. This leaves me with uv minus u prime
v. So this is going to leave me with uv, that's negative 1 over s. It's going to leave me with
the t and it's going to leave me with an e to the power negative st and that it goes from 0 to
infinity. Remember it goes from 0 to b and I'm taking the limit of that. Then I'm going to have a
negative improper integral and now it becomes u prime v. That's why I chose t because I could
simplify it so the new integral must be a bit simpler than the old one was. 1 over s, negative 1 over s
is a constant so I can bring that out. That makes this 1 over s and I'm going to have e to the power
negative st dt. Now what is this? This is the Laplace transform of 1. This is nothing other. We've just
done it in the previous video. This is the Laplace transform of 1 and we know what the Laplace transform
of 1 is, well this is 1 over s. So here I'm already going to have 1 over s times another 1 over s. You
can do this whole thing again. We just did it in the previous video. So it's going to be 1 over s
squared for these two. Remember this is times 1. So that's the Laplace transform of 1 which we showed
1 over s. Let's do this side though. It's going to be negative 1 over s times this is going to be t over
e to the power st going from 0 to infinity. So let's do that. That is negative 1 over s. So what
are we going to have? We're going to have infinity over e to the power s times infinity minus 0 over
e to the power s times 0. And we have that plus 1 over s squared. Now this is in determinate form
because I have infinity divided by infinity. I will have infinity divided by infinity but remember
this wasn't actually that was actually a b. It was actually the limit as b goes to infinity
of it was b over e to the power s b. And if I put in the limit there it would be infinity divided by
infinity in determinate form. So I take independently the first derivative of both. That would have left
me with 1 over s times e to the power s b. And if I now slip in infinity in there it's 1 over infinity
that's the 0. So that's 0 minus 0. This is 1. That's the 0. 0 times this is the 0. So it's just 1 over s squared.
There we go. The Laplace transform of t to the power 1 is 1 over s squared. That is the Laplace transform
of t. Remember we showed before the Laplace transform of we said 1 but that's the same as t to the power 0
is 1 over s. t to the power 1 is 1 over s squared. I think you can see where this is going.
But we'll get to that and we'll do some more examples next.
