Now let's do something even more difficult. Let's select the Laplace transform of this f of t.
So the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t. And there's a reason why I probably, although I'm sure it's a pain,
I'm going to keep on writing this on this side. So that's going to be the improper integral game from 0 to infinity
of e to the power negative st sine of 2t dt.
Let me not keep on writing it, but you'll see it becomes important later.
So two functions, both of t, product rule, I'd better decide on a u and a v' which one's u, which one's v'
Let's choose this one. When it is like this, we're going to just iterate between sine and cosine.
Always choose this as your u, unless this is like t, which will make it 1, which will make it easier as we go.
So u' is going to equal 2 cosine 2t. If that's equal to e to the power, if this is equal to e to the power negative st,
that means v is going to equal negative 1 over s e to the power negative st.
If I take the first derivative of that, I'll end up with that.
So this has got to equal uv. So I've got a negative 1 over s.
I've got a 1 over e to the power st.
And again, I'm suggesting that s must now be larger than 0, otherwise this does not remain a negative.
And I have the sine of 2t.
And all of this must go from 0 to infinity as far as t is concerned.
Minus the integral of uv'
But there's a 2 which is a constant.
There's a negative 1 over s which is a constant.
Integral going from 0 to infinity of, I'm still left with e to the power negative st, cosine of 2t dt.
Okay.
Now let's see what we can do here.
It's going to be a negative 1 over s.
So let's plug infinity into this quickly.
And then 0.
So it's going to be 1 over infinity.
So that's going to be 0.
1.
Just put the 1 out there.
Multiplied by, we've got to put infinity in there.
Now, of course, the sine of, it can only go from positive 1 to negative 1 to positive 1.
But at a positive infinity, I suppose it would be at the positive side.
But there's a proper way of doing this.
But let's just suggest that it is going to be a 1.
Minus, if I put a 0 in there, that is going to be 1.
If I put a 0 in there, it's going to be a 0.
So what are we left with here?
And I always have to check that I don't make a mistake.
I think I did.
In as much as, if I plug infinity in there, this is a 0.
If I say e to the power of s times infinity, this becomes a 0.
So I have 0 minus 0.
So it was actually naughty of me to suggest that this equals 1.
I mean, there's a way to look at it.
But there's 0 and another 0, so this all cancels out.
Here I'm left with a positive 2 over s, improper integral, 0 to infinity of e to the power negative st, cosine of 2t dt.
So I'm almost where I started, but instead of the sine, I now have a cosine.
You can see I'm going to get back to that.
So this term is all 0.
Apologies for doing that incorrectly.
So we have 2 over s.
Now again, I'm going to have to let u equals something.
Let's make it the cos of 2t and v prime.
Still a product of two functions of t.
e to the power negative st.
That makes u prime equal to negative 2 sine of 2t.
And that makes v equal to negative 1 over s e to the power negative st.
So it's 2 over s.
Still, now we're going to have uv.
So there's a negative 1 over s.
There's a 1 over e to the power st.
Still with s larger than 0 to make this there.
And a cosine of 2t.
And all of this has got to go from 0 to infinity.
Then minus.
But the product of these two, there is a negative 2 of constant that I can bring out.
Another negative 1 over s that I can bring out.
Integral of going from 0 to infinity of e to the power negative st sine of 2t.
Guess what?
I'm back where I started.
I'm back where I started.
We only need to do this now.
So it's going to be 2 over s.
So it's going to be 2 over s.
Let's see what happens here.
It'll be an interesting one.
We're going to have the negative 1 over s.
Let's see what we have here.
If we plug infinity in there.
1 divided by e to the power s infinity.
Well, that's 1.
That is definitely going to be a 1.
Times, if I plug infinity in there.
Now what would be the cosine of infinity?
Indeed, what would be the cosine of infinity?
And that is something that we will have to ponder.
So let's just leave it for a little bit.
Let's just leave it for a little bit.
And now if we plug in zeros in here.
It's going to be 1 and the cosine of 0.
Well, that's going to be minus.
And we have to get these two.
So let's leave that one, the cosine of 2 times infinity, out for just a little bit.
And so these two brackets go together.
So what are we going to have if we plug in 0 there?
That's 1 over 1.
That's just a 1.
Cosine of 0 is 1.
So we're definitely going to have a negative 1 there.
And what do we have left on this side?
Well, now see what I did?
See what I did?
Made exactly the same mistake, didn't I?
So if I plugged in infinity there, I have 0.
Okay, if I plug in infinity there, I have 0.
I have 0.
And anything times this, so it's this 0, times whatever, that would still remain a 0.
And this would remain a 1.
There's a negative, a negative, a negative, so there will definitely be a negative.
And we have 2 over, let's see, 2 over s.
And here we are back to the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
We are just back there.
So this is a 0, a minus 1, so that's negative 1.
So here we're definitely going to have a 2s.
And here we're going to have a 1 over s.
There we're going to have a 1 over s.
We're going to have a 1 over s.
And here we're going to have a negative 2 over s times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
That's what we're going to have.
We've got to multiply this 2s in, so we're going to have 2 over s squared minus 4 over s squared times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
But remember that equals the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
I still have that on my left-hand side.
So let's bring this over to this side.
So I have 4 over s squared times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t plus the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t equals 2 over s squared.
So I have to get s squared as a common denominator here.
That will leave me with 4 times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
Let's just do that minus, what do we have on this side?
s squared times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
That equals 2 over s squared.
The 2s squareds will go.
Same in the denominator.
I can take out the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t out as a common factor.
And that's going to equal 2.
And whatever I have left on this side, I'm just doing it all in one go, it's 4 minus s squared.
If I took out the Laplace transform there, Laplace transform there, out, I'm left with 4 minus s squared.
I'm just taking it, dividing both sides by it so I get that.
So the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t equals 2 over 2 squared minus s squared.
Now I must say, just looking at it quickly, I don't know where this suddenly became from a positive into a negative, apologies for that.
That's that.
And we usually write it as 2 over s squared plus 4.
And so what we basically, what we do see is that this s squared is there, the 2 is there, and 2 squared is there.
So it's actually, if this was sine of 8t, that would have been a over s squared plus a squared.
It'll always work out like this.
So sorry for the hicks and stutters and et cetera for this problem.
You've got to think about it.
Fortunately for us, fortunately for me, you don't have to consider the cosine of 2t at infinity because you are multiplying it by 0.
So 0 is left.
Same with there.
1 over e to the power s times infinity is going to be 0.
0 times whatever the sine of 2 times infinity is, it's always multiplied by 0.
So 0 remains.
So that falls away for us.
Unfortunately, here this falls away and we just have the negative 1 times the negative 1 over s, leaving us with 1 over s.
Okay, so a few hiccups there, but we still get to the answer.
And you have to practice these Laplace transforms initially.
They do take some getting used to.
