Now, let's use the fact that we know now what a Laplace transform is and an inverse Laplace transform.
We know how to deal with partial fractions.
Let's solve this problem.
Y prime is 3y equals 13 sine of 2t.
It's an initial value problem we have that the y of 0 equals 6.
Can I use the Laplace transform and inverse Laplace transform,
which is something I do to an equation to see if I can solve this linear equation,
first order linear differential equation non-homogeneous.
Let's take the Laplace transform of both sides.
I remember my linearity property.
So if I take the Laplace transform of this left-hand side,
it means I take the Laplace transform of each of these.
And then of that, I remember that I can take a constant outside of that Laplace transform.
So what am I left with here?
I've got the Laplace transform of y prime of t.
Or in other words, dy dt or whatever.
Let's leave it y prime.
Plus 3 times the Laplace transform of just y.
And that's going to be 13 times the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t.
Where does that leave?
Where does that leave?
Remember right in the beginning we wrote the Laplace transform of the f of t equals f of s.
That's what we wrote.
Let's use that same notation.
So let's now write this as the capital y of s.
Now these are functions in t.
I have there, they might as well be functions in x, whatever.
We have it y of s.
That is the Laplace transform of y prime.
Is it ys though?
This is certainly ys there.
But can you remember what the Laplace transform is of the first derivative?
That was s times ys minus the f of 0.
Wasn't it?
That was the Laplace transform of the y prime of t.
So we've got to remember that one.
So in here I'm going to write s times ys minus y of 0 plus 3 times the Laplace transform of y is y of s.
And that equals 13 times, what is the Laplace transform of the sine of 2t?
Well that is 2 over s squared plus 4.
2 over s squared plus 4.
Let's clear this up.
Let's clear this up.
What is y of 0?
y of 0 is 6.
So I've got that.
I've got, let's clear this up.
I have y of s, y of s.
I can take that out as a common factor.
And I'm left with s plus 3 on this side.
Minus y of 0 is 6.
That equals 26 over s squared plus 4.
In other words, y of s equals, I've got this 26 over s squared plus 4.
And I've got the plus 6, plus 6 there.
And I'm dividing both sides by s plus 3.
I'm dividing both sides by s plus 3.
Let's just rewrite that.
Let's get these all on a common, this on a common s squared plus 4.
So here I'm going to be left with 26 plus.
6 times that.
So that is 6s squared plus 24.
And I've got to divide the whole lot still by s plus 3.
I'm going, I'm going over this fairly quickly.
This is basic school algebra.
So I'm not going to get stuck with that.
So that equals, what does that equal?
6s squared, 6s squared plus 50.
Divided by s plus 3 and s squared plus 4.
And there you have it.
Now just look at what happened here.
Y of s equals that.
But what did the Laplace transform do for me?
The Laplace transform changed a differential equation into normal algebra.
Normal algebra.
I have y of s, s, so it might as well have been y and an x.
I'm back to school algebra.
So the beauty of a Laplace transform is it takes me from a differential equation
into a standard, into standard algebra.
I have the f of x there and I have my x values there.
There's s, there's s which is just x.
Okay, I'm going back to y equals x.
Nothing, nothing different from that.
So yeah, I have basic algebra.
I have the y of s equals this.
Now in the previous video I showed you this partial fraction,
this fraction written as partial fractions.
So let's carry on with that.
What if I now have this?
I have y of s, y of s on this side and on that side of the equation I have that.
Let me take the inverse Laplace transform of both sides.
The inverse Laplace transform of both sides.
I remember my linearity property.
So let's take the inverse Laplace transform of each of these and bring the constants out.
So that's going to be 8 times the inverse Laplace transform of 1 over s minus negative 3.
I'm writing it like that.
Negative times negative is a positive.
Minus 2 times the inverse Laplace transform of s over, what about here, s square plus 12.
Just for a moment.
Now, after that phone interruption I was left on taking the inverse transform of,
Laplace transform of both sides.
This being the constant out, so maybe the linearity property.
So I can take it of each one individually.
And where was I?
Plus 3 times the inverse Laplace transform of 2 over s squared plus 4.
Oh, I've got to move this.
Anyway, so if I take the inverse Laplace transform,
remember this is the inverse Laplace transform of the Laplace transform of the f of t.
So what happens if I take the inverse Laplace transform of the plus transform?
Well, I'm just left to the f of t.
I'm just left to the f of t.
So this side I've got 8.
Here I've got a equals negative 3.
So that's e to the power negative 3t.
Minus 2 times.
Here I have my k equals 2.
k equals 2 there.
So it's s over s squared plus k squared.
That leaves me.
That's the cosine of kt.
So that's the cosine of 2t.
Plus I'm left to 3 times.
Here I have my k equals 2 as well.
2, so it's k over s squared plus k squared.
That leaves me as a sine of 2t.
And then beautifully I've used the Laplace transform to change my differential equation into an algebraic equation.
Normal, normal, normal algebra.
I used my initial value problem.
It was an initial value problem, so at least I could get rid of this.
I then had this fraction, which I then had to use partial fractions as in the first video to rewrite it as three different fractions.
And then I just reversed the whole thing because I took the Laplace transform.
I then take the inverse Laplace transform and I'm beautifully left with an answer.
That is fantastic.
That is absolutely phenomenal.
Yeah, thank you very much.
Sure.
Thank you.
Isn't that great?
Thank you.
That's the one.
My knowledge that I carry on that bit ofрен.
I'll try it out.
You know, I've came off the phone with a couple times but I've picked it apart.
I'll try it out.
You know, if you can't respond with that.
It's like a cute bond.
You can depend on the laptop.
My knowledge.
P 1969 at Space точity.
I do this.
Really?
Every time will come in, I guess it might take off that.
Yes, it might come over and thank you.
I never will run the basic quality of the crédical equations.
That's just like our main g-nya.
Because I've managed my excel now.
You can continue marketing, it doesn't matter.
