I'm going to show you something quite neat. It's called operational properties.
So I might know the Laplace transform of the f of t, but what if I multiply that f of t by e to the power at?
So I can have, well, we'll look at an example after this.
Now, instead of doing, I mean, it can become very onerous to do these Laplace transforms.
There's a simple way, though, and if you multiply f of t by e to the power at, that becomes the f of, not s, but s minus e.
It's as simple as that. It's as simple as that.
So if I were to ask the Laplace transform of e to the power 3t times, for instance, t to the power 3, t times t to the power 3, t cubed, what would that be?
Well, first of all, I note that a equals 3 here, a equals 3, and I know what the Laplace transform is of the f of t, here,
which is the Laplace transform of t to the power 3, and here I have n equals 3.
So for me, this is going to be 3 factorial divided by s to the power n plus 1, so that's 4.
So I'm going to have 6 over s to the power 4.
Okay, so I have the Laplace transform of the f of t, being 6 over s to the power 4, and I have this a equal to 3.
So everywhere where I had the s, everywhere where I have s, I just have to replace that with s minus 4.
So the Laplace transform of this whole thing is now going to be 6 over, and in place of s, I'm going to have s a minus of 4.
So a was 3, so where that clipped in, a was 3, I have s minus 3 to the power 4.
So just instead of that s, I now have s minus a, which is s minus 3 to the power 4.
If I had to do this the long, if I had to do this the long way, remember that's going to be the, this indefinite, this improper integral of e to the power negative st times e to the power 3t times t to the power 3 dt.
Now, at least with these, it's quite easy, because I can rewrite this as the improper integral of e to the power, I can have minus s minus 3t times t to the power 3 dt.
I can have that, which I'll now have to run through various, setting that equal to my u and this to my, this part to my v prime with a product rule.
Then I'll have a t squared, then I'll have a t to the power 1, eventually t to the power 0.
So I'll have this long pages and pages full of doing this, this improper integral.
Instead, I can just use this property.
If I multiply f of t by e to the power a t, I can just replace, just do my f of t, do my normal Laplace transform of the f of t, and wherever I see a s, I just substitute it with s minus a, which is here was s minus 3.
