Now let's have a look at this problem. I'm going to do it on paper because if I use the board there'll just not be enough space. It's going to take us a couple of pages. So what we're discussing here is coupled oscillators and we're going to use the Laplace transform to solve this problem.
So what we have here is a mass hanging from a spring. There's the spring and it has a spring constant k1. There's a mass with a mass m1 but that hangs from the bottom of that another spring with another mass m2 and this spring has its constant.
So if this hangs at equilibrium and we displace mass 1 from equilibrium we displace mass 2 from equilibrium and we can give it an initial velocity in any direction.
Now we just have to set up our equations of motion here. We have f equals ma so there's my mass 1 and a sub 1 written as the second derivative of position.
So let's put this as the positive x direction. Good. So what are we going to have here if we just have f equals ma so there's m sub 1 and a sub 1 there.
Well first of all there's going to be a force, two forces on this mass 1, the spring pulling in that direction and the spring pulling in this direction.
So first of all it's going to be negative k sub 1 x sub 1 because we're taking down as positive up as negative so there's going to be a restoring force but there's also going to be a force in this direction in the opposite direction which is a positive direction and by how much?
Well we just have to look at it. We have to look at the net displacement. If we have a look at the net displacement for this pull down it's the difference between this x2 and x1.
So it's going to be x2 minus x1. The same is going to go for a mass number 2. It's going to be a negative k sub 2 and again the difference between the difference between those.
Because remember this is now pull down this x2 direction so from equilibrium down so that's x2 but not all of that is just due to x2.
Some of that pull down the difference from there to there is due to x1 so you've got to subtract that.
So that's going to leave me here with a if you can see there negative k sub 1 x sub 1 plus k sub 2 x sub 2 minus k sub 2 x sub 1.
And this is going to leave me here with k sub 2 x sub 2 plus k sub 2 x sub 1.
So let's put some values in here. We have m sub 1 and m sub 2 both being 1 for this example problem and let's have k sub 1 equals 6 and k sub 2 equals 4.
We also have this initial conditions x sub 1 at time 0. Let's have that at 0.
So x sub 2 also at 0 so they're actually both at the rest position but we give it initial velocity x sub 1 we're going to give an initial velocity of 1 downward and x sub 2 we're going to give an initial velocity of 1 upward.
So we're going to throw these two together and now these two oscillators are going to be coupled.
So if we just put these values in let's see what we are left with.
So m sub 1 is just 1 so we're going to have x sub 1 double prime equals negative k so it's going to be negative 6 x sub 1 and we're going to have a positive
we said that's 4 x sub 2 minus a 4 x sub 1 and if I put those together it's going to be a negative 10 times x sub 1 plus 4 times x sub 2 and if we look at the second one that's going to be x sub 2 double prime equals negative 4 x sub 2 plus 4 x sub 1.
So okay so let's put down our two equations let's just get everything on the left hand side so we have two homogeneous differential equations let's do that.
So where are we going to end up with let's have a look we're going to have we're going to have an x sub 1 double prime plus 10 times x sub 1 and we're going to have minus 4 times x sub 2 equals 0
and we're going to have an x sub 2 double prime plus 4 times x sub 2 minus 4 times x sub 1 equals 0.
So we have this linear system of differential equations and they are they are coupled in as much as that x1 definitely is that x sub 1 and all these are functions of time.
So one way to solve this would just be for us to take the Laplace transform of both sides so what would be the Laplace transform of this remember the Laplace transform of this left hand side would be equal to the Laplace transform of each of these.
So what is the Laplace transform of the second second derivative so that's going to be an x squared x sub 1 of s minus s times the x sub 1 of 0 minus x sub 1 prime of 0.
So we're going to have plus 10 times what is the Laplace transform of x what is the Laplace transform of x well that's just x sub 1 of s minus 4 times x sub 2 of s and the Laplace transform of a constant is that constant over s so 0 over s which is just 0.
So I think we can take out a common factor here that would be x sub 1 of s so we'll be left with s squared and we're going to be left with that there we go a positive 10 we're going to have x sub 1 of 0 0 so that falls away this was 1 remember so that's negative 1 and then minus 4 times x sub 2 of s equals 0 and if we just clean this up a bit that's going to be x sub 1 of s
with an s squared plus 10 and then minus 4 times x sub 2 of s and that's going to equal 1 let's call this our equation number 1 let's just clean up the second one or let's take the Laplace transform here so we're going to be left with x sub 2 well s squared x sub 2 of s minus s times x sub 2 of 0 minus x sub 2 prime of 0
plus we have x sub 2 of s plus we have x sub 2 of s minus 4 times x sub 1 of s that is going to equal 0 let's clean this up we have an x sub 2 s here is a common factor so we have s squared there and we have a plus 4 there again this is 0 this is minus
this this is negative 1 negative 1 negative 1 negative positive 1 taking to the other side will be negative 1 and we are left with minus 4 times x sub 1 of s so look at this we have two equations and two unknowns
and let's call this our equation number 2 so here we have two equations and two unknowns x sub 1 capitals x sub 1 and x sub 2 two equations two unknowns we just have to solve this
let's take let's take equation 1 let's take equation 1 and just solve for x sub 2 so 4 times x sub 2 of s it's going to equal x sub 1 of s s squared plus 10 minus 1 in other words x sub 2 of s is going to equal a quarter x sub 1 of s s squared plus 10 minus 1
minus 1. In other words x sub 2 of s is going to equal a quarter x sub 1 of s, s squared plus 10
minus a quarter. We'll call that equation number 3. Now let's take equation number 2 and we pop
equation number 3 into equation number 2. So instead of x sub 2s we're going to have all of
this. So we're going to have a quarter times x sub 1 of s, s squared plus 10 minus a quarter
and now this s squared plus 4 minus 4 times x sub 1 of s and that's going to equal negative
1. Okay so the whole reason behind, I hope you couldn't see there, the whole reason behind
the Laplace transform is I'm now stuck with normal algebra. Now these are long algebraic
problems and it's easy to make a little mistake somewhere. So let's just go edit, let's distribute
this s squared plus 4 in there. So I'm going to have a quarter x sub 1 of s, s squared plus
10 and an s squared plus 4 minus a quarter s squared plus 4 minus 4 times x sub 1 of s equals
negative 1. So I'm just trying to solve for x sub 1. I'm going to multiply throughout by
4 so it's going to be s to the power 4 plus 14 s squared plus 40 it seems minus a quarter.
I can take over to the other side already minus, I'm just multiplying throughout by 4 so that
is going to be 16 x sub 1 of s and that's going to equal a negative 4 and I'm taking that over
to the other side which is now just an s squared. It's the negative I'm taking to the other side
so it's an s squared plus 4 on that side. Easy to make a mistake. S sub 1. Just taking this
out as a common factor so I'm left here with s to the power 4. I'm just going to have to change
the battery pack after this 14 s squared and 40 so that's going to leave me with negative
24 and that equals just s squared. Let me stop here and I'll change the battery pack.
25
system
system
system
system
system
system
system
system
