It's early morning here in the farmland and I just before we start the homework
I thought I'd just show you what it looks like. It's always good to come for
early morning runs so today's homework is all about taking derivatives of
parametric equations and it is as easy as taking derivatives of a single
variable function. So in the description down below you'll find the homework set
so you can just download it and try these for yourself first and then we're
going to go through each and every one of those problems. In problem 1.1 we asked
to derive the equation for the first derivative of the parametric equation x
comma y equals some function x which is a function of t and y which is also a
function of t. So for any value t remember I'm going to be somewhere on this
crazy curve here on the right hand side and what we're interested in really we
want to take the derivative and we're going to take the derivative at some
point some constant point. So let's stick to this little interval here and on this
little interval here we can say that y is just a function of x so we're not
writing it as a parametric equation here it's just going to be some function of x
in the end and we write uppercase f there just to show that you make a
difference from y equals f of x with a lowercase f just to distinguish from what's
going on here because in some books you might see that y equals some function of
a function of t. So we have to remember that this x that we see here it is a
function of t as we have up here it is a function of t so we just have to remember
that or in some books you might have the fact that we have x is x of t. So what
are we after? We are after an equation dy dx. So we want the first derivative of a
parametric equation as it's written here on the top right. So let's do that here on
the left hand side we're going to take the derivative with respect to t because
at the moment we have functions of t of y here on the left hand side and on the
right hand side we take the first derivative with respect to time of this
function f which is a function of x. But we remember that x the x here is
actually a function of t. So if we wanted to really do this dy dt on the left hand
side we're going to have to take the derivative of this outside function times
the derivative of the inside function if I can use those words outside and inside
for referring to the fact that this is nothing other than the chain rule that we
have here. So we've used just the prime notation there from Newton. So let's just
stick to Leibniz notation here. So f prime of x but what is f prime of x? Well
there's f of x. The prime and this is with respect to t well that's going to be
dy dx. So why do y dx? Because at the at the moment we've just written it as it is
here. Y is some function of x. And if you look at this little short segment here
just think back to normal algebra. Y is a function of x. That is what the curve is
all about and then we parametrize the curve. But on that little section it is. So
f prime of x that's dy dx and x prime of t well that's dx dt because we're taking the
derivative with respect to t of both sides. And then by simple algebra and I'm going to
put it in green because it's something we should always remember. So that's our
definition here of the first derivative. So I have the fact that dy dx which is what
we were after that's dy dt over dx dt. And that's our final solution. That's our
derivation of the first derivative. This equation for the first derivative of a
parametric equation. So very simply we're going to look here on the right hand side
and we're just going to take the derivative with respect to t of y and we're
going to put that over the derivative of x with respect to t in our problem
sets. So problem number two. We've got the first derivative. So let's just write
that down. We're going to do green here. So we have dy dx and that's equal to dy dt
over dx dt. Very simple derivation there. And now let's be clear about what we are
asked here. We are asked here. We are asked for the second derivative d squared y
over dx squared. That's what we asked for. So we have this on the right hand side
our definition here in green. So let's just take the d dx of both sides. So I'm going
to take d dx of dy dx. And on the right hand side I'm also taking the d dx of dy dt
over dx dt. So that's what we have there. So let's be clever about this. Let's do
something about this. And I'm just going to multiply both the numerator and denominator
by the same thing. And this thing that I'm going to multiply it by is 1 over dt divided
by 1 over dt. So that's it. And I'm doing that to this bit here. So where are we left
with that? Well that's going to equal the d dt over dx dt. So that's all I've done. And
I still have dy dt over dx dt. So nothing has changed there. On the left hand side I
have what I desire d squared y over dx squared the second derivative. And now well let's look
at the numerator and denominator of what we have here. And we see in the denominator I
have dx dt and another dx dt. Let's bring one of them to the numerator. So what I'm going
to have is d dt. I'm going to have a dy dt. And I'm going to have a dt dx. And in the denominator
let me get something to make a straighter line here. So here it's not really so straight I
suppose. And I still have 1 dx dt in the denominator. And what we see here is we can cancel some things
out. It's usually hello there. That dt and that dt can go. So what we're left with is very simply
the d dt of well what remains is dy dx over dx dt. And there we have it. This equation for the second
derivative. Now if you think about it this dy dt that we have here. This dy dx. That is a function
of t. When we take the first derivative of this parametric equation we're going to be left with
a function of t. And we're taking d dt of a function of of a function of t. And in the denominator
dx dt well we know what x is. And it is a function of t there. So we can take that as well. So let's put
this in green because this is something that we should remember. D squared y over dx squared.
And that's going to be the d dt. The d dt of the first derivative. And our first derivative is dy dx.
And we're just going to divide that by dx dt.
And once we see a problem or two it is actually it's it's a matter of just taking two derivatives.
So we're asked to find the first derivative of this parametric equation x comma y. That is r cosine
of t and r sine of t. And let's put it in green because we always put our definitions in green.
And remember we have dy dx. That's our first derivative. That is going to be equal dy dt.
First derivative of y with respect to t and first derivative of x with respect to t. And that is as far as
these parametric equations are concerned. So let's just do that. Let's just do dy dx. And we have to
look at what dy dt is. Well we have y there r sine of t. And that's just going to be r times the cosine
of t. And dx dt. And with x dt being r cosine of t. So we're going to have negative r sine of t. And we
can simplify that by getting rid of the r both in the numerator and denominator. So we have this minus
the cosine of t divided by the sine of t. And that is the first derivative. Although we can do slightly
better. Let's just draw let's just draw a little triangle here on the left hand side. Let's just do
this. If I have if I have this that and that. And I remember that this is my x. This is my y. And then
that means that is going to be r. The the the radio or the the hypotenuse there are. So if I'm looking at
the cosine of t. If this is my angle with respect to what I'm doing. So if I take the cosine. Remember
that is adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's going to be x over r. And remember we have a minus there.
And the sine is opposite divided by adjacent. Opposite divided by hypotenuse y over r. And that's
going to be minus x over y. And that is my first derivative. If you want to express it in a slightly
different form. Just remembering that when we do work with cosine and sine when it comes to these
functions that we do. We are talking about functions of some angle. And we might as well t. Remember
we always we say t is time. And that's usually the problems that we're dealing with. But it's not
necessarily time. It's just a parameter. And in our instance here it is this angle here. And if we have
the two sides in hypotenuse. Well we can express it this way. Problem number four. 1.4. Find the second
derivative of the same equation. So we know what the first derivative was. And let's just jot it
down. So we just remember what the first derivative was. We had the fact that dy dx. And I'm just going
to stick with the trigonometric solution that we had here. And remember that was the cosine of t
over the sine of t. And there was a negative there. So as I said the first derivative is a function of
t. Because now if we remember the equations for the second derivative. So let's just write it here.
d squared y over dx squared. That's going to be the d dt. Do dt. There we go. Let's just get rid of that
little mark there. There we go. So that's going to be the d dt of dy dx. And I've got to divide that
by dx dt. That is the equation that we derive. So we have d squared y over dx squared. That's what we're
looking for. So we've got to take the d dt of this function here. So the d dt. So d dt of negative
the cosine of t divided by the sine of t. So we have to take the derivative here of a of a quotient.
And so we have to remember our little rules there. If we wanted to do that we've got to choose one as
u and one as v. And remember that's going to be well not choose u as the numerator and v is the
denominator. So we're going to have this u prime v minus u v prime over v squared. So let's just do
that on the side here. So u where shall we do it down here. u is going to equal the negative the cosine
let's put the negative up there t and v is going to be the sine of t. So I'm just doing it the long way
of course. You can just go ahead and do it in a much quicker way. So cosine of t its derivative is
negative the sine of t but we have the negative there. So that's just going to be the sine of t
and v prime is going to be the cosine of t and v squared is going to equal sine squared of t.
So if we were to do this derivative but before we forget remember that we have a denominator here
as well and that is going to be the first derivative of dx dt and dx of t is this r cosine of t. So remember
here we're going to have negative r sine of t in the denominator. So d squared y over dx squared
that is going to equal. So we need u prime v minus u v prime. So u prime the sine of t. So we're going to
have sine of t multiplied by u prime v that's another sine of t and we're going to have minus now we have
u that's negative the cosine of t times v prime that's the cosine of t. There we go and that's going
to be divided by that has to be divided by this v squared and v squared is sine squared of t but we
already have that in the denominator so we're going to have the negative r there and we already have
a sine of t there now another sine of t well let's write it out so we don't get confused and then we
have a not equals multiplied by sine squared of t. So we have d squared y over dx squared so we have
sine squared of sine squared of t sine squared of t and negative times negative positive plus cosine
squared of t and we know that's a trigonometric identity and that's just going to give us one
and that's divided by negative r times sine cubed of t. So what we're going to have here is negative one
over sine cubed of t and let's just do our little drawing again just to remember that we can express
this in terms of x y and r let's do that and you can see that i should just go back there and just
remember that there still has to be an r there so let's not forget about that one and here we have x
here we have y here we have r and here's our angle so if i'm looking at the sine of t the sine of t
remember that is opposite divided by hypotenuse so that's y over r so if i were to rewrite this let's
go on d squared y over dx squared we have the negative one there we have the r there and then
we have one over let's just do this r cubed so that's going to be y cubed over r cubed and if i were
to do that let's just use a different color so let's again that r is going to go and this one is going to
be two let's go back to the gray there we go so what we have here is still a negative and because
this is in the denominator if i bring it to the numerator that's going to be r squared over y cubed
if you wanted to if you wanted to look at it like this negative r squared over y cubed the second
derivative so it's actually a nice problem because you've got to remember how to do this derivative here
you've got to remember how to do that derivative and then it's just like simple i mean one other
thing we had to do is just remember the trigonometric identity that we have here or i should say here we
have the trigonometric identity and the fact that um we can just express this what we have here just in
terms of this little angle this little triangle right triangle that we have there so we can express it
because remember our problem initially was given had an r in there so we can express it this way but it's
i think it's quite okay for me if you leave it in that in that format the answer question 1.5 find
the first derivative of another function a parametric function tq plus t and t to the power of 7 plus t
plus 1 so this is going to be fairly simple and what this really is is this just reminding us how to do
how to do derivatives so let's kick off um if you start with these always try and remember your
equations so we have the fact that dy dx that is going to be equal dy dt if you write this often
enough it becomes second nature and that's what you want you want unconscious competence so there
we are dy dx is dy dt dy dt over dx dt and we have a function x of t and we have a function y of t so
this is not a problem the first derivatives should never be a problem so we have dy dx
and if we take the first derivative of y with respect to t we're going to be left with 7
t to the power 6 plus 1 so that's in the numerator and if we look at the denominator the first
derivative of tq plus t that's going to be 3 t squared plus 1 and there we have it i mean that's really
simple the first derivative of this parametric equation so in problem 1.6 we've still got the same
parametric equations there and we asked us to get the second derivative so let's just remind ourselves
as always how do we get the second derivative well that's going to be a d squared y over dx squared
that's what we're after we've derived this that's the d dt of dy dx and remember dy dx is now a function
of t and let me get my little ruler out on the screen there there we go and that's going to be
d dx dt so that's what we're after and we have to remember of course what our first derivative was
because we need the first derivative right there so we can remember from the previous problem dy dx
that was simply going to be 7 t to the power 6 plus 1 over over 3 t squared plus 1 so again this is
just a good exercise just to remember how to do this derivative because you have to take the
derivative of this with respect to t so we're going to have u equals 7 t to the power 6 by all means
just do this in your head if you're comfortable with that i'm just going to write it out here 3 t
squared plus 1 so u prime that's going to be 42 2 to t to the power 5 and v prime is going to be 6 t
and v squared well that's going to be 3 t squared plus 1 all squared and we remember we have to have
u prime v minus u v prime over v squared that is how we do the quotient rule so let's just apply that
and so what we now want is d squared y over dx squared so remember we have to use this
uh definition that we have uh in green there so it's d dt of what we have uh over here so we just take
the d dt of this first derivative of ours so u prime is 42 t to the power 5 times v and then we have v
that's this 3 t squared plus 1 minus u u is 7 t to the power 6 plus 1 and v prime is 6 t and we have to
divide this by all the way by 3 t squared plus 1 all squared but remember all of this is over dx dt
so we still have to multiply all of this or divide all of this by dx dt so well let's not do that let's
stick to convention here so let's just get rid of that there we go so all of this
is still going to be over dx dt and dx dt remember is just 3 t squared plus 1
so where are we d squared y over dx squared dx squared and now it becomes this laborious task of
just simplification and well first we just have to multiply out and then we can expand so let's just
do that on the right hand side here so say 42 we've got to take 42 and multiply that by 3 and that gives us
126 so that's 126 t to the power 7 if we look at 42 times 3 and t to the power 5 times t squared
plus 42 t to the power 5 and then we have a negative there 7 times 6 that's 42 t to the power 7 and then
a negative again because we have the little negative there so it's negative 6 t 6 t and now let's just
write that out all over the same denominator because as you can see there we'll have 3 t squared plus 1
we've squared that and we've got another one so now we have it cubed so if we simplify this 126
t to the power where are we t to the power 7 and we have to subtract from that 42 and that leaves us with
84 so that's 84 so that's 84 t to the power 7 and we also have then a plus 42 t to the power 5 and we
have a negative 6 t negative 6 t and we're going to put that all over and we can put that all over
3 t squared plus 1 cubed now suppose we can simplify that because we can take a 6 t out
the numerator at least we can take 6 t out and then we're left with what is 84 divided by 6 that gives
us 14 so that's 14 t to the power 6 plus 7 t to the power 4 minus 1 and that's still all over 3 t squared
plus 1 or cubed so you see these are nice little exercises just like little mental exercises see
you know if you can simplify it any further i suppose this is a this is a an appropriate way
to leave to leave the solution so very simple there other than we have to remember how to do
the quotient rule and don't forget the dx dt in the denominator here because it's very simple just
to do the numerator d dt of of the first derivative and then forget that you still have the denominator
that you just have to add to that so do a couple of these problems i mean you can just come up with
your own just write two polynomials there with respect to the parameter as far as x and y is
concerned to create these these equations to play around and do a couple of them just so that you can
get back into the swing because usually you know we haven't done this these kind of derivatives for
for a while it's just easy to try to remember you know how to do them by just doing a bunch of
bunch of exercises so that was it the second derivative of this equation so this is a very interesting
problem problem and as much as it's related to physics remember in physics we take a derivative
with respect to time and for for many of the the problems in in when it comes to motion and we use
dot notation which just means with respect take the derivative with respect to time so we also get the
derivative of the parametric equation and we see that this is the generic function x of t and y of t
and just to remind ourselves what is d y dx d y dx that's going to be d y dt over dx dt so we just keep
that in mind so what we have here in essence is this y prime over x prime and i've just done i suppose
i've just done the solution here because if we take the first derivative of this genetic function
parametric function that is going to be d y dt over dx dt and in dot notation that is x dot
which what am i doing here it is going to be there we go y dot over x dot because it's just a different
a different notation that we use so now we have to find the second derivative in problem 1.8 we've just
had the first derivative just as always we're going to remind ourselves that d y x d y dx equals
d y dt over dx dt what an ugly d there we go d y dx and we've had our first solution here or as far
as the first derivative is concerned that's going to be y dot over x dot there we go now we have to
find d squared y over dx squared and we have the quotient rule again and remember let's just put the
quotient rule out here again that's u prime v minus u v prime over and we have v squared and we just have
to remember that that's just the derivative of the numerator we still have to do dx dt and the
denominator so let's just never forget to do that so let's just have this upstairs and upstairs meaning
the numerator so if we have let's just write it out and so we're all clear about it so we're going to
have u equals y dot and we're going to have v equals x dot so u prime is going to be y double dot i'm taking
the second derivative of there let's make those dots a bit clearer and we're going to have v prime equals x
double dot as well and we have v squared equals x dot squared so now that we have all of those so
remember this is just for the numerator u prime v so that's going to be y double dot u prime v and v is
x dot minus u v prime so that's y dot x double dot and that we've got to divide that by x dot squared
so that is divided by x dot squared but remember that is just the derivative that's just this part
we still have to do this part so all of that goes over and the x dt well that's just x dot and now we
can just clean things up because it looks a bit untidy and so it's going to be y double dot x dot
minus y dot x double dot double dot there and we're just going to have as the denominator x dot
cubed three of them and that's the solution and remember the dot just means with respect to t so
that's the second derivative of y with respect to t times the first derivative of x with respect to t
minus so the the minus there and then y with respect to t second derivative of x with respect to t all
divided by the first derivative of x with respect to t all cubed so we can do a lot of these problems
as polynomials and transcendental functions take the first and second derivative but we've got to do
something a bit more interesting and this is more the kind of thing that you're probably going to be
asked to know about so find the angle at which the cycloid expressed as parametric equations x comma y
equals 8t so let's just make this a little bit more legible at minus a times the sine of t
comma a minus a times the cosine of t where it meets the x-axis at the origin so if you think back
about with the previous problem set that we have when we just introduced parametric equations we
had this idea of the cycloid and what happened with the cycloid is right here when we asked
the wolfram languages to use the wolfram languages to to draw these for us a dip down here where at
the origin so we've got to find out what angle it is there well definitely we have a problem here
because the function not continuous at the origin and we'll have to look at it from one side or the
other and the angle at which it come in something that can help us there of course is what is the slope
at that point what is the slope at that point so let's have a look at it now as always we've got to
remember that dy dx always our definitions in green here that's dy dt over dx dt and let's just do that
so dy dx and as far as the function y is concerned we have a which is just a constant so the derivative
of the constant zero we have a negative a cosine of t the derivative of cosine of t with respect to t
well that's negative the sine of t but we have a negative there so that's going to be positive
we have a times the sine of t in the numerator let's have a look at the denominator which is x dx dt
so at there so we're going to be left with an a and minus a times the cosine of t first derivative
of the sine of t with respect to t that's the cosine of t and we can see that we can get rid of
all these a's that we have in as much as if we take the denominator and we just take a out as a common
factor there that's going to be one minus the cosine of t and then those can go and we set with the
sine of t over one minus the cosine of t so that is a function single variable function it's not a
parametric equation anymore dy dx equals this function sine of t minus one over the cosine of t that is our
slope at and now we just need to find out that slope and we can look at it now remember if we if we
remember back when t is zero that's exactly well that's exactly this point here so let's just do
that let's take the limit to find out the limit as t goes to zero but we'll have to come at it from the
one side because there's no continuity there so let's just do the limit as t goes to zero from from the top
side of the sine of t over one minus the cosine of t so we're just finding out what the value is going
to be of the slope as we approach that point and of course sine of zero zero and cosine of zero is one
one minus one is zero and we have indeterminate form so we just check for the use of the check the
the assumptions for the use of l'hapital's rule so let's just do that so we're going to use l'hapital's
rule l'hapital there we go so that becomes the limit as t goes to zero from the positive side so let's do
the derivative of sine of t well that's just the cosine of t and if we do this one is a constant
so we have negative the derivative of negative cosine of t with respect to t well that's just the
sine of t and if we do that as t goes to zero and so the cosine of that that's going to be one over
and we're approaching zero from the positive side and if we do that well we know that's infinity
so if the slope as we're approaching t equals zero from the right hand side as we approach
that point our slope becomes infinite of that line and an infinite slope remember that's a vertical line
so we can say that the cycloid at least as far as this origin is concerned it meets the x-axis at the
origin vertically this is vertically down when we get there we get there if you see if you go from
that side as well it's going to be the same it's going to be negative infinity but that's still a
straight line so it meets the cycloid meets that origin there at vertically at least so although we're
back to just this these transcendental functions here at least there's a bit of a twist that we asked
to get the slope of this parametric curve at a specific value for the parameter at t equals one
so as always remember dy dx that's going to equal dy dt over dx dt so we always keep that on the right
hand side just to remind ourselves and let's solve the problem so we're going to have dy dx
dy dx and let's take the first derivative of y with respect to t so that's going to be one plus
e to the power t and in the denominator something slightly more exotic i suppose that's going to
be five t to the power four and we have sine so that's going to be something the inside function
remember that's just going to be a two pi as far as that's concerned but we still have the cosine of
two pi t there we go and all we need to do now is take this derivative when t equals one so dy dx
when t equals one and we just have to substitute so that's going to be one plus e as far as the
numerator is concerned and we have a five there well when we plug in t equals one and we're looking at
the cosine we're looking at the cosine function of of two pi t so t is one so it's the cosine of
we're looking for is two pi and if if you think about that it just brings us back to one because
you know it has a period of two pi so that's just going to be one so we're just left with two pi
and there we go we have an actual value we have an actual real number there for the slope of this
curve at the point where the parameter equals one
so we asked to find the slope problem 11 find the slope of the curve and we have the parametric
equations there but this time not at a specific value for the parameter but at a point so we'll
have to find out what t is at that point so let's start off let's start off by doing that so this
remember is a function this is x and this is y and at this point x is one and y is one so we can
write that t squared plus e to the power t that's going to equal one and we also have t plus e to
the power t is equal to one so we see both right hand sides are one so we can just set the two left
hand sides equal to each other so we have t squared plus e to the power t that equals t plus e to the
power t and very simply those two can go and i have the fact that where's my blue we have t squared
we have t squared minus t equals zero and i can take out t and t minus one equals zero so from that
we have t equals zero or t equals one now just think about it we had a square in there so we just
have to be careful if we plug in t equals one into x and y we don't get the point one comma one do we
we get one plus e to the power t comma one plus e to the power t that's not what we want so we
definitely want when t equals zero so we know that t equals zero because we plug in zero we get one
comma one as the point so as always what is dy dx dy dx that is equal to dy dt if you write it down so
many times you're never going to forget it dx dt now that's not too pretty but you know what i'm
you know by now what i'm talking about so let's do that dy dx so we dy dx that's going to be one plus
e to the power t divided by let's just do that's two t plus e to the power t but what do we want dy dx
when t equals zero so we just substitute that in one plus e to the power zero that's this one
two times zero zero e to the power zero is one so that's just two so the slope at that point
is going to equal two so we're going to get towards finding these horizontal and tangent
and vertical tangent lines but let's have a look at this problem find the coordinates of the highest
point on the parametric curve and we see the 96t and then 96t minus 16 squared let's have a look at
what the plot looks like and there we go 96t and then 96 times t minus 16t squared and it goes up and
with the negative 16t squared there we could really think that this is going to be a parabola pointing
down and here about 280 290 somewhere there on the x-axis we can see the maximum and about 140
somewhere out there we can see where that maximum is going to go as t goes to in this instance i'm
letting t go from 1 to 5 so let's remind ourselves because the more you write this down the better it
gets so we have dy dx and that's going to equal dy dt over dx dt so let's have that let's have that
dy dx so the slope we're looking for the slope here and when it comes to y we're going to have 96
minus 32t and in the denominator dx dt we're just going to have 96 and if we simplify this a little bit
that's going to be 1 minus a third t now at a maximum remember we want the slope to be 0 so we can
certainly set that 1 minus a third t equals 0 our slope is 0 at a local maximum or local minimum
so we can solve for t here so we get t equals 3 that's going to happen at t equals 3 and if we look
at the point there that's going to be 96 times 3 and we're going to have 96 times 3 minus 16 and 3 squared
is 9 and i think if you look at that point that's going to be 288 comma 144 just check on the arithmetic
there and that's really when we saw the graph that was round about that spot now we can see from the
graph that it's going to be a maximum and the questioner asks for the highest point of that
graph and with a negative 16t squared the negative there we know it's a parabola facing down and but
really to to know that it is a maximum you've got to do the second derivative as well but seeing we
we've plotted the graph we know that that is going to be the point the highest point on this parametric
curve so the next problem and these become a bit more interesting once again we're going to find
the point or points on the curve and we see the parametric curve there 2 cosine of t plus sine of 2t
and 2 sine of t plus cosine of 2t where there is or there are horizontal tangent lines so let's
let's have a look at that curve so i've drawn it here let me drag it on the screen
and there we can see parametric curve in the first video we looked at how to do this in the
wolfram language so i'm just going to drag out t here and we see what's happening we see what's
happening there and if we look at this curve here definitely here where x is 0 and y is 1
there we find that there is a we find that there is a horizontal tangent line and if we open this up
it looks like it's around about point about 1.5 1.6 there about definitely 1.6 there about that is just
pi over 2 it's around about pi over 2 there so let's just see how far we get with the problem
so there's two things that we have to know about horizontal and about vertical tangent lines to
these parametric curves so let's start with horizontal horizontal tangent line so we know
from just a single variable calculus that horizontal so when the slope is 0 we where the slope is 0 we
have horizontal tangent line and if we're looking at a fraction that means the numerator the numerator
that must be 0 while the denominator denominator is not equal to 0 so definitely that is where we're
going to do this because it's going to be 0 divided by non-zero value and that's 0 so our tangent line
is horizontal or the slope of that tangent line is 0 so with that being said let's look at the derivative
so that's dy dx and i'm not going to write the equation for that anymore we know it's dy dt over dx dt
so let's get dy dt so that is we 2 sine of t we have there so that's going to be 2 times the cosine of t
and then we're going to have minus 2 times the sine of 2t that is when we have the derivative of y there
with respect to t and then if we do if we do x here with respect to t we're going to get negative
2 times the sine of t and we're going to get plus 2 times the cosine of 2 times t so we want to know where
this numerator is going to be 0 so when is 2 cosine t minus 2 times the sine of 2t when is that 0
so we can set that equal to 0 and let's do that if we have 2 cosine 2 times the cosine of t minus 2
times the sine of 2t equals 0 well we can just take 2 out as a common factor and we're left with the
cosine of t must equal the sine of 2t while the denominator cannot be 0 and if we just simplify the
denominator that means the sine of t the sine of t cannot equal the cosine of 2t so that's what we
that's what we need to do so we're going to find these values and it's not obviously we can't solve
for t there so i'm just going to show you again with the wellframe language we're going to do
the solve function there so i'm going to say solve when is cosine of t equal equal so you see the double
equal sign there that's a boolean some boolean logic there you say is this true or false so when
is this true and we're going to solve comma for t and we see there all these solutions it's when t
equals negative pi over 2 plus 2 pi times some constant so that whole series pi over 6 plus 2 pi
times some constant and these constants must be elements of the integers pi over 2 plus 2 pi and
pi five times pi over 6 and what i've done here i've created a computer variable i've called a
numerator and i've done the union of all of these four these four series and the way sequences i should
say what the way that we've done that is i've used the table function and i say negative pi over 2
remember when you use this on the wellframe cloud just use the forward slash pi forward slash 2 to do this
division i'm using the desktop version here so i can do a bit of fancy mathematical notation plus
2 pi n and n must be 0 1 2 3 4 so i'm just going to cycle of all of those then the next table pi over
6 plus 2 pi n and remember to get multiplication i put little spaces behind these values so there's a
space between 2 and pi and between pi and n and you can see i do all of that and eventually i get all
these values for which we will get 0 in the numerator but i also want to see where the
denominator is 0 because we can't have that so if i go denominator 0 that's my computer variable and
it's the union of all of these and i've done this solve function there as well i see that there's all
the values or at least the first bit of the values i shouldn't call this sequence or sets i
says of course just call them a set so this is just a part of an infinite set so the the important
part is that i've got to have values for which i'll have a 0 in the numerator but i can't have
the 0 in the denominator so we're only interested in pi from or t going from 0 upwards so we see that
pi over 6 will give me the numerator of 0 but it will also give me a denominator of 0 so we can't have
that so we move on there's pi over 2 that'll give me a 0 in the numerator pi over 2 is not in the
denominator there so definitely as we saw on the graph above when t is pi over 2 we are going to get
to that horizontal line at 0 comma 1 so definitely pi over 2 is something that we can choose so let's do
that and we're going to say t equals pi over 2 we say t is pi over 2 what is going to happen to dy dx so dy dx
at t equals pi over 2 if we were to solve for that the numerator is going to be 0 the denominator is going
to be some constant and that constant is not equal to 0 therefore my slope is equal to 0 so my slope is
there is equal to 0 we just have to find on the line where this is and we saw on the graph that it's at
0 comma comma 1 so let's just do that though so we're going to say x comma y so that's going to be at
2 cosine of pi over 2 plus the sine of 2 times pi over 2 this is pi and then 2 times the sine of pi over
2 plus the cosine of pi and if you solve for that you're going to get 0 comma 1 so at 0 comma 1 we are
going to have a horizontal tangent line so let's just bring up the graph again and there's our graph at
the top and right there and we see it's about you know 1.5 thereabouts which is which is a half pi
we get to this horizontal line now in the next question we're going to be asked to get where there's a
vertical tangent line at a vertical tangent line remember that means the slope is infinite it's straight up
infinite and it certainly looks like here at 0 comma negative 3 that it is going to meet
this y-axis at a tangent at a tangent line that has that is infinite or a vertical slope but because
we don't have a derivative there we must be careful because there's a cusp there so we'll have to
approach it and let's approach it from the left hand side and let's just see where that value is
it's around about there at about 4.7 thereabouts and what would that be well we'll see in the next
problem so here we are problem number 1.14 find the point or points on the curve x comma y it's the same
one as before where there is a vertical tangent line so if we bring up the or frame language again
and we saw that right there about 4.7 thereabouts something might be happening there and that's 3 pi
over 2 if you take 3 pi over 2 it's going to land roughly over there and if you put substitute
3 times pi over 2 into our parametric equations you'll see we get to this point 0 comma negative 3
so certainly certainly something is happening at that value so let's have a look so what we want
here is first of all is let's just do our equation there for the derivative dy dx remember that was going
to be 2 times the cosine of t and that's going to be minus 2 times the cosine of 2t where did my ruler go
there we go and that's all over dx dt and dx dt is going to be negative 2 times the sine of t
and then we're going to get twice the cosine of 2t so we want here for vertical asymptotes so let's look at
vertical i should say vertical tangent lines so for vertical tangent lines we remember from single
variable calculus the slope must be infinite so the first derivative is infinite we have a vertical
tangent line and we're going to get that when the numerator numerator if we have a fraction for the
slope that cannot be 0 but the denominator that must approach 0 let's put it that so if i have any
non-zero value and divide it in a limit as the limit approaches 0 in the denominator there then of
course we get infinity so that's what we've got to do so let's bring the warframe language back
so this time around we want values where the denominator which we've got here where the
denominator is got to be have b0 but the numerator cannot and we can run through all of these i've done
the union there as well negative pi over 2 certainly it's up there pi over 6 it's up there five times
where are we five times pi over 6 five times pi over 6 is there three times pi over 2 it's there 13 pi
over 6 is there they're all there and 17 is there 7 over 2 is there so you've got a bit of a problem
but we saw in the graph that something special happens at 3 pi over 2 so even though 3 pi over 2 is
here and it is there so i'm going to get 0 over 0 but remember if we if we have this limit and we
have 0 over 0 that's in determinate form and we can use L'Hopital's rule so let's have a look let's
just have a look at what happens at this point t equals 3 pi over 2 and we saw that that was 0
negative 3 so let's look in the limit and we're going to let t approach 3 pi over 2 from the left
hand side of this 2 times the cosine of t because remember this is the slope first derivative is the
slope minus 2 times cosine of 2t divided by negative 2 times the sine of t plus 2 times the cosine of 2t
well we saw that that was going to be 0 over 0 if we just the direct substitution but you know the
denominator certainly we were thinking there well it's approaching 0 from the left hand side all we
now need is for the numerator not to be 0 so we have 0 of 0 that's in determinate form so we can use
L'Hopital's rule there we go let's use his rule and so we're going to take the derivative of the
numerator and the derivative of the denominator and there are some assumptions for L'Hopital's rule
remember those assumptions from single variable calculus don't forget them so we're going to have
the limit as t approaches 3 pi over 2 from the negative side and let's take the derivative in the
numerator and so that's going to be negative 2 times the sine of t and that's going to be negative 4 times
the cosine of 2t over and what do we have we have negative 2 cosine of t and we're going to have
negative 4 times the sine of 2t and what is that going to be when t approaches 3 pi over 2 so once again
willframe language just to make things easier and here we have it we have now i've just simplified
i've taken negative 2 out as a common factor divided both numerator and denominator by that so that i'm
just left with this sine of 3 pi over 2 plus 2 times cosine of 3 pi over 2 times 2 and that gives us
negative 3 in the numerator now and 0 in the denominator so what we have here is negative 3 over
0 but we're approaching 0 from the negative side and that's a vertical slope so definitely here at
t equals 3 pi over 2 we get a vertical slope and all that's left to do is we must work out this point
x comma y x comma y let's do that x comma y where where t equals 3 pi over 2 so if we can do that
and if you substitute that in there and then there indeed you're going to get the point you're going
to get the point 0 comma minus 3 if you do that so that's beautiful and it only only worked really
because we had some idea of what this parametric curve looked like and of course when you're in
the exam situation this is going to be a difficult problem because you'll have to sketch it out a little
bit and that's going to take a lot of time and then realize what's going on the crux of the matter
here though is to remember if you're looking for horizontal tangent lines as far as the derivative
is concerned remember we have dy dt over dx dt so we're always going to have this or at least even
if it's over 1 we are going to have the fact that we have this fraction and we want the numerator to
be 0 and the denominator not to be 0 and if we're looking for vertical tangent lines we want
the numerator to be non-zero and the denominator to at least approach 0 in the limit so that we can
have this divided by 0 but it's not quite 0 it's a tiny tiny amount and in the limit that means that
the slope goes to infinity and that's exactly what we want
so in part two of this problem said we're just going to look at parametric curves as far as the
area concerned with these curves integration so the problem 2.1 there reads consider a single
variable function f continuous on an interval that's a less than equal to x less than equal to b so this
closed interval from a to b just a single variable function y equals f of x now derive an equation for
the area enclosed by the parametric curve of this function given that when we parameterize it the
parameter goes from c to d and then with no intersections of this curve on this interval
because you know we've seen some funny looking curves so we're not allowed any intersection of the
curve so curve crossing over itself except perhaps for a coincidence start and end point and a
clockwise traversal of that interval so clockwise it's got to be clockwise and you'll see with when
we do the problems what happens when we get to going counterclockwise so i've just written in
shorter driving equation for the area enclosed by parametric curve and if you think we were told we're
just considering at the moment y equals the f of x so it's just some function y equals the f of x
and x is on this closed interval going from a to b as simple as that and if you think what the area
under the curve is when we come to integration so if we just have the area under the curve that's going
to go from an integral different integral going from a to b of f of x dx it's as simple as that
and remember that f of x that's just y so we can probably write it something like this y dx now we
know when we parametrize these functions we get that f x of y that's going to be some function of t
and another function of t when we parametrize this x of t y of t now have a look at what we have here we
have a dx there in our integral so if we take if we take for instance x of t and we take the derivative
of that so we say dx dt dx dt i remember just with newtonian notation there that's just x prime of t
and i can say dx equals x prime of t dt but x prime of t if you wanted if your textbook does that
differently well that's just dx dt dt nothing nothing other than that and we've parametrized this now
so what we have in the end we have the different integral going from c to d we still have y there
we still have y but y is a function of t remember and dx dt dt and there we have it so the integral
going from c to d different integral of y dx dt dt and that will give us the area enclosed by a parametric
curve in problem two we ask to find the area enclosed by the parametrize curve x comma y that's
two cosine of t plus sine of two t comma two sine of t plus cosine of two t and t our parameter there
goes from zero to two pi so that closed interval so what i want to do here and what you're going to find
with these in some courses it might be slightly easier than than these because they just want you
to review your single variable calculus can you do can you do these derivatives and integrals
when it comes to these trigonometric functions for instance or other transcendental functions
polynomials of course much easier and can you just remember how to do these some courses they're going
to be quite difficult to do and you might be allowed to use a computer algebra system which is exactly
what we're going to use what we're going to use here so by all means if you want to practice your
single variable calculus your differentiation integration please go ahead and do that here
though we're going to use the wolfram language just to do these more difficult integrals for us just to
save some time what we want to practice here is the fact though that we have to remember that
we need to go clockwise and then then the area will be given by this definite integral and going from
c to d so we have our c and d there of y and then dx dt so that's y of t dx dt dt so if we look at it where
we stand at the moment there we have x of t and there's our y of t and what we need to do is get the
dx dt so let's just do dx dt at least dx dt and that's a simple enough one for us that won't waste a lot of time
so that's going to be negative two times the sine of t plus and we have twice the cosine of 2t so i've
just integrated this with respect to t and i've got to multiply that by the y of t so what we're going
to have here is not minus the sine twice the sine of t plus twice the cosine of 2t and i'm going to
multiply it by y of t we have dx dt there and divide and just y of t so that's two times the sine of
t plus the cosine of 2t and then we're going to take the integral of all of that so it's going to
be the integral from and there we have c and d there we are told so that goes the definite integral
goes from zero to two pi and we're going to have this negative two times the sine of t plus twice the
cosine of 2t multiplied by twice the sine of t plus the cosine of 2t and all of that dt so what i'm going
to do i'm going to bring up the warframe language here so we're both going to just look at this
different integral but we're also going to look at this curve because we are told here that this
area is enclosed by this curve on this interval for our parameter let's have a look at that
so here we have the warframe language and remember i showed you before you can just open a free account
on warframecloud.com i'm using a desktop version here for which i'm paying a pretty little money
every month and what we can see here i'm again using the manipulate function because i want to
manipulate the the graph to appear as the parameter changes from zero or just over zero we can see them
starting just over zero so i have a starting point until two pi and there i have the the the integral
so let's do that and let's just have a look at what it looks like and it goes like this as we go from
zero to two pi so first of all let's just rewind so if you think about it we are going counterclockwise
here so we have a problem as far as our function is concerned and what we do under these circumstances
well there are two things you can do the best thing to do is just to put a minus in front of your
integral so if you're going to go counterclockwise on that interval your parameters interval just put
a minus sign out in front of of of your definite integral and here we have that definite integral
and see i've put the negative sign up front there so i've just typed it in i've multiplied it out but
just put it in and we see the solution there is two pi so by all means if you want to do if you want
to do these integrals by hand go ahead but we're just going to save some time and remember there
the negative sign and that's going to end up as two pi the definite integral and going from zero to two
pi enclosing that special shape that we saw there so for the next couple of problems we're going to do
i'm still going to use the warframe language just to save a bit of time if you do do these in the
warframe language you'll see here what i have here i've got an integral sign there i've got the
squares up there and there's a writing assistant in the desktop version which allows me to write it
like this and that looks very neat and again a very special reason to use the the warframe language
because you can make your work look look like handwritten notes and it's still going to perform
that for you remember if you do this if you are going to do this on the web when you do these
multiplications remember just to put a little space there see at the end there cosine of two t
there's a little space there a space indicates multiplication instead of the square symbol
there remember you can also just use you can also just use the caret symbol shift six and then two
that would also mean square but of course as i said here we can do that we can do all of this
with a special notation in the desktop version so go ahead i challenge you to look up the code
that will do the integration for you because i've used the special integration symbol here
but of course in the on the cloud you'll have to write a function to do that one of the
keyword arguments inside of the warframe language and i challenge you to to find it and see if you also
get two pi if you can write out this this integral in this problem we have to find the area enclosed by
the ellipse x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one so we do recognize that
as an ellipse and a couple of things we have to remember in the first problem set remember we saw
that we can use a trigonometric substitution here by using a trigonometric identity and i'm going to put
it here so sine squared of t or theta or whatever plus cosine squared of t equals one so that means we
can let's put another color blue we can equate this to that and we can equate this to that and the one
equals one in other words if we were to do this x squared over a squared equals sine squared of t
we saw that was nothing other than x equals a times the sine of t because we can take square root of both
sides and take the a over to the other side so that's what we're going to have here and of course
for the same argument y is going to equal b times the cosine of t so what do we need to enclose this
area remember we need some parameter so it's going to be the integral going from c to d of the y of t
and then dx dt dt so another little thing that we would need here is this dx dt so let's have a look
at that dx dt given that x of t equals a sine of t so that's going to be a times the cosine of t
and what we'll have to do is a times the cosine of t and y of t is b b times the a time b times the cosine of
t and so that's going to be a b cosine squared of t now let's have a look in the wolfram language if
we just were to plot this function this parametric curve what it looks like so we can get some idea of
what the interval is as far as the parameter is concerned so what we've done here is we've just
put in a substituted value for a and b so i made a3 and b and b2 so so that we can can draw this ellipse
and what you've also noticed there is that my parameter t is going from zero to omega and i'm
setting omega going from 0.01 to 2 to 2 pi so in essence t is going to go from 0 to 2 pi so let's have
a look at what that looks like and again as we increase our parameter first of all noting that we are
going clockwise so that's good and if i open up that little plus sign there we can see the actual
value so we're going round round round we're going round round round and we're ending up at about 6.28
there about that means 2 pi so really we're going from 0 going from 0 to 2 pi and we're going
clockwise so that makes life very easy for us and as much as we're just going to do the integral and
going from 0 to 2 pi and what we have here is a b cosine squared of t dt a b is they are constants so
they can go outside so that's just the cosine squared of t dt and if you remember your single
variable calculus that's going to be we still have the a b there and then we're going to have t over 2
plus a quarter sine of 2 t and we've got to go from 0 to 2 pi from 0 to 2 pi and if you think you know
you can just get that easily of course just type that into the Wolfram language and it's going to
give you the solution so what we're going to have is a b and then 2 pi we're going to have 2 pi over
2 plus a quarter sine of 4 pi and we have to subtract from this so let's just do that we're going to
subtract do that and subtract from that just putting zeros in but the sine of zero that's zero
and the zero over two that's also zero so nothing is going to happen there so I'm left with a b
and here we just have pi plus and if we take the sine of 4 pi that's the zero so that's going to be
zero and we're left with the equation that we know for the surface area of an ellipse that's a b
times pi and there you go it works out to what we know or at least at school that's what we
we memorized as far as the area of an ellipse is concerned and now you can see using
parametric curve in the equation for this area enclosed by this curve on a certain interval for
the parameter that we do get to the same the same result so there we go problem 2.4 find the
area enclosed by this parametric curve so it's a half cosine of t minus a quarter cosine of 2t
and a half sine of t minus a quarter sine of 2t it doesn't give us the interval so you'll have to
figure that one out usually these things are from zero to two pi but let's have a look at it let's
have a look at what this curve looks like once again I'm going to go to the warframe language
and there we go and we have here problem 2.4 there's my parametric curve there and there enclosed
inside of a set of curly braces with a comma in between parametric plot is the function and I'm going
to go from t from 0 to 2 pi but instead of going straight to 2 pi so it draws the whole thing at
once I'm going to wrap this all inside of the manipulate function and so this end 0 to this
omega this omega is going to go from 0.01 to 2 pi so I'm going to go all the way from 0 to 2 pi
and then of course I'm just putting my plot range there so that I have this nice little window here
so let's open up there and just start drawing and we're seeing what happens oops what's happening is
we're going counterclockwise so we have to look at that and all the way around all the way around
and it gets to 2 pi and and we're there and that looks like a cardoid pattern so that's quite
interesting and now we can just look at the area enclosed by this by this parametric curve
so first of all let's put in the fact that we've already sorted out now that we need 0 is less than
equal to t is less than equal to 2 pi we know that we know that this is the x of t we know this is the
y of t and we know that we have to get dx dt dx dt so that's going to be negative a half sine of t
and then negative times negative is positive an eighth sine of 2t and we have to multiply that
by y of t there and we also remember very importantly that we're going to go from 0
to 2 pi and that's not what I usually put in green remember green is for just for our definitions and
theorems etc the things that we have to know about so the area is going to be this it's y of t dx dt
now I'm going to use this opportunity just to show you what happens when we have these counterclockwise
examples so that what we're going to do with a counterclockwise example is we're just going to say
it's negative going from a to b or we remember we had c to d but then y of t dx dt oh there must be a dt
there dx dt dt so let's do that let's clean up all these little mistakes and so that's going to be a dt
and just to stick to what we've been using let's just make sure that we use c and d that looks much
better so that would be one option but what you could also do is you could also say a equals going
from c to d and then we can do have x of t and we have dy dt dt so we can also have that and once we
have that we we can at least also use that as far as as these curves that go counterclockwise are
concerned so let's have a look at this one we've got it in the warframe language and we can do that
multiplication and then do the integral as i said if you're happy to do that just as some exercise
for single variable calculus go ahead and do that but here in the warframe language remember these
files will be uploaded for you so you can upload them straight to your free account online and you
can have a look at that and i've just drawn it out all the way by doing remember once we have that
we have these c c three separate expressions that are added to each other so we can do the integral of
them separately which i've done all the way down there and if we were to run this last one we see
that the answer is three pi over eight so by all means go ahead and three pi over eight see that you
get to three pi over eight as well either by doing this multiplication so we're going to multiply this
by this as i said we're going to end up with a couple of expressions and we we can take
the the definite integral separately for all of those going from t equals zero to t equals two pi
or use your computer algebra system it'll do this multiplication for you it'll even do this
derivative for you and then do the integral for you as well as long as you understand that this
this is what it's all about i think you needn't waste time and just rehashing some old stuff you've
learned before you know about integration you know about differentiation so let's just get on
and understand what's happening here with these parametric curves let's have a look problem 2.5
calculate the area enclosed by this parametric curve cosine of t comma sine of 2t and we see weirdly
there our parameter is on this closed interval pi over 2 to 3 pi over 2 so wolfram language to the rescue
let's just draw this and there we go i've written it for us there and look at this curve it goes out up so first of all notice that we are going clockwise so that's not a problem for us and it's enclosed there so nothing special here i just want for you to develop appreciation for these wonderful curves that we can create with with parametric curves much much more interesting i think than just when we did single variable calculus
than just when we did single variable calculus we just had this independent variable x and a dependent variable y and we had this function y equals f of x great stuff so again this is going to be a little bit of mild exercise for us
what should we do let's just recognize that this is x of t this is y of t we need to dx dt and dx dt is going to be negative the sine of t so in other words we're going to have the negative the sine of t and we're going to multiply that by the sine of 2t
and when we remember the sine of t and when we remember the sine of t and when we remember the area in this instance we're going clockwise so it's going to go from c to d and we have y of t dx dt dt
so if we just substitute there we know that this is c this is d so a our area enclosed by this parametric curve is going to go from pi over 2
all the way to 3 pi over 2 and we're going to have negative the sine of t multiplied by the sine of 2t dt
once again the wolfram language to the rescue but by all means please do this integral by yourself for challenge
but you can see i've written it out there shift enter shift return and we get our quick solution
4 over 3 so the area enclosed there is 4 thirds simple as that so our last problem here in this
problem set we're just going to again find the enclosed area but this time we have these two polynomials as
far as our parametric equations are concerned so reminder as always this is the x of t this is the y of t
and do we need the x dt or dy dt let's have a look at the curve so we see it here in problem 2.6
i think you know the code by now and let's just start running and we're going from negative 2 and we see
we're going clockwise so that's not a problem here we go and again we're going to from negative 2 to 2
this time but we see the nice enclosed area there so this one's going to be simple and we are reminded of
the fact that area is going to be this definite integral going from c to d of the y of t and then
dx dt of dt so let's do that so the area is going to go from negative 2 to 2 as far as our definite
integral is concerned we have t to the power 4 minus 1 and we're going to multiply that by 3t squared minus
4 dt and again long-winded multiply that out this is at least much simpler than some trigonometric
identity using some substitution there as far as trigonometric functions are concerned there we go
we see how it's multiplied out there 4 minus 3t squared minus 4t to the power 4 plus 3t to the power 6
and then that's our expression with respect to t and we're going from negative 2 to 2 for this
different integral and we get this big fraction 2048 over 35 2048 2048 over 35 there we go do it by
hand good exercise but probably a bit boring when you watch this on video do it yourself there's the
solution and as you can see here we've done quite a few different problems now i think whatever's thrown
at you in the in the tests or exams you'll be able to handle these the area enclosed by a parametric curve
