This video is on the calculus of functions that we express with polar
coordinates. So we're going to do differentiation and integration. So there
will be these two parts and the first question of each of course is to derive
equations for the derivative and the integral of these functions. Remember the
homework set that's available on github as a PDF file and also the set of notes.
Just go to the link in the description down below and you'll find those github
files so you can try these problems on your own first and of course there's
also going to be a Wolfram language file just a notebook so that you can code
along if you wish to do so. As mentioned we're now dealing with the calculus of
functions that are given in polar coordinates and to understand these
kind of problems first we have to just have an equation or ways to take the
derivative of a polar coordinate function. So in problem one here is then derive an
equation for the first derivative of a polar coordinate function and what we
need to do to to solve this little problem is remember three things that in
polar coordinates we have the fact that x equals r times the sine oops that should
be cosine r times the cosine of the angle and y equals r times the sine of that
angle with the positive x axis and we also just have to know that if we're taking the
derivative dy dx because we still have this univariate function f of x or y equals f of x
is that we can take this derivative dy with respect to d theta and if we divide that by dx
d theta what we're going to have then is just dy dx. Now suppose you can see that that we have in
the denominator of the numerator and in the denominator of the denominator we have d theta
which we can cancel out. So let's have a look at what these things are and let's just grab a pen there
so if we take the dx d theta let's start with dy d theta then and what we have here is the fact I
suppose we should we can put that in green as well that r is some function of theta that r is some
function of theta so if we have this now x equals r times the cosine of theta what we actually have
there is some function of theta cosine theta and we have some function of theta sine theta let's get
a darker gray there so if we take the the the derivative of dy with respect to d with respect
to theta y with respect to theta so dy d theta we have here the product rule that we have to apply
and remember that is going to be u prime v plus u v prime if one of the two is u and one is v so let's
make that u and let's make that v so we're going to have f prime of theta and then very simply the
the sine of theta and we add to that f of theta and now we have to take the derivative of v which is
sine theta and that's cosine of theta and if we write dx d theta that's going to be f prime of theta
cosine of theta cosine of theta and then it's going to be a negative because we have f of theta but
the first derivative of the cosine of theta with respect to theta is minus the sine of theta so that's
why we have the negative there and if we divide these two by each other that is going to be that is
going to be our derivative so let's write it out there so that we remember it dy dx of this polar
coordinate function that is going to be f prime of theta sine of theta plus the f of theta cosine of
theta and we divide that all by the f prime of theta cosine of theta minus the f of theta sine of
theta so it's actually quite an easy derivation and of course this last this last definition here
this function dy dx is the one that you can can commit to memory but as you can see even if you
can't remember it's quite an easy derivation so problem two 1.2 in the section on the derivatives
of polar coordinate functions we ask to calculate the slope of the polar coordinate function r equals the
sine of three times theta and you can see here using the Wolfram language we've got the polar plot
function we pass the function itself sine of three times theta remember you have to put a little space
between the three and the theta and i get that little theta symbol by just hitting the escape key
typing th and hitting escape again and then comma and we want theta to go from zero to two pi and you can
see the three little leaves there which is this polar coordinate function so let's get the first
derivative of this function and in the end remember we it's what we're expressing here is a function
y equals the f of x and we've just converted those to polar form and that's how we get r equals sine of
three times theta and if you think about it's actually quite wonderful that any point on this curve
will have that the radius is going to be the sine of three times the angle of that the vector that points
towards that point so it's actually quite quite fascinating so let's remember let's go for green
we have the fact that dy dx and that is going to equal f prime of theta and remember y equals r times the
sine of theta so that'll be the sine of theta plus we have f of of theta and then we have the cosine of
the cosine of theta and let me just skip my ruler and we divide that by the f prime of theta and we
have the cosine of theta minus the f of theta times the sine of theta so let's get those going so dy dx
remembering now let's just put that there we have the fact that x equals we have sine of theta
theta and remember x is the f is r times the cosine of theta so that's sine of we should say three
theta times the cosine of theta and we have the fact that y equals then the sine of three theta times
the sine of theta so those are the two functions that we have to get the derivatives of so let's get
the the first derivative of y with respect to the first derivative of y with respect to theta so and
we're going to treat this as u and we're going to treat that as v so it's u prime so that will be
three times the cosine of three theta and as much as we have to use the chain rule the sine of
an angle its first derivative is the cosine of that angle so we have the cosine of of the angle which is
three theta and then of the inside function the three theta we have to take that derivative of l
as well which is going to be three so and and then we still have to have the v as well so we still have
the sine theta there and then plus we have to have the f of theta which is r that's the sine of three
theta and then we have to take the derivative of cosine of theta because remember that is going to
be u and that's going to be v so we've left u in place and we just have to take the derivative of v
so that's going to be the cosine of theta
and we divide that by let's do the same for x so this is going to be our u this is going to be our v
and remember what we're after is u prime v plus u v prime that's what we're after so let's get u prime
so that's the first derivative of the sine of three theta that's going to be three times the cosine of
three theta three times the cosine of three theta and then we leave v we leave that alone that's just
the cosine of theta and we subtract from that and we have the just the u that we have to take now
that's the sine of three theta and then the first derivative of the cosine of theta remember that's
the sine of theta and we have the negative out front and that is the first derivative of this
function this polar coordinate function r equals the sine of three theta problem 1.3 find the
coordinates where the slope of the polar coordinate function r equals sine three theta is horizontal so
we've just had that let's have a look what the what it looks like using the warframe language
there we go there's our function and the curve of our function and where do we think that we're going
to have that the slope the slope remember this is the first derivative and i think we can identify
three spots i hope you can see there i mean as it curves around here we're going to have a slope that's
zero if we curve there that we're going to have a slope of zero here at the bottom where x equals zero
we're going to have this slope of zero and right down here we're going to have a slope of zero so we
should have actually have have these four spots where the slope is going to be zero let's have a
look at that as always and this is probably not one that you you know you have to memorize because
it was so easy remember problem 1.1 to work this out but we're going to have the fact that dy dx
of these functions that is going to be f prime of theta times the sine of theta plus the f of theta
cosine of theta and if i grab my ruler there there we go that's going to be over the f prime of theta
cosine of theta minus f of theta sine of theta so that's what we have and if we remember our
previous problem problem 1.2 we had the fact that dy dx and let's just think about what that was or we
can just quickly do it it's not a problem so that's going to be three times the cosine of three theta
sine of theta and we're going to add to that the sine of three theta cosine of theta so all i'm doing
here is i'm just using i'm just using the product rule and we divide that over dx d theta and that's
going to be three times the cosine of three theta cosine of theta we subtract from that the sine of
three times theta three times theta times the sine of theta so we need we need this to be zero and the
way that we do that is to have this equal zero over not zero let me write it down like that we can't
have the denominator being zero we can't divide by zero and if it's zero over zero we have indeterminate
form etc so what we need is we need for find values for theta for which the numerator is zero so that
what we really need here is three times the cosine of three theta sine of theta plus the sine of three
times the angle cosine of the angle that has got to equal zero so you've sort of got to solve that
little problem let's have a look at the world frame language and we see problem 1.3 there let's just
increase the size a little bit so it's not too difficult to see we can see what we've done there
so what i've plotted is the numerator and denominator and we can see um that they are not zero you know
the the spots where they are zero do not coincide so actually quite safe then it's only this blue line
the numerator where it is zero and we can see it's zero there it's zero there it's zero there it's zero
there it's zero there and of course we're going to have this periodicity and we just got to see that
we don't go over two pi because then we repeat you know we go round and round the circle so we kind of
need those first four spots where that is zero and i'll i'll just quickly write that down because
you'll actually need you know just your calculator or of course the wolfram language just to do that
and what we're going to have we're going to have theta at least for those spots is going to be about
0.659 it's going to happen at pi over 2 it's going to happen at 2.48 and it's going to happen at
pi so those are the four and then of course we can work out
um we can work out what uh what r is going to be because remember r is just some function of
theta and in this instance this problem that we have it's the sine of three theta so then it becomes
easy to work out the three values for for r and you can just plug that in sine times the three of
of that sine sine of a three pi over two the sine of three times this bit or the sine of three pi and
you can work all of those out and then you'll have these values r comma theta and what you'll have to
do then is just convert that to x and y and that's easy enough because remember x equals i should do this
in green because these are the things we always have to remember we have that x equals r times the
cosine of theta and y equals r times the sine of theta and if you do that check on the wolfram
language see that you get the same results as i do so we're going to get these uh these four values
so it's a 0.726 thereabouts by 0.563 that's the one the second one we're going to get is zero comma
minus one and the third one we're going to get is negative 0.722 and 0.562 and the last one we're
going to get is zero comma zero and that's sort of from the graph that we expect these things to be
so in this problem it's the the point is not to do these calculations these simple numerical
anyone can press a button on a calculator to do this is this is the crucial part here where we
where we were concerned about how do we get this to be zero and we have to have that the numerator
equals zero and the denominator is not and hopefully in the exams you'll be given you know some sort of
clue as to work out values for theta or just be able to use the wolfram language and at least when
you do this on your own it's easy enough to do to use the wolfram language just to see where the
numerator is going to be zero and to note that at those spots the denominator is not zero at the same
time and you can see here using the wolfram language we've got those values for the angles
which i've just saved and i may create a little function x coordinate and y coordinate here
which will take a value and that's what it will do as far as solving those um you know how to get to
the x and y coordinates so we can work out the x coordinate y coordinate and if i pass all those
four angles to the x coordinate and the y coordinate we get these you know the two values for each as
i've shown in the results problem 1.4 we want to find a coordinate where the absolute value of r the
the length of r of the polar coordinate function is at a maximum and the polar coordinate function
we're referring to is still this sine r equals sine of three theta and if we look at the wolfram
language here in this first plot we did for problem 1.2 and 1.3 is that the maximum radius is going to
be right out here so from the origin right out there from the origin right out there and from
the origin right out here so you can work out any one of three of those it's just once the problem
just asks for one of them so how would we go you know how would we go about that just this maximum
distance that we are there well there's a few things that we can remember and so first of all
let's just have as far as the problem is concerned we have r equals the sine of three times this angle
now the sine function this is what it is the sine of some angle equals r the sine the the maximum value
that it can go remember is from negative one to one so one would be the maximum so what we're actually
going to have here is that the sine of three times theta the maximum value that it can take is one we
just need to find out what those angles are you know what what angles this will be and if we if we
were just to do some work on the side just take some other function some other angles say the sine of
alpha the sine of alpha alpha equals one that means alpha equals the arc sine of one and you know at
what angles is this you know is this going to happen we can write down a couple of these angles it's going
to be at pi over two and then it's going to have this plus two times or two times n times pi where n is
just this natural number so we're going to have five pi over two suddenly going to happen there it's going
to happen at nine pi over two and it's just going to carry on like that so let's choose alpha equals
pi over two we're just going to choose one of those but that remember equals three times theta we had
alpha there and we have three there those are equal to each other in other words theta is going to be
pi over six so let's just take um theta or theta over six so what we have here is the fact that we have
this r comma theta so r is going to be at the maximum value that sine can take that is going to be
one comma and we're going to have uh pi over six but we remember x we need x and y coordinates that is
r times the cosine of theta i should do this in green and anyway that's going to be one times
the cosine of pi over six and y is going to be the r times the sine of theta so that's going to be one
times the sine of pi over six can you remember that little how to draw that little triangle it's always
easy just to uh to draw this over and over again so that sticks in your mind as well so if you do that
this is the angle we're concerned about that's the pi over six angle right there so that's going to be
one two square root of three so if we think about what x comma y is going to be so what is the cosine
of pi over six that is adjacent divided by hypotenuse so that's going to be the square root of three
divided by two and and as far as a half is concerned for this angle up here opposite divided by hypotenuse
that's going to be a half so that is going to be one of the coordinates where we're going to find
that this value r here that is at its maximum and if you take the second one you can have the fact that
alpha equals five pi over two and that is just going to equal three theta and here we're going to have
theta equals five pi over six and you're going to have r equals one for that point as well so you can
work out what x and y is going to be there and so you would carry on for those three values you just
have one more to do and that's going to be nine pi over six and that you just have to simplify as far
as that's concerned and you can work out the values the third value and from the graph it's easy enough
to see that it's going to be at x equals zero and let's bring up that graph
so it's going to be this one down here and that's going to be x equals zero and y equals negative one
that's going to be the last angle so we worked out the one right on top there problem 1.5 find the
slip of the tangent line to the polar coordinate curve we still stuck with this curve because there's
so much you can ask about these things r equals sine of three theta where r is at a maximum so we've
done that now we know you know one of those points are and we also remember from the previous problem
so please check out the previous problem that we have the fact that r comma theta at one of these
points one the one that we worked out at least was going to be one and pi over six so we know that and
we know what dy dx is we worked out dy dx in a previous problem so let's just write that out that was
three times the cosine of three theta sine of theta and we added to that the sine of
three theta times the cosine of theta and that was divided by three times the cosine of three theta
cosine of theta oh look at that i want to make an o of theta cosine of theta minus the sine of three
theta sine of theta so there we go and now all we have to do that's the slope remember and we have
a point where we have theta equals pi over 6. So we have to get dy dx at this theta equals pi over
6. So all we have to do is plug in that. And if you plug that in and use the Wolfram language or
your calculator, you're going to get negative 5 square root of 3 over 2. And that makes sense.
That's going to be negative slope. So I just want to show you the other two. We were also going to
have the fact that we have dy dx. And that next angle we had was, remember, that was 5 pi over 6
from the previous problem. And if you plug those in, that is just going to be 5 times 3 over 5 times
the square root of 3 over 2. And that's just from symmetry there. And then the last one, we're going
to have dy dx. That is going to be at theta equals 3 pi over 2. 3 pi over 2. And there we're going to
have 0. So if we just look at the curve again, that's going to be this one at the bottom. And
then we can clearly see the slope there. It's going to be 0. And the slope right up here is going to be
the negative 5 square root of 3 over 2. And here positive 5 times the square root of 3 over 2.
So problem 1.6. We've taken, sort of looked at all the different questions that you can get. And this
is sort of the last type of one that you can get. We're just going to use a different function here,
polar coordinate curve. R equals 2 times and then 1 plus cosine of theta. And we'll have a look at what
it looks like. Or if you can't wait, just use the Wolfram language and do that. If you don't have
that available during the exam, I mean, just take a couple of angles of theta there. And you don't
have to do too many until you can see what's going to happen to the curve. So remember, we're going to
have an extrema where the derivative is 0, unless we have this inflection point. But anyway, we're going
to have that. And the question already asked us for a maximum value. So we kind of think that it's going
to go up to a maximum point and, you know, and then come down. So at that point, you know, we're going
to get a derivative that is equal to 0. So what we're going to, what we're actually looking then for
is where dy dx equals 0. And we remember the fact that, let's do that in green. I haven't used green
properly. So remember that is r times the sine of theta and x equals r times the cosine of theta. We
remember that. So in the problem that we've been given here, is we're going to have r is that so
that's two times. So this is put that it's two plus two times the cosine of theta. And we have to
multiply that by the sine of theta. And here we're going to have two plus two times the cosine of theta
times the cosine of theta. So that is what we have for x and for y. And now what we have to do is we
have to take the derivative dy dx. And to do that, at least, let's try and do that here. Let's take dy
d theta first. And we have this now. And what you can do is, of course, you can simplify this or just
at least multiply it out. So I'm going to have two times the sine of theta. And we're going to have
plus two times the sine of theta cosine of theta. So that's easy enough to simplify. And I suppose let's
do it here. The fact not dy d theta. This is going to be y. I just want to simplify down here. We have
two times the sine of theta. And you remember this trigonometric identity, two times the sine of an
angle times the cosine of the angle. Well, that is just the sine of twice that angle. So that's quite
simple. And let's just multiply this one out. That's going to be two times the cosine of theta.
And what we have here is plus two times cosine squared of theta. Now, that is a bit of a difficult
one. We just have to sort of watch out for that one. Not specifically now, but when we do integration
to get the integral of this, that's a bit difficult. So we have x here at least as twice the cosine of
theta plus twice times the cosine squared of theta. So we just have to watch out for those.
So let's just, let me just take the eraser. There we go. Let's do it down here. So we need dy d theta.
So let's have a look at what dy d theta is. So that's going to be
twice the cosine of that angle. And then plus two times the cosine of twice that angle.
So that's simple. We're just using the chain rule there. And then that's going to be with x,
we're going to have negative two times the sine of theta. And then we're going to bring that two
forward. So that's going to be a four. So let's just do that. That's going to be four times
cosine of theta. But then also we have to do cosine of theta, which is negative the sine of
negative the sine of theta. And what we need here, well, that is over dx d theta. Let's just not
forget that. So again, to do this, we remember we need this to be zero in the numerator and not
zero, not zero in the denominator. So let's have a look at the Warframe language again to see where
this is going to happen. So there's problem 1.6. And we can see the two times one plus the cosine of
theta. And we see this card weight pattern here. And we want to know where this is going to have
a maximum. So that's going to be way up there. That's going to have a maximum. And what we've
done here is I've just solved the numerator there or take the derivative there. So we see that we get
the correct derivative there in the numerator. And then I'm just going to solve this. So I'm saying
solve, use the solve function. I put my expression there and I'm saying where it is equal to zero.
But you can't use equal because remember in a computer language, most computer languages,
equal means assignment. So I don't want to assign this to the value zero. I'm going to set it equal
to zero. So I'm using two equal symbols, zero. And I want to comma solve for theta. And it gives me
this sort of answer here. So theta is going to be negative pi over three plus two times pi times
an integer. And pi over three plus two times pi times an integer. And pi plus two times
pi with an integer. Remember because this is the cyclic. So what I'm going to do here is just to
solve for all of these to see all these numerators that I do get and all these denominators that I do
get. And I'm using a union of making all three of these tables. And instead of using all the values
of integers, I'm just using zero, one, two, three, four, five, and six. So I'm getting the union of
all of these. And that gives me this long list of values. And I'm going to do that the same with
that with the denominator because we don't want for those to overlap with each other. So for us
not to get any overlaps, I'm using the complement function. So numerator comma denominator is going
to remove from the numerator all those values, the denominator ones, so that we don't have these
duplicates. Think about how the complement works in set theory. So we can choose any one of these.
So I'm going to choose theta equals three. And then I'm just going to work out the x coordinate
and y coordinate. And we remember x equals r times the cosine of theta y equals r times the sine of
theta. So I can just plug that in. That's my r sine of theta there. And I'm just using pi over three
for my angle and pi over three for my angle. And I get three over two and three square root of three
over two. So that is going to be this point here where it is at a maximum. So we're going to have this
fact that y, x comma y, that's going to be three over two and three square root of three over two.
That point there, let's have a look again at the Warframe language.
So that's going to be that point way up there. That's going to be,
we can see it's about one and a half there right at the top for our x coordinate. Now y coordinate is
going to be around about there, just under three. So three is times square root of three divided by two.
That very point way up there. But what we have to remember is that we're going to get a horizontal
tangent line there. So if we take our function, we get the first derivative and set it to zero.
We know that the numerator must be zero, that the denominator must not be zero, because if I take zero
divided by a non-zero value, I'm going to get zero. And that is what we want. And all we have to do now
is to find values for theta. And we just have to make sure that if we use that value, it can't also
make the denominator zero. If I plug in into my dy dx, if I plug in theta values there, I don't want
the denominator to be zero. Up here, we did it visually. We could see that the values were going
to be zero, but they don't coincide. So no problems there picking any of the values in the numerator
to make that derivative zero. Here we had to go about it in a slightly different way. And you can
have a look at the code there. I'm using the union function. I'm using then the union of three
different things. So there's my table function there. And then I'm saying, comma, another table
function and comma, another table function. So I'm creating these three lists and I want the union
of them. So I don't get the repeats. And what I do there is minus pi over three plus two times pi
times n. That's exactly what it is there. Negative pi over three plus two times pi times, instead of c1,
I'm using n because these are integers. And then I'm using the table function. So I've got a cycle
over values of n there. And the values of n that I want to cycle over is zero, one, two, three. So
that's how we construct it. Have a close look at that. So it's going to create this table and it's
going to iterate n over zero, one, two, three, plug it, plug those n's in there. So I'm going to get
this whole bunch of values. And I'm going to do that the same for the second one, pi over three plus
two pi n, pi over three plus two pi n, just as we have it there, cycle through all those values of n
and do it the last time, pi plus that. And I just get the union of all of those so I don't get any
repeats. And that's all the possible values that I get that'll make my numerator equal to zero. And
we got these three values here by using the solve function. When is the numerator, which is the
derivative dy d theta, when is that equal to zero? So solve this for me when the numerator is equal to
zero and solve it for theta, please. Because sometimes you might have more than one variable
in there. So I get all these numerator values, I get all this denominator values, but I cannot include
in my final selection, something that will make the denominator, some angle of theta that'll make
the denominator zero as well. We can't have that. And for that, I then use the complement function,
numerator minus denominator. So it's going to remove all of those in the denominator
from my list of possible numerator values so that I know the ones that are left is only going to make
my numerator zero, not my denominator. And then we're just going to choose one that sort of makes
sense for the problem, which is obviously going to be pi over three. And if we look up there,
this angle up there from the origin way up there to where y is going to be a maximum, that's about
pi over three. So we're sort of going to estimate that. And that means, well, I suppose if we take
negative pi over three, we're going to land up here where y is a minimum, but we were asked for
the maximum. So if we do that, it's easy enough for us just to remember then x equals r times the
cosine of theta and y equals r times the sine of theta. Just plug our pi over three in there and we
get the two coordinates. So twice I've run through the problem. I hope you get it. If not, leave a
little message in the comment and maybe I can get another way to explain this problem. But this is
kind of a nice problem. If you get this kind of problem in the exams, you know, this is more of a
difficult one. And if you can solve that one, you really, you know, this is sort of, I would estimate
for this level of calculus, this would be a difficult enough problem to show that, you know, that you
really know your work.
So we move on to the second part of this lecture. We were just going to look at integration as far
as polar coordinate curves are concerned. And what we have to have is this is a equation at least for
for integration. So in problem one, always 2.1 here, derive an equation for the area of a polar
coordinate curve on the interval with some starting angle to some end angle, where we have
this polar coordinate curve, r equals some function of the angle. And we want this to be continuous and
positive as far as this problem or setting up this problem is concerned. So if you have a look at the
top right little figure there, we have a circle there with some radius. And we know what the area is of the
whole circle, pi r squared, but we only have a fraction of that, we don't have the whole two pi there. So if we think about the
area of this little bit, you know, it's going to be pi r squared, which is the whole, but only a fraction of the
whole bit. So if this is the angle we're dealing with, this is the angle theta, it's going to be theta, this fraction of the
whole. So this fraction of the whole, and then this would cancel out. So we're really left with a half
times r squared times theta. So that is going to be this area, this area here, the purple area
that we have here. It's some fraction of the whole, which we can see there. Now what we can do,
I suppose, just here is remember that r is some function of theta. So if we rewrite this, we would
say the area there is going to be half times some function of theta, and all of this is squared
times theta. That this, this and this here is exactly the same. So let's think about some curve
that we have, and that's in blue on the right bottom here. And that curve, we can also see if
we take a tiny little fraction of it, that it goes from some angle to the next angle. So you see going
from theta i minus one to theta sub i. So we're just going from the one to the other. And then that tiny
little area will also be a tiny little fraction of, you know, if this was part here, if this was part of
some circle around the origin. So that's also that, that tiny little ai there, the area of that tiny
little bit, if we just think about the area of that tiny little bit, it is also going to be on this,
on this curve. Now, if we, if that's part of some bigger, you know, we want from that angle to that
angle, the area under the curve, you know, between those two, and we're going to, you know, go from a to b,
where we start theta. So theta, oops, that's not a theta, where we start theta zero, we're going to
start that, say, for instance, at a, and we're going to go all the way to theta, the end theta,
then we're going to set that to b. And what we can always do is just to divide that up into equal,
you know, sort of equal little angles there. So you know, that would have been the previous one,
and that's going to be the next one. So we have b minus a divided by n, and that's just delta theta.
Theta. So all these small little angles, they are delta theta, delta theta, delta theta, delta
theta. So what we're going to have here is that this is going to be this function squared delta
theta, because we are just, you know, it's just this tiny little one. And all we're going to do
to get to all of them is that we just sum over all of these little i's. Now, if we sum over all of
them, that is just going to be approximately equal to, so that will be approximately equal to,
it's going to be approximately equal to this f of theta, which is this r, remember, squared delta
theta. And what we need to do if we sum over all of them is that we just have to do what we always
do with this kind of problems. We're just going to let delta theta go to zero or n go to infinity,
that I have an infinite number of these. So I have an infinite number of them, you know, that means
the limit as n goes to infinity of all of these tiny little, you know, these tiny little angles that
we have here, so that we now have this full area. It's going to be this limit, and we go from i equals
one to n. So we're taking all of these. So that's going to be the f of all these little theta i's,
I should probably say there, all these little theta i's, and we square all of them delta theta.
So in the end that we have this, this limit, it's just going to be the integral and going from a to b
of a half times this angle, or this function of this angle, which is this r, and remember,
we're squaring that d theta. So that's how we always set up these problems, just starting,
you know, and going smaller and smaller and smaller, and just noting the similarity between
these two setups that we have here. So this little a sub i that we're getting there, it's approximately
equal to, and if we make it smaller and smaller and smaller, of course we're going to get there,
and we just have to sum over all of them. And I suppose the most important part here is just to
think about this purple part here as this fraction, so that we take pi r squared, but we multiply that
by some fraction of the whole. And if we went all the way around two theta, that angle, that'll be
two theta, two pi, I should say, over two pi, and that's just one. So the whole thing would be pi r
squared. And then we can just cancel out those, and we're left with this r squared theta. And we
remember r is a function of theta when we're talking about polar coordinates, so that we can go from,
you know, that we can go from here to here, no problem. And as we divide this up into these delta
thetas, you know, we set up this tiny little one, we go to infinity as far as how many of these little
things there are, and we're left with the integral. So that's the one we're going to remember, so let's just
write that out in green, that the area is going to be the definite integral, and going from a to b
of a half times this function of this angle, this r, and we square that d theta. And we're going to
write that down a couple of times as we go through those problems, just to sort of cement that. But
even if you can't remember that, I think this whole idea of setting up this problem is quite intuitive.
So here we are in problem 2.2 with our good old friend, the polar coordinate curve r equals the
sine of 3 theta, we know what it looks like. But now we're interested in this area enclosed
by this polar coordinate curve, and going from an angle of theta being 0, to theta being pi over 3.
So let's have a look at that in the Wolfram language. So there we can see our equation,
and we're going to do polar plot of sine of 3 times theta, remember to put the little space there
between the 3 and theta to indicate that's multiplication. And theta is going to start at 0,
and it's going to end at some value. And this value, we just want to manipulate this value to
go from some start position to end position. So we're starting it here at 0.01. So that means
it's starting at 0, and initially it goes to 0.01, but then all the way up to 3 pi. So if we were to
do that, we see the curve goes out, and that's the first little of the three little leaves that we saw
there. So that's the area from 0 to 3 pi, that we want to know, you know, what is the area under the
curve of that. And we've used the integrate function there, we say half times sine of 3,
3 times theta squared, and we're going from 0 to pi over 3. And if we use that, to integrate that,
we see it's pi over 12. So let's see if we can get to pi over 12. So how are we going to set this
all up? So first of all, in green, we're going to remember that area, as far as these polar
coordinate curves are concerned, that is going to be the integral and going from a to b of a half
times, and we have this function of theta squared d theta. And in this instance, let's see what we
have. We have the fact that a equals 0, we have that b equals pi over 3, and we have r equals
the sine of 3 times theta. That means the r squared is going to be 9 times the sine squared of 3 times
theta. And we'll have to integrate that. So we just have to think about this a little bit. So let's just
do this. Let's just do a little bit of side work. Let's choose a different color. So we have, let's just
have something like alpha being 3 theta. So that just makes life easier for us. We're going to,
we're going to forget the, um, um, the 9 at the moment. And there's a good reason why we should
remember 9, because I don't know where that 9 came from. Let's get rid of it there. It's quite easy to
make these little mistakes. So it's sine r squared is sine squared of 3 times theta. That looks a lot
better. So what we have now is the sine squared, sine squared of alpha. And we can rewrite that.
There's another way to, to, to write that the sine squared of alpha. Remember, that's going to be
1 minus cosine squared of alpha. That's an easy one to do because sine squared of alpha plus cosine
squared of alpha, that's going to be equal to 1. And sine squared of alpha, well, that's 1 minus,
and there's a trigonometric identity for the cosine squared of an angle. And that is half plus half
times the cosine of twice the angle. It's much easier for us to integrate twice an angle than it
is to integrate the square of a function. So we have the sine squared of alpha, that's going to be 1
minus 1 minus 1 half minus 1 half cosine of twice that angle. And now we just have to put in the fact
that this angle alpha, that's actually 3 theta. So the sine squared of 3 times theta, well, that's going
to be 1 half minus 1 half cosine of 2 times alpha, 2 times 3. So that's 6 theta. So now we have
everything really that we need because the area that we're interested in, let's just choose a darker
color there. The area, and we've got it there in green, that's going to go from 0 to pi over 3,
pi over 3 of 1 half. Remember, that's a constant, so we can actually bring it outside of that.
And we need, remember the f of theta in this instance for us, that was sine of 3 theta,
so we need that squared. So f of theta all squared, that's the sine squared of 3 theta that we need.
And we've done, we've just done that now. So it's half minus a half. So let's just put all of that,
that's a half minus a half cosine of 6 theta d theta. And let's just, you know, do all of those.
So I can just bring out that first half. So let's bring that out. And then we're going to have the
integral and going from 0 to pi over 3 of a half minus a half cosine of 6 theta. And all of this
d theta. So there's a negative sign there. So we can just do this in two bits. So we're going to have
the half here. And what we really have here is then the integral going from 0 to pi over 3
of a half d theta minus, we have another integral and going from 0 to pi over 3, pi over 3. And we
can bring that half out there, cosine of 6 theta d theta. So that's what we have there. So it's going
to be a half. Let's do all of that. This half d theta, that integral, so that's going to be a half
times theta. And that goes from 0 to pi over 3, minus another half. And now we just have to take
this integral of cosine of 6 theta. So we know the sine of an angle. We know the sine of an angle,
its derivative is the cosine. So we know that we're going to have the sine of 6 theta there.
And then we'll have to take the derivative of 6 theta. So this better be a 6 in the front there.
And that also goes from 0 to pi over 3. So that's just some nice, just remembering how all of these
things work. So we still have the area. That's a half times. So we're going to have this idea of a
half times pi minus 3 minus 0. So we can just leave that alone. And a half times that, that'd just be a,
just put 12 there. And then what we're going to have is the sine of 6 pi over 3, 6 pi over 3,
which is 2 pi. And remember minus 0 again, but we needn't worry about that. So a is going to be a
half. And here we have pi over 6 minus, and nothing happens there because the sine of 2 pi, well,
that's the 0. So we have that. And in the end, we have pi over 12, just as lawframe language
calculated for us, pi over half. It was actually quite a bit of work here. And it's nice to remember,
you know, some of your, your integral calculus for single variable, because that's basically all we
did here. And you can see this is quite easy, as long as you can remember this equation here for
taking that, for doing the integral. And of course, this is finicky, because you mustn't forget about
this half, and you have to carry that half the whole time. And in this instance, at least,
very useful trick identity that you have to remember. And maybe we can do a video about how
to drive that. But that's a very important derivative to remember. And, or trick integral to
remember, at least, because just taking cosine of some multiple of an angle, that's a much easier
integral to take, you know, than to struggle with a square of some trigonometric function,
as I said. And then it's just a matter of, you know, keeping track of this, of this sort of thing
here, so that you don't, so that you don't miss out on where these things are, you know, are supposed
to go. Let's get tracking problem 2.3. We calculate the area enclosed by the cardioid,
r equals 1 plus the cosine of theta. So let's use the lawframe language just to have a look,
see what that looks like. So we go, here we go, problem 2.3 is 1 plus the cosine of that angle,
and we're going all the way from 0 to 2 pi. So this whole area enclosed by this, this polar
coordinate curve, and our limits of integration, that's going to go from 0 to 2 pi. So let's first
of all, remember how we do this. And remember, always with these things, the more you write it
down, the more it becomes part of you, and you're going to remember that. So that equals a half. And
what I'm going to do from now is just bring the constant out. So it's a to b, and we're going to
take this function r, which is the function of theta, and we're going to square that d theta.
So let's just do a little bit work here on the right hand side. If we have r equals 1 plus the
cosine of this angle, if we square this, that is going to be 1 plus the cosine of the angle times 1
plus the cosine of that angle. So r squared, what's that going to be? It's 1 plus 2 times the cosine
of the angle. That's an easy one to do when we integrate that. And then plus cosine squared
of that angle. So let's put it in green because, as I said, that's always going to be useful,
this idea of cosine squared of an angle. This cosine squared of an angle, remember, that's equal
to half plus half times the cosine of twice that angle. So that's a bit easier for us to deal with.
So here we're going to have plus a half plus a half cosine of twice that angle. So in the end,
if we simplify a little bit, we have a half plus a half, 1 plus a half there. That's 3 over 2.
And let's see, plus we have 2 times the cosine of theta. That's at least very easy to integrate.
And in the end, another half times the cosine of twice that angle. And again, that's easy enough
to integrate as well. We also just remember the fact that a is going to equal 0. And we have b is
going to go 2 pi. So our limits of integration there. So let's do this. It's going to be half
times the definite integral. We're going to go from 0 to 2 pi. And we have the square. And that
is going to be 3 over 2. We're going to add to that twice the cosine of theta. And we're going to
add to that a half times the cosine of 2 theta. And all we have to do now, that is, with respect to
theta, is not, you know, not make any silly little mistakes. So we have the addition of three terms here,
which means we can break this integral up. So that's going to be half, is still here, way on
the outside. So there's going to be the definite integral going from 0 to 2 pi of 3 over 2 d theta.
And then plus, we're going to bring that 2 out, because it's a constant, 0 to 2 pi,
this definite integral of the cosine of theta d theta. And in the end, we can bring that half out
as well. Definite integral going from 0 to 2, 2 pi of the cosine of twice the angle d theta. And close
all of that. So again, a equals a half. Let's not forget that half. So the first one, you know,
it's just a constant d theta. So that's going to be 3 over 2 theta. And that's going to go from 0 to 2 pi.
Okay, plus twice. And what do we have there? It's the sine of theta is the antiderivative of the cosine
of theta. And that goes from 0 to 2 pi. And then we have, eventually we have a half. And then remember,
it's the sine of twice that angle. Its antiderivative would be that. But then we also have the 2 there.
So that's got to be a half. So think about it. Take the antiderivative, take the derivative of a
half sine twice the angle. The derivative of that is going to be cosine twice that angle. And that also
has to go from 0 to 2 pi. And we close all of that because we cannot forget this half way out front
here. So this first one is going to be 2 pi minus 0, as far as substituting, as far as the theta is
concerned there. So that's going to be 3 of 2, just 2 times pi there. So that one's easy. The sine of 2
pi, well, that's 0 minus the sine of 0, which is also 0. So that term disappears. And the same thing is
going to happen for that third term, because we have the sine of 4 pi, which is 0, and then minus the
sine of 0, which is also 0. So that term disappears as well. So what we're left with here is a half.
And we're left with the 2s can go. And that means we're left with 3 pi. And in the end, that means
we have 3 pi over 2. So once you get to do a couple of these, a bit of side work. But yeah, they're quite
exciting to do. And think about it. We have this pretty odd curve. And we can calculate the exact
area enclosed by that curve, which is quite neat. Problem 2.4. Calculate the area enclosed by the
inner loop of the limacon, or limacon, or, you know, the Turkish, I suppose. We'll just say limacon.
R equals 1 plus 2 times the cosine of an angle. And we see the limits of integration there. It's going
to go from 5 pi over 6 to 7 pi over 6. This just means that, you know, there's going to be a lot of
side work. And there's going to be a lot of opportunity to make a little arithmetical errors.
Because what you won't make an error with is just to remember that the area is going to be half times
this definite integral and going from a to b. And there's our a and there's our b of this function
of theta r. We're going to square that d theta. That we won't forget. And we have things right there.
So it just means a lot of side work. So we have r equals 1 plus 2 times the cosine of this angle.
By the way, let's have a look at, you know, just what this looks like. So there we go, problem 2.4.
And what we really want is this little inner loop. And hence, we have this integral set by the angle
going from 5 pi over 6 to 7 pi over 6. So let's see if we can do that. So what we need is r squared,
of course, that's 1 plus 2 times the cosine of the angle, times 1 plus 2 times the cosine of that
angle. So r squared is going to be 1 plus 4 times the cosine of theta, plus 4 times cosine squared of
theta. Now we know that little integral there is a bit too difficult. So you're going to have 1 plus
4 times the cosine of the angle, plus 4 times, remember, that's half plus a half cosine of twice
the angle. So what we're going to have is r squared equals 1 plus 4 times the cosine of our angle,
plus that's going to be a 2, plus that's going to be a 2 cosine of twice the angle. And eventually,
we get to r squared equals 1 plus 1 is 3. 1 plus 2 is 3, I should say, 4 times the cosine of that angle,
plus we're going to have twice the cosine of twice the angle. So let's go about doing that. So we have
a is the half, and we're going from 5 pi over 6, that's an ugly 5, but remember what it's for, 7 pi over
6. And we have this 3 plus 4 times the cosine of the angle, plus twice the cosine of twice that angle,
and that's all with respect to theta. So let's do a equals a half. And this is where, I suppose this
is where all the little mistakes do come from. So we're going to have this integral in 5 pi over 6
to 7 pi over 6 of 3 d theta. And we have the integral of 5 pi over 6 to 7 pi over 6 of, I suppose
we can bring that 4 out, cosine of theta d theta. And lastly, we can bring that 2 out, definite integral
5 pi over 6, 7 pi over 6. And we have the cosine of twice the angle, d theta. And we close that all
off there. So the area is going to be a half. We still have all of this. That integral there is going
to be 3 times theta. And that goes from 5 pi over 6 to 7 pi over 6. And what is that? Let's just see,
because we're going to probably do that. So 7 pi over 6 minus 5 pi over 6. That's very easy. That's 2 pi
over 6. And that's pi over 3. So we've got that one. So let's carry on. Plus 4 times. What's the
antiderivative of the cosine of theta? Well, that's just the sine of theta. And that's got to go from
5 pi over 6. I keep on making those ugly fives. 7 pi over 6. And then we're going to have plus 2.
And this is going to be a half sine of 2 theta. So take a half sine 2 theta. Take its first derivative.
It's cosine of 2 times that angle. And yeah, that's also got to go from 5 pi over 6 to 7 pi over 6.
And we have got to close that because that's all got to be multiplied by this half. So if we do that,
if we do this, we are set with the fact that it's 3 times that 3 that we have there times that. So
that's just going to leave us with pi. So that just leaves us with pi. And then we have to do this
4 times, plus 4 times. And then we have the sine of 7 pi over 6 minus the sine of 5 pi over 6.
Great. And then that's just going to cancel out. So 2 times a half, that's this 1. So we're going to
have plus, we're going to have sine, sorry, sine of twice this angle. So that's 14 pi over 6. 14 pi over 6
minus the sine of twice that angle. So that's 10 pi over 6. Close that. And all of that's going to be
multiplied by a half. And so where does that leave us? Still with a half. This is going to leave us with
pi. And I suppose what you have to do now is use the Wolfram language or take out your calculator
because it's not so easy to remember what the sine of 14 pi over 6 is or 10 pi over 6, even if you
simplify those a little bit. But if you do know, great for you. I'm going to just use my Wolfram,
the Wolfram language. And you'll see that equates to, this is going to be minus 5 plus the square root
of 3. That's where we're going to end up with. And I suppose we can just simplify things a little bit
in as much as we can say a equals a half times. We're still going to have pi. We're still going
to have positive the square root of 3. And we'll have a negative 2 if we distribute that in. We can
have a negative 2 at the end. So that's it. These problems are really designed just for you to go
through a lot of exercise and just keep your head together so that you don't make an arithmetical
error because that's where it's going to creep in. And of course, you know, you might be required to
remember what the signs are of all these angles or at least simplify them and know and remember what
they are or you might be given them. I think it's just fair to give you access to a way to calculate
those. And in the end, it's keeping your head together. The problem itself in the end, as you
can see, is not that difficult. Let's have a look at the area enclosed by one loop of this lemniskate
R squared equals cosine of 2 theta. Let's bring up the Wolfram language.
And there's our problem. And remember, this is a function of theta, R, but we have R squared.
So just to get R, we just need the square root of cosine of 2 theta, which is what we have there
for polar plot. And we're going to go from 0 to somewhere. And that somewhere is from 0.01 to 2 pi.
So we're just using this manipulate function, remember? So if we do that, and we go all the way
round, so we'll see that's what it was. But this is a trickier one than you think. And remember with
these, always with these calculus problems, try to use symmetry and get the smallest possible area
and multiply it because of symmetry. And we see here we basically have these four quadrants. And it's
not as simple as that. When you really sit down and you get to there, it goes back and forth.
You know, there's a lot happening there. So let's just go from there slowly, slowly, slowly down to
there. 0.8 somewhere there. So that's pi over 4. And we can just do that from zero, that integral from
zero to pi over four and just multiply it by two, because we just asked for one loop. And if we were
going to do all both loops, you know, we would multiply it by four. So that's just a little rule of
thumb, just do the smallest one you can and just multiply it because of the symmetric properties
of the shape created by the curve. So let's have a look at this. So always remember, we're going to
write that down, the area of these functions that are expressed in polar form, that's going to be the
integral of half of the f of theta squared d theta. So let's get our blue pen there. So let's do this.
And so what we're going to do, we're going to do twice this area. And we're going to go from zero to
pi over four, we saw from the from the plot that that was the smallest piece we can do, we just
multiply by two, and we have that area. And then a half, and then r squared. And we've already given
the function as r squared. So this is going to be the cosine of two theta d theta. So the area is
going to be two times, we can bring the half outside of the integral here. So two times a half
is this one. So that's going a different integral going from zero to pi over four of the cosine of
two pi, two theta d theta. So the area is going to be what is the antiderivative of the cosine of
twice this angle, but that's very easy. That's half times the sine of twice the angle. And if you
take the derivative of this with respect to theta, you get back to cosine of two theta. So we know that's
right. And we go from zero to pi over four. Now try to do this by, you know, by not multiplying this
by two, and go from zero to pi over two, or go from zero to pi. And see what, you know, sort of see what
happens. And you can very quickly get to this idea of take the smallest possible area and just use the
symmetric properties of this curve to get this area. So this is area going, it is from a half. And so we're
going to have sine of twice the angle, and we're going to go from zero to pi over four. So it is
going to be a half times the sine of two times pi over four, that's sine of pi over two, minus the
sine of that's going to be zero, which is the zero. So it is going to be the sine of pi over two is one.
And we're just left with a half. So that one loop, if we just looked at the loop itself, just that
shape that is formed, that the curve forms, the area enclosed by that is going to be a half.
Problem 2.6. Calculate the area of one of the petals of the polar coordinate curve r equals the
sine of two theta. Let's bring that up. And there we go. The polar plot of the sine of two theta,
and we're going to go from zero to two pi. So we just want the area of one of these petals.
Now in the problem, I think we are given a hint that we have to take theta going from zero to pi over
two. So if you're using the Wolfram language, put the manipulate function in there, and then go from
zero point zero one, just something larger than zero, to pi over two, and you'll see one of the petals
there. So as always, we're going to start with, by just reminding ourselves what the equation is that
we derived for this area. We're going to go the definite integral of going from zero to some angle,
some zero to some angle of the half of our function squared with respect to that angle.
So if we just take our blue pen there, so we're going to have the area is going to be this definite
integral. We were told in the hint from zero to pi over two. So that's from zero to pi over two
of a half times, we're going to have the sine of two theta all squared d theta. So we've got to sort
of first figure out how we're going to do this, this, what are we going to do with a sine two theta
squared, so that we can do this. So let's just take a different color there, usually the side work
in this lavender color. So what I'm going to do is just let, let's do this, let alpha equals two times
theta. So what we have here is the sine squared of alpha. If we just have a look at this, we're just
plugging in alpha for two theta, two times theta. So that's the sine of alpha squared or the sine
squared of alpha. And we remember from the most famous of the trigonometric identities that this
is going to be one minus cosine squared of alpha. So that's one way to do it. You can, of course,
just, if you can't remember the double angle formula for this, the one that I always remember
is just the cosine, you know, what to do with the cosine squared. And the sine squared is actually
very easy. And when we get to the end of it, you'll see, you've probably memorized it. But let's go,
let's go this long way around, just for a bit of exercise. So the sine squared of alpha,
that's going to be one minus. And remember, what is this? Well, the cosine squared of an angle,
that's half plus a half cosine of twice that angle. So the sine squared of alpha, that is one
minus a half minus a half cosine of two alpha. And sine squared of alpha, one minus a half is a half.
So it's a half minus a half cosine of the double angle. So if you didn't remember that the sine squared
is one as a half minus a half, whereas the cosine squared is a half plus a half, it's very easy to
derive, as you can see there. But we're not interested in alpha, are we? We're interested in
theta. So that's going to be the sine squared of two theta. That's going to be a half minus a half
cosine of four theta. So that is the integral that we're dealing with. So let's just do this.
That's going to be the area of, we're going to bring the half out, definite integral going from zero to
pi over two, and we're going to have this half minus a half cosine of four theta d theta. So we have
two terms in there, and we can take the integral of both of them. So area is going to be a half,
let's just keep this halfway out here. So that's zero to pi over two, zero to pi over two of a half
d theta minus the integral and going from zero to pi over two of the cosine of, well there's a half in
there, let's bring the half out there, of four times the angle d theta, and we close that. So this is an
exercise really in not making silly mistakes here. So that's going to be a half out there. So this is
going to be a half theta, and this is going to go from zero to pi over two, minus, this is a half here,
and so we've just got to take the antiderivative of the cosine of four times an angle, well that's
going to be sine of four times that angle, and a quarter in front. And if you take the derivative
of a quarter sine four times theta, you're going to get to cosine four times theta. And this also has
to go then from zero to pi over two, and all the way out there. So the area here for us is going to
be a half, all the way still out here. And then we've got this half this angle, and we've got to go
from pi over two minus zero. So that's what we have there, minus a half, and we can bring the quarter
out as well. So that's going to be an eighth. So then we're going to have sine of four times the
angle, and that's going to go from zero to pi over two. And guess what's going to happen to that?
So the area is going to be this half, and we have pi over four here, and then we have this
sine of this. So let's just do that on the side here. Let's just grab another pen. So I'm going to
have sine of four times a half pi. So that's two pi, and we know that that's going to be zero. And
with a zero as well, that's going to be the sine of zero. They're both zeros. So this minus eighth
times zero, nothing is going to be left there. So we just have that. That'd be the wrong color. And
eventually the area here is just one eighth pi, or pi over eight. This is right. They'd need a pi over
eight. So really just an exercise in remembering your trigonometric identities here. And if you
can't remember sine squared, it's just easy to derive. As I say, somehow in my head, this one sticks.
And I was sort of unsure about this one, but it's easy to derive. And it's really not that difficult
to remember. And of course, just to make life easier for yourself, just simplify the angle first
so that you can deal with that. Problem 2.7. Calculate the area inside r equals two plus cosine
two times theta. And where theta goes from zero to two pi. Let's bring up the Wolfram language and
have a look at it. And there we go. Two plus cosine of two times theta. And we're going all the way from
zero to two pi. Interesting shape. And we need to calculate that area.
As always, let's start by remembering that the area is going to be this definite integral and going
from starting angle, which is usually zero to some final angle times a half. And we express our
polar form of our equation there. And we square that d theta. So we're going to probably have to do some
side work here if we look at two plus cosine of twice the angle. So let's give it a start. So
we're going to go area equals, we were told from zero to two pi. We're going to have a half. And then
we're going to have two plus cosine of two theta squared d theta. So let's do some some work on the
side. Let's square that first. So two times two is four. And that's going to be plus four times the
cosine of two theta. And we're going to have plus cosine squared, let's make that a positive cosine
squared of two theta. Now just in previous problem 2.6, had a look at that. Just have a quick look at
that one. Because remember, we substituted two theta for alpha. And we remembered, we can remember
what cosine squared is. Let's just do that here. Four plus four times cosine of two theta. That'd be easy
enough to integrate. And what we're going to have here is, remember, let's just do one other color
here. If we have cosine squared of an angle, remember, that's going to be a half plus a half cosine of
twice that angle. But our angle is not alpha, it's two times theta. So that's going to give us four times
there. So that's going to be plus a half and plus a half cosine of four times that angle. And four plus
a half is nine over two, plus four times the cosine of two theta, plus a half times the cosine of four
theta. So that's quite, you know, there's three separate things there that we can integrate. And that
makes the integral not too difficult to do. So let's, let's get at it. So area is going to be,
I'm going to bring this half out. And we're just going to have all of these separate, three separate
integrals. So we're going to go from zero to two pi, just of nine over two d theta, with respect to
theta, d theta, plus, let's just bring the four out, that's going to go from zero to two pi. And we
have cosine of two theta, d theta, and another integral going from zero to pi. I've got that
half, I can just squeeze it in there, half, cosine of four times and our angle with respect to our
angle, and close all of that up. So the area is going to be a half. So let's start here, that's going
to be nine over two theta, going from zero to two pi, plus four times. And we've got to take the
antiderivative of the cosine of two theta. Well, we're going to have a half, at least out there,
we're going to have the sine of two theta. And that goes from zero to two pi. And here we've got our
half, we're going to bring out a quarter there, and we're going to have the sine of four times
theta. And that also has to go from zero to two pi. And we have to close all our brackets. Now you can
see what's going to happen to these terms. Sine of two theta, two times theta, and the angle is two
pi. So that's going to be four pi. And that's going to be zero, and the sine of zero, zero. And the same
is going to happen here, four times, so eight times pi, that's also going to be zero, and the sine of four
times zero, that's zero, sine of zero, zero. So those terms are all going to disappear at the end
there. So what are we going to be left with something? Very easy. We've got the half here,
we've got the nine over two there, and we've got the two pi minus zero there, basically. So that's
going to be nine over four, nine over four, times two pi over one. And that's going to simplify
to nine pi over two. So our area is just nine pi over two. So a lot of work, just to keep things
together. But in the end, it really simplifies quite a bit, as that our term number two and three,
they just disappear on that interval that we have. And there we have it.
Then we'll go, 2.8. Calculate the area inside r equals cosine squared of theta over two. So it's
complicated by the fact that we have a problem with angle, and we've got a square already as
far as our trigonometric function is concerned. So let's try this. We're going to remember that
a equals, the area equals, from some starting angle, which is zero, to some final angle, half.
And we have our angle, our function at least, but we've got to square that, and d theta. The other
thing that we're also going to remember, let's just write that out, cosine squared of some angle,
let's call this angle alpha. Remember, that is half plus a half cosine of twice that angle. So that's
what we're going to use. So let's just look at our cosine squared of theta, and theta over two,
I should say. So what's going to happen to that? So that's going to be a half plus another
half cosine of twice that angle, but the angle's already theta over two, two times that, so that
just leaves us with theta. But we remember we've got to square this, because we've got
our function squared there. So this is going to be a half times a half is a quarter, a half times a
quarter times two, that's again, a half times a quarter, that leaves us with a half, and that's
cosine of theta, and plus a quarter cosine squared of theta. So we've got to do something with that
cosine squared theta again. So this is going to be a quarter plus a half cosine of theta, plus a quarter
here, and this is going to be a half plus a half cosine of twice that angle. So that leaves us with a
quarter plus a quarter plus a half of cosine of that angle, plus an eighth, plus an eighth cosine of twice
that angle. A quarter plus an eighth, that's three over eight, and plus a half cosine theta, plus an eighth
cosine twice the angle. So it's as simple as that. And what you can already see here is that the
antiderivative of cosine is going to be sine, and we've got the angle itself, and we've got twice the
angle, but we're going from zero to two pi. And that means the sine of those in the integral, they're
just going to disappear. So if you want to do that the long way, please go ahead. But what we're going
to be left with, of course, is going from zero to two pi. And so we're just going to have three
eight d theta, there we go, three eight d theta. Because all these others, as you see in all the
previous problems, but please write them out, do them the long way, they're all going to disappear.
So what we're left with is a half times three over eight, and we just have theta, and we're going to go
from zero to pi, zero to two pi. So area is going to be three over 16, and times two pi. So that's
going to, area is going to be three over eight pi. This is right, that a bit neater, three pi over eight,
three pi over eight. And bring up the Wolfram language, just, I didn't show you, I think, in this
one, just to see what that, what the graph looks like of this polar coordinate function. And
please write out all the other terms here, I'm being a tad lazy here, but you've seen with all
the other problems now, if we take the antiderivative, that's going to be the sine, and for the
bounds of this integral, those terms are just going to disappear. Calculate the area here in problem
2.9, swept out by this polar coordinate equation, r equals the tangent of theta, and theta going from
zero to pi over four. Let's have a look at what this looks like.
There we go, I've got my tangent of my angle there, and as we sweep it out from zero, so that,
think about it, we are, obviously, this is going to be about vector calculus, so we'll get to vectors,
but think about this vector going straight down the x-axis, so along the x-axis, and then it curves
up to pi over four, pi over four is 45 degrees, so if I had the straight line going through there,
because what we really wonder when we, what we've got to think about when we're doing this integral,
the area under the curve here, that's not the area under this curve, and certainly when you
transform this into rectangular coordinates, I can do that equation, you can see it there,
try to do it yourself, and the area under the curve would be that, but that's not what this
problem asks. This problem actually asks the following, so our curve is now down here in
orange, but it's this area, remember we go counterclockwise, from zero to pi over four,
so it is this area here, the inside area, on top of, so if I had a straight line up here,
it's this inside area that we're talking about. Remember if we have other curves going all the
way around, we want this anti-clockwise movement, as the angle gets larger, so we're sweeping up this
top side, so let's have a look. Remember always area equals this integral of a half, our function
of theta, and we square all of that d theta, so we're certainly going to need that. Other things
that we might need is a trigonometric identity, and if you can't remember the trigonometric identity,
let's just remind ourselves we have sine squared of some angle, let's call it alpha, plus cosine
squared of some angle, that equals one, but if we divide both sides by cosine squared, cosine squared,
and cosine squared of that angle, we are left with the tangent squared of that angle, plus one,
plus a little bit better, and that's the secant squared of theta, so there's your second one,
and since we have r equals the tangent of theta, we've got to square that, that's going to be the
tangent squared of theta that we have to deal with, so we're going to have tangent squared of theta
theta equals secant squared of alpha, what am I writing, theta's there, let's just correct that
before, we go any further, so where were we, alpha, we're dealing with alpha's here, minus one,
so we're certainly going to do, we're certainly going to need some of that, and we're going to
need one more thing, but let's have a look, so we got this half, we're going from zero to pi over
four tangent squared of the angle, and with respect to that angle, so we're going to rewrite this as
area equals half of the definite integral, and going from zero to pi over four, of secant squared
theta minus one, so that's secant squared theta, d theta we can say, because we can also then say,
let's just put that there, this integral zero to pi over four of one d theta, because it's
just two separate expressions, so if they're all part of the integrand, we can of course just do
them separately, take the integral separately, so that's going to be a half, and what is the
antiderivative of the secant squared of theta, and as that's what I said, that's the other thing that
we must remember, what is d d theta of the tangent of theta, well that's the secant squared of theta,
so what we're going to have here, so what we're going to have here, is the tangent, oh let's just
make a lighter blue there, the tangent of the angle, and that's going to go from zero to pi over four,
minus, and then we're going to have theta, and that's also got to go from zero to pi over four,
so what is the tangent of, let's have a look at that, what is the tangent, let's do this first
one, so the tangent of pi over four, well that's just one minus, that's going to be a zero, tangent
of zero zero, minus what we have here, pi over four minus zero, so that's what we have there, so we have
a equals a half, and then we have one minus pi over four, and let's simplify that, that's going to be a
half, let's put that four there, and that is going to be four minus pi, and eventually we have that the area
is going to be four minus pi over eight.
So another lovely little problem, just to remind yourself of your first year calculus,
and some trigonometric identities, and just remember the very simple fact that the integral
of the difference between two expressions, that's just equal to the, taking this, the integral
separately. Problem 2.10, calculate the area inside the cardioid, r equals one plus the cosine of theta,
and outside the circle, r equals one, let's have a look at those plots.
There we have it in the Wolfram language, so it's this blue one, which is the cardioid,
so it's going to be inside that, but outside, outside of this circle, r equals one. So all we're
going to do is one minus the other one, and we're going to make use of symmetry, because if we go
from zero, that's the positive x-axis, to pi over two, which is the positive y-axis, we do this upper
half, and then we just have to multiply by two for the bottom half, but I hope you can see that this
area that we're interested in here, in between these two, that's just this outside one minus
the inside one. Let's see what that looks like. As always, area is going to be this integral of a
half, our function, which is the function of theta squared d theta, and let's pick our blue pen.
So what we're going to have here, we're going to use symmetry, so that's going to be two times a half,
we're going from zero to pi over two, and now we just have the one minus the other one. So this is
going to be one plus cosine of theta all squared, minus the other one, which is one all squared,
and that's d theta. So the area is going to be equal, two times a half, that's just one,
so that's very simple, zero to pi over two, and we have here a one plus twice the cosine of theta,
so I'm just squaring this bit here, plus cosine squared of theta minus one, all of that with
respect to theta. And now I can just remember what to do with the cosine squared, and I can say one
minus one, that goes away. So this is this definite integral going from zero to pi over two, as I say,
one minus one, that's zero, we're going to have two cosine of theta, and here we're going to have
plus a half plus a half cosine of twice the angle, all of that d theta. So let's do that. So area is
going to equal, well that's going to be two times the sine of theta, as the antiderivative, and that's
going to go from zero to pi over two, plus this is going to be a half theta, and that's going to go
from zero to pi over two, and that's going to be a half, and this is going to be another half
sine of twice the angle, and that goes from zero to pi over two. Now I hope you can see what's going
to happen to these, because the sine of pi, that's zero, and the sine of zero, zero, so that term is
going to drop away. This first term, let's have a look at that. So the area, the area here, that's
going to be twice, what is the sine, what is the sine of pi over two? Well that's just one minus the
zero, sine of zero, zero, so that's there, plus a half, and here we have pi over two minus zero, that's
there, and as we said that last term is zero, so this is going to be two plus pi over four, two plus
pi over four, and you can eaten that up if you wanted to, just to have a single fraction.
So I hope you enjoyed these couple of problems, dealing with a calculus of functions that are
expressed in polar form, they're not very difficult to do, just do a bunch of them, as I say, my one
tip is just always going to be, keep it very simple, take the least amount of angle that you have to go
to do your integral, so from zero to the smallest possible, and then just use symmetry, multiply by two,
multiply by four, and for the majority of these you see all you need to remember is a bit of,
or some at least trigonometric identities, and you might have to remember that the
anti-derivative of the secant squared of an angle is the tangent of that angle, that sort of thing.
See ya'll soon.
...
...
...
...
