So you might ask, what is one of the first things that flow from this?
One of the first things is a law.
Let's call it the cancellation law.
Cancellation law.
Let's just have a quick look at the cancellation law.
All we're going to have is something like this.
We're going to say AB equals AC.
That implies that B equals C.
What is that? B equals C.
You know what that was.
But anyway, it's easy from all those properties that we set to be able, for something to be able to be a group.
Because I can multiply both sides or I can bring this operation and this operation is going to be this operation of multiplication.
So I can bring A inverse in on this side and I still have AB.
And on this side, I'm going to also bring in A inverse and I have AC.
Look at the order of that.
This comes in from the left-hand side.
Now we had this property of associativity.
So I've got A inverse A and then B.
And that is going to equal A inverse A and C.
And we had that property that we must have the identity element in there.
So EB equals EC.
And we had this property of there must be this identity element.
And the product of that is just going to be B and that is going to equal on the other side, C.
So that is the cancellation law.
And that follows naturally or one of the first things that we do follow, that does follow from that.
Can we use the cancellation law?
Ah, let's use it in a nice fun little exercise here.
Let's suggest that if AB equals the identity element, this implies that A equals B inverse and B equals A inverse.
Can we prove that from the stuff in our bucket, the properties that we've had?
Let's have a look.
Let's have a look.
Proof.
Proof.
Given.
What is given?
Well, given that AB equals E, what can we do to this?
We can multiply this side by A inverse AB and that equals A inverse E.
Associativity we can bring into this.
So E, B, anything with identity element, just leaves that for me.
This is just this B equals A inverse.
So I'm taking a group here and my group operation, by the way, is this multiplication allowing me
to do this.
OK, remember though that this is not, it doesn't really mean the algebraic form that we used
to, that you used to from simple algebra.
It says, it is just a notation for the inverse.
So if this was addition and under the integers and three and was my element, then minus three
would be its inverse.
But I could also just have said this was A, this was my A inverse, not necessarily saying
this, this makes sense for us algebraically.
What we mean here is, I'm just generally implying what the group operation is here, but I'm generally,
talking about an inverse.
Now we've proven one, but we haven't proven the other implication here.
And we can really simply do that.
Let's see if we can do that.
So that's proven on that side.
Let's also, given what is given to us, given that AB equals E, I can have this AB and let's
have B inverse on this side.
So I have this and I have E and I have B inverse.
On that side, associativity, which is just going to be A and you can clearly see here,
we're going to be left with E and this is A. And on this side, we're going to have B inverse.
So with the cancellation law and those properties, this is what it implies.
If I take two elements of my group with a group operation, applying the group operation
to those, if that equals the identity element, it means the one is, one, the one element is
the, the one element is the inverse of the other.
