So let's eventually get to the definition of the center of a group.
And if we have a group G and we make it some set and a binary operation on that,
we call the center of a group the center, we write Z, and then the group name in the parentheses there.
And we're actually going to show that this is a subgroup, a subgroup of G.
And we are going to define ZG, the center of G, that's all the elements, G elements.
Well, we'll do that because it is a group.
So it's G element of G set such that S binary operation with G equals G binary operation with S for all S elements of G set.
Remember then also the binary operation and close.
This is a group. So this is a set of all these elements.
And it's the elements in G such that we have this commutative property with all of the elements in the set.
So certain of these elements will show this commutative property under this binary operation.
We have to show that it's a subgroup by showing that it has the four properties of a group.
So first of all, we need closure.
So we need if G1 and G2 is an element of the center, we must have the G1 composed with G sub 2.
The binary operation must also be an element of the center.
And how do we do that?
Well, let's just write G1 composed with G2 composed with S.
Well, if we write this with associativity, we could do this.
And remember, G2 is an element of this.
So we can rewrite that as S composed with G2.
So that's exactly the same thing.
And by associativity, I can have these two together composed with G2.
G1 is an element of the center.
So I can do commutativity there.
So that is going to be S composed with G1 composed with G2.
And remember, I started with this.
I started with G1 composed with G2 composed with S.
And that is equal to this.
And I can do that.
So this with S and S with that.
Well, that just falls within the definition of this.
This new element, this new element that I get by the binary operation by composing these two,
is commutative as far as all the elements S is just being an arbitrary element.
In other words, by definition, whatever this is must also be an element.
So we have closure.
So if G1 and G2 is in the center, the binary operation between those are also there.
We're going to have associativity because this is a set.
And we're just taking it from a set.
The identity element is very easy because, you know, by definition of an identity element,
it does commute.
So that's not a problem.
And now we just have to show that every element G that's in there, its inverse is also there.
So we've basically got to show that G inverse composed with S,
that that equals S composed with G inverse.
So how can we do that?
Well, let's have a little look on this side.
What can we do on this side?
Well, what shall we do?
Let's start rather with this side.
Let's say G inverse composed with S composed with G composed with G inverse.
That equals SOG inverse.
Now, I've done nothing.
I'm just composing with the identity element.
I'm composing with the identity element.
But if I can do this, I can do associativity.
G, I'm starting off with G being an element of the center of G.
I can do that.
So I'm going to have G inverse composed with G composed with S.
Because it is an element, I can do that composed with G inverse.
Composed with G inverse.
What I'm left with here, in the end, is just the identity element.
So I have that GOS as we start G inverse composed with S equals S composed with G inverse.
And that, once again, satisfies the definition that I have here.
So I do have closure.
So in other words, no problem, I have closure, I have associativity, I have an identity element.
And every element in the center also has its inverse being in the center of G.
So we can really show that the center of a group is a subgroup of our original group.
