So yesterday I showed you very briefly this column view. Now I didn't mention
really I think the word column view but there's a way not to see matrices as
rows but as columns. There's really two views on the matrices. We have row
operations that's really just seeing these things as rows but much more
interesting is the column view. So here I have two equations and two unknown
instead of x and y I've made them x sub 1 and x sub 2 just so that we don't get
that confusion with the x and x and y's again. And I can have my
augmented matrix. Let's just have that first. My augmented matrix and that would
be a 2, a 1 and a 7 and a 1 and negative 1 and a 2. You can even do that and if we
do if we do Gauss-Jordan elimination I get to 1, 0, 0, 1 and I'm going to get to a 3
and a 1 just to indicate that x sub 1 must be 3 and x sub 2 must be 1. So that's one
way of looking at it. I could also have done the following. I could just have my
matrix of coefficients call that A and that would be a 2 and a 1 and a 1 and a negative 1 and I would have my matrix
my column vector x I should say and that would be x sub 1 and x sub 2 and I showed you that if I have
A times x my matrix times a vector that's why we looked at that we're going to get this solution
vector and my solution vector B was going to equal 7 and 2. And I showed you if I were to write this A and
x like that and I did that multiplication I was indeed going to end up with that and that has got
to equal B on that side and if we could get A inverse I would have A inverse A and x and that would
equal A inverse B. In other words x was going to equal A inverse B. So if I could get that that's what I showed you.
What I'm really interested in here is this idea of looking at it in column form and we'll look at that
because it's much much more interesting. Let's have a look at that. What we are really saying here is the
following. I have this column vector 2 and 1 and I have another column vector there which is a 1 and a negative 1.
And what I'm trying to get to is this column vector 7 and 2. This is what I'm looking at here and I'm
saying I'm looking for some scalar multiple of this column vector and I want to add to that some
scalar multiple of the second vector to get this column vector. Is that so? Yes it is because I want 2 times x1
plus x2 to give me 7 and I want x1 minus x2 to give me 2. So everything holds but I want to see all of this
as a column vector and all of this as a column vector because look at this. If I see this in a
two dimensional plane as a column vector there's 2,1 which is this there and there is 1, minus 1.
You'll have to watch this on a large screen to see there's 1, negative 1. And my solution vector is this
one 7, 2. And I'm asking how many times this vector added to how many times this vector will give me that vector.
Can I get to there by a linear combination of these two vectors? So if I have a, if I, a linear, a linear
combination means I've got to scale this vector along this line and this little vector I've got to scale
along this line so that I eventually I get to two of them and if I add, so I might get to there and this one I
might get to there or I might multiply it by negative and get to there and get to there and if I add these
two can I get to that vector? That is the column view. I hope you see this column view of a vector. I want to know
how many times this column vector, how many times that one plus how many times this one do I have to get to get to that one.
And then these coefficients that we have there, two and one, those are vectors in this space that I have here,
this two dimensional space. And when we look at it and we see that x1 equals 3 and x2 equals 1, look at what happens.
If I take this vector and I multiply it by 3, it means each component is multiplied by 3 and so I get this vector
for this vector here becomes 6 and a 2 and if I multiply this by 1 I'm left with a 1 and a minus 1.
So I'm saying 3 times this vector plus 1 times that vector and if I do that I land up at 6 and I land up at 3
which is right there and that is along the line of this vector. This vector has been multiplied by a scalar
which just stretches it in this line and that one is just itself which is just 1 minus 1 which is right there
and there I get to 7 and 2. So that is a linear combination of these column vectors to give me a third vector.
And now you can see that these two vectors that I have here, a linear combination of them can get me anywhere in the plane.
Anywhere in the plane I can get to by a linear combination of just these two and we say that these two vectors span,
they span this whole two dimensional space. And you can also see why now if my second vector was along this line,
if my second vector was along this line as well, so say imagine it was just there or it was there,
no linear combination of them would get me anywhere off of that line. So these two would not span two dimensional space.
And we'll see that if we have linear combinations of them then we can't get to anything other than a combination of this space.
So it's just this illustration that I'm trying to make is that we see these matrices as not as, or these systems of linear equations then,
not as rows in a matrix, not as an augmented matrix, not as a matrix of coefficients, but as this linear combination of column vectors
to give me another column vector in the same space. It's two rows, so it's two dimensional space, two dimensional space, two dimensional space,
I'm here in flat two dimensional space. And that is much more important and a much more interesting view of these systems of linear equations
and of matrices is to see them as these linear combinations of column vectors, the columnar view of a matrix.
for eight international matrix.
