Yesterday we looked at vector spaces and subspaces and I really want to talk today about, let's
do this.
We're going to talk about the subspace of a matrix.
Now we've already looked at a matrix as far as its columns are concerned and we saw those
as column vectors but I want to build onto that.
So imagine that I have some vectors in a space, let's call it vector v1, vector v2, vector
v3 and they are all elements of this bigger vector space v and so much so that they're
all part of a subspace and I can even have this v, let's make this vj.
And if these are all, say v1, v2, v3, if all of them are part of some subspace of v, subspace,
so listen carefully.
So they are part of this vector space but more so they're part of a subspace of these three
at least a subspace of v.
If this is true then the following things hold.
If I were just to add them, v1 plus v2 plus v3, imagine that equals this vj, that would
mean that this vj is also in that subspace.
That guarantees that and if there is some scalar c and I c1 and I multiply that by v1,
that is also in the subspace.
And if I have, so it's a linear, it's this scalar times that and if I c1 v1 and c2 v2 and
c3 v3, the linear combination of these vectors, remember that each column, each column, a linear
combination of them, so multiply each by scalar, will still also be in this subspace.
So if this is true, if this holds, then this holds and these two holds, so it's a linear
combination.
Now imagine I have a matrix A. Here's my matrix A and it has 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 3, let's make
it 2, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, and I have 3, 1, 3, 2, 3, 3.
And I have some vector x, it's my vector x, and it's x sub 1, x sub 2, and x sub 3.
That's it.
So imagine that we are used to that, we've seen now a, let's do that, a x equals b.
We've seen that.
A system of linear equations, and I'm trying to get that solution.
That's what linear algebra, or most of linear algebra is all about, and we can do Gauss-Jordan
elimination, we can get the inverse of this so that we have x equals a inverse b, we can
do all of those things, but there's a much more important thing going on here, and that
is to see the subspace created by this matrix.
So that's a bit weird, because if that is so, then this is our matrix of coefficients.
What do all the coefficients have to do with it?
Well, the coefficients have everything to do with it, let's have a look.
What we're trying to do is to solve for this, now let's do this.
Let's do this multiplication that we have here.
So I have a 1 1, a 1 2, a 1 3, and I have a 21, a 2 2, a row 2 column 3, 3 column 1,
row 3 column 2, row 3 column 3, and I'm multiplying that by x sub 1, x sub 2, and x sub 3.
What I'm going to get, if I do this multiplication, that's a 3 by 3 matrix, that's a 3 by 1 matrix,
it's going to be this 3 by 1 matrix, another vector, and that vector better be b.
Also a 3 by 1 matrix, a vector in this instance.
But what do I get if I do this multiplication?
Well, I get a sub 1 1, or let's make it x1, x sub 1, plus x sub 2, a 1 2, plus x sub 3, a 1 3.
And I get x sub 2, a sub 2 1, plus x sub, for this one, x sub 1, x sub 2, x sub 2, a 2 2,
and this one, x sub 2, a 2 3, and this one's going to be x sub 3, and then it's a sub 3 1,
plus x sub, this row in this column, 1.
x sub 2, a 3 2, plus x sub 3, a 3 3.
Apologies for that horrible writing.
What I want you to see is that these are all x sub 1, that's all x sub 2, that's all x sub 3.
So what I could write is something like this, x sub 1, and that is a 1 1, a 2 1, a 3 1.
So here, this I'm going to write neatly because this is the important bit.
And now I have a 1 2, a 2 2, a 2 3, and x sub 3, a sub 1 3, a sub 2 3, a sub 3 3.
And that is going to equal, I hope you can still see there, b sub 1, b sub 2, and b sub 3.
Can you see what's happening here?
There's various ways to look at this.
So we're back to what we had here.
There's a vector, there's a vector, there's a vector, there's a vector, there's a vector, there's a vector, there's a vector,
and a scalar, scalar, scalar, scalar, scalar, scalar.
It's just that this scalar makes up this vector of values that I require, and that equals this other vector.
And that's why we want to talk about the vector space, or column space, or subspace then more specifically, of this matrix.
Because this matrix, if I do this column view, it gives me the ability to do this linear combination of them to get to a solution.
And imagine, so I need a specific value for that, and a specific value for that, and a specific value for that to give me this.
But let's view it just slightly differently.
Imagine I plug in any value here, any value here, and any value here, and that is going to give me a specific.
If I put another value here, another value here, another value here, I'll get another b.
And all the b's together make up, all the b's together make up this vector space of this matrix.
So that matrix has its own vector space.
And I will only get a solution for this if b exists inside of the vector space of that, or the column space then, of this matrix.
And that's a very important thing.
So, you know, let's get away just from the simplistic view and linear algebra of just, you know, the different methods that you have to learn and write out on paper to solve this.
Look at this.
This has, this, this specific matrix has a vector, a column space.
And it's only if this vector is inside of the, all the possible ones by varying these, that the final solution would be possible.
B has to be in the vector space of this, this subspace at least, because it's linear combinations of these that will give me that.
There's always the trivial solution.
There's always the trivial solution.
Remember, the vector is 0, 0, 0.
So the 0 vector, the 0 vector is always in this, this column space of this matrix.
Because I can make that one 0, that one 0, that one 0.
That's the trivial solution.
That will always be there.
And that's why we always say that there's a 0 vector must be in the subspace of a larger vector space.
Can you see why that is so?
So let's expand our minds and just see any matrix that we have here actually as having its own column space.
And we do that by noticing that it is a linear combination.
If I were to just, you know, it's x1 times all of those.
And that's exactly what happens when we do that.
Exactly what happens when we do this multiplication.
And it will only be so, you know, we'll only get a solution to these.
If I swap it around now, I'll only get a solution for these, a specific solution for these.
If this b that I'm given, because remember I'm giving something equals something, something equals something,
something equals something, I'm giving a linear system.
And that is b1 and b2 and b3.
So it's only that I will get values of x if and only if this side of the equation exists in the column space of my matrix of coefficients.
And that's very profound.
So let's have a quick look at this notebook that I have prepared.
And we're looking at the column space of a matrix.
Once again, we're going to cheat a bit.
If you look at the top here, I've got three equations and three unknowns.
I'm going to let my x, y, and z, but let's make them x sub 1, x sub 2, and x sub 3.
I'm going to solve it immediately by getting x sub 1 equals 3, x sub 2 equals 1, x sub 3 equals 2.
And I put these coefficients in here so that I can work out what the solution is.
So I can have my three equations and three unknowns as you would see it in a textbook.
So I have 3 times x sub 1 plus 2 times x sub 2 plus x sub 3 is 13 and my other two equations.
And I have to solve for x sub 1, x sub 2, x sub 3.
So let's just remind ourselves how to do this in Mathematica.
I have my matrix of my augmented matrix, I should say, and I'm calling it A, A, uppercase A, lowercase A, augmented matrix.
Let's execute that.
I've put a semicolon, so there's not going to be any expression to the screen here.
Let's just view this in matrix form, and I see my whole augmented matrix there.
Very easy for me to do row reduction there, and to reduce row echelon form.
I'm going to express that in matrix form, and we see our solution.
x sub 1 is 3, x sub 2 is 1, x sub 3 is 2.
3, 1, 2 for x sub 1, x sub 2, x sub 3.
Very easy to do.
The other way that you would obviously learn about, let's have just our matrix of coefficients,
and our solution matrix, which is 13, 5, and 3.
And I can do the inverse of A times B, and express that in matrix form, and I get the solution 3, 1, 2.
As we did here with the elementary row operations, I get 3, 1, 2.
But let's do this column view.
So I'm going to create three columns, and each of those are going to be a vector.
So the 3, 1, 2 is this first column here, 3, 1, 2.
The second column, 2, negative 2, 1.
The third column, 1, 2, and negative 2.
So that's all I'm going to create.
And I claim as this has a column space, because depending on what the values for x sub 1, x sub 2, and x sub 3 are,
and these are now just taking that vector and decomposing it as three scalars,
and it's a scalar multiple of these three column vectors, and that, you know, gives me another vector B.
And because we have 3, 1, and 2 as those solutions,
if I, and remember I have a little space there in between to indicate multiplication.
So 3 times A1 plus 1 times A2 plus 2 times A3, and I express that in matrix form,
I get the vector B, which was 13, 5, and 3.
So it's a linear combination.
Now imagine I had some other values.
So that's just specifically to this problem.
So let's move away from this problem, and all I have is these three column vectors,
the columns of my matrix A, the same matrix, depending on the values that I put in for the scalars,
I'm going to get a different B.
And it's all those together forms this column space of this very specific matrix.
So this matrix has a column space, and I will only get a solution if B,
in this instance it was 13, 5, and 3, is one of the possibilities.
We know it's 1 because we plug in the scalars 3, 1, and 2, we are going to get a solution.
So please see it from these multiple points of view.
It's very important that you see the column space of any specific matrix,
and that you see that the 0 vector, 0, 0, 0, because this is 3 space,
you know, would also be a solution because if I put in, and let's, I mean, let's just do that.
If I have 0 times, if I have 0 times, if I have 0, and then we get the solution 0, 0, 0.
So that is, the 0 vector is in this column space, is in the column space of every matrix that we can construct,
such as the one that we have there.
So please have a look at it from these multiple points of view,
and understand this column space of a matrix.
Thank you.
