In this video I want to introduce you to complex vectors. Now I'm pretty sure you know what a real
valued vector is and especially when we only have three elements in that vector and we can represent
that geometrically as this line in three space. Now we can no longer do that if one or more of
these elements are complex numbers because every complex number lives in the argant plane. So what
do we do if we have a bunch of elements in a vector and those are complex numbers? So in this
video let's talk about complex vectors. I'm going to show you how to multiply a complex vector by a
complex number, so that's scalar vector multiplication, how to add and subtract complex
vectors, how to do the dot product between two complex vectors, and then how to think about
taking a transpose of a complex vector. Now that's called the complex transpose or the
omission adjoint and we're going to really use the omission adjoint a lot in this course. So let's
then talk about complex vectors. So we already know what a complex number is. We will say a complex
number z is an element of the set of complex numbers and we'll say that z equals some real part
plus some imaginary part times the imaginary unit i and we know that both a and b are elements of the
set of real numbers. So there we have any complex number part of the set of complex numbers. So we
want to define something that is a complex vector. And so as with real vectors let's use something like
a lowercase u. Now I can't do a bold font when I write. So what we usually do is we put a little line
under that just to denote that that's a vector. And the vector we're going to have a column vector
just as with real vectors it's just an array of values. And so let's have a couple of complex numbers.
So maybe we have complex number one, complex number two, complex number three, and all the way down to
complex number n. And so let's put square brackets around these. It's difficult to see I should actually
get a ruler that is see-through so we can do this with a bit more confidence other than this way.
There we go. We have a column vector there and it consists of these complex numbers. Now there's n of
them, so we're going to say it has m rows, that's m, lowercase m, and a single column. Now remember
if the imaginary unit is zero, the imaginary number I should say is zero, then this complex number is
just a real number. So any of these can be real numbers, they can all be real numbers, but one or
more of them can be complex numbers and that's how we define a complex vector. And we're going to say
that this vector is an element, so let's have it's an element of the set of complex numbers,
and we put a little subscript, a superscript in there because we want to denote it's n dimensional.
There's n elements in this array of numbers for us and that is how we're going to define a complex
number. So let's have a couple of examples of this. So let's say examples,
and so let's have our first vector u, so let's say u being an element of the set of complex numbers
in three. We want to think of it as three space in as much as in real, if these were real numbers,
that would be three space. We can't really think of that because every one of these complex numbers,
remember that lives on an argand plane. So this has a real and imaginary part which we can do on a
on a argand plane. So we have to think of each one of these as being on the plane,
so it's very difficult to think of this in any kind of geometric sense,
and that's why we really don't like to think of these vectors purely as geometric objects. It doesn't make sense
of these elements. And eventually, because once we get beyond three of these elements in real,
if it's in R3, you know, that's as far as our minds can almost go because we live in a three-dimensional
world and now we just complicate mirrors quite a bit. So let's have an example of this one. This
might be something like, let's do i, and i, let's do 2 plus i, and let's do 4. And that would be,
you know, one of these examples of a complex vector. Let's just try and put these little
brackets here. Again, me just guessing how far this line has to go down. I don't like doing this
with my trusty old Nvidia ruler here, but that's what I have on my desk at the moment. So that's what
we're going to go for. And so there we go. There's an example of a of a complex vector. So next up,
let's think about complex vector arithmetic. So let's write that. So let's do some arithmetic with
complex, with a complex vector. And the first thing I want to do is, the first one I really want to do is
scalar vector multiplication. So why do we start there? Because it really helps us to think about
the subtraction of two complex vectors. It helps to start with scalar vector multiplication. So what
we're going to have, we're going to have any kind of scalar c, and we're going to say that c is an
element of the set of complex numbers. So once again, it might be a real number, it might be a complex
number. And we have any vector u, such that u is this element of the set of these complex vectors.
And so let's just make one of them. Let's say again, u equals, and so let's make it z1,
z2, all the way down to zn. And what I want to do is I want to multiply this by this complex,
this scalar, at least the scalar, which is c. So if I want to do something like c times u,
well, it is going to be very easy. If I put a c right there, it's c times u, I put a c here,
and this is going to be element-wise multiplication. So c times z1, c times z2. So it's going to be c
z1, c z2, all the way down to c times zn. And we've all seen how to multiply two complex numbers.
It really isn't difficult. We saw that in the first part. So let's just put our little
square brackets around to denote that this is a vector.
And now it's very easy to do, let's do an example, let's say, let's c, let's c equals the number
negative one. And so we can also say that's plus zero i, it's the exact same thing. Still,
negative one is still an element of the set of complex numbers. It just so happens to be
one of the elements of the subset. And the subset is the real numbers. And so let's do this one.
Let's use u here. And so let's do negative one. We want to multiply negative one times i,
and we have two plus i, and we have four. So negative one times that. And, you know,
I don't want to insult your intelligence. It's just, as you imagine it would be,
well, that's just going to be negative one times each of these elements. And so I'm going to have
negative i, I'm going to have negative two, negative i, and negative four. It's as simple
as that. Because, you know, now that we know that, it really makes us, it makes it easy for us to think
about subtraction. So that was number one there. Let's talk about number two. So we're going to do
vector addition, vector addition. And once again, this is very simple. Let's have u,
and let's have u equals, let's make it u1 here, and u2 and un. And by the u, I mean that any one of
these ui's, let's put it out here, u sub i is an element of the complex number, u is then an element
of c superscript n. And let's have this v, and v is v1, v2, all the way to vn. And so we know if we
want to do vector addition, we have to have this fact that both of them have to have n elements.
So it's got to be an n element array. So let me try these brackets again. It is really annoying.
I've got to get a c-through ruler for this. Otherwise, oh, I'm just guessing as to where
I have to end these. And that's perhaps not that important, but it's kind of annoying.
But so let's do u plus v. And that's just going to be u1. Well, let's just say here that any vi is
also an element of the set of complex numbers, which means it means it can be a real number as
well. And this is going to be u1 plus v1, u2 plus v2, all the way down to un plus vn. And that is
really, really not that difficult. It's no different from dealing with vectors of real numbers,
or real valued vectors. So now that we've done that, we can at least have a vector subtraction.
There we go, vector subtraction. And now we can have vector u minus vector v. And we've seen scalar
vector multiplication. So we really know that this is going to be u plus, and we've already done,
we've already done addition. So we know how to do addition. And we know how to do scalar
vector multiplication. So this is going to be negative 1 times v. So now that we've defined
scalar vector multiplication and vector additions, the only two of these binary operations really that
we need to think about. And once we have defined those vector subtraction as just, you know, just
some form of or combination of scalar vector multiplication and vector addition. And it's
as you would imagine, you just take u1 minus v1. There's really nothing to it. So we won't do any of
these examples. I think they are so easy. I want to get to something much more exciting. Let's talk
about the Hermitian. Hermitian. That's h-e-r-m-i-t-i-a-n. Hermitian adjoint.
The Hermitian adjoint of a complex vector. Let's try and put a line there. There we go. The Hermitian
adjoint. Now it has some synonyms. And we're going to call this, this is also known as, so let's say
also known as, this is called the complex transpose. The complex transpose. So we know
how to take the transpose of any vector, real value vector. We take a column vector into a row vector
or a row vector into a column vector. And so that's very simple to do. So again, we're going to have
our vector u. It's our vector u. It's going to be an element of the set of complex vectors.
And let's have a little example of this. We're going to say u equals u1, u2, and all the way down
to u n. It's an n-dimensional vector. If we can think of that in terms of complex vectors. Remember,
this has no geometric analog because each one of these, let's put that out there, that each one of
these u sub i elements here, that is an element of the set of complex numbers. And now we want to take
the transpose of this. And we can't just do it as we did if all these were real values. So we're going
to say not u with a little t on the top. We're going to put a little h in the superscript to denote
that this is an emission adjoint or complex transpose. And there's another way to write this.
There's actually a couple of ways to write this. You would also note a little, like a little cross
there, denoted as a dagger, as a dagger. And so let's define that. So what we're going to do,
this is a column vector. So it's going to turn into a row vector here. So we're going to have u1,
u2, all the way to un. But what we have to do is we have to take
the complex conjugate of each one of these. So we have to take the complex conjugate of each of
those. So let's have a little example. Example. And so let's have example. Let's denote this as
as a calculate, calculate the omission adjoint of u equals, and so let's have this one, i,
2, negative i, 3 plus 3i, and 4. So that's a nice vector. And that's an element of c4.
Even though, you know, one of them there is just a real number. And of course they can all be real
numbers. And then it makes, you know, then the omission adjoint is going to be the normal transpose.
Nothing's going to happen there. So we're going to have a solution. Let's have the solution
right here. And we're going to say u, omission adjoint of the vector u. And now we just have to
take the complex conjugate of i. That will be a negative i. So you take, you take the imaginary
part, which is b, and you multiply it by negative 1. And so the b here is 1i. 1 times negative 1 is
negative 1. So we just have the negative there. Here we have 2 minus i. And so that's going to become
2 plus i. Because the b part was a negative 1. And negative 1 times negative 1 is positive 1.
And we're left with a positive. Here we have positive 3 times negative 1 is negative 3. So
this is 3 minus 3i. And then 4 is plus 0i. And plus 0 times negative 1 is still, you know, 0.
So the 4 just stays as it is. And so there we have a very exciting thing. You know, it looks so innocuous,
but it's a very exciting thing. This idea of, and we're going to build on this so much,
the omission adjoint of a complex vector. And there you have it.
So now we know what the omission adjoint is, we can do the dot product. So let's do the very simple
dot product, dot product of two complex vectors.
And we have to define this somehow. We really have to define this in some way. And so we're going to
have two vectors. We're going to have, let vector u and vector v both be elements of this set of complex
vectors with n elements. So they both have to obviously be the same, the same as we did with
the dot product of real valued vectors. And we're going to say then, then we're going to have that
u dot v is going to equal u omission adjoint of u times v. So u dot v, the dot product of u and v,
is this multiplication of u superscript h, which means the complex transpose times v.
If that doesn't make sense, let's do an example. And so let's have two vectors. I'm going to have
vector u. And we're going to make that vector u 1 plus 2i. And we'll make it 3. And let's do 4
minus i, 4 minus i. And let's have vector v. That's vector u. Let's have vector v. Let's do that 1.
Let's do 3 plus i. And let's do 2 minus i. So there we have our two vectors. Let's do this
blindly. The right angle bracket is just done blindly. I'm really disliking that. But anyway,
there we go. u dot v is what we have. So then we're going to have as our solution, let's do
u dot v. That's going to be u omission adjoint. So the omission adjoint of u times v. And let's do that.
Let's do the omission adjoint of u. So that's going to be u here. So that's going to be 1 minus 2i.
It's the complex conjugate. 3 just stays as 3, of course. And 4 minus i becomes 4 plus i. And then
I'm going to multiply that. And we do that element-wise multiplication and then summation
over that. The v stays as it is. It's 1, 3 plus i and 2 minus i. Let's put a little dot there so we
can see as i. So I like to write it like this because I want to go down this row and this column.
And then it's element-wise. And that's how we define the dot product, remember. So I've got 1,
2, 3 elements in each. And of course, that's why we need these both to be in, you know, the same
dimension. So 1 times 2 minus 1 minus 2i. That remains 1 minus 2i. And I'm going to add to that.
Let's add the following. 3 times 3 plus i. So that's going to be 9 plus 3i. And then lastly,
I've got to do 4 plus i and then times 2 minus i. So let's do that 4 times 2. That's going to be
plus. Let's do that plus 8. 4 times negative i is negative 4i. And then I have 2 times i. That's
another plus 2i. And then eventually, i times i. That's negative 1 times another negative. That leaves
me with a positive 1. So what do we have here? We have 1 minus 2i plus 9 plus 3i plus the 8 plus the
1 gives me a 9. And negative 4 plus 2 is negative 2i. So all we have to do is we have to simplify.
And so we do that 1 plus 9 is 10 plus another 9 is 19. So that's 19 negative 2i plus 3i. That's
plus 1i minus 2 is negative i. And there we go. There's our solution. The dot product
has to end up being a scalar. And there is our scalar 19 minus i. So do remember if we want to do
the dot product. So crucial if we want to do the dot product of two complex vectors that we take the
first one and we have to take the transpose of that. But we don't take the normal transpose. We
have to take the complex transpose otherwise known as the Hermitian Adjoint. And so there you can see
my Hermitian Adjoint. So let's consider the next thing I want to talk about. That sun has really changed.
So let's do the Hermitian Adjoint. Here we go. The Hermitian Adjoint of scalar vector multiplication.
So we're going to take a scalar, multiply it by a vector and then take the Hermitian Adjoint of that.
Because we really need to do that in many applications. So let's put a line there.
Here we go. So what we're saying is let's take a complex number c and we're going to multiply that
by a complex vector u. And then we want to take the Hermitian Adjoint of that. And what we want to
show that this is going to be equal to the complex conjugate of that complex number times the Hermitian
Adjoint. So either I can do this multiplication first and then do the Hermitian Adjoint or
I can just do this multiplication. Take the complex conjugate of this number c. So let's just do that
as well. So let's just make sure c is an element of the set of complex numbers. It can be a real number
as well in other words. And we have the respect to u as an element of the set of complex vectors
in n elements. So let's have u here. Let's say u. And let's make that equal to u1, u2, all the way down
to u n. And as I mentioned, every one of these UIs, they are also elements of the set of complex numbers.
So each one of them. They can be real or complex numbers. And what we usually say, I don't think
I've used this word in this video before, it's over a field. Now field is an abstract object
and examples of fields are the real numbers and the complex numbers. So let's consider this. Let's
take this number c. This scalar c, I should say. And let's make an arbitrary c. Let's make it equal to
a plus bi. So a and b, they're real numbers. And i is the imaginary unit. And so I have a standard
complex number there. And let's take any of these arbitrary elements. I'm just going to make it u sub i.
So it's going to be any one of them. And let's make that equal to x plus yi. Or iy, it doesn't matter.
So a, b, x and y, they're all real numbers. So it's just any arbitrary value here. And let's
so do that because we do know that if we take this complex number and we multiply it by this complex
vector, we just do that element y. So it's going to be that element y's multiplication. So I'm going to
take c and multiply it by each one of those resulting in my new, resulting in my new vector.
So let's just do that. Let's do c. Let's just do c times ui. So I'm going to take c and multiply it
by ui. So that's going to be a plus bi. And I'm multiplying that times x plus yi. And now we've done,
you know, it's just distribution. So that's going to be the a times x, that's ax. And I'm going to
have the a plus the yi. So that's a plus a times y times i, the bi times the x. So that's going to be b
x i. And then lastly, I have the b and y. So that's going to be plus a b and a y. But I do have i times
i, which is a negative one. So I just have to remember that. And so if I simplify, and I put
all my real parts together, that's going to be ax minus by. That's my real part. And if I take out
i as a common factor, I'm left with this imaginary part, which is going to be a y plus bx times i.
So that's fine. That's c times ui. Any one of those leaves me with another complex number because
that each of those elements in my new vector, after multiplying c by the vector u is going to
have this form. Now what I want to do is I just want to take the complex conjugate of this. So I'm
going to say ui, u times i. But what I want to do is to take the complex conjugate of that, thinking
what is going to happen to each one of these elements, as I take the emission adjoint. And if
I take the complex conjugate of that, that's just going to be ax minus by. And then that'll be minus,
I'm taking my imaginary part, and I'm multiplying that by negative one. So I'm going to get a y plus bx
i. So every one of the elements is going to have this form in my new complex transposed vector.
And now, now that we've done that, let's do the opposite. Let's take, let's take c,
and let's take its complex conjugate, and I'm going to multiply that by ui, and its complex conjugate.
So what I'm saying here, I'm doing this part, and I'm taking any one of these arbitrary elements
in this row vector, and see what that is like. Now that I know that specific, randomly selected
element in this new row vector, the complex transpose, that's what it's going to look like.
Let's look at what it looks like if I do this multiplication individually.
So I'm going to have a minus bi, and I'm going to multiply that by x minus yi.
Because I'm taking the complex conjugate of that value, and that number, and the complex conjugate of
that. So I'm making negative one times both of these, both of those imaginary parts. So let's do that.
And I'm going to be left with a times x. I'm going to have a times minus yi, so that's a negative a yi.
I've got another negative there, so it's going to be negative bxi. Negative times a negative is a positive,
but I have i times i, which is negative one, so I'm going to have negative
by. And so let's simplify that again. I'm going to have a times x
minus b times y,
and I'm going to take out negative one as a common factor there, and i as a common factor, and I'm left with
a y plus bxi. If I distribute that negative in there, I have my two negatives. And look at that.
These two are exactly the same value. They're exactly the same complex number. And remember,
this is going to be the comparable element in the new complex transposed row vector coming from this
column vector. So this is what you can use to put together the proof of the fact that if I take the
emission adjoint of a scalar vector multiplication that is equal, that is doing the exact same thing,
is taking the complex conjugate of that scalar and multiplying it by the emission adjoint. We're
going to get exactly the same solution. So let's do a little example. There we go. Example. And so what
shall we use? Let's say, let's do c equals, let's do one plus i. And for my vector u, my complex vector,
I'm going to have one plus four i. Let's do three. And let's do four minus i. Four minus i. And let's do this.
I really am going to go get a see through ruler. There we go. Let's do c times u. And then take the
complex conjugate of that. So let's have c times u. And that's this element wise. So here I'm going to
have one plus i. And I'm going to multiply that by one plus four i. Next one is going to be three times
that. So that's going to be three plus three i. That's easy. And then I'm going to have one plus i.
And I'm going to multiply that by four minus i. And so that's my vector. So forgive me for doing this
to make things easier. So one times one is one. And I'm going to have a plus four i. And I'm going
to have another plus i. And then I'm going to have a four. But i times i is negative one. So I'm going
to have a negative four. Here I still have three plus three i. And here I have one times four is four.
One times negative i is negative i. i times four is plus four i. And then i times i is negative one
times a negative. That leaves me with positive one. And so what I'm left with here is one
minus four. That's negative three. And then I have plus five i. Four i plus one i is five i.
I have three plus three i. And then lastly four plus one is going to be five. Negative one plus four i.
That leaves me with positive three i. But that's not what I want. I want the complex conjugate of
this new vector. So let's take the emission adjoint then. So I'm going to just take each one of these
five and three and three. That's the imaginary part of my complex number. And I'm going to multiply
each one of those by negative one. So I'm going to be left with negative three minus five i. Three
minus three i and five minus three i. So there is my new row vector. And so let's do the other way
around as well. I'm going to take the complex conjugate of c and multiply that by the emission
adjoint of u. So what's that going to equal? Well for c it's going to be one minus i. And I'm going to
multiply all of that by the emission adjoint of u. And so there we have u. It's going to be one
minus four i. It's going to be three. And it's going to be four plus i. So let's have a look at this.
So that leaves me with one minus i times one minus four i. That's going to leave me with a one minus i
which I'm multiplying by three. And then a one minus i which I'm multiplying by four plus i.
So it's the scalar vector multiplication. So I'm taking each one of these, the scalar,
multiplying by each of the elements in my vector. And that's going to leave me with, let's do this
one. One times one is one. A negative four i. A negative i. Negative times a negative is a positive.
I have a four but i times i is negative one. So that leaves me with a negative four.
Here I have three minus i. And here I have one times four is four. Plus i minus four i.
I times i is negative one. Times a negative leaves me with a positive one. So let's simplify this.
One minus four. That leaves me with negative three. I have negative four i. Negative i. That's negative
five i. Here I have three minus i. And then four plus one is five. And I have negative four plus one.
That leaves me with negative three i. And just look at that. There's my one solution. Here's my second
solution. No matter which way around I do it, I get exactly the same result.
So now that we know how to do this, let's just consider the following. If I have something like
the dot product. So let's look at the dot product now in just a little bit more detail. So I said we
are just going to keep on thinking about these things as building on them. So what if I have
c times u, the vector u dot product with v. What is going, what is that going to look like? Well,
we know that we have to take the emission adjoint of this. So we do have to have c times u,
the emission adjoint times v. And that is just going to be the following. I'm taking the complex
conjugate of c, I'm taking the emission adjoint of u, and I'm multiplying that by v. So that'd be very
simple. And what if I have u dot c times v? Well, we don't do anything to that. So that is just very
simply going to be the emission adjoint, let's put a line there, the emission adjoint of u times c times
v. And that's also just going to be c times the emission adjoint of u times v. So that's how easy
it would be to do the dot product. So do remember the scalar comes with our first vector, we have to
take the emission adjoint and we can do it in either of the two ways which we've just looked at
and then multiply that by v. But if we have the dot product and the c, our scalar is multiplied by the
second vector, that means we don't have to do anything to that second vector. Let's put a line
there to make sure we can all see that that is a vector. So next up, this is the last section on
talking about complex vectors is to talk about the norm, the norm of a complex vector. So it was easy
to think about the norm of a vector in three space because we can think of the vector then as some
geometric object, some line in three space and it has a length. But what we do when it is a complex
vector. So there's actually a couple of norms. The first one I want to talk about is the L2 norm,
that's the one that we would usually think about. And we would also write it like we did the norm of a
real valued vector. This is what we're going to write and let's square that length. So remember this
is going to be a scalar. I want to square that and I'm going to define that just as u dot u.
So I have my complex vector u here, it's an element of the set of complex vectors.
And if I do the dot product, I get the square of that. So remember, if I want just the norm,
I've got to take the square root of this. But we've defined the dot product before. So we do know
this is going to be the emission adjoint of u times u. And so it's very easy to think of this L2 norm.
And so let's think about one that's slightly more complicated. Let's look at this. What about c times
u? So if I want to look at this, and now we have that c is an element of the complex numbers, we still
have that u as an element of the set of complex vectors. What do I do now? Well, we do know we've
sort of looked at this before. And so the norm is defined by this. So this is going to be c times u
dot product, c times u, scalar vector multiplication, scalar vector multiplication,
and the dot product of these two vectors. And we know how to calculate this if we take the emission
adjoint. So this is going to be this complex number c, but we take the complex conjugate of that,
we take the emission adjoint of u, and then times c, and then times u. But we do know that
this commutes. Now we haven't proven this, or haven't shown that clearly. So let's take
take for granted that, you know, this multiplication does commute, and it certainly does. And so we have
c, it's complex conjugate, times c, times u, and it's emission adjoint times u. And by commute,
I don't mean commutativity on these vectors, I just mean commutativity on these scalars, so that I can
bring them out as, as these, just take this c and bring it out to the, to the front. Now remember,
what I'm really after is just this, c times u, that's what I'm after. So I've got to take the square
root of all of this. And that also means I can just take the square root of c, times c, and then the
square root of this emission adjoint of u times u. So that's that square root. Now this here, on this
side, well, we know that's just the norm of u. And I have to think what happens here. So what happens
when I take a complex number and multiply by its complex conjugate? Well, then I'm just going to get
a scalar. So let's do this on this side. So let's let c equals a plus bi, a and b being real numbers,
a and b being elements of the set of real numbers. So that means the complex conjugate of that's going to
be a minus bi. And if I then do this, there's commutativity here. And so let's do a minus bi,
we have a plus bi. And so what we're going to get is a squared. And then I have positive a times bi,
negative a times bi, that cancels. And then I have b squared, i times i is negative one, but I have a
negative there as well. So negative times the negatives of positive, and I get positive b squared.
So really, this value is just a real number. It is just a real number. And if I take any real number,
I can take, well, we have to take the square root of that, remember. So this is going to be the square
root of a squared plus b squared, nothing there. But if I think about this square root here,
it is positive numbers, at least non negative, that's real number, that's real number, I'm squaring
each of these, I'm making them positive, unless they're both zero, which is a non interesting case,
this is always going to be, this is always going to be positive. So what we can think of here,
is if we do this, is that this is just the absolute value of this value c. And that is how we would
define the L2 norm. If I say L2 norm, that means there must be an L1 norm as well. Well,
you would think there's an L1 norm. And the L1 norm of this vector u, this vector u still being
an element of the set of these values, the complex vectors. Well, that's going to be, I'm just going
to take every complex number, and I'm just going to take the modulus. Remember, that's what we call
the modulus. I'm just going to take the modulus of each of these. And I am just going to add all of
these, all the way to the last element. Remember, these are all complex numbers. They're all the
elements that go into this complex vector u. And if I just take the modulus of each of these,
I get to the L1 norm. So if c was indeed a real value, the modulus would just mean the absolute
value. But if it is a complex number, we've looked at how to think about or how to calculate that
modulus. And that's what we have there, the modulus of c. And remember, if we look at one more norm,
not remember, I'm showing you this, the last norm that we're going to talk about is this infinite
norm, infinite norm. So L with a subscript. And that is just going to be the maximum,
the maximum of all the moduli. So you're going to take each one of these moduli individually,
and you're just looking at the one that has the largest value. Remember that these are going to be
real numbers, as we've shown there. So I want the maximum value of all of those individuals. So just
by the way, if I look at ui, just so that we're sure about this, I don't want to leave you without
thinking about this, this is going to be ui times ui complex conjugate. We've done that right there. So
if I take any complex number, and I want its modulus, this is how I'm going to calculate it.
You take the square root of the product of that complex number times its complex conjugate.
And of course, if it's a real number, that's going to work out to just taking the absolute value of
that real number. And this is what we would talk about, we'll see this, or you might see this over
and over again thinking about the norm of a complex vector.
