Welcome to this edition of Literature in Surgical Education.
I'm Jean Topper, a surgeon in the Division of General Surgery at Grutuskir Hospital in Cape Town,
affiliated with the University of Cape Town.
Now, let's have a look at the journal article for this video.
We're looking at the comparison of Canadian and Swiss surgical training curricula,
moving on towards a competency-based surgical education.
Now, that's from the Journal of Surgical Education, volume 74, number 1,
that's the January and February 2017 edition by Henry Hoffman and colleagues.
And you see there they were from the Department of General and Visceral Surgery
at the University Hospital in Basel, Switzerland,
and the University of Surgery, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, in Canada.
Now, what is at stake here?
Really, it's about the reduction of trainee working hours
and how that impacts safety and patient safety
and the training of the trainees.
Now, in Switzerland, there is a 50-hour workweek
and in Canada, 80-hour workweek cap.
So registrars, trainees, residents,
are really not allowed to work any longer than this,
based on the fact that working longer than this
might lead to fatigue
and that obviously impacts on patient safety.
Now, there are still some outstanding questions.
Is there a reduction in quantity and quality of training
and does this really improve patient safety?
Reducing these hours does really impact on patient safety.
Now, the reports regarding the impact on training and safety are really mixed
and the authors do refer to two papers there that show no impact,
quite good papers there,
but also several papers that show that there is an impact
on both patient training and the effectiveness of training.
Now, irrespective of these mixed reports,
the authors are really concerned about the diminution
in the degree of independence given to trainees
and they posit a solution.
They think that there should be a transformation of surgical curricula
from a pure unstructured time-based training
to highly structured competency-based programs
and I think many programs throughout the world
are moving in that direction.
So there's mention of the development of several initiatives
to implement a competency framework,
both for evidence-based training models
and very, very important, I think, assessment of trainees' competency
with validated tools in various domains.
Really good, validated tools,
not just subjective thoughts on what training skills might involve.
And they do reference quite a few articles there
that you can have a look at.
Now, the authors give an overview of the current training logistics
in Switzerland and Canada
and the changes that are being made at the moment
and are going to be made over the next couple of years
and that makes for some very good and interesting reading
and especially for us as we plan what to change for the future as well.
Now, the objective of the study was really to compare
two surgical training programs
in the academic teaching hospitals in Switzerland and Canada,
so one unit in each of these two countries,
with the potential to identify opportunities for program enhancement,
which is why we're reading this paper,
really through a comparison of the essential training elements
in the two programs.
So this was a cohort study,
so an online survey, as most of these are these days,
completed by what they sent to faculty and trainees
of the two institutions between September and October 2014.
And the questionnaire consisted of 40 questions,
was originally developed, went through some modification,
iteration through reviews by the authors,
a pilot tested on a subset of five individuals,
reviewed again,
and eventually sent to the faculty and trainees.
There were three parts to the questionnaire,
demographics,
then nature of the training program,
just to see what the difference between the two are,
and then really importantly,
the views on training in this era of duty-hour restrictions
for the consultants or the attendings
and the trainees in both of these institutions.
Now, the specific training elements that they looked at is the following,
and I think most training programs will have these tutorial lectures,
then virtual reality training simulation,
surgical skills training,
teaching ward rounds,
objective assessment of technical and non-technical skills.
I think that's a new one,
and that's where the effort should go.
Then the use of established benchmarks for performance,
very, very important,
and the use of post-operative debriefings.
Now, I think some of these are quite unfamiliar to many institutions.
So, in the questionnaire,
a definition of either structured or ad hoc
was given based on whether most of the above
was provided on a regular basis.
So, if most of the above was available in the training programs,
that was seen as a definition for structured,
and if not, it was a definition for an ad hoc training system.
So, let's look at some of the results,
and I'll just discuss some of those as well.
The response rate, 37%, low,
but what you can expect from these online surveys,
still 105 respondents out of 284,
so I think we can learn something from the results of the study.
Now, the training programs structured or rather unstructured,
remember that's based on the definitions that I gave,
and you see quite a difference between the group here in Switzerland
and the group in Canada.
We saw, see that only 25% of the consultants thought
that the training program was structured or rather structured,
and only 3% of the trainees versus 86% and 75% in Canada.
On the question of informal ad hoc tutorial assistance in the OR,
we see that's fairly even.
In Switzerland, the consultants, 75% of the consultants,
thought there was some informal ad hoc tutorial assistance
in the operating room, 50% only of the Basel trainees thought so,
and you see that recurrent theme that the trainees
would agree less with these statements, 60% and 52%,
so at least more than 50% do feel that there is some ad hoc
tutorial assistance in the OR.
On the question of informal teaching ward rounds,
I think that's fairly high, almost 80%, almost 60%,
60% there for the group in Switzerland,
and a bit higher, of course, for the groups in Canada.
Although, once again, when we look at the trainees,
59%, 62% of the trainees in both these institutions
thought that there was some informal teaching ward rounds.
Median weekly duty hours, just to put that on the table,
so for consultants in Switzerland, 60%, 60% for the trainees,
60 hours, I should say, and 60 hours for the consultants in Queens,
and 80% mean weekly duty hours for the trainees in Canada.
Median weekly formal structured surgical training hours,
and there's a huge difference, really very little of it occurring,
one and a quarter median weekly hours there,
and one, according to the trainees, much more structured there,
seven and a half, seven hours, according to the consultants
and trainees, and I think locally, we would fall somewhere between these.
The percentage of dedicated structured teaching time,
lots more, quite significant difference here
between the Canadian and the Swiss groups.
Is virtual reality as part of training important?
And I think throughout, we see very high percentages here,
and virtual reality training in the era of reduced duty hours,
and not only the reduced duty hours.
As we move towards a more fellowship-based program,
where perhaps our normal trainees, postgraduate trainees,
don't get the operative experience because this has been driven by the fellows
in subspecialty training, those do drive our numbers down
as far as our registrars or trainees are concerned,
and virtual reality would be one of the solutions to this problem,
to get technical skills, and we see quite a high, almost 80%,
and higher for all four of the groups.
We really think that virtual reality simulation training is important.
And now, as far as the thoughts of the whole group's concerned
towards training outside of the OR as a modality to improve patient safety,
and once again, very high percentages throughout that really,
I think everyone buys into the fact that training outside of the operating room
can really improve patient safety.
The same goes for this training outside of the OR to improve surgical skills.
Everyone agrees with that.
And then training outside of the operating room to improve post-operative patient outcome.
The numbers are a bit less, but still the majority of people would feel
that training outside of the OR can really improve patient outcomes as well.
Now, even though everyone feels that virtual reality simulation training is important,
the trainees in both institutions were asked whether they had experience
with virtual reality training, and less than 50% of the Swiss group
and almost 90% of the Canadian group had some experience in this.
Was there any training in surgical skills lab?
Once again, for only about half of the Swiss trainees
versus almost 100% of the Canadian trainees had some surgical skills lab
and something that we really are developing locally as well.
Now, trainees performing less surgery, in this era of reduced hours,
75% of consultants thought so in Switzerland,
but only half of the trainees thought really that they were performing less surgery.
A very high percentage, again, of the consultants
and a much lower percentage of the trainees.
So really, trainees feeling that they don't get less experience.
Of course, the consultants perhaps being the longer,
well, I mean, this article doesn't answer the question
as to why the consultants feel this way.
Certainly, this is not a quantitative article.
It didn't look at numbers.
But certainly, the perception of the consultants
that there really is a reduction
for the trainees performing their surgery.
As far as the reduced hours being acceptable,
65% of the Basel consultants feeling that this reduced hours
is an acceptable thing.
Only half of the trainees in Switzerland,
the Queen's consultants in Canada,
only half of them feel that this is acceptable,
and less than half of the trainees in Queen's feel
that this is acceptable.
So even though thoughts might lean the other way,
this being acceptable is only viewed
by about half of the cohort here.
So in conclusion, a very good, interesting information here
is specifically for us or others looking into
developing their own new curricula
and to perhaps compare yourself against
what is happening at these two institutions,
one in Canada and one in Switzerland.
And I really urge you to read the complete article.
It is available on the link that you see there.
I think it's worthwhile to keep in your file.
