And so we've looked at complex vectors. Now we're going to look at complex matrices. We're going to
talk about complex matrices and the arithmetic, how to multiply a scalar by a complex matrix.
We're going to talk about addition and subtraction of these matrices, and then how to look at matrix
vector and matrix matrix multiplication. So let's talk about complex matrices, or then probably
better stated, complex valued matrices. And as much as at least one of these values in our matrix
should be complex. And so we'll have a typical matrix A, it'll have M rows and N columns. And
so, you know, that's your typical A sub 1 1, A sub 1 2, all the way down to A sub 1 N, N rows. And
then A sub 2 1, A sub 2 2, all the way down to A sub 2 N. And then these go all the way down,
all the way down, all the way across. To A sub, I have M rows, M row, M row, all the way down to
M N. And forgive me, I'm just going to use these brackets today because really, I still haven't
gotten a see-through ruler there. So there we go, M rows and N columns. And what we're going to have
is that I sub IJ is an element of the set of complex numbers, which means it can be a real
number as well. And then we should also say one is less than or equal to I is less than or equal to
M. So that's I, you know, the I-th row. And one is less than or equal to J is less than or equal to N,
the N-th column. And that denotes for us the complex matrix. So good, let's have matrix A.
Let's do 1. Let's do 1. Let's do 2 plus 1. Let's make it 2 plus I. I should say 3. Let's make it 2
plus I, negative I, and 7. And there we see a beautiful example here of a 2 by 3 complex valued
matrix. And I'm just going to call it a complex matrix. We have a complex number, complex number,
complex number. Now, of course, these are all complex numbers, just that the imaginary part is 0.
So, and hence they are, they're real numbers. Let's have another one. Let's have B. And let's have
B be 1 plus I. Let's have I, 4 minus I, 1, negative 1, 5 plus 2I. And now I have 2. They both have 2 rows
and 3 columns, which means we can very easily talk about addition and subtraction. The first thing that
we do talk about when it comes to arithmetic, though, so let's do complex matrix arithmetic.
The first one that we're going to talk about always is this scalar matrix multiplication.
And the first scalar that we're going to have C is, I think, as always, we're going to make it
negative 1. So that if we do C times A, it's going to be negative 1 times this matrix A.
And it's just element-wise. This negative 1 is going to be multiplied by each one of these elements.
So negative 1 times 1 is negative 1. Negative 1 times 2 plus I becomes negative 2 negative I.
Negative 1 times 3 is negative 3. And then negative 1 times 2 plus I becomes negative 2 negative I.
Negative 1 times negative I, well, this is positive I. And then negative 1 times 7 is negative 7.
As simple as that, element-wise. And this can now be any number, any complex number. And you can just
multiply that element-wise. So nothing new there, over and above what we had with real-valued matrices.
2 is just matrix matrix addition. So I'm just going to call it matrix addition. And here we'll have A plus B.
And so let's do that. It's going to be element-wise. And I can only do that because I have 2 rows, 3 columns,
2 rows, 3 columns. Otherwise, this addition will not be defined. And so 1 plus 1 plus I, that becomes 2 plus I.
2 plus I plus I, that becomes 2, let's put I there, 2 plus 2I. 3 plus 4 minus I, that becomes 7 minus I.
Do you remember? It's just I add, you know, I add the two real parts and then the two imaginary parts,
but the imaginary part is 0. So it stays the negative I. So 1 plus 2I, 1 plus 2 plus 1 is 3.
So that's 3 plus I. Negative I, negative 1, that's negative 1, negative I. And then 7 plus 5 is 12 plus 2I.
So very simple indeed. And now we can talk about matrix subtraction. And remember, that's nothing other than the combination of these two.
So that when I have A plus negative 1 times B is what I really have. So I have scalar matrix multiplication and then matrix matrix addition.
This is going to be the same as A minus B. So I already know there's negative A. That's how we did negative A.
So now we've got to get negative B. So let's just look about, look at what negative B would look like.
Negative B is going to be negative 1, negative I, negative I, negative 4 plus I, negative 1, positive 1, negative 5, negative 2I.
And now I've just got to look at A and add that to this negative B. So I'm going to have A and I'm adding to that this negative B, minus 1 times B.
So I've got 1 and negative 1 there. So it's this element there, this element there. 1 minus 1 is 0. So I'm just left with the negative I.
2 plus I and the negative I. Well, that's just going to leave me with a 2. I have 3 and negative 4. That leaves me with negative 1 plus the I.
2 plus I and the negative 1. 2 minus 1 is 1. So that's 1 plus I. I have negative I and 1. So that's 1 minus I.
Just adding these, 7 minus 5 is 2 plus I. And there we go. And of course, that's a negative 2I that I should have right in the end.
So please make that for me. Negative, negative 2I. 7 minus 5 is 2 and I'm left with a negative 2I. So just check on that one.
So let's do matrix vector multiplication. Matrix vector multiplication. So we already have our matrix A.
And what we'll do is let's put it again. Let's put it again. It's a clean sheet. And we've lost the other one. 1, 2 plus I, 3.
And let's introduce a complex vector U. And the vector that we're going to have is 1 plus 2I. Let's have 3. And let's have 4 minus I.
So it's the same one that we used in the video on complex vectors. And now I want to define A times U.
And again, that's nothing other than you've seen before with real value.
So the way that I like to write that is in this form here. I'll write a 1, a 2 plus I, and the 3.
And then the 2 plus I, the negative I, and the 7. And then there's my 1 row, my 2 rows, and now I'm going to write this U right over here.
So that's 1 plus 2I, the 3, and then the 4 minus I, such that I can just do this first row and this column, and then the second row and this column.
And that, you know, stacks up neatly for me. So it's 1 times 1 plus 2I. So that's 1 plus 2I.
2 plus I times 3, that is plus 6 plus 3I. And then the 3 times 4 minus I, that's plus 12 minus 3I.
Then the second row and this column for us. So I've got 2 plus I and 1 plus 2I.
So 2 times 1 is 2. 2 times plus 2I is plus 4I. Negative I plus 1 is plus I. And I times 2I, well, it's negative 2.
Negative 2. And then the negative I times 3, that's negative 3I. And then 7 times 4 minus I, so that's plus 28 minus 7I.
And now we have to simplify a little bit. So that's going to be a 1 plus a 6 is 7, plus a 12 is 19.
And then 2I plus 3I is 5I minus 3I is plus 2I.
And then 2 minus 2 plus 28, that leaves me with 28.
And then 4I is 5I is 5I, 2I minus 5I.
So just a simple, just some simple algebra there, keeping the real parts and the imaginary parts together.
So that's really nothing, nothing too dramatic there.
Let's do matrix multiplication. So by that I mean matrix, matrix multiplication.
I'll just call it matrix multiplication.
And so what we're going to have here is we're going to have a matrix C.
So let's do C. I'm going to have 1, 2. Let's make it 4 plus 2I.
And then let's do 1I, 1.
Now this matrix is clearly 3 rows and 2 columns.
A is 2 rows, 3 columns.
So I can do A times C.
A times C is defined because the number of columns here, 3, is equal to the number of rows there, 3.
And again, I do this in this way.
So I would write 1, 2 plus I, and 3.
And then 2 plus I, negative I, and 7.
And then I'm going to write this down the columns here.
So 1, 2, and 4 plus 2I.
And I leave myself enough space.
And 1 and I and 1.
And now I can think about doing this, this first row, first column, this first row, this column, this row, this column, this row, this column.
And so here I have a 3 by 2 matrix.
Here I have a, oh, I should say 2 by 3.
What am I talking about?
Two rows and three columns.
So let's correct that.
And this one is 3 by 2, which means 2 by 3 and a 3 by 2, I should be left with a 2 by 2.
And so let's do that.
So 1 times 1 is 1.
2 times 2 plus I.
So that's going to be plus 4 plus 2I.
And then this 3 and there.
So that's going to be plus 12 plus 6I.
So first row, let's go to this column.
1 times 1 is 1.
2 times I is plus 2I.
I times I is negative 1.
And then 3 times 1 is plus 3.
Good.
Let's go to this row and this column.
So 1 times 2 plus I is 2 plus I.
2 and negative I is negative 2I.
And then 7 times 4 is 28.
And then 7 times 2 is 14.
And there's just a little I there as well.
And then this row and this column.
So this is going to be 2 plus I.
And I have I times I is negative 1.
And there's a negative that makes it positive 1.
And then plus 7.
So we can carry on.
We can think of 8 times C still.
1 plus 4.
Now I just have to make sure what I did with this little.
That's supposed to have a little I on there.
That's 2I.
1 plus 4 is 5.
And 12 is going to give me 17.
And then the I is 2I and 6I.
That gives me a plus 8I.
That's fine.
Now I have 1 minus 1 plus 3.
That's giving me a 3.
And then a plus 2I.
Here I have 2.
And 28 gives me 30.
And then plus I, negative I is negative 1.
And plus 14 gives me plus 13I.
And then 2, 3, that's a 10.
And plus my single I there, plus I.
And so, you know, this is just a exercise in a little bit of arithmetic.
And it's so easy to make a mistake here.
And that's why I really want you to watch the Python video
to show you just how easy this is to do in Python.
And you don't have to worry about all this sort of very easy work
but also very easy to make a little mistake.
And this is just a minute.
