Welcome back to another lecture, and in this lecture we're going to continue talking about
the complex numbers.
In the previous lecture we defined the complex number, it's just an addition of a real number
called the real part of the imaginary number, plus some imaginary part, also a real number,
times the imaginary unit i.
So very easy to think about, but what we want to do is we want to define a couple of things,
arithmetic with these numbers, it's very easy to do, and actually you can do this in a couple
of seconds.
So let's do addition, I'm going to start with addition on the complex numbers, and what
I want to do is let's just define two complex numbers, let's have them z, that's the usual
thing to do, let's have that as a subscript, I'm going to have a subscript 1 plus b subscript
1 times i, and my second complex number is going to be a sub 2 plus b sub 2i, and I do
know in all these instances, a sub 1, a sub 2, b sub 1, b sub 2, they are all members of
this ordered set of real numbers.
Okay, I just want to distinguish two separate, okay, complex numbers, and by the way that I've
constructed the z sub 1 and z sub 2, they can be any, any number, any complex number, and
I want to, I want to define addition of these.
So I want to define z sub 1 plus z sub 2, how do we do that?
Well, I mean, we've got the two, we just write them out.
So that's going to be a sub 1 plus b sub 1i plus a sub 2 plus, I think there's clearly
a plus, b sub 2i.
Okay, that's kind of as simple as that, but we just want to rearrange things a little bit
so they look a little bit nicer.
So why don't I combine the real parts and the imaginary parts, and I can clearly do
that.
Those are two real parts, so why don't I just put them together?
So I'm going to have a sub 1 plus a sub 2 plus, now look at this, I have b sub 1i plus
b sub 2i.
Now just as with algebra where we had an x, we can just take that out as a common factor.
So why don't I just take out i as a common factor, which leaves me with b sub 1 and b
sub 2, so there is b sub 1 plus b sub 2i, and I have just normal distributivity on that,
so it will be i times b sub 1 and i times b sub 2, leaving me with those two terms there.
And there we have, we have a real part and we have an imaginary part, and actually all
we did when we did this addition, just add the two real parts, there they are, and add
the two imaginary parts, and just take out i as a common factor so that you can write
it very neatly.
There is the real part, there is the imaginary part of this new complex number, I might have
called this w, is that addition.
So we also see another nice thing happening with this.
If I take the real part, if I take the real part of z sub 1 plus z sub 2, well what's that
going to be?
Well there is the whole new number, I add those two complex numbers, I get a new complex number,
there is its real part, that is a sub 1 plus a sub 2.
What happens if I take the real part of z sub 1, and I add that to the real part of z sub
2, well there's the real part of a sub 1 and there's the real part of a sub 2.
So we can see these two things are exactly the same.
And what do you think is going to happen when we look at the two imaginary parts?
Well we're going to have, we're going to have the exact same thing.
So that's very easy.
Now I don't want to spend, I mean, I don't want to waste your time talking about subtraction,
but you can well imagine how subtraction is going to work.
So let's define this idea of z sub 1 minus z sub 2.
Now remember, with real numbers we did not have commutativity on subtraction.
So z sub 1 minus z sub 2 is going to be different from z sub 2 minus z sub 1.
So that's going to be the same as what we had with real numbers.
And here we're going to have a sub 1 plus b sub 1i, and then minus, now I'm going to
take a sub 2 plus b sub 2i.
And that's going to be a distribution of this negative inside of there.
So I'm going to have a sub 1 plus b sub 1i minus a sub 2 minus b sub 2i.
And so I just want to put my real and imaginary parts together, and hopefully you can still
see here that's going to be a sub 1 minus a sub 2, just putting those two real parts together,
plus I'm going to get b sub 1 minus b sub 2i.
And you can see we're kind of in a similar situation.
If I do subtract one complex number from another, what I'm going to do is I'm going to do the
subtraction between the real parts, and I'm going to do a subtraction between the imaginary parts,
but I do still have the plus inside, the plus there.
And you can think about for me, please, what would happen if I were to write the real parts
of z1 minus z2, and I write them individually, real parts, and then also what I would do with
the imaginary parts.
That's a very simple, very simple thing to do.
Now, as final part of this lecture, let's have a look at what to do when we multiply two
complex numbers, so we're going to do multiplication.
Multiplication is going to be a very special thing, and now we want to define that.
I'm still going to take my two very arbitrary numbers, complex numbers, z sub 1 times z sub 2.
You can put a dot in between.
You can put multiplication, but you can also just do a juxtaposition there, just write them
next to each other.
We all know that that means multiplication.
So let's do that.
I should have done that in green.
Of course, I'm trying to do green for all of our definitions.
So I'm going to have a sub 1 plus b sub 1i, and I want to multiply that by a sub 2 plus
b sub 2i.
And I'm going to do exactly what we did in algebra, so I'm going to do FOIL.
And so I'm going to have the first, and the outer, and the inner, and the middle, and the
final one.
I always forget what all the FL stands for, but you know where I'm going with this.
So let's have a look at this.
It's a sub 1 times a sub 2.
It is going to be a sub 1 times a sub 2.
That's fine.
Plus, I've got a sub 1 times b sub 2i.
A sub 1, b sub 2i.
I have plus a sub 2.
I'm just going to do a bit of commutativity there to keep my a's in the front.
So it's a sub 2.
Where am I?
A sub 2, b sub 1i.
Okay, so that was that first outer, inner, and then last.
Okay.
So now I've still got to do this final one.
b sub 1i plus b sub 2i.
So I've clearly got b sub 1 times b sub 2.
Actually, I have b sub 1, b sub 2.
And then i times i is i squared.
i sub 1 is i squared.
But I've got to remember what i squared was.
i squared is defined as negative 1.
So I actually have a sub 1, a sub 2.
Now, i can take out i there as a common factor.
Why didn't we do that?
So I'm going to have a sub 1, b sub 2 plus a sub 2, b sub 1 times i.
Now, i squared is negative 1.
So I'm going to do negative b sub 1, b sub 2.
And all I want to do is some rearrangement.
I just want to put the two real parts together.
So I'm going to have a sub 1, a sub 2 minus b sub 1, b sub 2.
That's now going to be my real part.
And here's my imaginary part.
Plus, I'm going to have a sub 1, b sub 2 plus a sub 2, b sub 1, i.
And there you go.
That is how we multiply.
You know, you can just think of all the knowledge you have of multiplication when we had real numbers.
And all we have to remember is that that i squared is a negative 1.
So now that we have that, I suppose a great thing to do would be, let's see if we can fit in a z sub 1 here.
Let's make that 3 plus 4i.
And I'm going to have z sub 2.
Let's make that 2 plus 2i.
And let's see if I can multiply those together.
So let's do z sub 1, z sub 2.
That is going to be 3 plus 4i.
And that is going to be 2 plus 2i.
2 plus 2i.
And let's see if we can do that.
3 times 2, that's going to equal 6.
3 times 2 is also 6, but there's an i.
So plus 6i.
4 times 2 is 8.
Plus 8.
But there's an i.
Now I'm going to have 4 times 2 is 8.
But i times i is negative 1.
So that's going to become a negative 8.
So if I look at this, 6 minus 8, that leaves me with a negative 2.
6 plus 8 gives me 14 plus 14i.
So negative 2 plus 14i.
So all you have to remember is when you do this, 4 times 2 is 8.
That's positive 8.
But i times i is negative 1.
So that makes that a negative 8.
And now you can also sort of plug these two in and see if that's going to work for you.
So 3 times 2 is 6 minus, and 4 times 2 is 8.
6 minus 8 leaves us with a negative 2.
And if I have a sub 1, the 3 times the b sub 2, that's my 6.
So 4 times 2 gives me the 8, which leaves me with 14 with my i.
Very simple to do.
So please try and do some of these.
I'm going to let you do the addition and subtraction on this yourself.
It's really just easy to do.
And once you've done one or two, you know, just show that you can do it.
You're not going to waste our time doing something so easy.
But it's nice just to see it once, just to make sure you understand how these things work.
They're very, very easy, and as I said, you can use knowledge that you've had before.
Just bear in mind, i times i is i squared, which we've defined i by defining its square as being negative 1.
