In this video I want to talk to you about the complications of gallstones.
We're going to start with gallstones.
You might be confronted with a patient with gallstones,
you might be confronted with gallstones in the exams.
What do you do? How do you think about the complications of gallstones?
Well, there's one easy way to go about it, and that's to think back at your anatomy.
You did anatomy at med school, and it was important for this specific reason.
Thinking about the complications of a disease based on the anatomy.
Now think of the anatomy of the biliary tree.
You can really just open a book or just bring it up from long lost memory.
You have a gallbladder.
From the gallbladder there's a tiny little duct called a cystic duct.
It joins up with a common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct.
And that common hepatic duct, remember, it splits in two and then goes into the left and right lobes of the liver.
Remember, that common bile duct comes all the way down and joins with a pancreatic duct into the duodenum.
And it really depends where those stones are that will give you these complications.
Now the vast majority of patients with gallstones, remember, will not have any symptoms at all.
Those are actually quite dangerous patients.
Because you'll do an ultrasound for some vague abdominal discomfort symptoms,
and gallstones will be discovered.
Now, are those gallstones the cause of this problem?
It is really something that you have to deal with.
In many situations, we'll do an upper GI endoscopy just to look for pathology.
Because remember, this upper GI area can have very similar symptoms.
All the diseases of the upper GI tract can have very similar symptoms at least.
And you've got to be very careful.
Just to discover gallstones on an ultrasound does not mean you necessarily have to do something about it.
So the first thing is, gallstones in the gallbladder, no symptoms whatsoever,
or some vague symptom that might not be related to the gallbladder at all.
Because remember, you don't want to take out or send your patient to have their gallbladder removed,
and the patient comes back and the symptoms are still there,
because they were never related to the gallstones.
That's a horrible situation.
So asymptomatic is the first one.
Now, the stones are in the gallbladder.
One of the first proper symptoms,
I'm going to call these symptoms because they're not really a disease,
not really a complication.
Well, let's call them a complication for now.
So the gallbladder contracts after eating,
and the stone goes into the little neck of the gallbladder and gets stuck.
It can't go into the cystic duct.
This gallbladder is trying to contract to express the bile.
It cannot, and there's tension in that system,
and it really is extremely painful.
That stone falls back.
Suddenly, there's a release of that high pressure,
and all the symptoms are gone.
So it's this patient with,
a while after eating,
getting these intermittent, very severe pain,
and it disappears.
It's called biliary colic.
So that is the first real complication.
It's called a complication of gallstones.
The second one is where this might become an acute thing,
that that stone is stuck,
and some real inflammation sets in leading to cholecystitis.
The whole gallbladder is inflamed.
There might be bacterial overgrowth.
We never know if there are bacteria or not,
just when we see simple cholecystitis,
and hence we always give antibiotics for acute cholecystitis.
What happens here, though, is that the pain does not go away.
The pain does not relieve.
It is something that goes beyond, say, a six-hour time period,
and we usually have to admit those patients.
When you do the white cell count,
it might be up,
and they might even be running a bit of a temperature.
So anatomy, remember, the gallstone is still there.
When the gallstone gets beyond that into the bile duct,
what can happen now?
Well, it can get stuck in the bile duct,
and that can give you obstructive jaundice,
and if there's inflammation and infection,
the patient is severely ill with cholangitis.
Cholangitis, remember, pain, fever, and jaundice with these patients.
If they become septicemic, of course, they become hypotensive,
they become a bit delirious,
and they can go into septic shock.
That's a very serious situation.
Right at the end, the gallstone can go all the way down,
get stuck together with a pancreatic duct,
and now we're going to get biliary pancreatitis.
It's all anatomical.
Remember, some of the pancreatic juice is now going to get free,
and we get pancreatitis.
One of the rarest ones that you should never mention first, of course,
somewhere along the line,
the gallstone erodes into the small bowel,
and it can be a direct erosion,
it can be from different pathways,
but it can go all the way down the small bowel,
and it can get stuck at the ileocecal valve,
and we get this gallstone small bowel obstruction.
Whether that's mechanical or paralysis of that area,
not of concern here.
It is very rare.
It is extremely rare.
Over the last couple of years,
I've seen a single patient with this condition.
So you leave that one for last.
So just anatomically, that is the main problem.
You just think about the anatomy,
and you'll answer that question in the exam,
or when you see a patient,
you'll be able to deal with the possible complications of gallstones.
The patient gets sent for an ultrasound.
They ask you about this report that says that they have gallstones.
They want to know more.
You can explain it to them really by way of the anatomy.
Now, there are a few more subtleties to this.
Remember, any type of infection, inflammation in the biliary tree,
we can get abscess formation in the local area.
We can get abscesses even in the liver.
We see that in very neglected cases locally with severe cholecystitis.
You can also see an empyema.
That's just a gallbladder full of pus that develops that can even rupture,
and you can get pus and bile into the abdomen.
So just think locally.
Just make where you start off with a smaller complication,
just expand things and make them worse.
Liver abscesses, pericholecystic abscesses, etc.
Empyema, that is pus in the gallbladder itself.
Think anatomically,
and you'll be able to get all the complications of gallstone disease.
