So in this lecture we're going to talk about the complex number.
In the previous lecture we looked at the imagined unit,
this brand new number that we have,
and we've defined it such that if we take this imagined unit,
we square it, we get negative one.
That's how we defined it.
But now we want to talk about the complex numbers.
The complex numbers, we're going to call that a set,
and it is going to be the set, and it's a double-struck C,
and just like we had for real numbers, the double-struck,
it's one word to use when you have these symbols,
that's a double-struck C,
and that's going to be our complex number.
So we want to define this thing called a complex number.
We have real numbers, well, we have integers,
we have rational numbers, we have the irrationals,
but now we have the set of complex numbers.
So how are we going to define the set of complex numbers?
Let's have a look at that.
I'm going to define, so let's keep it in green,
we're going to try and keep in green at least,
so I have this definition of a complex number,
and this complex number is going to be such,
it's going to be something plus something else.
So I'm going to have a plus b times i,
and that's going to be a complex number.
Now that bi, I don't put a multiplication or a dot in between,
but clearly there's multiplication happening there.
I'm multiplying b by i, and I'm adding that to a.
And I just have to tell you what a and b are.
So a and b, they are members of the set of real numbers,
an ordered set of real numbers.
So they're both real numbers.
So I take a real number, and I add to that another real number
times the imagined unit i, and that defines for me a complex number.
Now you will see it written in different ways.
So you might also see x plus i, y.
And for some reason we have, you know, written the other way.
But we have commutativity there.
These are, you know, the real numbers and complex numbers
are all part of the algebraic structure called a field,
and they share all the properties of a field.
So we have commutativity there.
i times y and y times i is exactly the same thing.
Sometimes we write it that way, and sometimes we don't.
The point being that x and y, they're still just both members
of this ordered set of real numbers.
So no, it doesn't matter what symbols I'm using there.
We usually have a variable, you know, that represents these,
and that's usually z.
So we're going to say z equals a plus bi, or ib,
or x plus iy, or yi, it doesn't matter.
As long as those two things are real numbers.
And the variable that we use is usually z.
Remember, in calculus and algebra, for real numbers,
we use x and y for the variables most of the time.
Although we can also use a's and b's,
but those are really for coefficients and constants.
It doesn't matter, that's a variable.
But it's very common in complex analysis
to use this variable z instead of x.
Because, you know, I might want to use x and y there.
I'm much more used to them being variables
as far as real numbers are concerned.
So we're going to use z.
Other common ones are w.
We'll use w as well for these.
So that's a variable.
And it can be a complex number.
Now, we see, well, there's something, you know,
special going on here, of course.
What if I have, let's have z.
Let's have three plus zero i.
Can I write that?
Of course I can.
Zero is a real number.
But zero times i is just going to be zero.
Nothing special there.
And so this is just going to be three.
Well, that's just a real number.
And that shows us kind of very clearly that the real numbers,
this ordered set of real numbers,
they are only a subset of the set of complex numbers.
They're actually special cases of the complex number.
And that is when this b or y, whatever that part is,
when that is equal to zero, then I am back to real numbers.
And that's very nice because when we saw the imaginary unit before,
when we saw the imaginary unit, we can think of that now as a complex number.
That's zero plus i.
Okay?
So there's a one hidden in there.
And anything times one is just one.
And that a, or x then, is zero.
And that's a complex number.
i is also just a complex number.
Now, we want to give names to these, to a and b.
That's something we can do as well.
So let's have these definitions.
So we're going to have definition.
We have what we call the real part.
So we're going to say real part.
And the way that we can write that is uppercase re of z.
And we have the imaginary part.
Imaginary, imaginary part.
And that is going to be written as i, m, uppercase i, lowercase m, of z.
And that is going to equal a, and that's going to equal b,
in the case that z equals a plus bi.
So we're going to call this the real part of the complex number
and the imaginary part.
Now, there's nothing imaginary about this.
I mean, there's unfortunate common terms that we call these complex,
you know, we call this the imaginary unit and that an imaginary part.
There's nothing imaginary about it, you know.
These things are very useful and, you know, you'll,
depending on the field of study, you're going to use them all the time.
And so the real part, the imaginary part,
and this is how the symbols that we use,
if I'm letting a and b be the variables that I do use,
both a and b are real numbers and there they are.
So we have constructed the complex numbers.
It's very easy to do, very easy to think about.
And please just think about this as the sum multiplication,
multiplication by i.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
So, let's see.
