Okay, so let's have a look at a very interesting topic and that's co-sets.
Co-sets. The emphasis here is on sets. We're going to have a set.
And there's a few things. This goes somewhere which is quite important, but
as per usual it takes a while to get there. So we're going to define a few things. Again,
we're going to have a group G. It is going to be a group and it contains a set of elements
and some binary operation on that. And we're going to have a group H, which is a subgroup of
group G. I'm going to use that less than sign as subgroup. I'm saying that as a subgroup.
I'm also going to have a relation and we're going to have, we're going to use this tilde
squiggly line and they are left and right co-sets by the way. So we're going to just concentrate
on the left for now. Anything we do you can just do in the reverse and you can show the right as
well. But let's stick to this relation. And the relation is going to be on elements A
and B, elements of G, such that, or if and only if, A inverse binary operation B is an
element in H. That is how I'm going to describe my relation. I'm going to take two elements of
G and I'm going to say that relation is only for if I take two elements there and I take the inverse
of A, binary operation B, that that product is, and I use product sum group composition, remember
binary operation can be anything, is an element of H. And then furthermore, I'm just going to state
the following. I'm going to state that this is an equivalence relation. And if it's an equivalence
relation, I have these equivalence classes on G and if A is an element of that, I'm just going to say,
I'm just going to write it like that. That's an equivalence class on this group G and it contains
the element A. Remember I take its inverse binary operation with B and I say that's an element of H.
That is how I define this. And my claim, my theorem in the end is going to be that this equivalence
class, which is a set, remember it's a set of elements, is equal to the set of A, binary operation
with H, such that H is an element of my subgroup. I'm stating this is a set and I'm stating that's a
set. And in the end I'm going to call them cosets. In the end I'm going to call this a left coset.
Okay, first of all, before I prove all of this, and if I say these two are equal to each other,
I've got to prove it in this direction and I've got to prove it in this direction.
First of all, is this an equivalence relation? This video is just going to be about is this an
equivalence relation? For this to be an equivalence relation, we have to have the properties,
the reflexive property, reflexive property. Let's see if that holds. I'm going to say, in other words,
I'm looking at A and A. Now is that true? What does this mean? Well, it says what I have to do here is
then if this is my relation, I'm saying A inverse binary operation A. Well, I set this up as a group.
If A inverse is there, then definitely A has to be there and this is just the identity element E
and the identity element we know is inside of H. Because it's a subgroup, it must have that same identity,
it must have that identity element. So the reflexive property clearly holds. E is an element of H.
H. The symmetric property, does that hold? If I have AL with B, does that imply a B equivalence relation
with A? Is that so? Now what I'm asking here is if I have this relation, remember, A inverse and B.
That is an element of H. That is how I set it up. This chalk is flowing right to my eye. Anyway,
if this is in that set, then if that is an element there, its inverse must also be an element of H.
And remember how we define an inverse? We looked at this before. I take the inverse of the second one
and then the inverse of the first one. That must be an element of H. And lo and behold, B inverse,
the inverse of the inverse is just A and that's an element of H. So what do I have here?
Well, I have just shown that if this holds, then that holds because this is nothing other than
saying B, this relation on A. So we've shown that the last one is the transitive property.
Transitive property. What we have here, I'm going to say if A, this relation to B
and I'm just using set notation and B, this relation to C, this implies A's relation with C.
C.
So can we show that? What are we saying here? We're saying A inverse B and we are saying B
inverse C. We're saying that's an element of H. We're saying that's an element of H.
Well, if they're both elements of H, if I take the binary operation between two of them by the closure
property, that should obviously also be there. That should obviously also be there. So
if I have A inverse B and that with B inverse with C and I say I claim that that's an element of H
and by the associative property of groups, I can do this first. That gives me the identity element
which leaves me with A inverse C as an element of H. Therefore, I'm showing that there is A,
this relation to C and that's an element of H. So all of them hold the reflexive, the symmetric
and the transitive and the transitive property. So really, I have shown that this is an equivalence
relation and you can do it the other way around as well. When you do R, it's B inverse A.
Everything swaps around. It's easy to prove that that's an equivalence relation. So I have really
shown that this exists. It is a set here with the elements A in it. That's how I've defined it.
It is an equivalence relation. It's an equivalence class. And now, in the next video, we're going to
show that this is a set. Well, this is a set but that it's equal to doing this. It's equal to this set.
And I'll show you how to do it in this direction. You know, you take this and end with that or you take
this and you end with that. Because if you want to prove that two things are equal to each other,
the best way that we are going to do it is if you want to show that two sets are equal to each other.
Remember, these are two sets. It's to show that A is a subset of B and B is a subset of A. And if that
is so, then A equals B. And that perhaps by the weekend, you can see if you can set that up very easily.
I'm just going to show you how it starts. You're going to take X as an element of this A. And then
you continue. And the same you're going to do with this side and then get to that side. But we'll get
to that video. First of all, we've defined this. We've shown that this is an equivalence relation.
And we're going to end up with a set which we call a coset. In the end, we're going to call this
a left coset. And then also, you get the right coset and the right coset. Well, we also write this as
H. And you also, oh, I'll check that out. And you also get the right coset.
Let me not get into that now before I get too confused. We'll look at all of those once we've
proven this. This is, by the way, this is the left coset because the A, which forms our
equivalence class here is on the left. And then it's going to be on the right, which we just write
as HA and this is AH. But we'll get to that. That's not the important thing. We've shown that
this is an equivalence relation.
