Now in this video, we're just going to have some fun.
We've looked at complex matrices and now we're going to look at the column space
and in some sense the row space of a complex valued matrix.
We're going to look at elementary row operations
and then finally how that all fits together when we do CR factorization of a complex matrix.
So let's play a little bit and we're going to take a complex matrix.
We're going to take a complex matrix and we're going to think about the following things.
We're going to think about its column space and its row space
and perhaps let's talk a little bit about CR factorization.
It's this idea of factoring our complex matrix into two matrices.
That one will say something about the column space.
That one will say something about the row space.
And if you multiply those two matrices, you must get back to your original complex matrix.
So let's try and do that.
That's just a little bit of fun.
So let's have a matrix A.
We're just going to do this by creating a little problem here.
So let's do this matrix.
Let's make it I.
Let's make it 1, 1.
That's our first row of the matrix.
Then we're going to have 3.
Let's do negative 1 and let's do negative 2 plus 3i.
Let's do 1, 1, 2 plus i.
So I have my matrix there.
Forgive my notation.
And this is a 3 by 3 matrix.
And so can we think of the column space of this complex matrix?
The column space meaning, you know, if I were to multiply this by a vector, and of course
this has to be a 3 by 1 vector, if I then look at the result b on the other side, a vector,
what space can I fill up with linear combinations of these three column vectors?
And what we have to do, of course, we have to do elementary row operations on these.
So can we do elementary row operations on a complex matrix?
Well, let's see by this example problem that we do have.
Now, I do my elementary row operations in a specific way.
You might have learned how to do that in a different way.
And what I like to do is not to subtract, but to add.
So I've got to think carefully about what I want to do.
So what do I want to do to make this i a pivot, such that I have a 0 there and a 0 there?
Now, there's so many ways to go about this.
So we just have to choose one.
Well, what I could do immediately is not worry about these, but change that pivot into a leading 1.
So how would I have to go about that?
Well, I have to take that first row, and I've got to multiply that first row,
if I think about that, by negative i.
And that's how I write it.
That's my first row.
I'm going to multiply that row by negative i.
So i times i is negative 1 times a negative.
That gives me a 1.
1 times negative i is negative i.
And 1 times i is negative i.
So that 1 times negative i.
So I've just done, and I've taken a scalar, and I've multiplied it by that row.
So everything else stays the same.
So now I would have 1 leading 1 there, a negative i, and another negative i.
And then I have a 3, a negative 1, a negative 2 plus 3i, and a 1, and a 1, and a 2 plus i.
So that's where we stand at the moment.
We've done one elementary row operation, multiplying by some scalar.
Now I really want to get rid of this 3 below my pivot there, which is the 1 there.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to multiply this top row by negative 3.
And so that will give me 1 times negative 3 is negative 3.
Negative i times negative 3, that leaves me with a 3i.
And negative 3 times negative i leaves me with a 3i.
So that's what I now have.
I've multiplied again this first row by this scalar.
So I'm going to leave that first row low now.
1 negative i, negative i.
And now I'm going to take this constant multiple, the scalar multiple, I should say,
of this first row plus the second row.
So negative 3 and 3 is 0.
There's my 0 that I required.
Negative 1 and plus 3i, that leaves me with negative 1 plus 3i.
And now it's negative 2i plus 3i.
So the negative 2 we still have.
Negative 2 we still have.
And a 3i plus a 3i, that gives me a plus 6i.
And then we still have our third row here.
1, 1, 2 plus i.
So that's where we stand now.
We also have to get rid of this.
1 here.
I want zeros below this first pivot.
So again, I'm going to multiply my first row by negative 1.
Now, what you could also do is just say, you know, this one minus that one.
But I like to think really about two elementary row operations.
I'm firstly going to multiply throughout by scalar, and then I'm going to add two rows.
And I really like to think about those two as my elementary row operations.
We're not going to consider here, you know, interchanging any of the rows.
So if I take 1 times negative 1, that leaves me with a negative 1.
Negative i times negative 1, that's an i.
Negative i times a negative 1, that's an i.
And now I'm going to have 1, negative i, my first row.
My second row is 0, negative 1 plus 3i, minus 2 plus 6i.
And now I'm going to have this scalar multiple of row 1 added to row 3.
So 1 and negative 1 is a 0.
1 plus i is 1 plus i.
And 2i plus i, 2 plus i, I should say, plus i is 2 plus 2i.
Now I really have to think, what do I have to multiply this with, such that when I add
this one, I get 0.
So what we really have to do is to think about some complex arithmetic.
And so let's do that on the side.
I'm thinking I have to take this value here, negative 1 plus 3i.
So I'm taking negative 1 plus 3i.
And I've got to multiply that by some complex number.
Let's call it z.
I want to call it z.
And if I add this to it, plus 1 plus i, if I add that to it, I must get 0.
So what do I have to multiply this with?
That's what I have to multiply to get that.
Now I would really like just to isolate z on one side.
And how can I go, you know, how can I think about, or at least go about that?
So we still have the negative 1 plus 3i.
And I'm going to multiply that by z.
And now I'm just going to add the negative of this to both sides, which means I'm going
to have negative 1, negative i on that side.
Now I want to divide both sides by this complex number.
And so this complex number divided by itself is just 1, and 1 times z is z.
And on this side, I'm going to have negative 1 minus i.
And let's do that properly with our NVIDIA ruler.
And there we go.
And that means I'm going to divide this side by negative 1 plus 3i.
Negative 1 plus 3i.
Now I have to think about what do I do when I have division?
Well, I multiply both the numerator and denominator by the complex conjugate of the denominator.
So that's negative 1 minus 3i.
And on this side, divide by negative 1 minus 3i.
So multiplying by 1.
It's the complex conjugate of this denominator.
And so let's do that.
We're going to have z equals, so negative 1 times negative 1.
And that's negative 1 times negative 1.
That's 1.
Negative 1 times negative 3i.
That's positive 3i.
Negative 1 times negative i.
That's a positive i.
And then a negative times a negative is a positive.
So I've got positive 3, but i times i is negative 1.
So it leaves me with a negative 3.
And of course, on the denominator, because I'm multiplying a complex number by its complex conjugate,
I'm going to get a real number.
And it's going to be the square of this plus the square of that.
So it's going to be negative 1 squared plus we have the 3 squared.
And that's just going to be 10.
So z equals, let's look at this.
1 minus 3, that's a negative 2.
I have 3i plus another i.
That's plus 4i.
And I'm going to divide that by 1 plus 9, which is 10.
Divide that by 10.
So I'm going to say z equals negative 1 over 5.
Just simplifying, two tens.
And then plus, and that should be, if I divide that by 2, that's 2.
And if I divide that by 2, it's 5i.
Now I know what the constant multiple of this row should be.
So let's do that.
So I know if I do 0 times that, that's just going to leave me with a 0.
And now I have to think, what do I get if I multiply this by this?
Well, I better get 1 plus i.
That's what we did.
I said if I multiply z by negative 1 plus 3i, and I add that, that I should get 0.
If I do then take the z and I substitute it there, this is what I must get.
So that's going to be negative 1, negative 1, negative i.
And now I've just got to do negative 2 plus 6i, and I've got to multiply that by z.
And so let's see what that is.
So I'm going to take negative 2 plus 6i there, and I'm multiplying it by z,
which is negative 1 over 5 plus 2 over 5i.
So let's see what we get.
So negative times the negatives are positive.
And so I'm going to get 2 over 5.
And negative 2, that's going to leave me with a negative 4 over 5i.
This is going to leave me with a negative 6 over 5i.
And that's going to leave me with a positive 12 over 5.
But i times i is negative, so that leaves me with a minus 12 over 5.
And so let's simplify that.
I've got 2 over 5 minus 12 over 5.
That leaves me with negative 10 over 5.
And I've got here negative 4 over 6, negative 4 over 6.
That's negative 10 over 5.
Negative 10 over 5.
And that's i.
So this is nothing other than negative 2, negative 2i.
So what we have here is negative 2, negative 2i.
So that is multiplying this second row by this value, which I then want to add to row 3.
So here I'm going to have 1.
I'm going to have minus i.
I still have minus i.
Now this row.
Let's take the constant multiple that we do have.
There we go.
It's 0.
It's minus 1 minus i and minus 2 minus 2i.
And now I want to add this constant multiple to this one.
So 0 and a 0 is a 0.
I have 1 plus i and negative 1, negative i.
That's a 0.
I have 2 plus 2i and negative 2i.
And that's a 0.
Hmm.
Look at that.
So we have row of all 0s here.
We also see that if I look at this, if I divide, you know, if I multiply this by 2, I get that.
So this is just twice that.
So that's going to be 1 and a minus i and a minus i.
And I have a 0.
And I have a 1.
And I have a 2.
And I have a 0, 0, 0.
Great.
And now what we would like to do is just to get rid of, you know, that i right there.
So I can multiply the second row by i.
And so that leaves me with a 0, with an i, and with a 2i.
So let's add this scalar multiple of row 2 to row 1.
1 plus a 0 is 1.
Negative i plus i, that's a 0.
And then negative i plus 2i, that's an i.
And then on this row, I still have 0, 1, 2.
And then a 0, 0, 0.
And that's my final, this reduced, or this row echelon form that I do have.
And look at this.
What is this trying to tell me about this original matrix?
That's what we have to figure out.
It says, well, take 1 times the first column.
That's in the first position.
In the second, take 1 times the second column.
And that's it.
We only have rank 2 here.
Now, this is a rank 2 matrix.
That means that if I see that as a column, that as a column, this one, this column vector
is linearly dependent upon those two.
So if I think of the column space, it's that one, 1 times the first column, 1 times the
second column, and there's my column space.
So if I can say the column space, the column space of A, well, that's just going to be the
linearly independent column.
So that column and that column is linearly independent.
So that's an i, and that's a 3 and a 1.
That's a 1 and a negative 1 and a 1.
And that is my column space.
Linear combinations of these two is the only vectors, B, that I can get to in a system AX equals
B.
But now, look at the beauty of all of this.
I'm going to call this, I'm going to call this my matrix C in CR factorization.
That's my column vector, my column space, the vectors of my column, the linearly independent
two columns.
And here, if I look at this, if I, you know, just forget about that last row, there is my
row space in row echelon form.
So I'm going to call that my matrix R.
And look at that.
It's 1, 0, i and 0, 1, 2.
And there's my matrices C and R.
If I multiply C times R, I'm going to get back to A.
Not only that, there's something very special going on here.
If we look at this last, this very last two values here, what it's trying to tell me, this
matrix here, it says, now what you do have to do, this is in reduced row echelon form for
me to get R, as that, or at least in row echelon form, what I have to do here is the following.
I have to think about, I'm taking column one, one of column one, plus one of column two.
Now those two are my independent, those two are my independent columns.
But it's telling me here, the i and the two, it's telling me how I get to this linearly
dependent column vector three.
It says, take i times the first column, plus two times the second column.
So let's do that.
i times i is negative one, two times one is two, and two minus one is one.
And you'll always see it.
i times the first column, plus two times the second column, that's what I read off there,
gives me this third column.
So that is absolutely beautiful.
I have reduced row echelon form here, leading pivots, zeros below, zeros above, no problem.
So once you get to R, it has to be in this form, and then you get the column space, and
there's no representation of the row space, and if I take C and I multiply by R, I'm going
to get back there, because what it's saying is, you know, take, there's my first column,
there's my second column, and I'm taking, for the third column, I'm taking i times this
one, and plus two times this one gives me the third column, which is right there.
So this was actually just a little bit of fun.
You can think of the column space, the row space, and what we call CR factorization, or
CR decomposition, decomposing or factorizing my matrix A into two matrices, C being these
column vectors that are linearly independent, and my row space, being what is left here,
you know, taking away this row that only has zeros in it, and we can see that, you know,
there's a rank two, and of course rank two for my row space as well.
Those two ranks have to be the same, and in actual fact it is.
And what it's telling us, if it's in this row reduced echelon form, is that I take i times
the first column vector plus twice the second column vector, and that gives me the third
column vector.
