Now that we know about subgroups let's move on to a new type of group called a
cyclic group cyclic cyclic cyclic cyclic group don't confuse that with cyclic
subgroups you know they're also cyclic groups because a subgroup is also a group
and depending on how this is explained to you sometimes the explanation will
involve the subgroup sometimes it will just involve a proper group so just get
your mind around those so what is a cyclic group well first of all it is a
group so you know we must have a group and it must have a set and there must be a
binary operation between all the elements of that set with our four properties
let's just say our four properties there and we know that's closure associativity
unique identity element and every element has its unique inverse in that so what
is a cyclic group a cyclic group is then if I take one of the elements in my set
and under that binary operation it generates all the other elements in that
set and say we take this element a it's an element of I'm going to say g so that it
incorporates both the set and its binary operation then a then a is a generator of
the group and we write usually also in these bracket notation it's a generator of that group g such and we write it so that any multiple under the binary operation of that generator such that n is an element of the integers what does that mean you know what does that notation mean so it says a to the power n but you know that normally would indicate to us it's a
multiplicative but we also actually just want it to include n a you know so that it's additive as well so this would be really for this binary operation being multiplication this will be for this binary operation to be addition but most textbooks and most explanations just you know leave that out and assume that no matter what the binary operation is you know there's more than just addition and multiplication
this just means repeated ones of that so you know if my binary operation is just this generic this you know a on itself that will just be a1 a that that would be written as a squared but it's not really squared because if this was addition that means a plus a and that was 2a and not a squared but you understand what we mean by this square this power notation
notation here so that if we have a a a that's a3 and this a3 is also an element of the set if that is so that every element in the set can be generated by multiples under the binary operation of that element then that is a cyclic group so let's look at an example let's look at an example of a cyclic group well one cyclic group would be the integers
the integers under the integers under addition because it has a generator which is just one so any multiple of integer multiple of one so and remember n is that multiple and that's an integer so from all the negative to zero to all the positive integers that all this whole set this infinite set can be generated by one
okay so which makes it you know also this infinite set being generated by one some uniqueness there but we might get into that a bit later so let's move on just to stating the very obvious here that cyclic groups are abelian
then if you saw that cyclic groups are abelian in other words they commute not all abelian groups are cyclic but cyclic groups do commute and let's prove that very quickly
ah don't you just love proofs so let's just prove prove that very quickly not a difficult proof
we're going to say let g1 and g2 be elements of my cyclic group g so g is a cyclic group g that means it has a generator
you know let the generator let the generator let let let's say a element of g be the generator of that cyclic group because that's how we defined it
in other words we can write we have we have we have two elements say r and s and they're both elements of z
they can be both of them they're all n so that means i can write g1 as a r
because g1 remember is generated by a so it's just some multiple of a and it's an r multiple of a and that is in there
okay and let g2 equals a s if i now have the binary this g1 g2 that is going to equal a r a s and remember that's just a r plus s
and since r and since r and s are both integers they commute so that is a s plus r
and that equals a s a r and that equals g2 g1
so g1 g2 equals g2 g1 for any for any g1 g2 elements of a cyclic group
so cyclic groups do commute i'm going to clean the board and then we'll carry on
now let's consider now clean board let's consider the integers mod 6
what were they well that's a group of six elements
zero one these equivalents classes
and five
let's see
if any one of them
are generators
of the whole group
can they be generators of the whole group
remember we have
modular addition here
so in other words five plus four is nine
nine minus six is three
so four plus five would be three
so let's look at just the generator zero
what is zero going to get us
well that is just zero
very uninteresting
does one generate
well it will have zero
one ones is one
two is two
three is three
three ones
four ones is four
five ones is five
six ones
i'm just carrying on with my integers
six ones
under this modular diction
six
but that is
mod six is zero
plus
another one
which will give me
seven
which is
but seven mod six is just one
so i'm just going to repeat
as n grows bigger and bigger and bigger
i just repeat this modular addition
so look at that
one is a generator of the whole group
one is a generator of the whole group
let's go to two
well that's going to give me a zero
it's going to be two
it's going to give me four
when it gets to six
it'll be back to zero
when it gets to eight
that's four
and so on
so that's actually all i have
then it doesn't matter how big n grows
that mod six
will be one of those
let's look at three
well that is going to be zero
and that's going to be three
and three plus three is six
which is just back to zero
so that's all you're going to get
let's go to four
what is four going to give us
well that is going to give us a zero
it's going to give us a four
four and four is eight
and eight minus six is two
and four and four and four is twelve
and that's just back to zero
and four and four and four and four is sixteen
minus six
minus twelve
this was back to four
so i'm just going to cycle around all of those
five
is going to be interesting again
okay so let's just do this
zero five is zero
one five is five
so that's you know just a five
five plus another five
because remember this is addition
five plus five is ten
mod six is
four because ten minus six is four
five plus five
plus another five
that's fifteen
minus six
is nine
minus another six is three
so we have mod three there
five plus five
plus five plus five
now we have twenty
and six and six is three
is eighteen
so i can subtract six from it
three times
and that leaves me with mod two
and the next one is going to be twenty five
minus twenty four
that's mod one
and just look at that
i have zero
one two three four five
i have the whole
z six again
so look at this
there were two
generators
inside of this
that gave me the whole set
so this is
number one
it is a cyclic group
the integers mod six
because
there's always going to be one
that is going to with
modular arithmetic
additive
addition here
it's going to give me one of those
but there's more
than just one
in this instance
it was five
that gave me this
five
that generated
the whole group
for me
so don't get these confused
so i'm just looking at
these elements
as generators
and
of course
we can check
each of these
if they are cyclic
we can check
each of these
if they are cyclic
and we have to check
each of these
to be a group
because remember
a cyclic group
has to be both
a group
and then have to be cyclic
so don't get all of this confused
so
we first have to check
if this is a group
if this is a group
and then check if it's cyclic
that's not what i'm doing here
i'm just showing
this is cyclic
because
this element
and this element
generates
the whole
this whole set
let's clean the board
okay let's move on
to the integers
i'm doing it the other way around
now let's move to the
integers mod
12
and i want to look
at one of its
subgroups
and i claim that
0
3
6
and 9
is a subgroup
it's one of the subgroups
so as i say
don't get these things
confused
cyclic groups
subgroups
cyclic subgroups
so just
let's just concentrate
on what we're trying
to achieve here
i'm looking at
z12
so remember
that is going to be
0
1
all the way
and these are all congruence
these are all congruence classes
or equivalence classes
up to 11
and so i'm saying
i'm taking some of its elements
0
3
6
and 9
and i'm asking
i'm not going to put these
square brackets in every time
i'm asking
is that a subgroup
remember
in the previous lecture
put the link up there
if i remember
if i remember
is that
it has to
be
there has to be closure
and then
every element must have
its inverse
so there's only two things
we need
so let's have
modular addition
as our
sometimes we just put plus there
but remember
this is modular addition
and we have
0
0
3
6
and 9
0
3
6
and 9
0
0
and 3
and 6
and 9
and 3
and 6
and 9
3 and 3
is 6
6 and 3
is 9
9 and 3
is 12
mod 12
is 0
6 and 3
6 7 8 9
9 is there
6 and 6
is 12
minus 12
is 0
9 and 6
is 15
minus 12
is 3
9 and 3
is 12
mod 12
is 0
6 and 9
is 15
that's mod 3
9 and 9
is 18
and we have
we have 6 times 3 so that's mod 0. So just have a look at that. So we have closure. Definitely
we have closure because no matter what the modular addition is between any of these it
remains inside of my set. So we have closure. Do we have unique inverses for each? What
is the inverse for 0? Well if I do mod 0, 0 modular addition with 0 I get 0 so it's
its own. What do I have to do with 3 to get 0? Well its inverse is 9, 6's inverse is just
its own inverse and 9's inverse is going to be 3. So 0, 3, 6, 9 each of them has a unique
inverse so indeed this is a subgroup. It is a subgroup. Let's see if it's cyclic. One of
its elements must generate all of them. Let's choose 3 for very obvious reasons.
You can guess at what's going to be 3 because what does that give me? Multiples of that, no
multiple of that is 3. One multiple of that is 3. 3 and 3 is 6 and 3 and 3 and 3 is 9 and
3 and 3 and 3 and 3 is 12 but that's mod 0 and then I'll carry on. No matter how many
3's I add with modular addition I'll just get back to that. Remember we are talking in
these congruence classes. Okay so not only is it a subgroup but it's also a cyclic subgroup.
So I've shown both things so don't get the set, don't get those mixed up. So I've shown
that it's a subgroup and I've shown now that it's a cyclic subgroup. So that leaves me with
one more topic for, that leaves me for one more topic for this. Let's just look at Z12.
Z12. Which of its generators is going to generate the whole group? So I'm just walking away now from
cyclic groups but this is usually added to cyclic groups. Which of its, which of its generators,
generators, so if I have a zero and I have one, you know, not elements I should say, not generators,
which one? 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Which ones of those will generate? Well I'm going to give you the
answer now. We won't look at a proof but it is the co-primes, the co-primes, just remember that always,
the co-primes of 12. The co-primes of 12. What is a co-prime you ask? Something we haven't put
in the box yet, not in this video series else, so let's put that in the box. Let's take the numbers 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 9, 10 and 11 and 12 in this instance. 12. Let's just see what all the factors
of 1 is. What times what gives me 1? Just 1 times 1. 1 and 2. Let's do this. So 1 and 2 because that is
1 and 3. 1, 2 and 4 because 4 times 1 is 4, 2 times 2 is 4, 1 times 4 is 4, 1 and 5 so that's prime.
1, 2, 3 and 6. 6 times 1 is 6, 3 times 2 is 6, 2 times 3 is 6, 1 times 6, 6 times 1,
7 is 7, 7 is prime again, 8 is 1, 2, 4, 8, 9 is 1, 3 and 9, 10 is 1, 2, 5, 10, 11 is prime again,
12 is 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 12. So it's all the factors that you can factor these values into.
And co-primes, what a co-prime is, if you take that number, the two numbers, you know, to decide
whether they are co-prime, the only factor that they can have in common is 1. If they have any other
factors in common they are not co-prime. So I'm not, each number, each of the two numbers does not have
to be prime. That's not what co-primes is, not both primes. Definitely 12 is not prime. But what I want
between those two numbers is that the only factor that they have in common is 1. So let's look,
1 is definitely co-prime with 12 because the only factor they have in common is 1. 2 is not co-prime
because there's a 2 and there's a 2. It's not only 1. 3 is definitely not co-prime. 4, a 2 and a 4,
it's not co-prime. 5 is definitely co-prime. 6 is not going to be co-prime. 7, yes it's only the 1,
there's no 7 there. So 7 is co-prime. 8 is not, 9 is not, 10 is not, 11 definitely is co-prime.
So the generator is 1, the generator 5, 7 is a generator, element 7 is a generator, and element 11
is a generator. And that is going to give us the integers mod 12, the whole of integers mod 12. That
is going to give us the integers mod 12. And that is going to give us the integers mod 12 again.
So just to look at which of the elements are generators of this, remember this is always going
to be a cyclic group because definitely one is going to always with the integer, with the modular
arithmetic integers mod n is always going to give you, generate the whole group for you. But there will be
the others and the others are the ones, are the elements that are co-prime to mod n, whatever that
n is. So what we've looked at here is what a cyclic group is. You see that cyclic group? Catches is,
we always write this, but remember this just depends on what our binary operation is. But we always
write it like we'd never do addition and mod, you know, we always just keep to this same thing.
And remember when we talk about subgroups or cyclic subgroups, first show that it is a subgroup and
then you can show that it is, then you can show that it is cyclic. So you can take any one of these
subgroups, first show that it is a subgroup and now an interesting thing, are all the subgroups
cyclic. Look at that. Alright, and then we looked at, you know, which of the elements in this
integers modulo n is going to generate for us the whole group. So there's different things
that's usually discussed together in a cyclic group. Please remember a cyclic group is a group,
so it has to be a group first, so a set and its binary operations with the full properties.
And if one, at least one, just one, it can be more as we've shown, if at least one of them,
not there, that's not what we showed, if at least one of them generates
by just multiples of itself, generates all the elements in that group, then that becomes a cyclic group.
so
from
