In this lecture I want to talk to you about data types or variable types.
Now it's important to understand this because you have to do statistical analysis on your data.
And it really depends what type of data it is that determines what statistical analysis you can do.
Now there's really two main ways to categorize data.
One you'll see here I've called categorical and numerical data types.
That's one way to distinguish data types.
And the second would be discrete and continuous data types.
Let's start with categorical and numerical.
Now under categorical we get two subtypes as well.
One would be nominal and the other ordinal.
But what are categories?
Well categories are usually just words.
It is something that you cannot do arithmetical operations on.
In other words I can name certain diseases.
Or I can name certain tests.
Or certain outcomes.
These are words.
I cannot do multiplication on them.
I can't really add them together.
Now nominal is the quintessential type of categorical data.
As I said the names of diseases.
You cannot say one disease is three times the other disease.
These are words.
These are terms.
These are terms.
Now you get an ordinal type as well.
Ordinal, you can hear the word.
That means there's some order to this.
Think about a survey.
You've all done surveys.
A survey where there's a question and you're asked to rank what you feel about such a statement.
And you might be able to answer I totally agree.
I agree.
I neither agree nor disagree.
I disagree.
Or I strongly disagree.
Now there is some order to that.
You might also ask what was your feeling towards the treatment that you received in the ward.
And you might have one star to five stars.
There's certainly some order to this.
But you cannot say someone who chose four stars is twice as happy as someone who chose two stars.
So although there's order to this, this is categorical data.
As opposed to that we have numerical data types.
Numerical meaning they are numbers.
Once again there are two types.
Now the first normal numerical data type is really just an interval type.
In other words, just plain numbers but without an absolute zero.
Temperature, a patient's temperature, the ambient temperature is a very good example of this.
Now let's just talk degrees Celsius for a moment.
It might be 30 degrees outside in Fahrenheit.
I'm not quite sure.
That's getting into the 90 some way.
Versus it being 15 degrees outside.
Now 15 might be the half of 30.
But you can never say that 30 degrees is twice as warm as 15 degrees.
It's impossible.
Because the zero that exists 0 degrees Celsius.
Minus 32 Fahrenheit is not an absolute zero.
The absolute zero is in a Kelvin scale.
Now Kelvin scale is minus 273 degrees Celsius.
That has a true zero.
Now a ratio type numerical data does have a true zero.
We can say that a white cell count is zero.
We can say that a patient's hemoglobin level is zero.
That has a true zero.
If someone has a hemoglobin count of 10, that count is really twice as much as five.
And now you can do proper analysis on this data.
Now the second way just to categorize your data is discrete versus continuous data types.
Now the quintessential form of discrete data really is the flip of a coin or the roll of a die.
There are only certain values that can come from such experiments.
You can either hit a head or a tail.
If you just want to divide your data set between those patients with complications after procedure versus those without.
That is discrete data, yes or no, male or female.
It is only certain values that are possible, nothing in between.
Now that is opposed to continuous data types where you can continuously subdivide the data.
Now I want to warn you it is not as clear cut as it might seem.
Let's take for instance white cell count.
Now you can keep on dividing white cell count, dividing white cell count, dividing white cell count.
Eventually you are going to end up with one cell.
And you can't divide that cell anymore.
But things are relative.
If we are talking about white cell count in the human blood,
we are really talking about millions and millions and millions of cells.
There are so many in the context of what we are dealing with that we do view that as a continuous data type that is infinitely divisible.
Think about financial research where we look at money.
Money you might suggest that well there is a finite smallest amount of currency in whatever currency you deal with.
Not really so though.
If you think about banks and they have to work on interest rates etc.
If your interest rate comes to a certain percentage,
that percentage might mean a long set of decimal values for the money.
That cannot be thrown away.
Otherwise, you know, if we are talking about billions of dollars,
the bank is either going to win or lose a lot of money.
So you can't throw away those decimal values all the time.
So money is also a continuous data type.
So just be careful when we talk about this.
When something is continuous or not continuous.
The vast majority of cases we do deal with continuous data types.
Even if it is something such as blood cells in the context of a clinical setting.
In other words, we are taking blood from a patient.
Because there are so many, the order that we are talking about is so huge,
we do see that as continuous types.
If you are doing another type of research where you really are dealing with the individual cells,
then you might have to think about things slightly differently.
So there you have it.
Data types.
Remember the categorical and numerical data types.
And I let the cat out of the bag a little bit with the categorical data.
The quintessential test we think about is the chi-squared test.
And we look at ratio type numerical data.
We are talking about students t-test.
And you can see the big difference between those two.
And that's why it's important to understand the different data types that exist.
Have a read through these lecture notes.
