As many others, I feel that for those that study mathematics and physics, some of the
lectures should be combined.
It makes so much more sense.
Here I will combine differentiation and classical mechanics to help you understand the concept
behind differentiation.
I will take for granted that you have done some limit and differentiation problems but
may not understand fully the connection between the two or what differentiation actually represents.
It actually represents two values, plotted as x and y values on a graph that are divided.
Later in calculus, you will see that integration represents two values that need to be multiplied.
Differentiation gives the slope of a curve, hence the division.
And integration gives an area, height times width, and therefore multiplication.
If this does not make complete sense to you now, listen to this introduction again after
finishing the video.
Newton was the father of classical mechanics and to be politically correct I shall say
that he and Leibniz invented calculus.
In modern calculus we use the concept of a limit but that was not available in the 18th century.
Instead the two masters used the concept of an infinitesimally small value.
It is quite a bit easier and mathematically correct though to use limits.
Here we have a table plotting distance travelled versus time.
Imagine we have a motor vehicle and it races away from a starting point and we measure how
far away it is from that starting point every second.
Obviously at second zero it is zero meters away from the start.
At second one it is one meter away from the start.
At second two it is four meters away from the start and at second three it is nine meters
away from the start.
Clearly it is accelerating.
That means its velocity is changing.
As a matter of fact the velocity was zero to start with and then increases exponentially.
In fact I have constructed this experiment so that if I plot these values on a curve I get
a graph for the positive x values of x squared.
Now think about it.
How do I calculate velocity?
It is distance divided by time.
The difference between two y values divided by the difference between two x values.
So if I take the distance covered between second one and second two I need to see where
my motor vehicle was at these times.
At second one it was at one meter and at second two it was at four meters.
Calculating the velocity which is called the average velocity I will need to divide the
change in distance by the change in time.
That is four minus one divided by two minus one.
And that is three divided by one leaving me with three meters per second.
Looking at the graph I note that I can plot these two points and connect the dots.
I note that what I have just done is calculate the slope of the line through these two points.
And that is fantastic as you will see later.
Calculating the average velocity is actually calculating the slope of a straight line.
Now that is all good and well.
But what if I wanted to know what the vehicle's exact velocity was at second one.
Up between second one and second one comma zero zero zero zero zero one.
At second one exactly.
That is called instantaneous velocity.
The velocity is changing all the time.
It is not static.
Today I will just look at the speedometer at exactly second one.
But neither Newton nor Leibniz had a speedometer let alone a motor vehicle.
Looking at the problem mathematically, at any instant in time, a freeze frame, there will
be no movement and there will be no passage of time.
So at second one precisely the car will move from one meter to one meter and time will pass
from one second to one second.
Looking at my fraction now, I will have one minus one divided by one minus one and that
is zero divided by zero, a mathematical disaster.
Aha, my graph to the rescue.
If I call my time at second one x and the difference between second one and second two h, then second
two will be represented by x plus h.
At second one my y value will be the f of x and at second two my y value will be the f of
x plus h.
Now calculating my average velocity will be the f of x plus h minus the f of x divided by
x plus h minus x, that is y2 minus y1 divided by x2 minus x1.
Simplifying leaves the f of x plus h minus the f of x over h.
The x minus x cancels.
Note I have called my average velocity m because remember, from before, the slope of the line
through the two points represents the velocity.
By looking at what happens at and only at one second, I am in actual fact making h zero.
Now we cannot calculate that.
As we have seen, that divides zero by zero.
But we know that the vehicle actually has a velocity at exactly second one.
Even though we are freeze framing at second one, in reality the car has an actual velocity
at second one.
And that is where the concept of a limit comes in.
We take the limit of our equation for m, the slope, as h nears zero.
Now look at my graph.
As h goes to zero, the slope changes.
And as h equals zero, there is a definite straight line with a slope.
And we now call it a tangent line.
It touches the curve at one single, infinitesimally small point, at exactly second one.
Now I have chosen my experiment to represent the function f of x equals x squared as I have
mentioned.
Now let me do some simple algebra in the form of a limit problem.
I have to get rid of the h in the denominator, seeing that I am not allowed to divide by zero.
So let's see, if the f of x is x squared, then the f of x plus h equals x plus h squared.
I simply substitute.
That leaves the slope equaling the limit as h nears zero of x squared plus 2xh plus h squared
minus x squared divided by h.
Cleaning up a bit, I am left with the limit as h nears zero of 2xh plus h squared divided
by h.
I can take out one h in the numerator as a common factor and that leaves the limit as
h nears zero of h times 2x plus h divided by h.
The h's cancel and I am left with an equation containing no h in the denominator.
If I replace the remaining h in the numerator with zero, I am left with 2x.
And look at the beauty of it.
2x represents the slope of the tangent line, actually at any exact point on the graph.
At second one, the vehicle is travelling at 2 times 1 and that is 2 meters per second.
And you will note that 2x is the first derivative of our function f of x equals x squared.
It simply represents meters divided by second.
So from an equation for distance, I can derive an equation for velocity.
Differentiation simply represents a Cartesian coordinate plane where the difference in whatever
the y-value represents, divided by the x-value represents, gives an instantaneous rate of change
as delta x nears zero or h nears zero.
Background music
