So what shall we do today as far as graph theory is concerned?
Let's talk about directed graphs.
Directed. So far, directed graphs.
So far we've only looked at undirected graph and remember in Mathematica
we did put the escape, escape and then
undirected edge and another escape. Remember that?
Now we're going to have a directed edge. Now think about
let's just bring this into the real world but remember graphs
really are abstract things. But imagine we have
a road map and we represent the traffic lights
at the intersections as nodes.
So we have this little road and there's four intersections. The roads
cross and the roads cross and the roads cross. We might find that
the road going from this traffic light to that traffic light is a one way.
So you can't go driving in that direction. You can only drive in that direction.
So if we have an edge between those two nodes
we put a little arrow there
to indicate that this is a directed edge.
It's not just an edge that connects two things. Look at me.
I connect two things. No, I connect it in a certain direction.
And this might be a one way in this direction.
And this might be a one way in that direction.
So all these directed, we have these directed edges.
Imagine a social network.
And we have people here.
There's Sue again and Sarah.
And there is, let's say Andy.
And all these things, all these people.
And they are friends on a social network.
And Sue, or Sarah at least, follows Sue.
But Sue does not follow Sarah back.
So Twitter, here we go.
And Sarah follows Andy.
But Andy follows Sarah as well.
So don't worry about this notation for now.
It's just the concept.
So don't be too concerned with what I have there.
And then Sue doesn't follow Sarah.
But Sue does follow Andy.
So you can imagine this network of people
following each other in a social network.
We can think about people who write
the research papers together.
And then, you know, not who's connected there.
We can look at the traffic, the road traffic grid here.
There's so many things.
If we have pipes that flow gas in a certain direction.
Or water in a certain direction.
Sewage in another direction in another pipe.
There are so many things that you can, you know,
that can be represented by graphs.
Remember, as I always said, these are abstract objects.
We just use them in the real world.
But in short, this is what directed graphs are considered.
The edges have a direction to them.
And you can't travel back along that edge.
So that makes this node not, in a certain way,
not connected to that edge.
Certainly in that, to that, this node to that node.
Certainly not in that direction.
And that's going to become very important
when we do paths and trails through these graphs
that to get from this node to this node might be impossible
because you can't get there.
And if this was a one way in this, or it was a one way in that direction,
both these edges end up in that node and there's nowhere else.
There's no way out of that node.
And that's something very specific or very, very important.
And we'll certainly, certainly have a look at that in the future.
So here we are in Mathematica.
And very short and simple, just going to show you three lines of code
and we're just going to create some directed graphs.
So, by now, you would think that it's quite easy to guess at what the proper function is going to be.
And indeed it is directed graph.
So there you see I've tapped down to it and I'm going to hit tab
and tab completion, directed graph.
And let's make some directed edges.
I'm going to do an edge list.
Node number one, I want to go to node number two in that direction.
So instead of UE, undirected edge, I'm going to say DE for directed edge.
You can see the line of code there.
You could also have typed this backslash and then inside of square brackets, the directed edge.
But doing ESC, DE ESC gives you that directed edge.
So that has to go to two.
I want two to go to three.
And I want three to have a directed edge back to node number one.
Back to node number one.
I'm going to close that, close, and let's have a look.
And beautifully you see I have my three nodes or vertices.
I have the edges between them, but they are now directed edges.
And we didn't put vertex labels here, but you can well imagine node one with an edge to two, two to three, and three back to one.
I could do the exact same thing just thinking back at a cycle graph.
Remember the cycle graphs.
I'm going to say a cycle graph with three nodes, please.
And what I'm now going to say is directed edges, and I want that to be true.
So it is just going to decide.
It's a cycle.
Remember a cycle graph.
So it's going to go all the way around, and I get the exact same thing.
That is a cycle graph with directed edges.
Let me show you one more before we get into later on in the course about the deeper issues as far as directed graphs are concerned.
Let's make a little table.
We're going to make a table of cycle graphs.
So let's have cycle graph, and let's cycle through a couple of them.
Cycle through cycle graph.
So I'm going to have the placeholder I.
I'm going to say directed edges to be true.
And I want to show you something else.
Let's add a style to our edges.
Edge style.
And I'm going to say edge style arrowheads.
Tap down arrowheads.
Arrowheads can take an argument.
The argument I'm going to give it is medium, to have medium sized arrowheads.
So you can change the way things look here in this graph.
And this makes, especially, makes Mathematica very powerful.
The way that you can manipulate the graphs and plots that you do.
So that is medium.
And then I want a plot label to each of these.
I want each of these cycle graphs with directed edges that I'm going to draw to have,
at least to have a plot label.
And the plot label, I'm going to say it's a cycle graph.
And I'm going to say sub.
So it's either control underscore or command underscore.
And then I.
Remember I was my placeholder.
So I'm going to close that.
And remember I want I.
Let's take I going from 3 to 6.
So 3, 4, 5, 6.
And close.
So you can see what happens here.
On the outside it's a table.
It's a table function here.
And it has this placeholder I, which is not I squared or I plus 2 or anything.
It's just I.
And I is going to go from 3 to 6.
So 3, 4, 5, 6.
So first time around it's going to be 3.
It's going to draw a cycle graph with 3 edges.
Directed edges is true.
And I'm going to have some edge style.
So this edge is going to have a certain style with a medium arrowhead.
And each one of these 3, 4, 5 and 6 is going to have a label.
And it's going to be in this format C with an underscore.
Let's see what this looks like.
And that's beautiful.
So there's C3.
So you see the plot label up there.
C sub 3, C sub 4, C sub 5 and C sub 6.
And you can clearly see the nature of these directed graphs.
They are cycle graphs.
So that's the way to do directed edges in Mathematica.
Play around and create some interesting edges.
And see how far you can get.
