and so it's already time for the third lecture we're going to look at powers and those powers
are also going to include roots and then finally add some logarithms now we use logarithms as well
as powers all the time in data science so this is a very important lecture and so distribution
how we distribute numbers constants variables all of these interesting things and i've mentioned
this is so important we use distribution all the time so i'm going to use a couple of variables
here just so that we can come up with some kind of definition so we're going to say x times a plus b
plus c and what we mean by that is that's a variable these are variables now usually these refer to
whole numbers constants there's usually real number but to see them all as variables and what we're
going to do is we're going to do this multiplication we're going to distribute this x across this
expression here and so that we have there's a multiplication symbol there you can put multiply
there you put a dot there but usually we put nothing it's just getting used to the way that
we write things in mathematics so this will be x times a another thing that you can learn is
the order in which we put variables we usually tend to keep these in alphabetical order so x times a
remember multiplication commutes so x times a equals a times x it doesn't really matter what i do
so i'm going to say ax and then i'm going to do plus bx and then i'm going to do plus cx
and that means a times x plus b times x plus c times x i'm distributing this x into or into this whole
expression which is three terms a bunch of terms and so let's make that the way that we're going to
define how we do distribution so that's going to be our blueprint there our definition there for how we do
distribution now let's just work our way through so many examples as many as we can in the shortest
amount of time and also remember what we've learned before so this is a good exercise when we go through
these examples just to bring in the previous lectures so let's do our very first example and
in our very first example we're going to see let's make this x the number three and i'm going to say three
times a plus b plus c and now i'm just going to take this three and i'm going to distribute it
into this expression multiplying by each of the terms so that's going to be three times a is three a
plus three times b we just write as three b we don't put multiplication or dot in between although
you can there's nothing wrong with it but this is just the way that we normally write mathematics and
three times c is plus three c so in this instance my x was just equal to the number three next example
we're going to just do so many of these let's do two times let's have four x four times x let's do
plus three times y let's do minus six so how would we go about that remember this is this multiplication
multiplication multiplication each of those so two times four times x now let's just think it
through it's actually it's two times four times x and we can use the distributive property here
two times four is eight times x well this is going to be eight x and so we have two times four x is
eight times x and so let's do the next one two times three so let's do that two times three times y
well two times three is six y six y once again it's two times three times y i'm making use of my
distributive property so i'm going to multiply those first that will be six times y and that's the six y
so i've got my six y and lastly two times negative six so i'm saying two times negative six here
and remember i'm just writing two times negative six and there's a little one there and this is back
to what we've learned many lectures ago and that's just going to give me a negative 12. so that means
negative 12. next example let's do negative one i'm going to have negative one times 2x squared let's do
minus 3x let's do plus 4 and that's not the way that we usually write it we just just drop that one
all together and we would just write negative 2x squared minus 3x plus 4 and when we do distribute
that negative in it's actually this negative one that we are distributing in so we're thinking
negative 1 times 2x so that's a negative 1 times 2 times x to the power 2 and i know those look the
same but i can do this first negative 2 times 1 is negative 2x squared and so i would have let's
write that there just distribute the negative in that's negative let's put that there negative 2x squared
now what happens if i have negative 1 and i multiply that by negative 1 well remember a negative times
a negative is a positive so here negative 1 times negative 3 that's positive 3 and there's still the
x and then negative 1 times 4 well that's negative 4. so in the end it's actually not that difficult
next example let's do one where we actually have a variable up front let's do 4x and i'm going to
multiply that by x minus let's do x minus 2 and then i'm going to have another negative and let's have
5x plus 3. can we do this now there's a lot going on here let's tackle this first term there we have a
negative so we have a second term in our expression i have 4 times x times x and if i had x times x
remember that's to the power 1 that's to the power 1 my bases are the same so i can say x
1 plus 1 and that equals x squared so i know 4 times x times x well that's going to be 4x squared
and then i have 4 times x times negative 2 and i can do use my commutative property so let's put the
negative 2 out front so negative 2 times 4 times x i can do my distributive property and do this first
negative 2 times 4 that's negative 8 times x that's negative 8x so 4x times negative 2 well that's just
negative 8x now let's look at the second part let's just look at i've got negative 5x plus 3 that's
the same as putting a little 1 there remember so negative 1 times 5x that's going to be negative 5x
negative 1 times 3 is negative 3 so this becomes negative 5x negative 3. now i'm not done yet i can
simplify this look at this i have negative 8x and i have negative 5x now let's just think about it
and again this is just back at school remember imagine i had two apples two apples and i add to
that another three apples well what do i have i have two plus three that's five apples and so you can think
of those apples as a variable x and as a variable x so 2x plus 3x well that's just 5x and same goes for
here minus 8x minus 5x negative 8 subtract another another 5 that leaves me with negative 13. so here
we're going to have 4x squared minus 13x minus 3. so very important thing for us to remember if my variable
here is exactly the same i can think about that x it's anything so i might as well write apples there
and indeed if i have two apples and i add to that another three apples think about i've got two apples
another three apples altogether five apples so if this was an x and that was an x i would have 2x plus 3x
which would just be 5x just a single x there i'm not squaring those x's i'm adding those two it's two
apples and three apples i've got negative eight apples and i take away another five negative eight
apples take away another five apples that leaves me with negative 13 apples great so we've learned
about this distribution we've learned about the negative one and we've learned about simplifying
when i have exactly the same variable thinking of them as nothing other than apples next great example
let's do the variable a and i'm going to do let's do a to the power four plus two a to the power two
let's make it plus three so what's going on here i've got a times a to the power four a times a to the
power four i remember that's a one i've got the same base i've got multiplication so that's going to be a
one plus four a raised to the power one plus four i add those two powers and that leaves me a to the
power five so a times a to the power four you learn to do these very quickly in your head that's going
to be a to the power five let's do the next one in our head there's a times two times a squared now
commutative property i can you know do the multiplication any order let me do the two first i'm
going to do the two first and now it's a times a to the power three there's a little one there one
plus three is four now let's just remind ourselves did i say this was squared or did i say cubed so
definitely i think this for me is a two so one plus two is three so that'll be a to the power three
and a times three commute it's just the same as three times a so i can just like three a so we like
to keep these in alphabetical order as we did there but we also like to put numbers first and then
variables so a great little example let's do another one let's have a to the power four and i'm going to
multiply that by a to the power three plus let's make a to the power one over four so i have a radical
my radicant my index what's going to happen here well i'm still going to do distribution
let me do it here at the bottom so let's do a to the power four times a to the power 3 the bases
are the same so that's going to be a and i just add these powers and that equals a to the power 7.
so i know this is going to give me a to the power 7 but now i've got a to the power 4 and
a to the power a quarter so i've got a to the power 4 times a to the power a quarter bases are the
same and I know I can just add these. 4 plus a quarter. Now how do I do that? And I think that's
a brilliant example of just going back to what we've learned before. So let's just put that way
up here. 4 plus 1 over 4. Now I can rewrite this 4 as 4 over 1 plus 1 over 4. 4 divided by 1,
anything divided by 1 just stays that thing. What we want is the least common multiple. And
what's the least common multiple between 1 and 4? Well hopefully you can very quickly see that that
is just 4. So I can multiply this by 1 and I'm just going to rewrite that 1 as 4 over 4. I have
changed nothing if I just multiply any number by 1. How did I know this has to be a 4? Because the
least common multiple between 1 and 4 is 4. Do you want me to prove that? Let's have a look at
that. Remember I'm going to break these into my prime numbers. So there's the number 1 and the
number 4. Now 1 is not a prime number. There's nothing I can do with 1. It is just 1. Now 4 can
be divided by the first prime which is 2 which leaves me with 2. 2 can be divided by the first
prime which is 2. There's another 2. 2 times 2 is 4. And now I'm just going to bring them all down.
In that column there's a 2. In that column there's a 2. And 2 times 2 is 4. So the least common
multiple of 1 and 4 is 4. Now I take my 4 and I multiply it by 1. But I'm not going to write 1
as such. I'm going to write it as 4 over 4. Now I do remember that I have two fractions and I'm
multiplying them which means I can multiply the two denominators. 4 times 4 is 16. Multiply the two
denominators. Sorry that's the two numerators. The two denominators. That is 4 plus 1 over 4. And now
I have the same denominators. Now I can actually do addition. So 16 plus 1 that's 17 over 4. I have
this common denominator. So 8 to the power 4 times 8 to the power quarter actually is going to be
plus. There's a plus. 8 to the power 17 over 4. That is a difficult one but it allowed us
you know to remember that how do I add two fractions if they don't have the same denominator. Well I've
got to make their denominator the same. And what I'm always after is the least common multiple
denominator. And for me to use the least common denominator I have to remember to factorize my
number into a product of primes. And so we did that right there. Now let's do what I think is a
very complicated example. So let's do something like this. 5 times 8 to the power. Let's make that
negative 3. Let's do b to the power negative 2. Now we do remember how to deal with those. Let's multiply
that by 2 times. Let's make it a b to the power 3 which we call b cubed. And let's subtract from
that say 3. Let's do a squared b squared. a to the power 2 b to the power 2. Now that looks horrendously
complicated. But I've still got one term here which I'm going to distribute into this expression. So
this term times that term and this term times this term with a negative outrun. So let's do that. And
we do remember that we when we deal with multiplication that we do have the commutative
properties. So the order of multiplication doesn't matter. But now I'm going to do these two terms.
So let's just put a line under these. So we just see what we're talking about. So here's my
full term here up front. Instead of a single 3 or a or x. I now have these terms that are slightly more
complex. So they are the terms that I'm dealing with. So I'm going to multiply this term by this
term. And I'm going to multiply this term by that term. And I do remember that there's a negative
out front there. So let's look at these. As I say the order doesn't matter. So let's do the 5 and
the 2. So 5 times 2. Now I've got a to the power negative 3. That's a to the power negative 3.
And let's put the other a there. That's a. And remember that's just to the power 1.
Here's my b to the power negative 2. And there's my b to the power 3. Now for the next term I've got
5 and a negative 3. So that's negative. Let's do 5 times 3. I've got my a to the power negative 3
from the side. I've got my a squared on the side. I've got my b to the power negative 2 here. And I've
got my b squared from there. And now I just have to remember I've got the same base, same base, same
base, same base. And now I can just add these exponents or these powers. 5 times 2 is going to equal
10. Let's do a. Negative 3 plus 1 leaves me with negative 2. I have my b. Negative 2 plus 3 leaves
me with a 1. Negative 5 times 3. Well that leaves me with negative 15. Negative 3. There's an a and a.
So negative 3 plus 2 is a to the power negative 1. And negative 2 plus 2 is 0. So that leaves me with
b to the power 0. And let's rewrite this. Let's clean it up a bit. So that's going to be a. 10 times
a to the power negative 2. b to the power 1. We can just leave this b. Minus 15. I've got a to the
power negative 1. And anything other than 0 to the power 0 is just 1. So I'm going to leave that out.
Can I simplify even more? Yes, I do remember what happens when I write a to the power negative 2. Well
that's just going to be 1 over a squared. And similar there a to the power negative 1 is just
1 over a. So if I really want to rewrite this I can say 10 times b over a squared minus 15 over a.
Great. Now can I get a least common multiple between those two? Yes, I can. But I think this is a neat
way to leave the solution of this distribution problem. So one of the things that you might see
in textbook if we have to do this. We might call this an example. We say expand the following.
And now I've expanded it. I've multiplied these two terms. I've multiplied those two terms.
And I've done some expansion. Now we've had those negative exponents. Let's do something even more fun.
Let's do the following. The square root of x times y. And I'm going to multiply that by another square
root of x times y. And I'm going to say plus the square root of y. Now there are so many ways that
we can deal with it. There's just absolutely so many ways that we can deal with this. And we can deal
with it in a very rigorous way. Or we can just have some fun with it. So let's start just with a fun way.
Okay. I've still got my terms. And again, what I'm going to do is I'm just going to put all my terms
together like this. There's one term. There's one term. And I've got the positive there. There's my
other term. So now we're going to multiply those two. And we're going to multiply those two.
So in actual fact, we have the square root of x y times the square root of x y plus I've got the
square root of x y here and multiplied by the square root of y. Now we have to remember this
property, which states that if I have, say, the square root of a and I multiply that by the square
root of b. Now remember, we have the fact that the index is the same. And the index goes there. We
don't write that, but that's two for square root. And that means I can just combine these a times b.
So if I had them separate, I can combine them. So the same is going to happen here.
But let's just do it more rigorously. Remember when we had this idea of the square root of c times
the square root of c, irrespective of whether that c was positive or negative. If it was negative,
I couldn't do that because I cannot take the square root of a negative number.
Taking the square root, let's put it out here. If I have 4 to the power half, now remember,
I'm going to write that as 4 to the power of 1 and my little index goes there. So I'm asking,
what is the square root of 4? Well, that is going to be plus or minus 2. Why? Because if I take
plus or minus 2 and I square them, so 2 times 2 is 4. There's my 4. Negative 2 times negative 2 is
also positive 4. So it's both positive and negative. But irrespective of whether that is a
positive or negative 2, if I square it, I'm always going to get a positive number.
And hence, I cannot take the square root of a negative number as far as getting a solution
where the solution is actually a real number. Can I do it with the complex numbers? Of course,
I can take square roots of negatives, but that's not what we're dealing with. We're dealing with
real numbers. Remember that we said that that would be the square root of c times c, which was equal to
the square root of c squared, and that was equal to the absolute value of c. We just want the fact
that we really do need just a positive version of these, reflecting the fact that we want to take
the square root of positive numbers. So what we have here is the square root of x times y times x
y, leaving us with x squared y squared. There's two x's in there and two y's. One plus one and one
plus one, leaving me with the twos. So we have the square root, there's a single x, and there's a y
squared in there. Now, I want to do all of this in reverse. If I had the square root of a times the
square root of b, I had the square root of a times b, but I can also work backwards. So I can do these in
reverse. So I can say, well, that's going to be an x squared times square root of y squared. And here
I'm going to have the square root of x and the square root of y squared. Now, I do remember the
fact that this can be written as x to the power 2 to the power a half. There's my x squared. There's a
little two there that becomes x squared to the power half. This becomes y squared to the power a half.
That stays the square root of x. And this one becomes y squared to the power a half.
And I do remember if I have something and I take it to the power, so that's something to,
with a power, to the power that I multiply these two. What's two times a half? Well, this is equal
to 1. So I'm left with x to the power 1. I'm left with y here to the power 1. Plus I'm left with the
square root of x there. And here I'm left with y to the power 1. So in the end, I have xy plus the
square root of x times y. So that's quite a long problem for us to deal with. I also just want to
make sure that we do have this idea here, that if we have x squared, that will be the same there as
c squared. It's just a variable. It's just a variable. But I must consider here that I only
have the absolute values. And that, strictly speaking, these should be absolute values.
Let's do an even more complicated example. Let's do the square root. And remember,
usually we don't put the two there. But let's put it here for now. Let's do xy. Let's do cubed.
And I'm going to multiply that again by the square root. Let's make this x cubed y. And I'm going to
have another. Let's do that. Let's have another square root. Let's have xy to the seventh. So that
is quite complicated. Again, I'm just going to have my terms and I'm just going to multiply these. So
there's my term up front. Here's my term and there's my second term. So again, I'm going to
multiply those two and I'm going to multiply those two. Let's see where we get. And I'm going to go
straight off the bat by remembering that this is a square root. That's a square root. There's also two
there that I can just combine all of them in one. So I'm going to have an x times an x to the power
three. There's a little one there. So one plus three is four. So I'm going to have x to the power
four. And I'm going to have y. And there's a little one there as well. Three plus one is four. So I'm
going to have y to the power four. And there I have a positive. And I'm going to put everything under
the same roof again. There's a one. There's a one. So that leaves me with x squared. And there's a
three. And there's a seven. Both are y's. So that leaves me with y to the power 10. So can I
simplify these? Yes, I can. And there's a variety of ways that I can go about that. Remember, we can
break them apart. Let's do that. I'm going to have x to the power four, that little square root. And
here's another little square root. Plus here's another little square root. And here's another
little square root. So I can break them all apart because I do remember the square root of a times the
square root of b. That is the square root of a times b. And I can also work in reverse, which is
just what I've done here. I've got a, b, and I'm just making them two separates. And I do remember
that I can rewrite this in another way. That's x to the power four to the power a half. Remember,
if I have the square root of a, that's going to equal the square root, or at least a to the power one
half. Those are exactly the same thing. And here I have y to the power four. And I also have a half
there. So I'm turning the square root into a half. Plus here I have x squared. I'm going to do that
again. And here I have y to the power 10. And I'm going to take that to the power one half. And now it
becomes easy because four times a half is just two. So here I have x squared. Here I have y squared plus
here I have x squared. Or at least I should say two times a half is just one. There's a list of one
left there. And here I have y 10 times a half is five. So I'm going to have x squared y squared plus
x y to the power five. Now we're going to make things even more complicated. Instead of just a single
term in the front, let's do something else. I'm going to have 3x. And I'm going to have plus four.
And then I'm going to multiply that by let's do 2x. Let's do negative one.
Now, how about this? Look at this. I have two terms here in this expression. As before, I only had
single terms. Now I can do exactly the same thing. I can still say that this is my little expression
up front. It is now two terms. But let's keep it as such. Here's another one. And there's another one.
And I can still do the exact same thing. Later on, we'll see there's an easier way to do this. Not an
easier way. But the way that is commonly taught. But I still have something in the front of
a two term or multiple term expression. And I'm still going to do this whole thing.
What I do remember, though, is that I have the commutative property. So if I have 3x plus 4 and
I multiply that by 2x, it'll be the same as 2x multiplied by 3x plus 4. Let's do that. Let's have
2x. And I'm multiplying that by this first term, which was 3x plus 4. And now I have this term times
a negative 1. But it can commute. So I can also do negative 1 times this term up front or the
expression up front. So that's going to be a negative 1. And I'm multiplying that by 3x plus 4.
And now, now I'm just where I was before. And now I have a single term out here. I still have my
two terms here. I have now this negative 1 out here, which is actually a term. And then these
two terms out here. So I'm still going to do this multiplication and then this multiplication.
Nothing before. Now I have 2x times 3x. So I've got 2 times x times 3 times x. I can do the
commutative property. So I can do 2 times 3 times x times x. The bases are the same. There's a little
1 and a little 1. 1 plus 1 is 2. So this will be 6x squared. So 2x times 3x gives me 6x squared.
And 2x times 4, by now you should know that this is 2 times 4 is 8x. The negative is going to
distribute in. That's going to be negative 3x. And that's going to be negative 4. And again,
I have this 8 apples take away 3 apples. I'm left with 5 apples. So this is going to be 6x squared
plus 5x minus 4. 6x squared plus 5x minus 4. But as I mentioned, there's another way that we usually
write this. Or explain it at least. There's my 3x plus 4. And there's my 2x minus 1. And what we can do
is to see all of these as individual terms. There's a term. Together with that positive 4, there's a term.
There's a term. And there's a term. And now what we can do is just link everything up. Now look at these.
This one was linked with that one. This one was linked with that one. They're all linked.
Now I'm going to do the same here. So this one is linked with this one. And it's linked with that one.
But let's also do this at the top. Let's just put our terms out here at the top as well just to show
you what's going to happen. Exactly the same terms that I have. So I had the 3x that I distribute over
this. But I'm also going to distribute this 4 as well. So that's what you're going to see. And so let's
do this. The 3x times the 2x. We still remember that to be 6x squared. Now I'm going to take the
3x minus 1. 3x times negative 1. That leaves me with negative 3x. I'm going to have the 4 times 2x.
That leaves me with a positive 8x. And I'm going to have the positive 4 times the negative 1. That
leaves me with negative 4. Now I still have 8 apples. Take away 3 apples. Leaving me with 5 apples. So this is
still going to be 6x squared plus 5x minus 4. Exactly the same solution as we had before.
So whether you stick with our definition of distribution that we had in the beginning,
that it's this whole term that we're distributing to each of these terms here,
you can also think of it as breaking everything apart. So I've got two terms here and two terms here.
And so I'm going to take the 3x and distribute that over those two terms. And I'm going to take the
positive 4 and I'm going to distribute that over those terms as well. Now we're having so much fun,
we can just keep on going, going, going. So let's make things even more complicated.
Let's have two terms here. 2x minus 4. So that's 2 times x minus 4. And I'm going to multiply that by
x squared. Let's do plus x. And let's do negative 1. Now, again, what we could do is we could see this
as a single expression and we're going to multiply this whole expression by x squared,
this whole expression by x, and this whole expression by negative 1. Or we can see them as
individual terms. And so we're going to do the following. I'm going to take the 2x and multiply it
by the x squared. I'm going to take the 2x and multiply it by the x. I'm going to take the 2x
and then I'm going to multiply it by the negative 1. Then I'm going to take the negative 4,
the whole of the second term. I'm going to multiply it by x squared negative 4 times x
and negative 4 times negative 1. So I'm linking up each one of these with each one of those,
this one with all of those as well. So let's do this this way around. So 2x, so I've got 2 times
x times x to the power 2. There's a little one there. The bases are the same. I can add those
2. 1 plus 2 is 3. So that's going to be 2x cubed or 2x to the power 3. So 2x to the power 3. Now
I'm going to take my 2x multiplied by positive x. So that's 2 times x times x. There's a little one
there's a little one. 1 plus 1 is 2 because these two bases are the same. There's going to be 2x
squared or 2x to the power 2. So that's 2x squared and 2x plus negative 1. That just leaves me with
negative 2x. And now I'm going to carry on. Now I'm going to do the second term, the negative 4,
and I'm going to distribute that through each of these terms in the expression as well. So negative
4 times x squared leaves me with negative 4x squared. Negative 4 plus x leaves me with negative 4x.
And negative 4 plus a negative 1 negative times a negative is a positive. And 4 times 1 is 4,
leaving me with plus 4. Now I just have to group the terms. There's only 1x cubed here. So let's
leave that alone. 2x cubed. But I have 2x squared, negative 4x squared. Once again,
I can think of x squared as being apples and apples. So I'm saying 2 apples, take away 4 apples,
leaves me with negative 2 apples. So there's negative 2 and there's my apples, which are x squared at the
moment. Same thing here. I've got negative 2 apples, take away another 4 apples, negative 2 times,
negative 2, negative 4. So that leaves me with negative 6 apples or just x. Now I call this
apples as well. Strictly speaking, I should have been talking about apples squared, but this is just
one single thing. If I take 3 and I square it, I get 9. And 9 is just a single thing. So I'm just
seeing x squared as a single thing. And so I've got 2 things and I'm taking away 4 things, leaving me
with negative 2 things. I've got negative 2 things. And now I don't, you know, that x, if x is 9, this is
9, whatever the number is. I've got negative 2 of those things. Negative 4 of those things leaves me
with negative 6 of those things. And at the end, I've got the positive 4 left. So 2x cubed minus 2x squared
minus 6x plus 4. That was a very fun example. Now I want to do one more for you. Let's do, let's do a
plus b and we're going to square a plus b. Now what does that mean? Well, square means you just take
whatever and you just multiply it by itself so many times. There's my a plus b. And once again, if this
was 3 and this was 2, 2 plus 3 is 5. So I'm taking 5 squared. I'm taking 5, multiplying it by itself
twice. I'm taking a plus b, multiplying it by itself twice. Once again, you can think of this
as a single unit, multiplying this by a, this by b. Or you can do this individually. And let's stick
with this doing this individually. So it's a times a. And remember a times a. There's a 1, there's a 1.
Bases are the same. It's going to leave me with 1 plus 1. That's a squared. 1 plus 1 as far as the
powers are concerned. So this is a squared. I have a times b. That's a b. Now the second term b times a
is b a. But this commutativity and we, you know, keep with the order of the alphabet. So that's another
a b. And then b plus b times b, I should say, is b squared. Now I've got a b plus a b. I can think of
a b as apples again. So 1 apple plus 1 apple gives me 2 apples. So that's going to be a squared
plus twice a b plus b squared. That's an interesting one. Now I want to do a plus b cubed. So I'm going
to have a plus b times a plus b. Oh, times a plus b. What now? You know, I would have had to draw so
many of these. But I do remember distributive, the distributive property at least. And so I've
already done this bit. There it is a plus b, a plus b. So I can rewrite this at least here as a squared
plus 2ab plus b squared. And then I'm still left with this a plus b right up front. So we would just
do it piece by piece. And now I can do my a distributed throughout and my b distributed
throughout. And a times a squared, I'm going to do this much quicker now. There's a 1 and a 2 that
leaves me with a 3 plus I've got a times 2ab. That's 2a squared b. I have a times b squared.
That leaves me with a b squared. I have b times a squared. I'm just going to swap that around. So
that's a squared b. I have b times 2 times a times b. So that leaves me with 2ab squared. And lastly,
I have b times b squared. That leaves me with b cubed. And now just similar terms. There's an a to
the power 3. And so I have a 2a squared b. And there's an a squared b there as well. A squared b,
a squared b. Two of them. And one of them makes three of them. 3a squared b. And there's an ab squared
and a 2ab squared. I have something plus another two of them. Makes it 3ab squared. And finally,
I just have the b cubed at the end. So we've just seen what it was like to expand, for instance,
a plus b squared. What I want to introduce you in this bonus section is this Pascal's triangle.
Pascal's triangle. And that's going to help us expand certain expressions. Let's have a look at
this triangle. This triangle starts with a 1 and then it builds down as a pyramid. So I'll have 1 on
the outer sides always. And now let's do one more level. There's a 1. There's a 1. But now I'm going
to look at 1 plus 1. And that gives me 2 right here in the middle. If I look at the 1 and the 2,
that gives me a 3. If I look at 2 plus 1, that gives me 3. And I add 1s to the end. 1 plus 3 is 4.
3 plus 3 is 6. 3 plus 1 is 4. And I put 1 at the ends. Let's do it one more time. 1 plus 4 is 5.
4 plus 6 is 10. 6 plus 4 is 10. 4 plus 1 is 5. And I put 1 in the ends. And this is what we talk about
when we are going to do something like x plus y all squared or a plus b all squared. And so let's have a
look if I just have on this level right here, I have a plus b, but I'm going to take that to the power
1. That's just going to leave me with a plus b. And we see there's a 1 as a coefficient. Later on we'll
have a closer look at coefficients. And there's another 1. And that corresponds to the 1 and the 1
there. And so right up here I suppose you can say this will be a plus b to the power 0. And anything
that's not 0 to the power 0 is equal to 1. And that's the single 1 that we see there. Let's have
a look at what we do when we get to this level a. There we go a plus b. Let's square that. And we get
a squared plus 2ab plus b squared. And there we go the coefficients. There's a 1, there's a 2,
and there's a 1. Let's do the next one. Now we've done these so you know what they should be. The
squared and the cubed. Well let's just try to use what we have here. We're definitely going to have
a to the power 3. So there's definitely going to be an a cubed. And then there's going to be a 3 and a
3 and another 1 right at the end. But let's make this one b cubed right at the end because we know right
at the end we are going to have b times b times b. And all we have to do now is to go down in powers
of 3 and go up in powers of 2. So this would be b to the power 0 which is this 1. That's fine.
This one's going to be an a squared. This one's going to be an a and then there's going to be an a
to the power 0 which is this 1. So let's work backwards with a b. So I'm going b cubed. I'm going to
b squared. I'm going to go to b to the power 1 and b to the power 0 which is just 1. And there's the
coefficients 1 3 3 1. And we just have the decreasing powers of a a cubed a squared a and a to the power
0. And then reverse we're going to go b cubed b squared b and b to the power 0 which is just 1.
Now let's try and do this very last one. Now we're going to start with a 1 and that's going to be a
to the power. Now this is the fourth level. So let's put it there a plus b to the power 5. So let's have
a look at that. There's definitely going to be an a to the power 5 plus now we're going to go down in
powers of a. So a to the power 4. There's going to be an a to the power 3. There's definitely going to be
an a to the power 2. There's going to be an a. And then a to the power 0 which is just 1.
And here by the a to the power 0 we're going to start with b in reverse order. b to the power 5.
b to the power 4. b to the power 3. b to the power 2. b to the power 1. and b to the power 0. So there'll
be nothing there. And all that is left is for me to put in these coefficients. So there's be a 1.
There'll be a 5. There'll be a 10. There'll be a 10. There'll be a 5. And there'll be a 1.
And that's what we are left with. a to the power 5 plus 5a to the power 4b plus 10a cubed b squared
plus 10a squared b cubed plus 5ab to the power 4 plus b to the power 5. And so if you use Pascal's
triangle it's very easy for us to expand something like x plus y or a plus b whatever these two variables
berge 1. And so if you useorders in theirâIfP as you use password to have a mic on your left.
Because you would like this. P Merge password to a power 5u4.
