Okay, let's get into something very exciting. We're going to look at the multiplication
of two vectors. Now, there are two types of vector multiplication. You might want to know
two types of vector multiplication. Yeah, there are two types of vector multiplication.
The first one that you'll usually see in textbooks or explain to you is the dot product, also
known as the inner product. And I've got two vectors here in two space, and I'm going to
do their dot product. And we see vector v1. Here's v1. On the x-axis, it's got square
root of 3 as a component. On the y-axis, 1. And v2 is 1 on the x-axis and square root of
3 up there. And you will notice them as these two angles that you memorize from trigonometry.
Remember, if this was a right-angled triangle, that's square root of pi over 3, and this is
pi over 6. And you'd remember those, so it's very easy to determine, say, the cosine of
pi over 3, which is a half, the sine of pi over 3, which is square root of 3 over 2, and
the same for here, the sine of pi over 6, which is just going to be a half. And that's why I
chose them, because we can very clearly see what the angle between these two are going
to be. It's going to be pi over 6, because this angle is pi over 6. That angle must be
pi over 6 for this angle to be pi over 3. So very simple. And that's what the dot product,
the inner product, at least, is going to help us with, is the angle between these two vectors.
Anyway, let me, without qualification, show you how easy it is to do vector multiplication
in a product. And we do put a little dot there between the two, and all we're going to do
is we take component-wise multiplication. So this one multiplied by this one, this one multiplied
by this one, and we're just going to do summation of all those products. So very simple here,
it's going to be square root of 3 times 1 plus 1 times the square root of 3. And that gives
us 2 times the square root of 3. A scalar. And of course it's got to be a scalar, because
how else is that going to help us with the angle between these two? So the solution to a
dot product is just a scalar. And again, without qualification, I'm just going to show you
the other way that we do this. And that is to take the norm of one of the vectors, the
norm of the other vector times the cosine of the angle between them. Times the cosine of
the angle between them. Let's just check if this is correct. Both of this is 2. The norm
of both of these are 2 by the Pythagorean theorem. And what is the cosine? Remember, the angle between
them we decided is Pi over 6. The cosine of Pi over 6 is square root of 3 over 2. Square
root of 3 over 2. So the solution is this 2 square root of 3. And poong! They're both
exactly the same thing. No problem. It gets us the same solution. Now you can see how we
can work out the angle between them very easily. I can just take this multiplication of these
two scalars, bring it over to this side. So if I do the dot product component-wise and I
divide it by the product of the norm of these two, I'm going to get the cosine of the angle
between them. If I take the arc cosine or the inverse cosine of that, I'm going to get the
angle between them. So very easy to do. Let's go to Mathematica and I'll show you. As I said,
this is done without qualification. Why exactly would we do this? What does this help us with?
What does this tell us with? What is really going on here? And we'll get to that in a future
for now. It's very simple. Don't get, don't get, don't overcomplicate dot products or inner
products. They are very easily, whether you do this or whether you do that. Same thing.
Let's go to Mathematica and I'll show you how easy it is over there. And so here we are
in Mathematica. Let's look at this inner product also known as the dot product. Now I'm going
to create two vectors and just to complicate your life for no good reason, I'm going to call
my one vector just v. Use the computer, computer variable v. Create that space in memory to
put this list object into. And this list object is just going to be a vector. And the components
of my vector I'm going to call v1 and v2. And let me put a semicolon there so we don't,
we suppress the output to the screen. And my second one I'm going to call w. And the components
of that, the x component will be w1 and the y component will be w2. Semicolon suppress any
output to the screen. Shift enter, shift return depending on whether you're a PC, Linux or
a Mac. And there we go. I've got two vectors v and w and they've got x components v1, w1,
y components v2, w2. They live in two dimensional space. Okay, so for complicating your life like
this on the board we had v1 and v2 as the two vectors here. I'm going to have v1 and v2 be the
components of vector v and w1, w2 components. So don't get these two confused. I'm sure you
won't. It's really not that difficult. Let's just look at v in matrix form. In matrix form,
there we go. We see the column vector there, v1 and v2. Let's do the same with the matrix
w. And we see w1, w2. Let's get the dot product of these to v1. And the way that we're going
to do the dot product is just to put a full stop, just a period, a full stop. W, I said
v, not v1. I'm back on the blackboard in my head. v dot w. Dot product, inner product between
these two, v full stop or v period w. As simple as that. Shift enter, shift return. And there
you see the component wise multiplication. So it's v1 and w1. And I see v2 times w2. And
I just do a summation. I just add these components. So if I had more components, it'll just be
the addition of all of these products. Very, very simple. Now let's go and we, let's just recreate
v. And I'm going to create this as in the form of my square root of three and one. I can write
sqrt square root of three. That's completely legitimate. I can also do it here on the desktop
form. I can also hold down command or control and hit two. And that gives me a beautiful
square root sign. Isn't that the most fantastic thing? Comma one. That was my one vector. And
let's make the other vector. Let's make that the one comma. And then we're going to have
the square root of three. So there's my two components. Let's have a look at those. I'm
going to say v matrix form. Lo and behold, square root of three and one. And let's just do
it the proper way around. So matrix, matrix form, w. That's the proper way. Remember the
two backslashes. That is post fixed notation. And I see the two there. What if we now have
v dot w? Two square root of three as promised. No problem at all. Two times the square root
of three. Remember the other equation that we have. For that we needed the norm of v. The
norm of v. That was two. Remember that's how we do the length of a vector. It's just the
norm function of w is that. Lo and behold, no problem. Remember how we calculated the angle
between what the function was. The Wolfram language function. It was vector angle. Vector angle
between these two. What is the vector angle between v and w? Oh, no surprise. Very beautiful
there. Pi over six. So let's see if we use the other equation to get to the inner product
between two vectors. If we do get the same solution of two square root of three. Remember
that was the norm of the one vector. Times. For times I'm going to use shift and star. Norm
the other vector w. Now there's another way to get a nice multiplication sum. I'm going to
hold down escape. Then hit shift and eight which is star for me and then escape again
and instead of that ugly star as a multiplication sign. Now I have a beautiful mathematical multiplication
sign. A little cross. Anyway, that's not what this is about. Oh, well it is. I'm showing
you how to use Mathematica. Anyway, so that's the norm of the one vector times the norm of
the other vector times the cosine of the angle between them. So that's vector angle and the
vector angle between v and w. So that's the closing square bracket for the vector angle
function which is just now used as an argument to the cosine function. So I've got to close
that square bracket as well. And I see two square root of three. Play around. Create your own
vectors as long as they live in the same vector space. Explore this wonderful world just of
calculating the dot product between two vectors. See also if you can figure out what the angle
is between these and try and figure out what the inverse cosine or the arc cosine function is in
Mathematica. I bet you can. It's very simple. See if you can work out the angle between two vectors
using this information. That will make me very proud. And you will enjoy doing it and you'll love
working with Mathematica.
책ration
Speaker 1
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 3
Speaker 2
Speaker 0
Speaker 8
Speaker 3
Speaker 3
Speaker 2
Speaker 0
Speaker 7
Speaker 2
Speaker 0
Speaker 6
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 3
Speaker 2
Speaker 3
Speaker 2
Speaker 1
Speaker 1
Speaker 21
Speaker 2
