So there you go, another cold day's run here in Newlands Forest.
Well, this is my first run back to Newlands Forest for a few days.
The last time I came was my closest encounter yet with a boomslang,
which is a type of snake here, extremely poisonous or venomous snake, I should say.
It's the third one, third confirmed one that I have seen close up
and probably one of the largest specimens as far as they go
and went right across in front of me and slithers up a tree as they do.
So boomslang literally means tree snake and so they live up in the trees.
The normal polyvalent antivenom that we have in South Africa
that is not effective against the boomslang,
you have to get a very specific antivenom for that
and it causes severe coagulopathy in its victims.
So that's the third one and it was so close
and that put me off for a couple of days really
because I thought it would be an area where you wouldn't see snakes
because it was right in the beginning
and there's a lot of foot traffic there
and it's close to the houses as you start new
so you wouldn't expect it.
The other two I've seen quite a bit higher up in Cecilia forest
where the stream goes.
So I didn't really expect it so close down here
and so close to me it was a bit unnerving
so I thought I'd run a different route.
So I've been sticking to the road for a couple of days
but anyway today I was back
and there was quite a bit of foot traffic everywhere
and I didn't see a single snake.
There's a lot of mole snakes and other kind of snakes
that you do see here
but the boomslang as I said
that was my third encounter
and there was a close encounter
so I stayed away for a couple of days.
I uploaded some educational videos.
Yesterday there was a video on the group actions
and group actions in abstract algebra
that can be a bit difficult to understand
and I really tried to use an example
putting an example together
and build on top of that
and today I just looked at some of the proofs
just to show how a permutation can be represented
permutation on a set can be represented
by an element in the set that makes up a group.
So have a look at those videos.
It's really I think you know
it's quite important stuff there
the actions the group actions on a set
and so have a look at that.
The next video that come up
is just to show an example of then
another example too of these group actions
and you actually see where Kayleigh's table comes from.
So have a look at those videos
and we'll have another run soon.
