Let's carry on looking at electric potential energy in a capacitor.
If we take our equation here, U equals Q squared divided by 2C,
and we multiply it by C over C, which is multiplying by 1,
we're going to get Q squared C over 2C squared.
And we know that V equals Q over C, so this is going to, this here,
we can replace that by V squared, so this is going to be a half CV squared.
So these are the two equations we have for electric potential energy in a capacitor.
We can also look at this potential energy as potential energy density.
And the density, U, its lowest score U, is going to be U divided by area times distance.
And that is going to give us volume.
The area in a three dimensional plate times the distance here, that is going to give us the volume.
So it's going to be electric potential energy per cubic meter.
Let's replace that.
Let's replace that with one of the equations that we have here.
Let's use, so that will be 1 over 2CV squared, that's for U, divided by AD.
But we also know what the capacitance is for a charged plate.
That's epsilon zero area divided by distance.
In a previous video we looked at that.
Let's replace that in here.
So that is going to be C as epsilon zero, A, V squared, divided by 2, A, D squared.
We can cancel those two out.
And we also know that the electric field equals V over D from my previous video.
And we have V over D there.
So we can say the electric potential energy density in that volume there is going to be a half.
Epsilon zero, V over D is E, squared.
So this is our equation for electric potential energy density due to the work we started doing by charging this capacitor.
Now that we know the equations for electric potential energy and electric potential energy density,
In a charge capacitor, let's look at an example.
We've given a sphere, isolated sphere, conducting with a certain radius, 0.0685 meters.
And we are told that there is a charge on it of 1.25 nanocoulombs.
That is 1.25 times 10 to the power of negative 9 coulombs.
We know two equations for electric potential energy as far as a capacitor is concerned.
Q squared over 2C.
And we also know that it equals a half CB squared.
Now certainly we don't know V.
Now given V, we were not given C.
But we know an equation for C, 4 pi epsilon zero R.
As far as the capacitors of a charge of an isolated spherical capacitor is concerned.
So we can rewrite this as Q squared.
We have Q squared.
The value there.
And we have a radius.
So 4 pi epsilon zero R.
And if we replace those values, I think the answer comes out to about 103.
If I'm not mistaken, 103 nanojoules.
So that was easy to do.
We are now asked what is V in energy density at the surface.
And we remember our equation for energy density.
I think that was a half epsilon zero E squared.
But we don't know E.
We do know E for an equation for the electric field over a charged isolated sphere though.
And that equals, if I remember correctly, 1 over 4 pi epsilon zero R squared.
Q over R squared.
And if we square this, we'll square that.
And we'll have that the energy potential then would be Y over 2.
So that will be epsilon zero, 2.
We're going to have Q squared.
We're going to have another 4.
We're going to have pi squared.
We're going to have epsilon zero squared.
And R to the power 4.
So that is going to equal 8.
Those will go.
So that will be Q squared divided by 8.
Pi squared.
Epsilon zero.
R to the power 4.
Just check that the algebra is correct.
But knowing this equation for electric field around an isolated sphere.
Knowing your two equations there.
And then knowing your equation here for electric potential energy density.
It's easy to answer this question.
Let's try and work through our problem now.
We are given this electrical circuit.
We see capacitor 1, 2, and 3.
The potential difference by a battery in our circuit.
And we are given the, I hope you can see in the corner here, the capacitance of capacitor
1, 2, and 3.
And the electric potential that can be generated in the circuit.
So what is important to note is that we have capacitors 1 and 2 in parallel.
And then combined in theory with capacitor number 3.
I've got my calculator.
Let's have a look.
The first question was to look what the charge is on capacitor 3.
The first step always, I think, is use our equations for capacitance to look at an equivalent capacitor.
So 1 and 2 are in parallel.
We are going to have that C12, the equivalent, is going to be C1 plus C2.
And that's going to leave us with 15.0 microfiber.
C12.
Now C12 and C3 are now in theory.
And if you remember correctly, in theory means that Q stays constant.
So C12 and C3 are in theory.
And with theory, we find that Q, the charge, remains constant.
In other words, if we have, let's just look, let's just finish what we started with.
Let me do that.
And if we have C123, so that is a combination of C12 in theory and C3,
that'll be 1 over C123 equals 1 over C12, the equivalent of 1 and 2 in parallel, plus 1 over C3.
Let's do that.
So we set that as 1 over 12, which is 15, times 10 to the power negative 6.
And 3 is the same, so that'll just be multiplied by 2.
And we get the inverse of that, so that is going to be C123.
So that's the equivalent.
So that's the equivalent.
It's going to be 7.5 times 10 to the power negative 6.
Farron.
Microfarron.
Now we say Q is constant.
And for this whole circuit, we're going to have Q equals Cv.
Q equals Cv.
These two are in theory though.
But let's finish here.
So our C will be C123.
Our Q will be 123.
And our V is 100.
So it turns 100.
So 7.5 times 10 to the power negative 4 coulomb.
Now with C12 and C3 being in theory and C remaining constant,
that means that must also be C12.
And it must equal C3.
They are in theory.
Q remains constant.
So Q12, Q3.
So we know that Q3 equals 7.5 times 10 to the power negative 4 coulomb.
Next we are asked the value of V3.
We are asked the value of V3.
Now once again, C1, C2 and C3.
We know what C1, C2 is.
Up there we know what C3 is.
We know what C1, C1, C2, C3 is.
But remember with C1, C2 equivalent and C3 being in theory
and Q being a constant from Q equals Cv,
we have that V equals Q over C.
But Q is a constant.
So we are going to get V3 is going to be Q which remains constant
and we have it there over C3.
We are also going to have V12 equals Q divided by C12.
But we are interested in V3.
So V3 is going to be our Q3 which we had 7.5 times 10 to the power
of negative 4 coulomb divided by C3.
We know it's 15.
And the power.
So let's have that.
Divided by 15.
We are negative 6.
That is going to give us a V3 of 50.0 V.
Lastly, we are asked U3.
If we remember that U is cited here.
U equals Q squared divided by 2C.
So Q we have 7.5 and 10 to the power of negative 4 coulomb squared.
So Q squared divided by 2 times the capacitance which over 3 was 15.
15 times 10 to the power of negative 6.
Far out.
Let's see what that is going to be.
7.5 times 10 to the power of negative 4.
So we are left with electric potential energy over those two plates.
It's going to be 1, 2, 3.
So it's 18.8 mJ.
So we've got to keep, we have to keep in our minds which ones are in Siri,
which ones are parallel and what stays constant.
Q or V.
Let's look at, let's just keep this.
So we say that Q remains a constant when we are in Siri.
So Q over C1, C2.
C1, C2.
Let's leave that.
And let's leave that V over 3 equals 50.
Zero volt as well.
Let's leave that information for ourselves.
Let's look at Q2.
I think what we shall do, let's do that in the next video.
