Now that we have some idea of the electric potential around all sorts of charges, let's
see if we can calculate the electric field if we know the electric potential around the
charged object.
And the best way to do that is just to look at the work done by the electric field as the
charge moves.
If we just look at the differential work done by the electric field, well that is negative
Q0 delta V.
That should be, well we can just see, let's see, as V changes.
But remember work is also force times distance.
So, V equals force times the distance, Vs, times, well that will be the angle between
those two vectors.
But we know force equals Q0 times the electric field.
So now we have two equations for work.
Negative Q0 dV is going to equal Q0 e cosine of theta dS.
We can cancel these.
And E cosine theta, E cosine theta is negative dV dS.
And what does E cosine theta mean?
Well that is the component of E along the direction of S.
We can simplify this.
First of all, let's have a simple case where the electric field is just uniform.
Well that is just going to be negative delta B over delta S.
This shows us though, this is a special case for a uniform electric field.
So we're just going to go, what it actually says is the rate of change of the electric potential
with respect to the change in distance.
So this is in the direction of the component of E along that movement.
So what we have here, we can have a subscript S.
So this denotes the component of the electric field along the displacement vector.
It's negative dV dS.
If we want to do that in component form, we're dealing with partial derivatives.
So E along the x-axis for instance will be negative dV dS.
Or diV diS, however you want to pronounce this.
And E in the y-direction is going to be negative dV dx.
That means this should actually just be x.
And E in the z-direction is going to be negative dV dz.
So very simple to look at the electric field when we are given the electric potential.
What it does mean though is the electric field.
So the unit here is going to be volts per meter.
Volts per meter.
Is the rate of change, rate of change of the electric potential with respect to a change in distance.
Let's then look at a problem or two.
If we have two large parallel plates.
We are told that they are about 1.2 cm apart.
And we are told that they have equal charge but opposite in charge.
Equal magnitude but opposite of charge on their internal surface.
We are also told that take the potential of the negative plate to be zero.
So if V here equals zero.
And halfway between the plates it is plus five.
So down here V will equal plus five volts.
What is the electric field in the region between the plates?
Well these are two large parallel plates.
So we can actually take for granted that the electric field will be constant.
And that just means the electric field is going to be negative.
Change in voltage divided by change in distance.
So this is in the direction of the electric field is going to go from positive to negative.
We know the electric field is going to be in this direction.
And we are looking at a change in electric potential in that very same direction.
Because it is constant.
Taking this constant we just use the simplified.
So it changes five minus zero.
So that is negative 5.0 volts.
Divided by a change in distance.
What's the change in difference is going to be?
0.6 cm.
0.060 meters.
So that is a simple answer to get.
And in the negative x direction.
Because we went in this direction for our displacement from the negative plate to half of the plate.
It's going to be in the negative x direction.
Which is exactly what we know.
Electric field goes from positive to negative.
Let's just see if we can do one more in this video.
The electric potential at points in the xy plane are given as V equals 2.0 volts per square meter x squared minus 3.0 volts per square meter y squared.
So in unit vector notation what is the electric field at a point?
Our point xy equals 3.0 meters and then 2.0 meters.
That's going to be very easy to do.
It is going to have an x and a y component of our electric field.
Remember our electric field in some direction.
The same direction as the displacement is negative dv dx.
So let's see what it will be in the x direction.
That's going to be negative dv dx.
And what is that?
If we take the partial derivative of V with respect to x.
That means y is a constant.
So that term will fall away.
And this very simply becomes 2 times 2 is 4.
4.0 volts per square meter times x.
And our x component is 3.
3 times force 12.
Remember it's negative.
So that's negative 12 volts per meter.
That is meters.
This is meters per square meter.
So they cancel out to per meter.
Even the y direction is going to be negative dv dy.
And that is negative.
Now x with respect to y.
So x is a constant.
So that will be negative times negative 2.
That becomes positive.
2 times 3 is 6.
6.0 volts per square meter times y.
y was given as 2.
2 times 6 is 12.
So that's positive 12 volts per meter.
So unit vector notation e.
The vector e is going to be negative 12 volts per meter.
In the i direction.
Plus 12 volts per meter.
In the j direction.
Simple differential.
Simple derivatives.
We take here.
But partial derivatives.
We started this chapter off by looking at electric potential energy.
And we define electric potential as work done divided by charge.
Leaving work equals charge times change in potential energy.
Change in electric potential.
If we choose electric potential energy to be zero at infinity.
And we bring in a test charge to this point.
Q1.
We've done no work because there's no electric field.
Existed here before we brought this particle in.
If we bring in another particle in.
If we bring in another particle with a charge q2.
We have to do some work because there's an electric field now that already exists here.
We have done some work.
We also defined electric potential a distance r away from a charge as 1 over 4 pi epsilon zero q over r.
And that certainly is going to be our v.
Our electric potential a distance away from there.
If I substitute that in.
That means the work done.
Is going to be 1 over 4 pi epsilon zero.
Q0 q.
Which in this instance twice would have been q1 and q2.
Divided by the distance between them.
That is the work.
That is the work that I did.
But work equals work done.
By my action equals also the change in potential energy.
If I now bring in a third particle.
And I place it here.
Q3.
I have to work out what work needs to be done.
To bring it in.
To the electric field by q2.
And separately by q1.
So the electric potential of this system now.
The electric potential of this whole system now.
Is going to be 1 over 4 pi epsilon zero.
Q1.
Q3.
Divided by this distance between them.
Say if this was a.
And that was also a.
Then it is going to be the square root of 2 times a squared.
And I have also got to look at.
The potential energy due to particle 2.
So that is going to be 1 over 4 pi epsilon zero.
Q3 now.
And Q2.
Over the distance between them.
Which is just a.
Which is just a.
And if I add these two together.
I get the electric potential of this whole system.
Of this whole system.
Now what we need to do is just to look at signs.
These are all going to be F3 values.
If these two charges are the same.
I do positive work.
If these two charges are opposite in sign.
Negative and positive.
I do negative work bringing the particle in.
So these just become simple algebraic addition and subtraction.
Due to the convention of positive work.
If they are both of the same sign.
And negative work if they are opposite in sign.
